- THE U.S.-HONDURAS BILATERAL RELATIONSHIP: ANALYZING THE SOCIALIST GOVERNMENT OF PRESIDENT XIOMARA CASTRO DE ZELAYA

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

THE U.S.-HONDURAS BILATERAL
RELATIONSHIP: ANALYZING THE
SOCIALIST GOVERNMENT OF
PRESIDENT XIOMARA CASTRO DE ZELAYA

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON WESTERN HEMISPHERE

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

OCTOBER 25, 2023

__________

Serial No. 118-55

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Foreign Affairs

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available: http://www.foreignaffairs.house.gov/, http://docs.house.gov,

or http://www.govinfo.gov

______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
55-693             WASHINGTON : 2024

COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS

MICHAEL T. McCAUL, Texas, Chairman

CHRISTOPHER H. SMITH, New Jersey     GREGORY MEEKS, New York, Ranking
JOE WILSON, South Carolina               Member
SCOTT PERRY, Pennsylvania            BRAD SHERMAN, California
DARRELL ISSA, California             GERALD E. CONNOLLY, Virginia
ANN WAGNER, Missouri                 WILLIAM KEATING, Massachusetts
BRIAN MAST, Florida                  AMI BERA, California
KEN BUCK, Colorado                   JOAQUIN CASTRO, Texas
TIM BURCHETT, Tennessee              DINA TITUS, Nevada
MARK E. GREEN, Tennessee             TED LIEU, California
ANDY BARR, Kentucky                  SUSAN WILD, Pennsylvania
RONNY JACKSON, Texas                 DEAN PHILLIPS, Minnesota
YOUNG KIM, California                COLIN ALLRED, Texas
MARIA ELVIRA SALAZAR, Florida        ANDY KIM, New Jersey
BILL HUIZENGA, Michigan              SARA JACOBS, California
AUMUA AMATA COLEMAN RADEWAGEN,       KATHY MANNING, North Carolina
American Samoa                   SHEILA CHERFILUS-McCORMICK,
FRENCH HILL, Arkansas                         Florida
WARREN DAVIDSON, Ohio               GREG STANTON, Arizona
JIM BAIRD, Indiana                   MADELEINE DEAN, Pennsylvania
JARED MOSKOWITZ, Florida
MICHAEL WALTZ, FloridaJ              ONATHAN JACKSON, Illinois
THOMAS KEAN, JR., New Jersey         SYDNEY KAMLAGER-DOVE, California
MICHAEL LAWLER, New York             JIM COSTA, California
CORY MILLS, Florida                  JASON CROW, Colorado
RICH McCORMICK, GeorgiaBRAD SCHNEIDER, Illinois
NATHANIEL MORAN, Texas
JOHN JAMES, Michigan
KEITH SELF, Texas

Brenda Shields, Staff Director

Sophia Lafargue, Staff Director
------

Subcommittee on Western Hemisphere

MARIA SALAZAR, Florida, Chair

KEN BUCK, Colorado                   JOAQUIN CASTRO, Texas, Ranking
MARK GREEN, Tennessee                    Member
BILL HUIZENGA, Michigan
WARREN DAVIDSON, Ohio
KEITH SELF, Texas

GREG STANTON, Arizona
JARED MOSKOWITZ, Florida
SYDNEY KAMLAGER-DOVE, California

Maggie Goessler, Acting Subcommittee Staff Director
C O N T E N T S

----------
Page

WITNESSES

Jacobstein, Eric, Deputy Assistant Secretary for the Bureau of
Western Hemisphere Affairs of the Department of State..........     8
Guilarte, Mileydi, Deputy Assistant Administrator for the Bureau
of Latin America and the Caribbean, United States Agency for
International Development......................................    14

APPENDIX

Hearing Notice...................................................    32
Hearing Minutes..................................................    34
Hearing Attendance...............................................    35

ADDITIONAL STATEMENTS SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD

Statement submitted for the record from Arturo Zacapa............    36
Statement submitted for the record from Erick Brimen.............   185

RESPONSES TO QUESTIONS SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD

Responses to questions submitted for the record..................   187

THE U.S.-HONDURAS BILATERAL

RELATIONSHIP: ANALYZING THE SOCIALIST GOVERNMENT OF PRESIDENT XIOMARA
CASTRO DE ZELAYA

Wednesday, October 25, 2023

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on the Western Hemisphere,
Committee on Foreign Affairs,
Washington, DC.

The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 3:08 p.m., in
room 2200, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Maria Elvira
Salazar (chair of the subcommittee) presiding.
Ms. Salazar. Sorry that we are a little bit delayed, but
you know we were just picking a new Speaker of the House. And
thanks to all of you for being here, and the Subcommittee on
the Western Hemisphere will come to order.
The purpose of this hearing is to discuss the bilateral
relationship between the United States and Honduras and to
examine the leadership of the current president of the country,
Xiomara Castro. I now recognize myself for an opening
statement.
As I said, let's talk about Honduras. And once again I
thank all of you for being here. Sorry that we are a little bit
delayed. Thank you for my colleague Mr. Castro and for the
witnesses to have--having waited at this time, but like I said,
you know, it is--we were on the floor.
So I am very happy to be here talking about Honduras. We
have so many constituents in District No. 27, people that I
represent that are of Honduras--Honduran background. And for
the last decade the country, a beautiful country in Central
America, has been fighting for its political life. In 2006,
then the president of the country, Manuel Zelaya, tried to push
Honduras to the left to embrace socialism. Case in point, he
was the first Honduran president to visit Cuba in 46 years
since Fidel Castro took over.
In the next 3 years of his presidency Mr. Zelaya tried to
take a copy out of Hugo Chavez' socialist playbook and
implement it in the country. Zelaya tried to stay in power and
challenged democracy by calling a referendum on a new
constitution. A change to the Honduras constitution was--
obviously his intention was to try to stay in power
indefinitely like Hugo Chavez has done. But the Honduran
Supreme Court stuck it out, did its job, and struck that
initiative as--or labeled it as unconstitutional. Then the
Honduran democracy stood strong; thank God for that, and the
armed forces abided by their duty to uphold democracy and Mr.
Zelaya was out of office.
But unfortunately socialism is like a plague that it always
fights back. While President Zelaya was in exile he hatched a
plan to make his wife president of the country and now that
is--President Castro is his proxy.
Zelaya is the real president at this hour although
President Xiomara Castro has the title.
During the 2-years that Mrs. Castro has been in power there
are many details and many instances that prove their socialist
ideology. Earlier this year at CELAC, which is a pro-China
Latin American summit, President Castro announced that her
government was following in the steps of Hugo Chavez. In a very
proudly fashion she explained that new idea.
On August 31 of 2021, 2 years ago, a video celebrating what
would have been Fidel Castro's 95th birthday, Fidel Castro,
President Zelaya doubled down on his socialist ideology saying
that our ideals are the same as those of Fidel and the Cuban
Revolution. In other words, disaster, poverty, destruction,
repression, despair, and exile.
In other words, Honduras is in trouble.
And there are more examples that I can point out. Like for
example, the president--the government of President Castro has
threatened to expropriate foreign companies, and one of those
instances is a project called Prospera in the island of Roatan.
The government of Honduras has broken relations with the
island of Taiwan and recognized Communist China as a new
diplomatic partner. They have created the so-called
collectivos, which are armed civilians composed of civilians,
activists, and all they do is intimidate political opponents.
And the best collectivos were seen during the Chavez years in
Venezuela. I happen to have interviewed a couple of their
leaders.
Last month at the United Nations President Castro defended
Cuba and Venezuela again and she said that capitalism only
causes misery. As if Cuba and Venezuela are paradises, right?
You have 7 million people who have left Venezuela; 2 more
million Cubans to have left the island. And for what reason?
Because it is unbearable to live under socialism.
Unfortunately socialism is not her only sin. Corruption is
also on her list. And here is the proof: President Castro has
given top positions to 13 close family members. That is called
nepotism. One of President Castro's first acts upon becoming
president was to forgive all those from her husband's
Administration. Everyone served under Zelaya's Administration
that was accused of corruption was forgiven.
In 2020 President Zelaya was detained with $18,000 in cash
at the airport in Tegucigalpa and he just couldn't explain
where the money came from. But unfortunately those who try to
expose corruption within the Zelaya or the Castro government
were punished. For instance, perfect example is the Consejo
Nacional Anticorrupci"n. Her name is Gabriela Castellanos and
she had to flee the country.
What surprises us and worries us in this committee is the
shocking response from the Biden Administration toward the
Zelaya-Castro government. The Biden Administration, our
president, has celebrated the election of Xiomara Castro and
wished her great success. In January 2022 the Vice President of
the country attended her inauguration. Not even President Lula
from Brazil got the Vice President at his inauguration for
president.
The White House has continued to make Honduras their
partner of choice in Central America despite all the warning
signs that I just enumerated, among a few of them. While El
Salvador, Guatemala, and other countries have been cast aside
by this Administration, Honduras is being showcased as a
success story in Central America.
El Salvador at this hour is trying to pledge in wanting to
help with the United States in order to stop those migrants who
are crossing the country trying to get to the United States and
is trying to help the United States with crime. Guatemala is
offering help also to the United States by continuing to
recognize Taiwan, refusing to do business with China, and
trying to stop the flow of migrants.
But El Salvador and Guatemala, they are not getting the
same type of treatment from this Administration as Honduras is.
Honduras does not help the United States with crime, with
migration, with China, and still it gets all the glory.
So I ask the Biden Administration to reassess its strategy
for Central America. When somebody tells you that they do not
like the United States and they do not like capitalism and they
like Fidel and they like Hugo Chavez, you got to listen to them
because they have a completely different agenda than what is
the one that we have in the United States.
So I just wanted to send a little message in Spanish as I
usually do to
[speaking in Spanish].
So having said that, I now recognize the ranking member,
the gentleman from the great State of Texas, Mr. Castro, for
any statements he may have.
Mr. Castro. Thank you, Chairwoman Salazar, for convening
this hearing to discuss the very important bilateral
relationship between Honduras and the United States.
And welcome back to both Mr. Jacobstein, who now gets to
sit on the other side of the dais here; welcome home, and Ms.
Guilarte, who testified here a month ago.
When the Honduran people elected President Castro in 2022,
they did so with the hope that her Administration would be a
change from the status quo. Her victory was historic, not only
because it made her the first female president of Honduras, but
also because of how she worked to bring marginalized Hondurans
into the political sphere.
The election of President Castro presented a new
opportunity to strengthen the U.S.-Honduras cooperation on a
range of issues including supporting the rule of law,
migration, development, and building on the strong record of
security cooperation between our two nations. This hearing is
an opportunity--is an opportune time to take stock of where our
relationship is and how we can move forward together.
At the beginning of the Biden Administration I raised the
importance of establishing a U.N.-backed anti-corruption body
in Honduras and I was encouraged by the Castro Administration's
decision to pursue the establishment of such a commission, now
known as CC. I have consistently fought to include funding in
our congressional appropriations for this commission and am
glad that the United Nations has also been very supportive, but
I know that progress on establishing this commission has been
slow. And I share the concerns of many in civil society about
whether CC will have sufficient independence, accountability,
and prosecutorial powers.
As we support Honduras in the establishment of
institutional anti-corruption mechanisms, I hope the Castro
Administration will also continue to prioritize key tenets of
democracy such as human rights, an independent judiciary, and
the protection of civil society. This is particularly important
as the country looks to choose its next attorney general and
aims to address gang violence and public safety which should be
done in a way that respects due process and access to justice.
Honduras has consistently been ranked one of the most
dangerous countries in the world for land defenders who have
often faced violence, murder, and forced disappearance by
illegal developers and organized crime. While progress has been
made, the Honduras government with our support must do more to
protect indigenous populations and land.
I also must raise the concerning developments in corporate
lawsuits against Honduras over the Employment and Economic
Development Zones, or ZEDE, which ask for $10.8 billion in
damages, which is one-third of the entire Honduran economy.
Although I support efforts to create a strong environment for
private sector investment, I have serious concerns about the
scale and scope of the lawsuits.
The United States has the option under the Central America-
Dominican Republic Free Trade Agreement to weigh in with the
Investor State Dispute Resolution Tribunal, and I hope that the
State Department seriously considers doing so.
As we discuss our economic bilateral relationship we cannot
ignore that Honduras is the most recent country to switch
diplomatic recognition from Taiwan to China. This is
disappointing as Taiwan has been a strong partner for many
countries in the region. While this decision has been made I
urge Honduras to be clear-eyed about the risks of deepening its
relationship with China. The United States should present
alternatives to the PRC including on development and should
actively support Honduras' ability to advocate for itself when
it engages with China including through technical support with
investments or contracts involving PRC entities.
The Biden Administration has rightly recognized that the
challenge of migration in the Western Hemisphere is one that we
do not face alone and I appreciate the Honduran government's
collaboration on regional migration issues. A key effort by the
Biden Administration to address root causes of migration has
been the establishment of USAID's Centroamerica Local, a pilot
program to pursue locally led development in Central America.
I was glad to work with Administrator Power and my
colleagues to get the authorization for this provision into law
and I look forward to working on more initiatives to promote
inclusive economic growth and support community stability. But
we also must go beyond root causes and ensure that U.S.
immigration policies reflect the needs of the region and
support the integration of migrants both in our partner
countries and across our hemisphere.
I was extremely disappointed that the Biden Administration
did not redesignate TPS for Honduras earlier this year, as
Chairwoman Salazar and I have called on the Administration to
do for multiple years.
Before I close I want to note that the Republican State and
Foreign Operations Funding Bill significantly reduces funding
for programs in the Western Hemisphere and the long delay in
electing a speaker has only further delayed the necessary
enactment of a funding bill that adequately represents our
Nation security interests.
We must be more engaged with our Latin American neighbors,
a view that I know many of my Republican colleagues share, and
I hope that members will reject these drastic cuts that would
make it harder for the United States to defend our values and
interests in the Western Hemisphere.
With that, chairwoman, I yield back.
Ms. Salazar. Thank you, ranking member, Mr. Castro.
And now I want to recognize and welcome the panel of
witnesses from State Department and the USAID who work closely
on the issues surrounding this bilateral relationship between
the United States and Honduras. And I welcome and I thank you
very much for being here.
Mr. Eric Jacobstein is the Deputy Assistant Secretary for
the Bureau of Western Hemisphere Affairs of the United States
Department of State, the right person to answer the right
questions.
So thank you for being here.
And Mileydi Guilarte is the Deputy Assistant Administrator
for the Bureau of Latin America and the Caribbean at the United
States Agency for International Development.
Thank you again for both of you being here, and your full
statements will be made part of the record. I will ask each of
you to keep your remarks to 5 minutes. And I now recognize Mr.
Jacobstein for his opening statement. Welcome.

STATEMENT OF ERIC JACOBSTEIN, DEPUTY ASSISTANT SECRETARY FOR
THE BUREAU OF WESTERN HEMISPHERE AFFAIRS OF THE DEPARTMENT OF
STATE

Mr. Jacobstein. Thank you. Thank you, Chairwoman Salazar,
Ranking Member Castro, and members of the subcommittee, for the
opportunity to testify today on Honduras. I am very pleased to
testify alongside my USAID colleague and friend, Deputy
Assistant Administrator Guilarte. And as Ranking Member Castro
said, it is a particular honor to be back here at the Foreign
Affairs Committee, a place where I worked for over a decade,
including on this subcommittee. The role of the Foreign Affairs
Committee and the Western Hemisphere Subcommittee could not be
more significant as we look to deepen relations with our
partners in the hemisphere.
Honduras is an essential partner. We share a host of common
objectives including countering corruption, creating
employment, improving education, protecting human rights,
enhancing security conditions, combatting drug trafficking, and
humanely managing migration.
Under the Root Causes Strategy we work with the Honduran
government and non-governmental actors to achieve results in
these areas. This is certainly not an easy undertaking.
Honduras faces long-standing challenges including poverty,
inequality, crime, endemic corruption, narco trafficking,
extreme weather catastrophes, and policies that inadequately
support economic growth.
To address shared challenges we partner with Honduras in a
range of areas with an emphasis on overlapping interests.
President Castro's November 2020 election victory presented an
opportunity to break with the corruption and democratic
backslating--sliding that took place under former President
Juan Orlando Hernandez, who currently awaits trial in New York
on drug trafficking charges.
Earlier this year I joined a delegation to Tegucigalpa to
participate in a bilateral, strategic, and human rights dialog
during which we sat down with Honduran leaders and took stock
of the bilateral relationship after the government's first
year. We discussed how we could move forward together on shared
objectives that support the goals of the Root Causes Strategy.
In September we hosted President Castro on a visit to the
U.S.-Mexico border which served to improve our shared response
to managing migration and to strengthening border security. We
applaud Honduras' progress in passing legislation regarding
internally displaced persons and also for working with us on
enforcement efforts.
We have a long-standing security cooperation relationship
with Honduras including through our presence at Soto Cano Air
Base. For decades Joint Task Force-Bravo, which is stationed
there in Honduras, has enabled robust security cooperation,
humanitarian assistance, and disaster relief, both in-country
and throughout the region. We look forward to continuing this
cooperation with Honduras.
We also look forward to continued collaboration to make
progress on effective governance and on the rule of law.
This hearing has committed to addressing corruption and
impunity and President Castro has invited the U.N. to establish
an independent anti-corruption commission. We applaud this
effort, but we urge its rapid establishment in accordance with
U.N. guidelines. And we also urge the government to fund
existing units that investigate corruption.
On security the Honduran National Police continue to
prioritize our relationship on a wide range of issues. Earlier
this year we also announced our intent to collaborate with the
Honduran government to address gender-based violence, a key
pillar in the Root Causes Strategy.
The Honduran government states its foreign policy is to
meet its international cooperation needs by opening the door to
new countries, including the People's Republic of China. While
we acknowledge that diplomatic recognition is a sovereign
decision, we note the PRC often makes promises in exchange for
recognition that ultimately remain unfulfilled.
Amid a highly politicized environment that is marked by
charged language on all sides we have been concerned by
inflammatory rhetoric to attack those who have raised
legitimate concerns. This includes civil society actors,
journalists, the private sector, and members of the
international community, including our own Ambassador. We have
firmly pushed back on this rhetoric in public and in private.
With regard to the economy we aim to mobilize additional
investment in Honduras through the Vice President's Central
America Forward initiative which has already brought $4.2
billion in investment commitments and new jobs in northern
Central America. Future commitments of course will depend on a
favorable investment climate and sound economic decisions.
We applaud the government of Honduras' prioritization of
human rights, but tragically human rights, environmental, and
labor activists continue to work under threat of violence and
death. We continue to call upon the Honduran government to
protect activists like Miriam Miranda, Jose Ramiro Lara, who
face serious threats, and to completely timely and transparent
investigations into killings of activists like Jairo Bonilla
and Aly Dominguez.
On the topic of civic space, in the context of the recent
supreme court election, the ongoing attorney general selection
process, we continue to emphasize the fundamental importance of
legal, transparent, and peaceful democratic processes.
The situation in Honduras is complex, but we remain
committed to a strong bilateral relationship given our two
countries' cultural, economic, familial, and geographic times.
The best way forward in our view to advance U.S. interests in
the region is to engage deeply with Honduras. In sum, the
success of Honduras will be our success.
Before I close I would be remiss not to mention a final
topic of import to this subcommittee. On October 20 the
Administration made a supplemental request to Congress on
migration which includes $1.3 billion to the State Department
USAID to address urgent migration management requirements in
the Western Hemisphere and to sustain enduring commitments
through the end of Fiscal Year 2024. We expect the number of
displaced persons in the hemisphere, including families and
children, to increase to nearly 25 million by the end of 2024,
so these funds are urgently needed.
Thank you and I look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Jacobstein follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Ms. Salazar. Thank you, Mr. Jacobstein.
Now I recognize Ms. Guilarte for her opening statement.

STATEMENT OF MILEYDI GUILARTE, DEPUTY ASSISTANT ADMINISTRATOR
FOR THE BUREAU OF LATIN AMERICA AND THE CARIBBEAN, UNITED
STATES AGENCY FOR INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT

Ms. Guilarte. Chairwoman Salazar, Ranking Member Castro,
members of the subcommittee, thank you for the invitation to
discuss our work in Honduras and for your bipartisan support. I
am also happy to join my colleague Deputy Assistant Secretary
Jacobstein and also, just as you mentioned be back--just a few
weeks, I think about 3 weeks ago, where I was here discussing
PRC's malign influence in the Western Hemisphere.
I am often asked about the most important element for
successful development. As someone who was born in Cuba and
emigrated to the United States the clearest answer to me is
simple: democratic governance. Responsive and transparent
governance-and an independent judicial system allows people to
have faith in their government. Without it people often
emigrate in search of a better environment, creating a vacuum
of human capital that impedes a society from flourishing.
The Administration's Root Causes Strategy recognizes that
and is focused squarely on improving governance, promoting
respect for human rights and a free press, increasing citizen
security, growing economies, and reducing gender-based
violence, key push factors for migration to the United States.
Across USAID's programs we are increasing our partnerships
with local actors under the Centroamerica Local Initiative so
that communities drive and sustain these efforts in the long
term. Our partnership is with the people of Honduras,
[speaking in Spanish], and it has endured through changes
of parties and Administrations. We work with the current
Honduran Administration in areas where we find common ground
and like in every bilateral relationship we engage in frank and
open conversations about areas where we have differences.
We welcome President Castro's commitment to establishing an
anti-corruption commission and we encourage both the government
of Honduras and the United Nations to expeditiously reach a
final agreement to implement a commission that will provide
tangible results.
We have also been disturbed by the high levels of impunity
for attacks on environmental, labor, and human rights defenders
and the increasing rates of femicide in Honduras. Observer
groups estimate that at least 23 environmental activists have
been killed since the beginning of 2022 and there have been 225
deaths of women and girls in less than a year. That is one
killed nearly every single day.
In our engagements with the Honduran government we
routinely raise human rights issues and advocate for robust
funding for the Ministry of Human Rights' Protection Mechanism.
We also encourage the Honduran Congress to select a new and
independent attorney general in a transparent process so the
public ministry, a crucial institution for the promotion of
justice in Honduras, can operate effectively to the benefit of
all Hondurans.
Given these challenges USAID remains committed to helping
the Honduran people build a stronger, more secure future. We
are particularly proud of our work with the National
Anticorruption Council, a Honduran civil society organization
that has exposed corruption across multiple--multiple U.S. and
Honduran Administrations. This type of civil society oversight
channels Hondurans' demand for transparent and responsive
governance.
USAID has also worked with the Supreme Audit Institution
and the Transparency Secretariat to improve access to public
information and oversight capacity in municipal governments,
and over the last 18 months we have worked with the Ministry of
Education to reopen schools and get kids back in the classroom.
USAID reached almost half a million primary and second
education students in areas of out-migration and refurbished
many schools this year so kids have a safe and healthy learning
environment. This is a clear area of mutual interest where we
have seen progress.
And we have championed economic growth by working with our
private sector partners including three of the world's largest
coffee buyers who committed $109 million to connect 70,000
farmer households with global markets. That is more than half
of all Honduran coffee farmers. And last year as a direct
result of USAID's assistance and these partnerships the yields
of nearly 18,000 farmers increased by about 30 percent, giving
hope to many rural families.
As we look ahead we hope to build on these efforts so
Hondurans can grow and thrive in their own communities. You
only have to look to Honduras' neighbors to see how important
it is to defend democratic values at all times. For this reason
USAID's presence and programming in the region has never been
more critical. USAID will continue to put the Honduran people
first so families, communities, and the country as a whole can
thrive and prosper.
Thank you and I look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Guilarte follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Ms. Salazar. Yes, thanks to you, Mrs. Guilarte. And I like
your comments: Honduran people first. And that is exactly what
we all have in common, Republicans and Democrats.
I now recognize myself for 5 minutes of questioning. And I
once again thank you, both of you for being here.
And, Mr. Jacobstein, look, I have a problem every time a
government says that they like Fidel Castro or Hugo Chavez. I
have a very big problem and I can only think that poor country
that has a government that wants to implement or install those
types of economic or social model or ideological model.
So my question to you is if you know that Manuel Zelaya,
the husband of the actual present president, has been very
close to Fidel Castro and Hugo Chavez, and President Castro has
said many times that capitalism leads to misery, I just would
like you to tell me briefly how do you rate those comments? Do
they concern your Administration?
Mr. Jacobstein. Thank you very much for the question, Madam
Chair. From my perspective the most important thing is actions,
not words. So we are really focused from--advancing U.S. policy
interests in Honduras through the Root Causes Strategy. So we
are focused on the actions of the government and ways we can
collaborate to advance U.S. foreign policy interests rather
than rhetoric.
Ms. Salazar. But when you are telling me actions, Xiomara
Castro just kicked out Taiwan and welcomed Communist China. So
right there it is something that no other nation--or it is very
difficult to take that political position. So what do your
Administration says to that?
Mr. Jacobstein. Yes, thank you for that. Well, we recognize
that diplomatic recognition is a sovereign decision. We
certainly cautioned Honduras that China often makes promises in
exchange for recognition that ultimately remain unfulfilled.
There are many recent and ongoing examples of such behavior in
Latin America and around the world. And we share those concerns
with the Honduran government at the highest levels.
Ms. Salazar. And what have they answered? What do they say?
Mr. Jacobstein. They ultimately decided to move forward
with the PRC, but this is something that--a conversation we
continue to have because we see a lot of promises unfulfilled.
There are countless examples, as I know you all pointed to in
your recent hearing on the PRC.
Ms. Salazar. Right. That is socialism, which I repeat just
mentioning those two presidents, we do not have to explain to
the audience or to you the consequences of installing an
Administration or ideology or a business model as Cuba or
Venezuela. That does not need to even be mentioned.
But let's now go into corruption. I am sure that you know
about the Engel list that in my understanding has become a
political tool of the left and many times has been used by the
present Biden Administration to punish some of the conservative
governments in Central America. I am just going to give you
some facts.
In El Salvador you have eight members of the Salvadorian
Administration on the list. You have 15 members of Guatemala.
You have zero names on Honduras on the--of Honduran--members of
the government or Honduran nationals in the Engels list. And I
just mentioned that one of the most important anticorruption
members had to flee because of threats. So how could that be
that the Engels list does not include anyone from Honduras? I
think that would be the simple question.
Mr. Jacobstein. Thank you. So the most recent iteration of
the 353 list, which is sometimes referred to as the Engel list,
was released earlier this summer. It included a number of
individuals from Honduras, Guatemala, and El Salvador. I would
say in the case of El Salvador this iteration included former
president, certainly not of the party of Bukele. I think if you
look at the list in sum, it is really ideologically diverse. It
includes a number of members. And we found it has been
effective. I mean, if you look----
Ms. Salazar. But it does not include anyone from the--
Xiomara Castro's government.
Mr. Jacobstein. Each time we make a different evaluation
about what is the most impactful way to use this tool to affect
corruption, and we will continue to do so as long as we have
that tool.
Ms. Salazar. And what about the 13 family members that are
in the current government? That is called nepotism. What about
those individuals?
Mr. Jacobstein. You mentioned the anticorruption
organization run by Gabi Castellanos, the commission. And I
know they have done some important work on nepotism that looked
both this Administration but also looked at previous
Administrations. So I think nepotism is certainly something we
have to look at across all----
Ms. Salazar. Oh, no, no. I am not saying the Honduran
people have endured many different Administrations that do not
necessarily serve their interests. It is just that this has--
this Xiomara Castro Administration has the caveat of being
socialist which brings other hardship to the Honduran people.
Now we will go back to the--to corruption, but let me just
give you other--another information that could be helpful. You
know that we have a very big problem with migration. And
according to my sources and to my research is that you have two
very important members of the Administration, of the Honduras
Administration--Xiomara Castro's Administration. One of them is
La Gobernadora de Choluteca. Her name is Ilse Villatoro. And
you have the Comisionado del Instituto Hondureno del Transporte
Terrestre. His name is Rafael Barahona.
What do they do? They are in the business of charging
people who are going from point A to point B trying to get to
the United States. They are charging $150 for a salvoconducto,
which is a little piece of paper that you are supposed to be
receiving in order to cross the country to get to Guatemala.
Are you aware of that?
Mr. Jacobstein. Thank you for your question. We certainly
agree that managing irregular migration is a top priority. In
2023 Honduras waived its fee for regular migrants entering by
land to prove its ability to track migrants.
Ms. Salazar. No, but listen. Let's get down to--do you know
that these two people that I just mentioned, their positions--
and they were put there specifically by the president--are
charging $150 for those who want to come to the United States?
Does the Biden Administration is aware of this and have you
mentioned this to the Honduran government?
Mr. Jacobstein. I am not tracking this particular case and
we would be happy to take it back. More----
Ms. Salazar. But I am going to tell you exactly. Look, La
Gobernadora de Choluteca, her name is Ilse Villatoro, and
Rafael Barahona, el Comisionado del Instituto Hondureno del
Transporte Terrestre--these people are--these are officials.
These are bureaucrats that are charging. Where do you think
this money is going to? A hundred and fifty bucks per person.
You know how much money is that? A lot of money. Because most
people go from el Darien and they have to go through Honduras
to get to Guatemala to get to Texas. So Xiomara Castro's
government is making a lot of money.
So No. 1, were you aware of it?
Mr. Jacobstein. We would be happy to take this back. I
would say----
Ms. Salazar. No, I am just asking you if you were aware of
this. If I know it, you have to know it.
Mr. Jacobstein. I am aware that in 2023 Honduras waived its
fee for regular migrants entering by land to improve----
Ms. Salazar. What do you mean waived their fees? I am
telling you they are charging $150 for a salvoconducto.
Mr. Jacobstein. The official----
Ms. Salazar. Don't you know this?
Mr. Jacobstein. The official fees have been waived.
Ms. Salazar. Yes. Well, on paper, but not in practice. It
is like communism. It is great on theory and it is horrible in
practice. So the Biden Administration does not know this? If I
know it, how come you guys do not know it?
Mr. Jacobstein. We are aware that official fees that have
been waived and we will take back this information.
Ms. Salazar. So you are telling me that it has, but I
repeat that--you know that it has been waived, but right now I
am telling that it has not. That is being charged by these two
people that belong to the government. You are not aware of
this? Am I the first person telling you this?
Mr. Jacobstein. We will take this information back.
Ms. Salazar. Honduras completa knows this. So the Biden
Administration that is trying to stop and curtail the legal
migration--and not only that, as Mileydi could tell you, it is
not only charging, is using these people as human cargo. So
could you please go back to the people in the State Department
and tell them that it would be a good idea to talk to the
President about this? Could you do that for me?
Mr. Jacobstein. Would be happy to take back your inquiry.
Ms. Salazar. Thank you very much.
All right. I know I am over time, so I do not want to
fatigue your patience, so I am going to then stop my
questioning right now and I am going to ask--I want to give
time to my ranking member. Thank you.
Mr. Castro. Thank you. A priority for the Biden
Administration and for my work on this committee has been
addressing root causes of migration and improving regional
migration management. Both State Department and USAID play a
key role in that effort, so I have a few questions for each of
you.
Ms. Guilarte, it has been a year since USAID launched the
promising Centroamerica Local initiative, which you and I both
mentioned in our comments earlier. So what is the status of
this initiative and what lessons about locally led development
has USAID learned through its experiences there?
Ms. Guilarte. Thank you, Congressman. Yes, thank you again
for all your support in our Centroamerica Local initiative, but
really localization at large at USAID.
As you mention, Centroamerica Local, it is a three--five-
year initiative for $300 million to empower local organizations
in all of Central America: El Salvador, Guatemala, and
Honduras, and through this initiative our missions, our
leaders, and the agency.
I am happy to report that on the first year of
implementation for Fiscal Year 2022 we reached 14 percent of
total funding obligations going to local organizations, which I
think it is quite remarkable knowing what our baseline was and
where we are today.
I will give you a specific example in Honduras specifically
on localization. Our work has been at the core of implementing
the Root Causes Strategy. So we have a number of projects that
we implement, but we are ensuring that that work is done
through local organizations. They are the ones that have the
skills, the know-how to be able to do this work.
A recent example is that we have partnered with Fundacion
Nacional para el Desarrollo de Honduras, FUNADEH, to increase
opportunities in communities with the highest crime and out-
migration, specifically working with youth and returnees. So
those that are returning migrants have an opportunity to
integrate. Again, it is scaling up and wanting to do more in
these areas of violence and out-migration.
Just in the last year we have worked with over 75,000 youth
and have worked in 61 youth outreach centers, again focusing in
areas of most need. And that is just one of the many examples
we have on localization.
Mr. Castro. Well, and let me ask you, because I mentioned
earlier that there is some very serious and deep appropriation
cuts here at stake. And I want to ask you why is it important
that we continue funding this particular initiative?
Ms. Guilarte. Well, it is essential because, as I mentioned
in my remarks, our commitment, our work, it is for the Honduran
people, and youth in particular. Highest unemployment rate,
whether it is gender-based violence. So there is a set of
different factors that have already alluded to in our remarks
and comments that it is--that is why it is essential to stay
engaged, to continue working on areas where we are seeing
improvement. So it is essential. That is what I would add.
Mr. Castro. Thank you.
And, Mr. Jacobstein, in the State Department's 2022 Country
Reports on Human Rights Practices in Honduras the State
Department painted a deeply troubling picture regarding the
State of civil and human rights in the country. The report says
there were significant human rights issues in the country
including credible reports or documented cases of unlawful or
arbitrary killings, torture, and cases of inhumane punishment
by government agents, life-threatening prison conditions,
serious restrictions on freedom of expression, gender-based
violence, and crimes involving violence or threats of violence
against indigenous, Afro-descendant communities, the LGBTQ
communities.
Given these conditions can you say that Honduran nationals,
particularly those who have been in the United States for
years, are safe if deported to Honduras?
Mr. Jacobstein. Thank you very much for your question. We
are very concerned over the killings and attacks of several
activists this year. These deaths certainly heighten questions
about security in Honduras and the ability for civil society
members to freely express their legitimate concerns.
And the Human Rights Ministry is working on the
government's national protection mechanism. The mechanism
reduced its staff recently. Several contacts assert that the
combination of reduced personnel and lack of financial and
technical assistance stands in the way of fully implementing
needed security measures and protecting vulnerable populations.
So the Human Rights Ministry is working to hire more staff for
the protection mechanism and we look forward to working with
the government to support improvements. But we do have concerns
about violence against human rights defenders, certainly
Garifuna indigenous communities.
Mr. Castro. And then one last question in this round for
me. What considerations went into the State Department's recent
decision to recommend only an extension of TPS to Honduras and
not a redesignation?
Mr. Jacobstein. Thank you. So as you know, the Secretary of
Homeland Security ultimately makes the designation with a
recommendation from the Secretary of State. And we consistently
assess country conditions and welcome your thoughts as we
continue to do so.
Mr. Castro. Thank you. I yield back.
Ms. Salazar. Thank you, ranking member.
And now I recognize Representative Stanton of the State of
Arizona for 5 minutes. Thank you.
Mr. Stanton. Thank you very much, Chairwoman Salazar.
Thank you for convening today's hearing.
Thank you to DAS Jacobstein and Deputy Assistant
Administrator Guilarte for joining us today.
Arizonans are directly impacted by increased migration from
Latin America driven by violence and lack of opportunity. My
bill, the American Cooperation With Our Neighbors Act, focuses
on addressing these issues via cross-border collaboration,
particularly with Mexico. That bill received bipartisan vocal
support from this committee.
And now that we have a Speaker of the House, I look forward
to moving it soon to the House floor, but today I want to focus
on the United States and how it partners with our Honduran
neighbors to address migration and its root causes.
DAS Jacobstein, our Customs and Border Protection officers
encounter more migrants from Honduras than almost any other
country. President Castro recently met with Secretary Mayorkas
about the flow of migrants from Honduras to the United States
and announced a plan to open four new consulates in the United
States. How will the additional consulates support legal
pathways for Hondurans seeking to come to the United States as
visitors and workers?
Mr. Jacobstein. Thank you for the question, Congressman. So
President Castro's visit to the U.S.-Mexico border certainly
move our cooperation on migration management forward. Among the
commitments the Honduran government made during that trip was
an announcement that Honduras would open four new consulates in
the United States.
So these consulates from the Honduran government will
improve coordination with the Department of Homeland Security,
the Department of Health and Human Services to help us humanely
and securely manage migration, including with regard to those
without a lawful basis to remain.
Additional Honduran consulates in four new cities could
also help identify potential U.S. employers for participation
in the H2 Temporary Work Program. Together the U.S. and
Honduras have significantly increased the number of Hondurans
participating in the H2 Program over the past year. Approval of
H2 visas have risen 45 percent in just a 12-month span. This
supports our commitment in the Administration to expanding
lawful pathways in the Western Hemisphere. And I know that
USAID has done some really important work on the--in this space
in the H2 field as well.
Mr. Stanton. Are you aware of any plans to open a regional
processing center in Honduras for those migrants heading to the
United States?
Mr. Jacobstein. Yes, thank you. So there are no plans to
open a safe mobility office in Honduras at this time, but we
are committed to working with partners around the region on
improving all access to lawful pathways.
Mr. Stanton. Deputy Assistant Administrator Guilarte, the
U.S. and Honduras met for a strategic dialog last January where
they announced partnerships on education and food security.
What is the status of the Alliance for Education and U.S.
Agricultural Assistance and how would these efforts target root
causes of migration?
Ms. Guilarte. Thank you, Congressman, for your question. As
you mentioned, the Alliance for Education--it is a public/
private partnership that was signed earlier this year. It is
$28 million over 3 years. We are engaging with the government
of Honduras, the private sector--Ficohsa for example is one of
our partners--and is really aimed at improving the basic
education for at least 300,000 children and youth in Honduras.
So far we have refurbished dozens of schools. Our aim is to
have 51 schools. And the focus and the target areas will be in
areas of high out-migration. Again, this is directly where
communities are impacted by lack of opportunity, jobs, and so
forth. So our investment through the Alliance for Education
will be targeting youth in areas of high out-migration.
And in terms of the agriculture assistance, we announced
$10 million this year to increase agricultural productivity to
offset rising fertilizer prices due to Russia's brutal war in
Ukraine. So this will support our local production, but it also
will be an extra tool to use--to--again for fertilizers, for
crop productivity. So that is how the investment will be used.
Mr. Stanton. Thank you. I want to--a discussion about
nearshoring in my remaining time. Obviously tensions with China
leads to nearshoring opportunities--Mexico, Central, and Latin
America. Such potential investments could create productive
local options for Hondurans who might otherwise join gangs or
migrate north to the United States. Obviously there are major
obstacles including inadequate energy, poor infrastructure, and
concerns about rule of law. What do you think the United States
should be doing differently to help Honduras attract
nearshoring investment opportunities? And that is for either
witness.
Mr. Jacobstein. Thank you, Congressman. Happy to start off
here. This is really important to us. And through the Central
America Forward Initiative, which is the Vice President's
flagship initiative on investment in the region, we are working
with the private sector in the United States and in Central
America to identify more opportunities for nearshoring in
Honduras and the region.
Central America certainly benefits from its geographic and
cultural proximity to the United States and the region is well-
positioned for growth with an opportunity to nearshore more
textiles, technology, and service jobs.
Yesterday, the New York Times published an interesting
story about the success of a Central America Forward partner
company. Columbia Sportswear has found and shifting production
from Asia to Central America due to trade barriers and
disruptions in the shipping industry.
So we continue to work with the Honduran government, with
the El Salvadoran and Guatemalan government, other partners in
the region to find more opportunities for nearshoring, and
appreciate interests on both sides of the aisle on this
important topic.
Mr. Stanton. All right. I will submit my final question on
human rights for the record. Madam Chair, I yield back.
Ms. Salazar. Thank you, Congressman Stanton.
Now I recognize Representative Kamlager-Dove of the State
of California for 5 minutes.
Ms. Kamlager-Dove. Thank you, Madam Chair. And thank you to
our witnesses for being here again. Once again I take issue
with the framing of this hearing, a very tired and old
McCarthyism trope of yesteryear, which is both antidemocratic
and counter to the U.S. interests to evaluate an entire
bilateral relationship really according to partisan domestic
political views. We should be a consistent partner to all
democracies in the region and that want to work with us
regardless of--political party in power. So I would like to
focus my question on some of those issues.
President Castro's June visit to China resulted in the
signing of 17 MOUs with the PRC. These reportedly included an
agreement on Chinese telecommunications. It also resulted in an
arrangement for the State-run China media group to broadcast
PRC news programs on Honduran state-owned television channels.
So, Deputy Assistant Secretary Jacobstein, do we know if
the MOUs include an agreement for Huawei to build out Honduran
telecommunications networks which would be especially
concerning given that the U.S. has a military base in that
country? And how is State responding to the PRC's broader
attempts to manipulate the news and information environment in
Honduras?
Mr. Jacobstein. Thank you for raising this critical issue.
And as I mentioned earlier, we certainly--while it is a
sovereign decision of the Honduran government to switch
recognition, we certainly raised our concerns and continue to
do so and continue to note that China's promises often are
unfulfilled.
With regard to Huawei and our presence at the Soto Cano
base, that is absolutely critical and it would be very
concerning if we saw a Chinese presence in any way at the base.
And this is something that we have made clear, both publicly
and privately to our Honduran partners.
Ms. Kamlager-Dove. OK. Remittances make up 29 percent of
Honduras' GDP, so clearly the Honduran diaspora in the United
States including the Honduran-American community in my
district, could be sources of investment into Honduras. So once
again is the State Department working to connect the Honduran
diaspora in the United States with investment opportunities in
Honduras?
Mr. Jacobstein. Thank you for that question. This is
something that I think we would love to collaborate more
closely with you on. Just this morning I was at the White House
for an event with the Salvadoran diaspora which focused on a
lot of ways that we can link up our domestic policy and our
foreign policy to benefit communities in the United States and
would love to work with you to find ways to leverage
remittances in a positive way.
So under Central America Forward we are pushing for more
private investment, but I do think there is more we can do to
link diaspora communities and would welcome the opportunity to
work with you and your office.
Ms. Kamlager-Dove. Thank you for that. Well many groups do
talk about the challenges with DFC. I had a meeting with the
Ambassador just yesterday and he said well, we would love to
have more American businesses here. He mentioned groups like
StarLink as it relates to telecom.
So how aggressive are we being in helping to make our trade
presence known or trade opportunities known? Because countries
are coming saying oh, I love America. That is my No. 1 best
friend. But we need more than defense and aid. We also need
trade. And we are hearing that more and more from our partners
in the Western Hemisphere who feel like we are overlooking
them.
Mr. Jacobstein. Absolutely. We think that is critical. And
that is why the Vice President has galvanized $4.2 billion in
private sector investment commitments in northern Central
America, which I think are not just--it is not just money. That
includes creating real jobs, connecting 4 million people to the
internet, bringing more than a million people into the formal
financial sector, training almost half a million people to
enhance their workforce skills.
So absolutely agree with you. I think it is very important.
The efforts through the Vice President's--through Central
America Forward and our partner, the Partnership for Central
America that does a lot of good work, not only encouraging
investment in the region, but also encouraging the rule of law,
good jobs, and good governance, ensuring that these aren't just
any jobs, but jobs that respect labor rights.
Ms. Kamlager-Dove. OK. And last, Deputy Assistant
Administrator Guilarte, I am going to give you these last
moments just to talk about gender equality, women's rights. We
know that Latin America suffers from the highest rate of
femicide. So has this political focus of President Castro
translated into any meaningful steps to improve gender equality
in Honduras or had an impact on USAID's operating environment
at all?
Ms. Guilarte. Thank you, Congresswoman, for your question.
As I mentioned in my opening remarks, this is one of major
concerns that we have. As I mentioned, there has been 225 death
this year. That is almost one girl, one woman or girl a day
being murdered in Honduras.
We have a breadth of activities in Honduras that--for us
gender-based violence and the way that we tackle and address
the issue, it is cross-cutting. It could be through our work
with the private sector. It could be through local
organizations, institutions that we support.
So the answer is yes, we are addressing these issues
through a number of different activities that we have on the
ground. And we have actually double, dare I say triple the
amount of funding commitment that we have to address gender-
based violence through the Root Causes Strategy. This is one of
the main pillars. It is one of the reasons why women flee at
higher numbers from the region. And I have to say this is one
of the largest foreign assistance packages we have seen since
the Civil War, what this Administration has done for Central
America.
Ms. Kamlager-Dove. Thank you.
And, Madam Chair, thank you for indulging me with that last
question and allowing it to be answered. With that I yield
back.
Ms. Salazar. Thank you, Representative Kamlager-Dove of
California.
And we will now begin a second round of questioning, and I
am going to recognize myself for a few minutes. I am going to
go back to Mr. Jacobstein. And I am sorry that I was
mispronouncing your last name as Jacobstein. They just
corrected me.
So I wanted to congratulate you. Hey, wow. Because we know
that you met with Johana Tablada, who is a top Cuban official.
And when she reached out to this Administration through you and
she said that once again the Cuban regime is asking for the
United States to lift the embargo you said that they need to
liberate and lift the imprisonment that they have on more than
1,000 political prisoners, 55 of them less than 16 years old.
So bravo. Thank you for that.
And I just wanted to see if you could share a little bit
more of what else transpired in that meeting. What else was
said that you can share with us?
Mr. Jacobstein. Thank you, Madam Chair. I really appreciate
that. So on October 10, yes, I met with Johana Tablada. We
discussed diplomatic facilities, consular services, and
irregular migration And yes, I pressed Ms. Tablada for Cuba to
release the approximately 1,000 unjustly detained political
prisoners incarcerated and to allow Cubans to exercise their
fundamental freedoms.
Ms. Salazar. And what did she say?
Mr. Jacobstein. We obviously did not get a very positive
response, but we will continue to press on these issues.
Ms. Salazar. No, just give me--if you can share with us, it
is like what do they say when you present the fact that there
are 1,000 people that are in jail just for going out on the
street and saying hey, we want freedom?
Mr. Jacobstein. Yes.
Ms. Salazar. And 55 of them are 16 years or older--I mean
or younger. So what do they say?
The. Clerk. I appreciate that.
Ms. Salazar. What is the justification? What is it that
they know that we do not?
The. Clerk. Yes, I appreciate that. I think Cuban officials
generally do not acknowledge that these are political
prisoners, and that is a long-standing concern of ours and
yours. And we appreciate your leadership on this issue.
Ms. Salazar. Of course.
Let me just ask a few questions to Mrs. Guilarte. I notice
you are Cuban-American just like I am, so regardless of the
political party we understand that everything that has to do
with socialism is never good for whatever people have to
confronted, specifically Cuba or Venezuela. You mentioned
Democratic values, Honduran people. And I think that USAID has
always done a fantastic program in bringing the American values
to whatever programs, whatever it touches.
So I am asking you specifically what can USAID and the
taxpayers' money can do in Honduras at this hour having a
government that is socialist? What can we do in order to open
the eyes of the average Honduran to continue believing in
democracy, something that has not really given too much
dividends to the average Honduran and not move to the Chavez
and Fidel ideology?
Ms. Guilarte. Thank you, Congresswoman, for your question.
I think USAID--I am proud to work for an agency whose mandate
is to improve the lives of the people in the countries that we
serve. As an immigrant myself I am also proud of the Biden-
Harris Administration and the real commitment, me as an
immigrant working in government to make sure that my
perspective also counts. So I really appreciate the opportunity
to be here as well with you, because it is very personal, as
you said.
I think the breadth of our programs have a reach that is
really hard to measure. Part of my role, I get to visit the
countries where we work and for me it is extremely humbling
when I am in a cab--with a cab driver who says USAID paid for
my son's scholarship to go to college. Now he is a professor.
Kids that had--through nutrition programs in the most remote
areas of Honduras were able to have a healthy life, right?
Or we have youth that are part of a youth corps program
that we have that are being allowed to have internships because
we broker those partnerships with the private sector. And youth
in the community--so they have opportunity to flourish and to
stay in their country. Because we really believe that that is
where the hope lies, right, for them to have these
opportunities, to remain home and not to take the dangerous
journey north. So I think that would be one way where I think
our foreign assistance and the work that USAID does is most
impactful.
Ms. Salazar. Thank you.
OK. Mr. Jacobstein, another question that I would like to
pose to you is that if--we understand that the whole Central
American area right now is in a difficult situation. I would
like to hear your opinion--and if it is possible you can give
us the most honest opinion of the government of Xiomara Castro.
What are your major concerns at this hour with the Castro
government or Administration? If there is one concern that the
State Department has about this government. I just explained to
what is mine. Now what is yours?
Mr. Jacobstein. Thank you. I appreciate that question. And
I would just say the top--our approach is to meet our partners
where they are because we want to find ways to collaborate in
areas that advance U.S. interests. But in terms of concerns I
mentioned earlier that we had concerns over shifting
recognition from Taiwan to the PRC. Certainly a concern.
Something we raised. Ultimately it is not our decision. And we
remain concerned about what this could mean for the future of
Honduras. But again, this is----
Ms. Salazar. But that is foreign policy. I am talking about
internal policy, things that you know, you notice and you
document internally. What is your No. 1 concern?
Mr. Jacobstein. As I mentioned earlier, I think our No. 1
concern right now looking ahead is ensuring that there is a
free, fair process for an independent attorney general. And
this is something we are very focused on and really matters a
great deal. Because if you look at a country like Guatemala
when you have a rogue attorney general who is going after
individuals who are actually fighting corruption, you have a
really bad situation in an area where you can completely
undermine democracy. And we do not want to see that elsewhere
in the region. So it is really important that there be a free,
fair independent attorney general selection process. So we look
forward to working with the Honduran government and partners to
support that.
Ms. Salazar. And what would be those instances where it
will not--where the Honduran government will not pick the
correct AG?
Mr. Jacobstein. Ultimately this a decision of the Honduran
congress, so we look forward to working with the Honduran
executive branch and the congress, the various parties in
Congress.
Ms. Salazar. What do you see that you may have concerns on
how they are going to pick that position?
Mr. Jacobstein. That process is still ongoing. It is taking
a long time. So obviously we would like----
Ms. Salazar. It is taking a long time.
Mr. Jacobstein [continuing]. We would like it happen
expeditiously, but ultimately at the end of the day----
Ms. Salazar. Why do you think it is taking a long time?
Mr. Jacobstein. Gridlock in Congress. As we see in
congresses throughout the hemisphere that sometimes these
things are hard to do, but we hope that can move expeditiously
in a free and fair manner.
Ms. Salazar. Right. But do you recognize or do you see the
same thing the same way I do that for the Biden Administration
the Honduran government has become the poster child versus
Guatemala, versus El Salvador--obviously Nicaragua is not part
of the equation--but that the Biden Administration is treating
Honduras and the current presidency or the Administration with
better eyes than the other partners who happen to be
conservative governments, not perfect, but conservative?
Mr. Jacobstein. I do not, no.
Ms. Salazar. Why not? Where am I mistaken?
Mr. Jacobstein. You see today my boss, Assistant Secretary
Brian Nichols, is in El Salvador where he will be meeting with
President Bukele. I recently visited the country. There are
certainly areas of concern, but we also have a lot of areas
where we collaborate. Secretary Blinken recently met with the
El Salvadoran foreign minister to find ways that we can move
forward. So I think these are complicated relationships. We are
not naive about the challenges that the region faces, but we
work with all governments in perfect context to try to advance
U.S. interests.
Ms. Salazar. Thank you.
I now recognize the ranking member, Mr. Castro, for 5
minutes.
Mr. Castro. Thank you.
And thank you, Mr. Jacobstein. And listen, I agree with
you. I think that there are leaders on both the left and the
right who over the years have abused their people and have
abused their neighbors, but I think part of our standard has to
be that the people of a nation get to elect who they want and
as long as those leaders are respecting their people, the
rights of their people and respecting their neighbors, then we
can work together on common interests including on interests of
the United States and allies.
I do want to ask you a little bit more about this--what is
a very big and consequential lawsuit for Honduras. Just to give
some context the Castro Administration has worked to revoke the
implementation of Zones of Economic Development and Employment,
known as ZEDEs, which have been deemed, or were deemed by the
Honduran supreme court as unconstitutional and illegal in their
violations of basic human rights, labor and environmental
obligations.
As I mentioned in my opening remarks, US, LLC is suing the
Honduran government for one-third of their GDP, which seems
fairly egregious, but as you know this lawsuit is being handled
through the ISDS under CAFTA-DR which allows non-disputing
parties including the United States to weigh in.
In response to inquiries earlier this year from two of my
colleagues the U.S. Trade Representative said that President
Biden does not believe that corporations should receive special
tribunals in trade agreements that are not available to other
organizations as well.
So do you believe that suing Honduras for a third the size
of its economy is reasonable and has the State Department
submitted or do you plan to submit a comment weighing into this
litigation particularly on the side of labor and the
environmental rights and inclusive economic prosperity?
Mr. Jacobstein. Thank you. Appreciate that question. And
you are right, in the run-up to the 2021 national elections
opposition to these so-called ZEDEs galvanized across the
political spectrum.
The State Department, our U.S. Embassy in Honduras closely
followed developments in the case and remain engaged with U.S.
investors as we try to promote a positive investment climate in
Honduras. We have raised the Prospera issue on multiple
occasions with the Honduran government at the highest levels
and ultimately have encouraged both sides to reach a consensual
resolution. But ultimately in terms of the question the United
States is not taking a position on the merits of the dispute.
Mr. Castro. So right now is it fair to say the State
Department is not planning to weigh in?
Mr. Jacobstein. That is fair, yes.
Mr. Castro. And how is the United States engaging with
private sector actors to ensure a good environment for
investment as well as an environment that protects basic
rights?
Mr. Jacobstein. Yes, thank you very much. Appreciate that
question. Recently I was in Costa Rica for the Central America
Donors Forum that the Seattle International Foundation put on.
And the Partnership with Central America, which I mentioned is
a critical partner working with the Biden-Harris Administration
on Central America Forward, announced new initiatives to invest
in anticorruption efforts in the region. So this continues to
be front and center as we think about investment. It cannot
just be investment. It has to be support for the rule of law,
support for labor rights, and the environment. So we continue
to robustly look at these issues.
Mr. Castro. Sure. Thank you. Then one last question for me.
The election of President Castro was for many Hondurans seen as
a new opportunity for democracy to truly work for the people
after years of widespread corruption and insecurity. The United
States has publicly supported the effort to establish a U.N.-
backed anticorruption agency known as CC. So I wanted to ask
you, Mr. Jacobstein, could you provide me with a detailed
update on the progress of CC's establishment?
Mr. Jacobstein. Yes. No, thank you and really appreciate
your leadership in this space, as you noted. I know you have
been talking about this from before even the inauguration, so
thank you for that.
So we are glad that the United Nations team began its
technical assessment of the legal and institutional changes
that would be required for CC to operate effectively. The U.N.
will ask Honduras to make a number of important changes
including potentially repealing the amnesty law. The Honduran
people I think will view quick action to implement the
necessary changes as proof of the Honduran government's
seriousness in combatting corruption. So we obviously laud the
Honduran government for putting this forward, but we urge
expeditious action because this needs to get--needs to happen
quickly, as you noted.
Mr. Castro. Thank you. I yield back, chairwoman.
Ms. Salazar. Thank you, Ranking Member Castro.
And I think I want to thank the witnesses for their
valuable testimony and the members for their questions.
The members of the subcommittee may have some additional
questions for the witnesses and we will ask you to respond to
them in writing.
And pursuant to the rules all members may have 5 days to
submit statements, questions, and extraneous materials for the
record subject to the length limitations.
So without objection, the committee stands adjourned. Thank
you for your time once again.
[Whereupon, at 4:17 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]

APPENDIX
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

INFORMATION SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD ARTURO ZACAPA
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
