- STANDING UNITED AGAINST THE PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF CHINA'S ECONOMIC AGGRESSION. AND PREDATORY PRACTICES

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

STANDING UNITED AGAINST THE PEOPLE'S
REPUBLIC OF CHINA'S ECONOMIC AGGRESSION
AND PREDATORY PRACTICES

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE INDO-PACIFIC

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

MAY 18, 2023

__________

Serial No. 118-25

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Foreign Affairs

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available:  http://www.foreignaffairs.house.gov/, http://
docs.house.gov,
or http://www.govinfo.gov

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
53-222PDF                  WASHINGTON : 2023

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Committee on Foreign Affairs

MICHAEL T. MCCAUL, Texas, Chairman

CHRISTOPHER H. SMITH, New Jersey      GREGORY MEEKS, New Yok, Ranking
JOE WILSON, South Carolina                Member
SCOTT PERRY, Pennsylvania   BRAD SHERMAN, California
DARRELL ISSA, California GERALD E. CONNOLLY, Virginia
ANN WAGNER, Missouri WILLIAM KEATING, Massachusetts
BRIAN MAST, Florida DAVID CICILLINE, Rhode Island
KEN BUCK, Colorado AMI BERA, California
TIM BURCHETT, Tennessee JOAQUIN CASTRO, Texas
MARK E. GREEN, Tennessee DINA TITUS, Nevada
ANDY BARR, Kentucky TED LIEU, California
RONNY JACKSON, Texas SUSAN WILD, Pennsylvania
YOUNG KIM, California DEAN PHILLIPS, Minnesota
MARIA ELVIRA SALAZAR, Florida COLIN ALLRED, Texas
BILL HUIZENGA, Michigan ANDY KIM, New Jersey
AUMUA AMATA COLEMAN-RADEWAGEN,    SARA JACOBS, California
American Samoa KATHY MANNING, North Carolina
FRENCH HILL, Arkansas SHEILA CHERFILUS-MCCORMICK,
WARREN DAVIDSON, Ohio   Florida
JIM BAIRD, Indiana GREG STANTON, Arizona
MICHAEL WALTZ, Florida MADELEINE DEAN, Pennsylvania
THOMAS KEAN, JR., New Jersey JARED MOSKOWITZ, Florida
MICHAEL LAWLER, New York JONATHAN JACOBS, Illinois
CORY MILLS, Florida SYDNEY KAMLAGER-DOVE, California
RICH MCCORMICK, Georgia JIM COSTA, California
NATHANIEL MORAN, Texas JASON CROW, Colorado
JOHN JAMES, Michigan BRAD SCHNEIDER. Illinois
KEITH SELF, Texas

Brendan Shields, Staff Director
Sophia Lafargue, Staff Director
------

Subcommittee on Indo-Pacific

YOUNG KIM, California, Chair
ANN WAGNER, Missouri                 AMI BERA, California, Ranking
KEN BUCK, Colorado                       Member
MARK GREEN, Tennessee      ANDY KIM, New Jersey
ANDY BARR, Kentucky      BRAD SHERMAN, California
AUMUA AMATA COLEMAN RADAWAGEN,       GERALD CONNOLLY, Virginia
American Samoa      WILLIAM KEATING, Massachusetts
WARREN DAVIDSON, Ohio                JOAQUIN CASTRO, Texas
MICHAEL WALTZ, Florida

Daniel Markus, Staff Director

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page

INFORMATION SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD

Reuters article titled "China Detains Staff, Raids Office of U.S.
Due Diligence Firm Mintz Group."...............................     3
Wall Street Journal article titled "Bain's Staff in Shanghai
Questioned as China Targets Foreign Businesses."...............     8

WITNESSES

Raphael, Alon, CEO, Femtometrix..................................    17
Scissors, Derek, Senior Fellow, American Enterprise Institute....    24
Reynolds, Matthew, Fellow, Economics Program, Center for
Strategic and International Studies............................    35
Feith, David, Adjunct Senior Fellow, Center for New American
Security.......................................................    46

APPENDIX

Hearing Notice...................................................    73
Hearing Minutes..................................................    74
Hearing Attendance...............................................    75

STATEMENT FOR THE RECORD SUBMITTED FROM REPRESENTATIVE CONNOLLY

Statement for the record submitted from Representative Connolly..    76

QUESTION SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD

Question submitted for the record................................    78

STANDING UNITED AGAINST THE PEOPLE'S
REPUBLIC OF CHINA'S ECONOMIC AGGRESSION.
AND PREDATORY PRACTICES

Thursday, May 18, 2023

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on the Indo-Pacific,
Committee on Foreign Affairs,
Washington, DC.

The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 9:01 a.m., in
room 210, House Visitor Center, Hon. Young Kim (chair of the
subcommittee) presiding.
Mrs. Kim of California. Good morning, everyone.
The Subcommittee of the Indo-Pacific on the Foreign Affairs
Committee will come to order.
The purpose of this hearing is to spotlight different
dimensions of the People's Republic of China's economic
coercion, economic coercion tactics, and discuss how we can
coordinate an allied response.
I now recognize myself for an opening statement.
Welcome. This is our Indo-Pacific Subcommittee's hearing
examining the People's Republic of China's economic aggression
and predatory practices. Today we will hear from experts on the
PRC's economic coercion, and my goal for this hearing is to
give the witnesses an opportunity to sound the alarm on the
PRC's predatory practices against our partners, allies, and
even everyday Americans.
One of our witnesses is a firsthand victim of PRC's
economic coercion and predatory practices. The PRC often
successfully intimidates individuals and entities not to speak
openly. So we thank you, Mr. Alon, for having the courage to
tell your story publicly.
I recall in October 2021 my colleague, Mr. Brad Sherman,
said during the House Financial Services Subcommittee hearing
on China that several financial industry representatives had
withdrawn their original commitment to testify because of fear
of backlash from China. It is unacceptable for the CCP to limit
Americans' free speech and even more unacceptable that the CCP
can do it without consequences.
Last month, U.S. Chamber of Commerce warned that China's
mounting scrutiny of American companies have dramatically
raised the risks of doing business in the country.
I would like to submit for the record a Reuters article
titled ``China Detains Staff, Raids Office of U.S. Due
Diligence Firm Mintz Group,'' as well as a Wall Street Journal
article titled ``Bain's Staff in Shanghai Questioned as China
Targets Foreign Businesses.''
[The information referred to follows:]

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mrs. Kim of California. These headlines are unfortunately
the new normal for American businesses. And as you will hear
from our witnesses, we are not doing enough to make these
predatory practices consequential to the CCP. The CCP must know
that every act of coercion will result in a countermeasure from
the United States and its allies, and that the PRC must abide
by the same international rules and norms that everyone else in
the international community is bound by.
We must also recognize the immense economic pressure that
the PRC puts on our allies, partners, and friends around the
world. The CCP uses debt-trap diplomacy through the Belt and
Road Initiative to achieve its political goals abroad, so much
so that it is willing to crash economies and generate
instability as it did in Sri Lanka.
This pressure is especially overt in the Indo-Pacific
Islands, Pacific Islands, where PRC diplomats host politicians
for dinner, and those politicians leave with envelopes full of
cash and promises of major infrastructure projects.
It is an unfair fight, and we need to show up. We must
equip our diplomats in these countries to respond to economic
coercion, and our diplomats need a clear sense of the direction
we are going.
To respond to economic coercion, the United States should
take several steps. As a first step, American money and
technology that fuels CCP coercion and predation cannot keep
going to the PRC. It makes no sense to increase the PRC's
ability to coerce the United States and help it gain more
leverage over us.
Second, if the PRC is unwilling to change coercive elements
of its economy, the United States must make it more costly for
the PRC to maintain that system. That means action on tech
transfers and subsidies.
Third, the United States needs to build a coalition of
countries, in particular in the Indo-Pacific, that adopt the
same actions. And I cannot stress enough the importance of
coordinating our responses to economic coercion with our allies
and partners in the Indo-Pacific. When even a few countries act
in concert, we can undermine core CCP strategies and
objectives. We must stand together to make sure each CCP
coercive act against an aligned country fails.
So I look forward to hearing from our panel on how to put
these objectives into practice.
The chair now recognizes the ranking member, the gentleman
from California, Mr. Bera, for his opening statements.
Mr. Bera. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman, and thank you for
holding this hearing. This is a topic that I have spent a lot
of time thinking about, we have introduced legislation on, and
is incredibly important.
Let me start by saying, you know, the PRC will, you know,
try to put out a dialog saying, you know, that the United
States is trying to, you know, isolate the Chinese
economically. The truth is, we would like to maintain the
status quo, which has lifted all the countries in that region
through a rules-based order. But we have to respond to Chinese
aggression and Chinese economic coercion, and the countries in
the Indo-Pacific know firsthand.
You can look at Chinese economic coercion against the
Republic of Korea when we deployed THAAD batteries for the
protection and the defense of Korea. You know, the Japanese
have faced economic coercion and blowback. The Australians have
faced economic coercion and blowback.
You see Chinese aggression in the South China Sea. You see
them encroaching on Vietnam's exclusive economic zone, the
Filipinos' exclusive economic zone, and it is incredibly
important for us to understand how they are using economic
coercion and how we can counter this.
Even more so worrisome is what they are doing in recent
weeks and months. You know, we have seen direct targeting of
American companies in terms of targeting of Micron. Now we are
seeing them go after consulting companies like Bain Capital and
others. And I would argue this is not in China's interest,
because as they start to target specific companies, it will
make it much harder for us to continue to think about how we do
business in China, how investment flows into China, but, again,
Xi Jinping has kind of signaled where he is headed.
In the last Congress, we were able to introduce a bill and
pass a bill, the Countering China Economic Coercion Act. This
bill authorized the Administration to establish an interagency
task force to respond to the PRC government's acts of economic
coercion and required the evaluation of the impacts on U.S.
business and economic performance.
This Congress, in bipartisan support for robust response to
the PRC economic coercion, we have introduced H.R. 1135, the
Countering Economic Coercion Act of 2023, led by myself,
Ranking Member Meeks, Chairwoman Kim, and Chairman of the House
Rules Committee, Tom Cole. There is also a Senate equivalent.
This bill would give the President new tools to provide
rapid economic support to partners and allies facing economic
coercion from the PRC and hold the PRC accountable for its
actions. This is the type of legislation that we should be
doing to make sure we can both support our allies but also
react fairly quickly.
It is also my hope that as the G7 meets in Hiroshima that
they will also discuss economic coercion, and hopefully we will
see, you know, some statements of support for rules-based order
and how the G7 can work together to support one another, but
also to support some of those smaller economies and smaller
countries, should they face Chinese economic coercion.
So, again, Madam Chairwoman, I appreciate your holding this
hearing. I think this is an incredibly important topic, and
this is a bipartisan, bicameral topic.
So with that, let me yield back. And, again, thank you.
Mrs. Kim of California. Thank you, Ranking Member.
And other members of the committee are reminded that
opening statements may be submitted for the record.
And we are pleased to have a distinguished panel of
witnesses before us today on this very important topic. Mr.
Alon Raphael is the president and CEO of FemtoMetrix, Dr. Derek
Scissors is a senior fellow at the American Enterprise
Institute, Mr. Matthew Reynolds is a fellow in the economics
program at the Center for Strategic and International Studies,
and Mr. David Feith is an adjunct senior fellow at the Center
for New American Security and was previously the U.S. Deputy
Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian and Pacific
Affairs.
Thank you all for being here today. Your full statements
will be made part of the record, and I will ask each of you to
keep your spoken remarks to 5 minutes in order to allow time
for members' questions.
I now recognize Mr. Alon for your opening statement. You
have 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF ALON RAPHAEL, CEO, FEMTOMETRIX

Mr. Raphael. Chairwoman Kim, Ranking Member Bera, and
distinguished members of the subcommittee, thank you for the
opportunity to testify at today's hearing. It is an honor to be
here and share my story.
Today I will testify about my company's recent experience
with trade secrets and intellectual property theft and how that
theft highlights industry-wide vulnerabilities in developing
advanced semiconductor production in the United States.
I am the chief executive officer of FemtoMetrix,
Incorporated, a small California-based company innovating in-
line process control tools for advanced semiconductor
production. We produce a complex tool system that is both
wholly unique and utterly vital to progress in advanced
microchip manufacturing. Our tool system, the Harmonic F-
Series, uses unique non-destructive techniques to detect
advanced microchip manufacturing blind spots created by the
introduction of new materials, new processes, and new 3D
architectures.
FemtoMetrix was founded in 2011 building on decades of
Department of Defense-funded research at various institutions,
including Boeing, NASA, JPL, and the Institute for Space
Defense Electronics. FemtoMetrix technology is essential to any
country wanting to lead in cutting edge, integrated circuit
manufacturing capability. It provides vital data to advanced
chipmakers, increasing yields and decreasing the field failure
rate of chips sold.
Also, it is the only metrology tool in existence that
functions in line for critical applications with the newly
emerging chip structures and designs like Gate All Around, also
known as Intel RibbonFET and Samsung MBCFET.
In September 2020, FemtoMetrix's Vice President of System
and Field, a Chinese national, resigned. Shortly after, another
Chinese national hired at first's recommendation, also left the
company, followed by a third. During their duties, the three
Chinese nationals were trusted team members privy to the inner
workings of FemtoMetrix's technology.
The three had significant experience building, calibrating,
and using the Harmonic F-Series systems, although they worked
in different areas. One even invested in the company while
employed there. As we later learned, the three individuals were
able to piece together the trade secrets they were separately
privy to and create a competing copycat business in China
called Weichong Semiconductor.
They made a business plan presentation that contained
highly sensitive and proprietary information, which they used
to solicit FemtoMetrix's customers, all while still employed
there. In the business plan, they did not even remove
FemtoMetrix's name from product images.
FemtoMetrix also discovered that they covertly absconded
with thousands of files and years' worth of proprietary
information upon leaving the company and snuck those files to
Weichong in China. In addition, because one was also an
investor in the company, he had access to and seems to have
taken additional materials.
Weichong has also filed Chinese patents using FemtoMetrix's
technology to publicize trade secrets and thwart legal
challenges to enforce American trade secret laws. In 2022,
FemtoMetrix sued the three Chinese nationals in Federal Court.
Weichong has retained a multinational law firm to defend the
lawsuit.
Counsel for Weichong has Stated their intention to wage a
legal war of attrition. Nonetheless, FemtoMetrix is committed
to fighting and defending what is right, because the United
States cannot afford to lose FemtoMetrix as that would
critically undermine U.S. semiconductor capabilities and
leadership.
Assuming FemtoMetrix obtains a judgment, as a practical
matter, it will not be enforceable in China. A permanent
injunction would likely limit Weichong's prospects for
expansion beyond China, but not within. The American legal
system is not designed to address deliberate international
thefts of this kind and is not adequate for the task.
Foreign companies like Weichong have become accustomed to
exploiting the court system's slow-paced and high cost.
Alternative means of addressing such international theft are
needed. Weichong is not an outlier but an exemplar for the
theft of American intellectual property.
It begins in China when someone like a venture capitalist
knows someone else like a technologist. The technologist works
to create rapport with the target company. Once the
technologist has the required access and data, the venture
capitalist funds a Chinese company supported by the stolen
technology.
The venture capitalist funds litigation through the copycat
company and attacks American intellectual property and
discloses trade secrets through published papers and patent
applications. Then, predatory venture funds likely owned or
controlled by foreign entities approach the undermined American
company to invest, despite the foreign challenges.
They seek proprietary information technology, customer
status, and market position under the guise of due diligence.
Their primary goal is to utilize leverage created by the first
venture capitalist to eviscerate the American target company
further. Developing a novel in-line process control technology
costs between 20 and $100 million or more and takes
approximately 8 to 10 years of development.
During that extended pre-revenue period, new companies are
vulnerable without significant support from large
organizations. Small companies like FemtoMetrix are innovating
against all odds domestically but cannot protect these
innovations from foreign agents.
Due to the theft of FemtoMetrix technology, Weichong is now
a company making a vital tool for advanced semiconductor
production. While novel hardware is fundamental to
technological advances, in-line process control tools rely on
algorithms to function and improve. When a tool is integrated
into the production line of a microchip fab, its efficacy
grows. This is because the algorithms learn from access to a
more extensive data set.
This means that if the Weichong tool is installed at
leading-edge microchip makers' fabs instead of the FemtoMetrix
tool, the FemtoMetrix tool will swiftly become obsolete.
Moreover, the tool would be a Trojan horse, allowing Weichong
to use the improved and improving algorithms in other areas,
further accelerating foreign technological advancement.
Last, a Chinese firm would be the sole supplier of the
strategic global resource. There would be no competitive
American source of this vital tool.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Raphael follows:]

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mrs. Kim of California. Thank you, Mr. Alon.
I now recognize Dr. Scissors for your 5-minute opening
statement.

STATEMENT OF DEREK SCISSORS, SENIOR FELLOW, AMERICAN ENTERPRISE
INSTITUTE

Mr. Scissors. Thank you. The chair stole my thunder, so I
am--but I will go into more detail. That is to say, if you want
to respond to Chinese predation, the minimum step is to stop
helping China become a better predator. We have been doing that
continuously at times when China was less of a predator than it
is now. There is no longer any excuse. American money and
technology should not be allowed to help the PRC become better
at coercing our allies and us and harming our interests.
And to give an example, in the case that my colleague on
the panel is talking about, can American money still flow
freely to this Chinese firm while it is in U.S. court? Is there
any warning provided to investors that you might be supporting
a company that has been accused with merit of taking U.S. IP?
Nope. Nope. No restrictions. We can pour money into that
company.
And, in fact, on the Chinese side, if you are successful in
stealing IP, you become subsidized and more attractive to
American investors. So let me flesh out the point--the main
point.
Let's start with the fact that we choose not to respond to
Chinese coercion. We have the capability to do so. The measure
showing this--I will just be brief. We have a little less debt
than China, a little less of a debt burden. Hard to believe,
because our debt burden is very high, but theirs is even worse.
We are a little bit younger. Both trends of those are in our
favor.
The wealth gap as measured by Credit Suisse is widening
between the U.S. and China. It is not a question of China is
catching up quickly, catching up slowly. The wealth gap is
widening.
The annual GDP gap is about the same as it was 10 years
ago. So the idea that we cannot stand up to the Chinese, that
they are the rising power, we are the declining power, on the
economic side does not make sense. Our allies of course are
much richer and more prosperous than China's allies. They do
not call them allies, but close enough, and that would widen
the gap if we weren't able to work together with our allies.
Let me say one more point about this. There is a lot of
talk about the dollar losing its status to the yuan. There is
no sign of that whatsoever. For that to occur, the Chinese
would have to be willing to allow money to flow freely out of
China, and they are afraid to do that. They are afraid to do
that because they have mismanaged their economy.
So until you see stories about money flowing freely out of
China, worry about our support for the dollar, our policies,
but do not worry about the yuan challenging us.
With regard to China's industrial policy, the goals I think
have shifted under Xi Jinping. That is a matter of debate. I do
not think they have been trying to maximize growth, at least
for the last 5 years. What they are doing instead looks more
like gaining economic leverage, taking an indispensable
position in key supply chains, so that they can threaten you
and it is harder to threaten China.
The tools have not changed that much. We have heard about
one, which is coercive IP transfer. Another one is skewing
competition in their favor through regulation and subsidies.
Large swaths of the Chinese economy are guaranteed monopolies.
State-owned enterprises have a national monopoly or a regional
monopoly.
There is a lot of revenue involved that makes them a
difficult competitor on the revenue side. There are also
subsidies for expansion globally, far in excess of what we
considered in the United States.
On the tech side, the original problem was requiring tech
transfer to operate in China. Now they have become, as we have
just heard, more predatory. You do not have to go to China
anymore to have China steal your IP. They will come to you and
steal it.
The U.S. responses, in the last minute and a half, we have
done very little. The tariffs that were imposed during the
Trump Administration had little effect on trade. And during
that--and I use this expressed very sarcastically--during the
trade war, U.S. investment--so 2017 to 2020--U.S. investment in
Chinese stocks and bonds rose $780 billion. I really would like
someone to declare a trade war on me, and I will issue a bond
and money will pour in. That is not standing up to China.
The Biden Administration has been extremely hesitant in its
responses in my view. Congress tightened export controls in
2018. The Bureau of Industry and Security, first under the
Trump Administration, and then the Biden Administration,
ignored part of that tightening with regard to foundational
technology, and then set it aside.
We had chip export controls promulgated by the Department
of Commerce in October of last year, but we have not gotten the
final version and we are still negotiating with South Korea.
South Korea is currently exempt from those chip controls, which
undermines their purpose.
On the stop helping side, we need to pass binding
legislation, not an executive order--executive orders are
always inferior to congressional action--that reviews
investment, and there is a simple principle. If we do not let
the Chinese buy it here because we are protecting the
technology, we should not allow American funding to develop it
in China. That is not a sensible action on our part, a set of
policies where you cannot buy the technology, but we will help
you fund it.
Last, I would say there are others, but punishing a few
high-profile beneficiaries of IP coercion, we are not going to
be able to do this comprehensively. The cat is out of the bag.
But we would send a signal to the Chinese that there could be
consequences if you steal American IP.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Scissors follows:]

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mrs. Kim of California. Thank you, Dr. Scissors.
I now recognize Mr. Reynolds for your 5-minute opening
statement.

STATEMENT OF MATTHEW REYNOLDS, FELLOW, ECONOMICS PROGRAM,
CENTER FOR STRATEGIC AND INTERNATIONAL STUDIES

Mr. Reynolds. Thank you, Chairwoman Kim, Ranking Member
Bera, and distinguished members of the subcommittee. It is an
honor to be here today, and I look forward to discussing this
important topic with you all.
I have been asked to talk today about our recent CSIS
economics program report entitled Deny, Deflect, Deter:
Countering China's Economic Coercion. China's economic coercion
carries real costs for the firms and sectors that find
themselves down range of Beijing's bullying tactics. The threat
of coercion can deter allies and partners from pushing back
against Beijing's malign behavior in other domains, whether
that be human rights violations in Xinjiang or the suppression
of democracy movements in Hong Kong.
That said, China's use of economic coercion carries costs
for Beijing, too. Therefore, a well-informed counterstrategy
presents an opportunity for the United States to exploit
Beijing's missteps and assert leadership on the global stage
while also enhancing our soft power.
In our report, we looked at eight prominent cases of
Chinese economic coercion that spanned approximately the past
13 years. Although each instance of Chinese economic coercion
is unique, common patterns and characteristics emerged across
the cases examined. We detail several of those characteristics
in our report, but I will briefly go over three of the most
salient here.
First, China displays a preference for implementing its
course of measures through informal means. This provides
Beijing some plausible deniability.
Second, Beijing prefers to target items in which it enjoys
an asymmetric advantage in the structure of trade.
And, third, China displays a cost and risk aversion. This
complicates its ability to inflict a significant economy-wide
cost on the countries it targets.
Our most surprising finding, however, was just how
ineffective China's economic coercion was. Across the cases,
Beijing had only mixed results at achieving its short-term
goals, and in fact Beijing's bullying often carried long-term
strategic costs for China as well.
Take Australia's experience, for example. Despite
restrictions on its wine, coal, and some agriculture products,
Canberra has refused to back down in its efforts to counter
Chinese interference in its domestic politics and in its calls
for an investigation into the origins of COVID-19.
In fact, Canberra has only been pushed into greater
strategic alignment with the United States since China's
bullying began, signing onto the AUKUS security agreement in
2021.
Australia's case also highlights another interesting
finding from our report. That is that China's economic coercion
intersects with U.S. interests in a more counterintuitive way
than one might at first expect. China's economic coercion
certainly works against U.S. interests in the obvious ways, in
that it challenges the rules-based international economic
order, divides allies and partners, and makes it more difficult
for the United States to build coalitions to push back against
China's malign behavior in other domains.
However, at the same time, China's economic coercion can
actually work with U.S. interests by driving trade
diversification, harming China's global image, and pushing
targets closer to the United States, again, as we saw in the
case of Australia.
That is not to say that China's economic coercion should be
tolerated. A world free from China's economic coercion is
preferable to one where the thread of coercion looms over the
decisionmaking of sovereign nations. Therefore, based on these
key insights from our report, we recommend a counterstrategy
which aims to deter China's economic coercion by building
resilience and providing relief to targeted allies and
partners.
The United States can help countries build resilience in
two primary ways, the first being through the negotiation of
free trade agreements that offer signatories real market
access, and the second by preemptively helping to identify the
mitigate countries' vulnerabilities to China's economic
coercion. The ongoing supply chain resiliency initiatives that
have emerged in the wake of COVID-10 offer logical platforms in
which to embed these efforts.
When China does coerce, the United States should be ready
to quickly provide relief to targeted countries. The United
States has several existing tools it could use to do so, such
as export financing, temporary tariff relief, and sovereign
loan guarantees, to name a few. We also recommend augmenting
this toolkit with the creation of a new coercion relief fund.
The counterstrategy should also be embedded in a larger
diplomatic messaging campaign, which draws attention to U.S.
efforts to build resilience and provide relief to targets while
also shaming China for its bullying behavior. The United States
should also seek to multilateralize its response by encouraging
allied countries to adopt similar strategies.
It is, therefore, encouraging to see reports this week that
the G7 is discussing how to jointly counter China's coercion.
In this way, the United States can mitigate the cost of
coercion for allies and partners, further reduce the
effectiveness of China's bullying, and over time demonstrate to
China the futility of its actions.
Thank you, and I look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Reynolds follows:]

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mrs. Kim of California. Thank you, Mr. Reynolds.
I now recognize Mr. Feith for your 5-minute opening
statement.

STATEMENT OF DAVID FEITH, ADJUNCT SENIOR FELLOW, CENTER FOR NEW
AMERICAN SECURITY

Mr. Feith. Thank you. Chairwoman Kim, Ranking Member Bera,
and members of the subcommittee, it is a privilege to testify
today.
My testimony has three purposes. First is to define the
problems of China's economic coercion. This is an enormous
challenge for U.S. foreign policy and national security. The
harm we face is broader than the bullying of individual
countries in a handful of cases.
Economic coercion is central to Chinese leader Xi Jinping's
grand strategy. Collecting and exploiting leverage over foreign
targets is how Xi approaches the outside world. It has helped
him perpetrate genocide in Xinjiang with impunity. It is part
of why he may feel confident enough to invade Taiwan and
discount the risks of world war.
In the coming years, China wants to become a kind of super
OPC, controlling key world economic supplies as leverage over
all of us. These are the stakes.
My second purpose is to suggest how the United States and
our allies should counter China's strategy of economic
coercion. Much of the debate on this matter has focused on
mitigating the harm done to victims of China's policies. We
should also seek to deter China by imposing costs on its
coercive behavior. To do this well, however, U.S. and allied
policymakers need to know more about relative strengths and
weaknesses in our economic relationships with China. We can
improve our knowledge by launching a 301-style investigation in
Washington, akin to the effective 301 investigation into
Chinese unfair trade practices undertaken in 2017/2018.
The U.S. could also lead, perhaps via the G7 or AUKUS, in
the creation of a standing multilateral body for studying these
issues together with allies. Most of all, we should limit U.S.
and allied exposure to Chinese coercion in the first place by
limiting trade with China in strategic areas. It is important
to ensure that the U.S. and allied balance of dependence with
China, especially in key technologies, continues to favor us.
My third purpose is to warn that current U.S. policies are
increasing America's exposure to economic predation by China.
We have important environmental interests, for example, but
increasing our reliance on Chinese solar panels and Chinese
components for electric vehicles is dangerous. It creates
national security perils similar to those that Germany
inflicted on itself by becoming dependent on Russian energy in
the years before the Ukraine war.
My written testimony has more details on all these matters.
For now, I will note further that this challenge is
unprecedented in our history. The United States has never faced
a geostrategic rival with as much economic coercive power as
Beijing wields today, let alone the economic coercive power
that Beijing credibly seeks to wield in the future.
The Communist party's goal is to decrease China's
dependence on high-tech imports from other countries while
making other countries more dependent on imports from China,
especially for critical technologies. The aim is to maximize
global economic leverage for future coercive use. It bears
repeating: the goal is for China to become a super OPEC of the
21st century, a single country that decisively controls crucial
economic inputs for the world economy.
Policymakers should constrain these aspirations now, first,
through coordinated deterrence; second, through strict limits
on China's access to technology, capital, and data controlled
by the United States and our allies. We should not wait until
China has taken fateful steps, such as attacking Taiwan, that
could lead to superpower conflict.
We and our allies require a strategy of constrainment to
counter China's economic coercion. This strategy would take
note of the realities of economic interdependence and aim to
adjust them to serve Western security interests. Constrainment
can provide deterrence, working to deflate the confidence of
Chinese leaders that they can achieve their aims through
aggression and war.
We do not want Chinese leaders to feel optimistic about
their coercive economic leverage over us and our friends. The
new U.S. and allied export controls on semiconductor technology
are a step in the right direction. If enforced diligently, the
rules could foil China's ambition to make itself a home for
advanced chip manufacturing. They can ensure that China remains
dependent on the United States and our allies for these
critical supplies.
While we are at it, U.S. and allied policymakers should not
ignore so-called mature semiconductor production. We do not
want China to dominate the global production of chips needed
for lower end electronics such as cars and critical
infrastructure systems either.
Constrainment should strive to maintain a favorable balance
of dependence in a wide range of areas. It should, for example,
strengthen the dominance of the U.S. dollar as a global reserve
and trading currency, extending Washington's ability to monitor
and punish money laundering, weapons proliferation, bribery,
and other dangerous actions by Beijing.
Constrainment should remind China of its dependence on
foreign sources of food and energy while reversing our growing
reliance on Chinese batteries, solar panels, and other green
technology. The green technology point is especially crucial
because trend lines appear to be moving fast in the wrong
direction.
As Washington subsidizes solar energy, electric vehicles,
and other renewable technologies, are we protecting against the
risk of growing dependency on China? Failure to do so would be
grave strategic neglect.
National Security Advisor Jake Sullivan recently gave a
speech underscoring the importance of both greening U.S. energy
supplies and limiting ``dependencies that could be exploited
for economic or geopolitical leverage.'' Yet there appears to
be little in current policy or in the language of the Inflation
Reduction Act, or other such bills, to ensure that we are
protecting ourselves properly.
We should reduce risks that U.S. subsidies and green energy
targets give greater coercive power to China. We should
carefully review the downsides of Chinese renewables exports
into the U.S. energy market.
Let's draw on the wisdom of the Hippocratic Oath. China
already has enormous----
Mrs. Kim of California. Sir, your time is up.
Mr. Feith. Thank you.
Mrs. Kim of California. And we will make note that your
full written testimony is in the record.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Feith follows:]

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mrs. Kim of California. I also do want to make a quick
announcement that our votes are called at 9:40. So we will go
as long as we can with member questioning, but we may have to
take a short break to go and vote and come back.
I want to thank all the witnesses for joining us and, you
know, sharing your testimony.
Mr. Alon, I want to thank you again for coming and for the
courage to tell your story publicly. And I just want to ask you
to elaborate on your experience, so we can understand how we
can stop what happened to you from happening to other American
companies in the future.
Mr. Raphael. May I ask which aspect I should elaborate on?
Mrs. Kim of California. The challenges, the coercion, what
kind of experience you had where you are doing business with
China.
Mr. Raphael. I have not done business with China, but
apparently China has done business with me.
[Laughter.]
Mrs. Kim of California. Is stealing the information you
have.
Mr. Raphael. Correct.
Mrs. Kim of California. So then can you talk about some of
the laws or regulations that is--I know I was told that you
were approached by China to try to sell your business to them,
and you did not do that. So could you talk about that? You
know, what stopped you from selling your company to a PRC
venture capital?
Mr. Raphael. I cannot confirm that they were a PRC venture
capital, but I know they are Chinese. And what stopped me is
because I am an American and I sell a critical technology that
if I am the only source of that ends up in Beijing, and I am
approaching you saying ni hao, then I have a very different way
of looking at the world than that of an American.
Mrs. Kim of California. Thank you. Is there anything else
that you can share with us about the challenges, so we can have
the public, especially the American companies, trying to, you
know, do business with China, or if they are facing with a
similar economic coercion from China?
Mr. Raphael. We are relying on policymakers to creatively
utilize all the tools in the toolbox to help us. So what I can
suggest is that, you know, my stick is the courts, and it is
ineffective.
Mrs. Kim of California. Thank you.
Mr. Scissors, you know, I recently joined Congressman Ed
Case to introduce legislation authorizing the President to
implement a pilot program of economic defense response teams to
provide emergency technical assistance to countries who are
subjected to coercive economic measures. You are aware of that,
though, right? Yes.
So what is missing in our response to countries under the
threat or use coercive measures? And do you think the response
teams referenced in that legislation can improve our response?
Mr. Scissors. I am sorry to say this, but I think what is
missing is credibility on our side. You know, we--basically,
when you are being--if China is coercing another country--
Australia, Lithuania, South Korea, Taiwan--the No. 1 thing the
U.S. would like to have is to tell people, ``Hey, we have to
work through our policies. We have to implement our
legislation. But trust us, we are going to come help you.'' And
I do not know that we always have that. We do not have that in
part, as you and I have both mentioned already, because we are
helping China at the same time we say we are going to help
whatever country is being targeted.
We also do not have it because the American policy attitude
toward trade has changed in roughly the last 10 years, where if
you say something like, ``Oh, you know, to help out a fairly
major exporter of a product, we are going to make it easier for
them to sell to the United States because the Chinese are using
their market size to coerce them,'' you are going to get
opposition to that. You know, people are going to say, ``No,
no, no. The China coercion part is not as important as the
trade part.''
And so I think any steps Congress takes, they do not have
to be large, if they are credible, if they are put into law--
and this is not an attack on any Administration--EOs die off.
If Congress takes steps that are put into law, that is going to
help, because I think the first thing we need to do to reassure
our allies is to say, ``You can trust us. It might take us a
while, but we are on your side, and we will take steps to show
that.''
Mrs. Kim of California. Thank you. You know, one of the
things that we can do is to ensure that PRC does not have the
tools to use the coercion in the allies, and especially in the
Indo-Pacific war in developing countries that need help from
us, which is why this Congress, we passed--the PRC is not a
developing country.
They are using that as a--in a way to game the system, so
they can use that special status to get the low interest rates
or no interest rates from the international groups like the
World Bank, IMF, and then they use that loan to backstop and
reinvest in those developing countries that truly need help to
set up the debt trap. That is one of the things that I think we
are using, but I know there is a lot more that we can do.
Mr. Feith, I want to ask, how do we get allies to join the
cause to push back on China?
Mr. Feith. Well, there is a need for the sort of support
and consultation that we have talked about, certainly for the
sort of supply chain resilience. You know, there has been a lot
of certainly post-COVID greater discussion about shifting
supply chains, but I think this economic coercion issue raises
the illustration of how really enormous that issue is.
It is fundamentally about macro trade relationships in the
world and unwinding really decades of shifting of greater
exposure of the U.S. market and of our allied markets to China.
If that isn't reversed, China's ability to coerce will continue
to grow.
Mrs. Kim of California. Thank you.
Let me now recognize Ranking Member Bera for your 5 minutes
of questioning.
Mr. Bera. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman.
Yes. Sometimes we are slow to recognize the threat, and so
forth, but I think everyone's eyes are wide open today. You
know, a decade ago, two decades ago, the hope would have been,
as, you know, China developed a middle class, an
entrepreneurial class, they would adopt what a lot of the rest
of the world has, free market opportunities, and so forth.
Clearly, we do not have to guess the direction that Xi
Jinping's PRC is headed. You know, he has certainly signaled
where he wants to go. And, again, maybe we are a little slow to
recognize the risk, but I think the world and the United States
certainly is doing what it can to have the tools and be ready
to counter that.
You know, this Congress we have introduced the bipartisan
Countering Economic Coercion Act of 2023, and, you know, some
of the specific things in there are authorities that we would
like to give to the President to, you know, if we see China
targeting some of our trading partners, you know, the ability
to reduce or eliminate duties, modify tariff rate quotas,
requesting appropriations and authorization for foreign aid and
financing, expediting export licensing decisions, and
expediting regulatory processes.
Mr. Scissors--or, Dr. Scissors, I certainly agree that it
is better for Congress to act and put into legislation. I would
be curious about your thoughts--I am sure you are aware of that
bill--your thoughts on that bill and strengths, but what is it
missing?
Mr. Scissors. Well, I think the strength is exactly what
you just said, sir, which is we have to be willing in a time of
crisis to be nicer to our friends than we are otherwise. That
does not mean our friends get to do whatever they want. I am
personally not happy with the South Korean government and their
companies right now with regard to export controls.
But in a time of crisis, we need to do more. We need to
show that we will stand up with them. That is a way to reassure
them and to deter China.
So those measures that you talked about of reducing
barriers to the U.S. market in time of crisis I think are the
right measures. And of course you have people who are very
sensitive to that in the U.S. I am not suggesting that we rush
to reduce barriers when there is a case of Argentina coercing
Bolivia, but China is in a very different category.
So I think that is the strength of the legislation and, as
you said, the fact that it is legislation that could be passed
on a bipartisan basis would be ideal.
I think, again, you know, I do not mean to repeat myself,
but the legislation is addressing a symptom, and the problem
is, if we take these steps to help our friends, and it happens
to be in that year--we have $200 billion in new money going to
China--on net, we are still helping the Chinese become better
at coercion.
So I think the legislation is a good idea. I support other
sorts of legislation from the Congress addressing this issue,
but I do think we need to look at, if we are helping the
Chinese more than we are countering them, the net benefit is we
are hurting our friends.
Mr. Bera. So I do not disagree. I mean, there is discussion
on how you slow down outbound investment and outbound flows.
Maybe, Mr. Reynolds, let me ask you. On that perspective,
how should we think about, you know, you still see a lot of
U.S. company investment flowing into China. You know, I am not
of the thought that says we should be telling companies what
they can and cannot do, but I also do think there is increased
risk. So how should we think about outbound investment and
perhaps approach that?
Mr. Reynolds. Yes. Thank you, Mr. Congressman. You know,
first, I may want to go to H.R. 1135. I really--what I really
like about that bill is the timelines you all built in for a
speedy response. I think that is really a key part of, you
know, any sort of counterstrategy to counter China's economic
coercion.
Something that you see in the sanctions literature is that,
you know, sanctions tend to be most effective really basically
when they are threatened, and then shortly after they are
imposed. So in that window before markets can adjust, they kind
of bite the most. So that is really, you know, to borrow a
medical term, sort of the golden hour that we need to be
responding and getting relief to the targeted countries, so
that they do not back down in the face of China's economic
coercion.
One other thing I would say that, you know, a big missing
piece of the response so far, though, is also on this
resiliency side. I think the U.S. needs to get back into
business of negotiating free trade agreements. We have seen
China continue to expand its presence in these trade
agreements, you know, applying the joint CPTPP-RCEP became
effective last year. You know, a greater and greater proportion
of the world's countries now see China as their largest trading
partner instead of the United States. So that is a big missing
component.
Quickly, on outbound investment, I agree, I think there is
a need to control this outbound investment, especially in these
critical technologies where China could gain this chokepoint
leverage over the United States. The Biden Administration I
know is looking at technologies--semiconductors, biotech, green
tech.
I would say one thing on that, though, we also need to make
sure that we multilateralize those efforts. We see this with
the export controls. When we do these things unilaterally,
there can be loopholes. And so I think the same thing for
outbound investment. We need to be looking to multilateralize
that.
Mr. Bera. Great. Thank you.
I notice I am out of time.
Mrs. Kim of California. Thank you.
I now recognize Congressman Barr for your 5 minutes of
questioning.
Mr. Barr. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman.
And I want to followup right where we left off with that
good question from the ranking member about outbound
investment. Dr. Scissors, my bill, the Chinese Military and
Surveillance Company Sanctions Act, sanctions specific
companies on four specific U.S. Government lists--the DOD 1260H
Chinese military company list, Treasury's non-SDN Chinese
military industrial complex companies list, and Commerce's
entity list and military end user list.
And the bill harmonizes these lists and imposes OFAC
sanctions on them to send a signal that not only are these
companies off limits on U.S. exchanges, but over the counter on
foreign exchanges and they presumably have a multilateral
effect insofar as its OFAC sanctions, and so it signals to non-
U.S. investors these are also off limits to them.
I would like your thoughts on this approach. Does it
provide the American private sector--specifically, asset
managers, index aggregators, investors--with sufficient clarity
and certainty about what Chinese businesses are red light
businesses and which Chinese entities are green light?
Mr. Scissors. I think that the bill would be an important
step forward. I think the key word you used there is
``clarity.'' Two things that it does. One, it tells us exactly
what the rationale is for these restrictions; and, two, as I am
sure you and your staff and everybody who has followed this are
aware, harmonization of U.S. lists would be a great idea for
the private sector. Sometimes you will meet private sector
actors and you will tell them, ``Well, did you check this
list?'' And they are like, ``What? There is another list?''
And, you know, we have Commerce, Defense, State, we have
different--Treasury. We have different agencies creating
different groups of companies that they want to single out.
Harmonizing that list for the sake of an action is a positive
step. Explaining the rationale for your action, which is done
in the bill, is also a positive step.
I think on the multilateral side, to get to both outbound
investment in general, and your bill in particular, we are the
leader on this. It is not an accident that countries began
looking at inbound investment reform after we passed CFIUS
reform.
We provide the technical information and the know-how to
most of our partners. So I think there is an automatic
multilateral benefit when you set out a U.S. policy. Clearly,
that does not mean they are going to do exactly what we did. It
means that they can learn from it and be encouraged by it.
So I think I wouldn't say the bill is, in my view, a
solution to all the problems because we do have critical
technologies to consider. That is a difficult debate. I think
your approach is excellent, because when we say we are--these
are bad Chinese entities that we shouldn't do business with, we
are not actually implementing that. The entity list, for
example, is a licensing process. We do not way to say, ``Oh,
this company deserves to be on the entity list,'' later give
them a license, and it turns out American investment is going
to the company.
So I think, you know, I see your bill as there are other
options as well, but it is an excellent first step, because the
private sector should be able to handle it better than the
current confusing U.S.----
Mr. Barr. And our bill not only requires coordination
entity lists--Commerce, Treasury, and DOD--but it also does
now--the amendment in the nature of a substitute we are working
on also requires as these agencies update the lists that they
look at--they look at special sectors of special concern. So
these critical technology sectors.
And I would invite my colleagues--the ranking member, Mr.
Kim, who is on the Select Committee with me on China. I have
talked to Ranking Member Krishnamoorthi about my approach. This
needs to be a bipartisan effort. I think it can and should be,
Chairwoman Kim.
So I want to engage with my colleagues on both sides of the
aisle to make this the right approach, and the approach that is
consistent with our basic default value of cross-border capital
flows, but identifying the specific entities of concern, of
national security concern, Chinese military technology and
surveillance companies, and excising them from U.S. investors'
investments.
Let me just go to Mr. Raphael really quickly. I was
interested in your testimony that you said the CHIPS Act, while
generally positive, does not help smaller, more agile
companies, and eliminate the fear that foreign entities will
ultimately reap the benefit. Can you amplify that testimony?
And, obviously, as a victim of Chinese commercial espionage,
what do we need to do to protect smaller companies like yours
in the semiconductor space?
Mr. Raphael. Well, we are relying on policymakers, again,
to creatively utilize all tools in the toolbox to help protect
us. I make cool things. I do not know how to protect them per
se, but what I can say is that the CHIPS Act is a double-edged
sword, insofar as companies like mine that will innovate and
grow a garden at the end may be harvested by foreign entities.
So we I think need to ensure that the resources to grow
this garden are present, but also the resources to defend it.
Mr. Barr. Thank you. My time has expired.
Mrs. Kim of California. Now I recognize Representative Andy
Kim your 5 minutes.
Mr. Kim of New Jersey. OK. Thank you. Thank you so much for
all of you coming on out here.
Mr. Reynolds, I would like to start with you. You were
talking earlier today about just kind of analysis of different
countries and whether or not they have been subjected to
economic coercion and how they fared, whether that was
something that was positive or negative in terms of moving that
direction.
That was really interesting to me, this kind of question
of--that I am kind of thinking about right now is our best
understanding of, you know, which countries are most vulnerable
to this type of economic coercion? Do we see any types of
patterns? Is it about, you know, geographic proximity to China?
Is it about certain size markets or last--you know, a certain
type of lack of diversification in their economy or other
things? I am just kind of curious if you have been able to kind
of elicit any insights on this?
Mr. Reynolds. Yes. Thanks for your--thanks for your
question. I would, you know, say just directly the most
vulnerable countries are going to be the smallest countries,
and not--you know, small countries can still be resilient if
they have advanced economies and advanced political system. So
the most vulnerable countries are really going to be the
countries that do not have market systems and do not have
strong political systems.
So you kind of see when the--in the case studies that we
have, probably the two where China had the most success of
coercing and getting the policy outcomes that it wanted was
against the Philippines and Mongolia. At the time, Mongolia was
facing a recession and was very susceptible to, you know,
Chinese threats of cutting off a concessional loan, so they
quickly apologized for inviting the Dalai Lama and then, you
know, promised not to invite the Dalai Lama back.
The Philippines is a little bit more complex because you
had Duterte, you know, become elected or was elected and then
kind of switched, you know, the Philippines' alignment. But I
would say and those two cases had sort of the weakest political
systems and weakest economies, and China had the most success.
Mr. Kim of New Jersey. Mr. Feith, I wanted to bring you in
on this because I was looking through your testimony. It seems
like you were kind of looking at this similar question, in fact
some of the same data there. I would like kind of your reaction
on that from--both in terms of what Mr. Reynolds just said, but
also in your testimony you said, look, you know, there are some
examples where they have been able to push back, but there are
some broader overarching examples as well where it has been
effective.
So over to you.
Mr. Feith. Thanks for the question. Indeed, you know, the
CSIS report is a really valuable study and allows us to work
through these questions, which really are sort of interesting
and nuanced in a detailed way. You know, as that report
highlights, and as was just discussed, there have been these
several cases that have gotten a lot of attention, and on those
cases--you know, roughly 8 or 10 over a decade--China's record
of apparent success in the particular sort of political aims of
its coercion against these individual countries is very mixed.
And there are interesting lessons in there about how
challenging it is for China to achieve some of its objectives
in some of these cases.
So, for example, you know, they generate fear and loathing
in these foreign capitals. They sometimes make foreign public
opinion and strategic opinion hardened against Beijing. Similar
effects can happen when China goes after companies, right?
China is not looking to make itself right now seem like an
inhospitable place, say to foreign semiconductor companies.
So when it takes an action and goes after a micron, it can
have some coercive bullying effect, but it also has an obvious
downside of making companies and governments that are
interested in those companies have less faith in these economic
relationships with China.
The problem is the full scope of China's economic coercion,
the full definition would appear to extend far, far beyond any
8 or 10 or 12 cases. China is using its economic coercion far
more broadly. China has been able to continue to carry out its
human rights abuses in Xinjiang largely because of its economic
coercive power, the sense that other countries do not want to
anger Beijing.
We have had a lot of discussion and interest in the
Congress in the fact that in the United States, in our media,
in Hollywood, across corporate America, major leaders with
influential voices are very careful about what they say about
China for fear of economic response.
Mr. Kim of New Jersey. One thing I would just kind of push
back a little bit on this, I mean, look, we have struggled, you
know, 20 years ago to address Sudan and the genocide in Darfur.
You know, we have struggled in a lot of those cases, not
necessarily because of just, you know, market issues. We have a
lot of challenges in terms of how to actually address human
rights abuses all over the world in both large markets and
smaller countries as well.
I just want to say this for my colleagues. I think this is
a really important issue about just, you know, where can we
have precision? Where can we have the scalpel? Where can we use
that? And where do we need the broad tools? And I think that
that is something that we think about in terms of understanding
all the tools in our toolbox and recognizing it. I think for us
to have that kind of fidelity would make our policies and our
strategies stronger.
And with that, I will yield back.
Mrs. Kim of California. Thank you, Representative Kim.
I now recognize Mrs. Radewagen for 5 minutes.
Mrs. Radewagen. Talofa lava. Good morning. Thank you,
Chairwoman Kim and Ranking Member Bera, for holding this
hearing. And thank you all for appearing today.
Earlier this week we held a hearing in the Natural
Resources Committee on countering China in the FAS and Pacific
territories. One of the stories we have heard is how China has
punished the Republic of Palau by hurting its tourism industry.
Another example is how when Australia called for an independent
investigation of COVID-19, China banned Australian goods. So
this hearing is a good followup to that hearing from earlier
this week.
Now, Mr. Feith and Dr. Scissors, my questions are directed
at you. Given the PRC's extensive economic coercion in the
Pacific Islands, what option does the United States have to
work in tandem with Pacific Islands countries to ensure that
the PRC's aggression is not successful?
Mr. Feith. Thanks for the question. Certainly, we have seen
this problem worsen in recent years, and we have seen U.S.
diplomatic and strategic attention grow toward the Pacific
Islands and the China-related challenges there, but not yet
sufficiently. Some of that is actually playing out, you know,
very much in real time this week, because President Biden was
going to be the first U.S. President to visit Papua New Guinea.
He was going to do this in a few days after going to Japan for
the G7, and he would have attended in Papa New Guinea the
Pacific Islands Forum. And this, you know, reflects sort of a
stepping up of U.S. interest that goes back into the previous
Administration and has in various ways continued since.
The President canceled that trip in light of the debt
ceiling questions here back in Washington, which is earning a
lot of predictable criticism and concern from the region, which
wants more U.S. engagement. That U.S. engagement can take the
form certainly of greater economic interest, which is often
difficult given, you know, companies have a hard time operating
in some of these environments.
The U.S., with the Congress, over the last several years
has strengthened tools like our Export-Import Bank, our
Development Finance Corporation, but bringing those tools to
the speed and the magnitude of relevance, including in the
Pacific Islands, has really been a challenge.
One obvious solution is working especially closely with our
allies, including Australia of course in that region, but also
Japan, when it comes to matters of export credit and
development finance where the Japanese have been very
successful over a very long time.
Mrs. Radewagen. Dr. Scissors.
Mr. Scissors. Thank you for the question. I think I would
start with the basics, which is that we should not be
considering, in the Pacific Islands or anywhere else, that we
get into a bidding war with the Chinese. We do not want to be
in a situation where, oh, you offered $100 million worth of
aid, we will offer 110 million, and around the world we do this
everywhere, Latin America, sub-Saharan Africa.
I think the best strategy for the U.S. to keep it simple is
to try to make the Pacific Islands States as strong and
prosperous as possible. So our goal should not be to say, ``Oh,
China is going to build something for you. We will build
something bigger.'' It should be to say, ``How can we make your
societies more resilient, but really also more successful, make
lives better for people?'' and then there won't be a thought
that, oh, we should reach out to the Chinese and they have some
magic wand they are going to wave.
So I think the basics are we should consider our Pacific
ally--friends and allies, Pacific Islands friends and allies,
we should consider their well-being. And as they do better,
they are going to be less interested in Chinese quick fixes.
Mrs. Radewagen. Thank you. And as a followup, other than
re-signing the compacts of free association, what steps can the
United States take to coordinate an allied response that
safeguards Pacific Islands from Chinese predatory practices?
Mr. Feith? Dr. Scissors?
Mr. Feith. I would just note one additional point, which
relates partly to what Dr. Scissors has mentioned about
resilience. Our efforts that would apply, not only in the
Pacific but around the world, to have a better understanding
and greater transparency around Beijing-backed corrupt
practices, because one of the ways that the Chinese Communist
Party takes advantage of countries that do not have strong
resilience at home and generally works in ways that are
disadvantageous to us, is they use corrupt practices, they use
them politically and commercially, and these can be very
effective, unfortunately, in capturing a lot of local political
influence to the detriment of those countries and to the
detriment of our interests.
Our ability in intelligence terms, in law enforcement
support terms, in support for public prosecutors in journalism
and transparency and sunlight in these cases, is really very
important and another area for U.S. and allied coordination.
Mrs. Kim of California. The gentlewoman's time has expired.
I now recognize Mr. Waltz for your 5 minutes.
Mr. Waltz. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Mr. Feith, I just wanted to continue with you. I think, you
know, as we talk about economic coercion, language matters.
Language from our leadership matters, so I will ask you a
question I have asked many in the Administration and thought
leaders in this space. Is the Chinese Communist Party in a cold
war with the United States? Using just the basic understanding
of using non-military means to supplant, replace, defeat a foe?
Mr. Feith. Yes. And Xi Jinping's own words, especially
spoken to his own leadership, say so. They believe they are in
a systemic and existential challenge with us and that they will
win.
Mr. Waltz. So I think that language matters so much because
if we are asking investors, researchers, academia, small
businesses, we can go down the line to essentially walk away
from a market, from profit for, you know, funding for research
that they may care about, we need to think about it as a
society in that light, right?
Mr. Feith. I would agree.
Mr. Waltz. Is there anyone that disagrees? Because I hear a
lot, you know, ``Oh, no, no. We are in a competition.''
Competition sounds like a couple of countries in the Olympics.
I mean, this is a cold war, and they seek to win it, and they
seek to win it without firing a shot.
Mr. Feith. That is right. And part of the challenge is
that, you know, we have habits and institutions that are for
good, historical reasons driven to see especially U.S.
Government action that is limited and restrained and surgical
and careful. And that is generally a good thing, right? We want
our government intervening, say, in markets in ways that are
generally limited. It is just that China poses a scale of a
threat----
Mr. Waltz. Sure.
Mr. Feith [continuing]. And a degree of economic
connectedness to us that we have never faced before.
Mr. Waltz. Let me just in the sense you are talking about
agree. I want everyone to make money. No problem. But when it
comes at the expense of our national security and key
dependencies, along those lines, there has been--I mean, there
is a plethora of information out there on the CCP's dominance
of global critical mineral supply chains, particularly cobalt
owns now nearly half of the world's mining, owns three-quarters
of the refining, lithium, manganese. We can go down the list.
I think my question is, how does the Biden Administration's
emphasis, billions that we are spending, that we passed out of
this body on green energy, electric vehicles, including in our
own military, to combat climate change, increase China's
economic leverage over the United States, and in accordance
with their own Made in China 2025, which is not just to in-
source their own manufacturing, it is to create global
dependencies, right? So how does that increase their leverage?
Mr. Feith. It would seem unfortunately that a lot of our
own recent policy decisions are pointing in the direction of
significantly increasing Beijing's leverage over us and over
our energy economy. And this was one of the factors after all
that appears to have made Vladimir Putin confident that he can
invade Ukraine and survive the consequences was because he
understood that he had a strong degree of leverage over western
European energy.
Mr. Waltz. Have you seen as you study CCP writings very
closely the actual translations? I mean, they have somewhat
tried supply chain coercion with the Japanese and the
Australians. Do you believe that is baked in, they are prepared
to do that even at risk of damage to their own markets and
economies with the United States?
Mr. Feith. Oh, yes. And we have seen them not only do so,
but especially since COVID, Xi Jinping has been increasingly
explicit about this. He gave a series of speeches in 2020, and
the speeches were then reflected in the 14th Five-Year Plan
that was published by Beijing in March 2021 where he spoke
explicitly about tying global supply chains and dependencies
increasingly to China using what he calls the powerful
gravitational field of China's domestic market in order to make
other countries dependent on them while reducing the dependency
of China on others.
Mr. Waltz. Just in the few seconds I have remaining,
shifting a bit, the board that oversees the Thrift Savings
Plan, which is the military's 401(k), has made a series of
moves to invest their international index into Beijing, amongst
other, because of this--again, this notion of ``We are just
here for returns.''
Our military's own retirement plan to be invested into our
greatest adversary, do you believe that this board, and boards
like it, have a moral, have a fiduciary responsibility, to
disinvest?
Mr. Feith. Yes. And there were efforts to bring that about
in 2020, especially that I gather have been undone largely by
some of the technical changes since then.
Mr. Waltz. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Mrs. Kim of California. Thank you. Thank you,
Representative Waltz.
I now recognize Representative Castro for 5 minutes.
Mr. Castro. All right. Well, thank you for being here today
to speak about this important and timely topic. I know we are
all watching closely as the G7 meets in Japan this week to
discuss China and its economic practices.
And the United States serves as an important counterweight,
as you all know, to China's aggressive economic tactics around
the world and in the Indo-Pacific region. The United States
must continue to be an economic partner, a first choice for
nations around the world, and work to build trust and goodwill
between any country looking for transparent, sustained, and
quality investments. But, as you all know, there is more work
to be done.
So, Mr. Reynolds, the United States has multiple tools to
counter China's economic coercion, which is mostly targeted
toward smaller nations. In your testimony, you indicated that
some of these tools include export financing, sovereign loan
guarantees, and temporary tariff reductions.
The United States also has many institutions that can
support a country's development goals, such as with the
Millennium Challenge Corporation. Though in recent years it has
become obvious that more countries need access to MCC funding--
and that is why I introduced the Millennium Challenge
Corporation's Candidate Reform Act, which would modernize MCC's
statutory criteria and redefine the MCC's candidate country
pool--and these changes would offer more countries an
alternative to China-backed financing.
Can you explain why it is important to ensure more
countries, especially those vulnerable to Chinese coercion,
have access to U.S. economic support?
Mr. Reynolds. Thank you, Mr. Congressman. As you mentioned,
in our report one thing we did see was that China has a
preference for targeting smaller countries. And one of our, you
know, recommendations was that the United States should
practically seek to build resilience. So, you know, not being
an expert on MCC, what I would say, any policy that can, you
know, practically help those countries build a resilience
should in theory in the long run make them more resilient and
able to stand up and withstand China's economic coercion.
One thing I will say is that there could be, you know,
tradeoffs with expanding the pool of eligible countries. If you
are raising the threshold to allow richer countries in, you
also need to make sure that does not come at the expense of
smaller countries that are the most vulnerable.
Mr. Castro. I will open it up for anyone else who would
also like to comment. No? OK.
My second question is really about Chinese misinformation
or disinformation and manipulation of certain industries, and
this time I am going to focus on an industry we do not focus on
too much around here, but we should focus on more, which is the
media and entertainment industry in the United States.
Mr. Scissors, you spoke extensively about the advantages
and disadvantages between the United States and China's
economies. You also pointed out non-traditional means of
economic coercion, such as bullying Hollywood, the 2021 NBA
spat, and what you described as ``data mercantilism.''
I am interested in how China might use its market to
influence aspects of American-made movies, for example,
identities of certain characters have been changed, movie
releases have been dropped, and whole scenes have been added to
stay in good standing with the PRC. Why do these changes
undermine the role of Hollywood as a source of soft power and
cultural diplomacy for the United States? And what implications
does it have for China's economic coercion toolkit?
Mr. Scissors. Thanks for the question. I could talk a long
time about the new data mercantilism coming out of China and
our need to respond, but I will focus on what happened with the
entertainment industry. You have seen in the NBA--you have seen
it in Hollywood for a long time, you have seen it in the NBA
more recently, that gravitational pull of the Chinese market
that David referred to, which is saying to companies,
``Wouldn't it be easier if you changed this movie a little bit
and you could make a lot more money? It is very seductive.''
And what happens is this is part of what China considers to
be information warfare. Stop letting people know what is
actually happening in China. It matters at the level of an
individual company operating in China where the Chinese say,
``Stop sending data outside of the country,'' and it matters
for U.S. entities here who wouldn't appear, like the NBA, to
have any real direct connection to China.
Authoritarian governments like information control, and our
advantage economically and as a society is to fight that off
and to allow people to express their views freely without
worrying about, is this going to cost me money?
Mr. Castro. It is interesting because China has created a
very competitive situation within Hollywood and American media
where they will only allow a certain number of movies--American
movies--per year to be shown in China. And so that is what
gives them oftentimes a leverage to say, you know, ``We are not
going to let you--we are not going to show your movie if you do
not take this out,'' or you change this or that. And there
seems to be no discernible end in sight necessarily to that
continuing.
Mr. Scissors. I think it would get worse. One of the things
I have noticed in our conversation is just to drive home the
point that sometimes we are slow in responding because we still
think China is the same as it was 20 years ago. Xi Jinping's
China is a different China, and we should expect more of that
coercion, especially if we do not respond to it.
Mr. Castro. I yield back.
Mrs. Kim of California. The gentleman's time has expired.
Now I recognize Mr. Davidson for 5 minutes.
Mr. Davidson. I thank the chairwoman. Thank you for our
witnesses calling attention to, you know, really an incredibly
important topic. I am glad we are having this hearing today. As
a guy who was trying to make a manufacturing company work in
the United States, it was really obvious we weren't just
competing against other companies. We were competing against
countries, and nowhere is that more true than China.
So, at this point, you know--well, let's go back to 2018.
2018, the Office of the U.S. Trade Representative, tasked with
monitoring China's compliance with WTO commitments, found China
to have ``a poor compliance record'' and is ``violating,
disregarding, and evading WTO rules.'' This committee has
recognized that they are abusing the developing nation status
or claims within the WTO.
So that was 5 years ago when those quotes were cited in
the--so I guess the real question is, is the WTO still an
effective, or was it ever an effective mechanism to deal with
the PRC's predatory economic practices? And what should the
United States do if the WTO structure is in fact failing? Mr.
Scissors?
Mr. Scissors. Wow. Big question. Thank you. I do not think
the WTO is effective any longer. I do not mean to say it was
never effective. I do not mean to say it is a terrible idea. I
think China has moved in a direction of violating WTO
principles and gaming the WTO, and it is now of a size that it
is intolerable.
When China broke WTO rules in 2003, it wasn't great, but it
wasn't as much of a strain on the system. Now they are more
aggressive in breaking the rules under Xi than they were under
Jiang Zemin at the time, and they are much bigger. So I do not
think the U.S. should just try to destroy the WTO, but I do
think we should recognize the WTO cannot check Chinese
behavior. And we are going to have to either act on our own or
create another organization of some sort to do so.
Mr. Davidson. Yes. And so do you believe there is a
coalition--does anyone really believe there is--you know, I
think not just at the military academy I attended, but probably
all of them around the world, they would say you are more
likely to win a war if you multiply your allies than you
multiply your enemies.
The curious thing is, how hasn't China multiplied their
enemies on trade? They have managed to do this to essentially
every country around the world, yet how is it that we are not
multiplying our allies to confront China on these abusive
practices
Mr. Scissors. My quick answer to that is, again, going back
to, how much credibility do we have? If the U.S. would take the
lead on this, not all countries, not everyone, but some
countries would join us? I think Japan, for example, would be
very happy if the U.S. would take leadership on confronting
Chinese predation. But it is hard to say you are taking the
lead if you are still having money and technology flowing to
China.
Other countries see that and they say, ``Well, you are
saying one thing. This committee may be saying one thing very
clearly. But the U.S. as a whole is not acting in that same
way.'' So allies aren't going to rally to us until we are
willing to take the necessary actions ourselves.
Mr. Davidson. Yes. So one of the things as I was coming to
Congress in 2016, the Trans-Pacific Partnership was falling
apart. And, you know, it was--the idea was we were going to
solidify some folks in the Indo-Pacific region against what
China was doing, but we were kind of doing it passively. We
weren't really confronting China about their abuses.
We were just going to build some allies there. And I think
that is a significant part of why TPP unraveled is because it
did not actually confront China as sort of passive-aggressive,
sort of this other way, and it failed from both sides. You
know, both parties started campaigning against TPP in the 2016
election cycle.
Is there a path where we might be able to put something
like that together? Or have we missed the moment? For anyone.
Mr. Scissors. Well, I did not--I will just say I did not
like the substance of the Trans-Pacific Partnership. I liked
the idea. I supported the idea. And then I saw the final
agreement, did not like it. And the main reason I did not like
it is exactly what you said. For example, in rules on State-
owned enterprises, we are very weak for the sake of making
Vietnam and Singapore happy, but it meant that we weren't doing
anything to limit the behavior of Chinese State-owned
enterprises.
I think we could, with the right partners, create an
organization, but it would have to be an organization that is
really focused on China. It is not a more general organization.
As you bring in more countries, they have different interests
with regard to China. So we would have to stand up and say,
``Look, we would love a strong TPP. We did not get it. So, as a
substitute for that, as an arrangement that is directed at
Chinese economic predation, we are going to propose something
else.''
Mr. Davidson. Yes. Thank you. And I wholly concur that is
really where I landed. And, in 2017, I introduced the Global
Trade Accountability Act, the counterpart to Senator Lee in the
Senate. And I do not really think it is timely that Congress
reclaim the Article I authority we have on trade. And, frankly,
we represent the people, not just, you know, one person at the
Administration, but really this body fully engaging on it,
because I do believe it is one of the most important problems
that we confront today that is shaping our foreign policy, our
domestic policy, and our economic future.
So I hope we do that. I yield back.
Mrs. Kim of California. Thank you. I now recognize myself
for 5 minutes, and I want to ask the question to Mr. Alon. You
know, how would you counsel an entrepreneur looking for talent
in a high-tech industry like yours?
Mr. Raphael. Be very cautious who you hire. So
fundamentally, you know, I can suggest that it is very
challenging to find talent that is not sharing a risk profile
in addition to the reward they can bring. So I would only say
think hard.
Mrs. Kim of California. Are you having a hard time finding
talent to work with you at your company?
Mr. Raphael. Absolutely.
Mrs. Kim of California. OK. Is there anything that we can
be of help to you in terms of policy initiatives?
Mr. Raphael. Well, certainly. Right now I think there is a
very clear and present danger that we are in front of insofar
as our defense capabilities. One might recall in Desert Storm
how the M1A1 Abrams tanks had a firing pin that cost 99 cents,
and it did not work and what we ended up with was a block of
metal in the desert.
I make machines that do process control. They help evaluate
microchips that are going to go into some of these very
glamorous, very large, and very critical systems, and I am
struggling right now to find the resources necessary, and the
protections necessary, to ensure that that firing pin or the
equivalent microchip thereof in these large-scale projects does
not cause another hunk of metal in the desert.
Mrs. Kim of California. Thank you. Well noted.
Mr. Feith, you mentioned--obviously, we all know a G7
meeting is happening right now. And I want to ask you, and then
maybe the others can chime in, what do you hope to see come out
of this G7 on economic coercion?
Mr. Feith. Well, we have been told by the governments
involved that they do plan to make this a focus and put it on
the agenda and perhaps issue some sort of special statement
about the economic coercion problem. It is not clear, though,
if that statement will mention China, which is not the most
important thing, but it is a proxy for how much, you know,
diplomatic weight and, frankly, you know, effort and risk
countries are willing to put behind these measures.
If the statement is just a statement and it is hollow and
not backed by the willingness of the national governments, you
know, back home to take real measures to push back--to incur
push back from China, as a result statements at the G7 aren't
going to matter for much, unfortunately.
And so it speaks partly of the question from a moment ago
about which trade coalitions can really work. The G7 would be a
great one, including if the European Union is willing to be
involved, but that is 27 member States and that is complicated
at best, beginning perhaps with AUKUS countries--that is, the
U.S., Australia, and the U.K.--or with Japan as well. We have
the Quad, of course, where Japan, Australia, and India fit.
These might be smaller but more appropriate because more robust
groupings for doing some of this overdue push back.
Mrs. Kim of California. Thank you. I yield back the balance
of my time, and I would like to now recognize Mr. Sherman for
your 5 minutes of questioning.
Mr. Sherman. Thank you. Our tax code has a capital gains
allowance, much lower taxes on the money you make by selling
stocks, bonds, other investments, designed to encourage you to
invest in the U.S. economy, create jobs and economic progress.
Can any witness here--raise your hand if you think you can
put forward an argument why we provide this capital gains
allowance to those who invest in the equity securities of
Chinese-based companies? Can any of you think of a reason why
that is good U.S. policy? The record should indicate no one
raised their hands.
Tariffs are really the only across-the-board way that we
can disentangle our economy, and disentangling is so important
because right now China does not need to hire a lobbying firm
here in Washington, because the biggest American companies feel
that their profits are dependent upon us kowtowing to China.
If we had a 1/4 percent tariff--just 1/4 percent tariff--on
all Chinese goods, and we increased it by 1/4 percent every
month, then companies that fail to disengage from China would
find a--they would be at a 40 percent disadvantage by the end
of the decade.
Finally, and I do not know if this is--I assume this has
not been brought up at the hearings. China allows only 40,
roughly, American movies to go into China every year. So if you
are a studio, you hope it is yours. So they will never make
another movie about Tibet. Richard Gere, sorry. Not just
because they cannot have that movie displayed in China, but
because if a studio makes a movie about Tibet, none of their
movies are ever getting into China, and they know that. I am
saying the quiet part out loud.
Does anyone on the panel have an idea of what we can do to
make sure that China does not use that kind of economic
coercion to affect what Americans see? Whether it is to
exercise--you know, we have American basketball players and
officials talking about human rights in China, we have movie
studios that would like to make this or that movie but would be
subject to retaliation. Does anybody have a plan just to make
sure that the First Amendment isn't interfered with by China?
Mr. Feith. Well, Congressman, one related thought would be
to find an appropriate way to ban TikTok, because the kind of
information power, the kind of--what the Chinese Communist
Party calls global discourse power, and the kind of ability to
propagandize to Americans and undermine our democracy,
including undermining our, you know, First Amendment spirit of
an open debate that is not coerced by foreign adversaries, is
advanced increasingly by TikTok, which is a kind of foreign
influence in our democracy no adversary has ever enjoyed.
Mr. Sherman. I would point out that there are a lot of
Americans who really enjoy TikTok. They are worried that that
enjoyment will be taken away from them. But I believe that
America can be self-sufficient in cat video distribution
systems. If we did not have TikTok, Americans would create
TokTik and the kitties would still be there.
We have a huge trade deficit with China. Other--in fact, it
is the most lopsided trading relationship in the history of
mammalian life. Do any of our witnesses have a plan other than
the tariff idea that I put forward to try to diminish that
trade deficit? Yes.
Mr. Scissors. I mean, I have a partial solution, which is,
you know, the 25 percent and sometimes 15 percent tariffs
proposed by the Trump Administration did not actually shrink
the trade----
Mr. Sherman. And I will point out, the average tariff on
Chinese goods----
Mr. Scissors. Is still low.
Mr. Sherman [continuing]. Is under 5 percent.
Mr. Scissors. Exactly.
Mr. Sherman. That was a very selective system. Go on.
Mr. Scissors. Agreed. I think we can start in an area of I
hope bipartisan agreement that it will not solve the trade
deficit problem, but it will certainly reduce it, which is
identify the goods that we do not want to depend on the Chinese
for. So there is dollars in goods we may not care as much
about. There is the debate over what those are. There is also
dollars in goods we know we care about. We can address both the
supply chain dependence----
Mr. Sherman. I understand that selectivity. I will say
whatever the goods are you run--for every billion dollars of
trade deficit, we are losing 10,000 jobs. And those who say
that we have a labor shortage in this country I think are wrong
until labor wages start going up.
I yield back.
Mrs. Kim of California. The gentleman's time has expired.
I know that votes have now been called, so I wanted to
thank the witnesses for their valuable testimony, and the
members for asking those questions.
Other members of the committee may have some additional
questions for the witnesses. So we will ask you to respond to
those in writing.
And I now recognize Mr. Bera for any closing remarks he may
have.
Mr. Bera. Great. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman. Yes. I do not
think Democrats and Republicans think about this issue in
different ways. I actually think we are all taking this very
seriously. And, you know, I think members on both sides of the
aisle raised legitimate questions and, again, the witnesses, I
thank them for, you know, raising the issues that we really do
have to think about in an urgent way.
There aren't easy answers when we--you know, again, I tend
to be a free market guy. I tend not to want to use the heavy
hand of government to tell companies what they can and cannot
do, where they can and cannot invest, but I also do think it is
important for us--you know, Mr. Waltz raised, you know, our
pension funds continue to go into China, continuing to
disadvantage us.
I have talked to CEOs about that as well, and, you know,
often they are just--you know, there is shareholder activism,
there is just this intense focus on quarterly profits. Again,
you know, Mr. Sherman raises some issues of how we might be
able to use the tax code to help influence that.
I mean, this is worth a bipartisan conversation to think
about, you know, how we, you know, protect our values, our
freedoms, but also, you know, do not disadvantage, you know,
what is, you know, the strategic competition.
I do not use the cold war language, but we do know we are,
you know, headed toward a confrontation, and how do we head
that confrontation off? And I think that is important.
So, again, thank you for holding this hearing. I would
encourage all my colleagues to take a look at the legislation
that we put forward. I think it is a good first step. It is not
a last step, and there is a lot more for us to do.
So thank you, and I yield back.
Mrs. Kim of California. Thank you. And, again, thank you to
all the witnesses. You know, as we prepare for this hearing, we
wanted to make sure that we are addressing the economic
coercion from PRC, and I think hearing from our witness, Mr.
Alon, it was--it is more than ever important that we need to
stress that American foreign policy must serve the interest of
the ordinary Americans and businesses as well.
And then, also, the United States must also take on the
PRC's predatory practices, which is why we had a very great
discussion here. Thank you.
And, last, I think we need to emphasize that America must
lead and then bring its allies and partners along, and that is
very, very important. We need to show to our allies that they
can trust us, that the United States will be the choice to do
business with and to rely on us to protect their interests as
well as showing through the combination of cooperation, that we
are working with our allies and partners, that our adversaries
should be able to fear us.
With that, I want to thank you so much for being with us.
And pursuant to committee rules, all members may have 5
days to submit statements, questions, and extraneous materials
for the record, and subject to the length limitations.
So without objection, the committee stands adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 10:27 a.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]

APPENDIX
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

STATEMENT FOR THE RECORD SUBMITTED FROM REPRESENTATIVE CONNOLLY
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

QUESTION SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD
[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
