- UNITED NATIONS' BIGOTRY TOWARDS ISRAEL: UNRWA ANTI-SEMITISM POISONS PALESTINIAN YOUTH

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

UNITED NATIONS' BIGOTRY TOWARDS ISRAEL: UNRWA ANTI-SEMITISM POISONS
PALESTINIAN YOUTH

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON GLOBAL HEALTH, GLOBAL HUMAN RIGHTS AND INTERNATIONAL
ORGANIZATIONS

of

COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

NOVEMBER 8, 2023

__________

Serial No. 118-59

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Foreign Affairs

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available:  http://www.foreignaffairs.house.gov/, http://
docs.house.gov,
or http://www.govinfo.gov

______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
55-685PDF           WASHINGTON : 2024

COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS

MICHAEL T. McCAUL, Texas, Chairman

CHRISTOPHER H. SMITH, New Jersey     GREGORY MEEKS, New York, Ranking
JOE WILSON, South Carolina               Member
SCOTT PERRY, Pennsylvania            BRAD SHERMAN, California
DARRELL ISSA, California             GERALD E. CONNOLLY, Virginia
ANN WAGNER, Missouri                 WILLIAM KEATING, Massachusetts
BRIAN MAST, Florida                  DAVID CICILLINE, Rhode Island
KEN BUCK, Colorado                   AMI BERA, California
TIM BURCHETT, Tennessee              JOAQUIN CASTRO, Texas
MARK E. GREEN, Tennessee             DINA TITUS, Nevada
TED LIEU, California
ANDY BARR, Kentucky                  SUSAN WILD, Pennsylvania
RONNY JACKSON, Texas                 DEAN PHILLIPS, Minnesota
YOUNG KIM, California                COLIN ALLRED, Texas
MARIA ELVIRA SALAZAR, Florida        ANDY KIM, New Jersey
BILL HUIZENGA, Michigan              SARA JACOBS, California
AUMUA AMATA COLEMAN RADEWAGEN,       KATHY MANNING, North Carolina
American Samoa                   SHEILA CHERFILUS-McCORMICK,
FRENCH HILL, Arkansas                      Florida
WARREN DAVIDSON, Ohio                GREG STANTON, Arizona
JIM BAIRD, Indiana                   MADELEINE DEAN, Pennsylvania
MICHAEL WALTZ, Florida               JARED MOSKOWITZ, Florida
THOMAS KEAN, JR., New Jersey         JONATHAN JACKSON, Illinois
MICHAEL LAWLER, New York             SYDNEY KAMLAGER-DOVE, California
CORY MILLS, Florida                  JIM COSTA, California
RICH McCORMICK, Georgia              JASON CROW, Colorado
NATHANIEL MORAN, Texas                BRAD SCHNEIDER, Illinois
JOHN JAMES, Michigan
KEITH SELF, Texas

Brendan Shields, Staff Director

Sophia Lafargue, Staff Director
------

Subcommittee on Global Health, Global Human Rights and International
Organizations

CHRISTOPHER SMITH, New Jersey, Chair
MARIA ELVIRA SALAZAR, Florida        SUSAN WILD, Pennsylvania, Ranking
AUMUA AMATA COLEMAN RADEWAGEN,           Member
American Samoa                   AMI BERA, California
FRENCH HILL, Arkansas                SARA JACOBS, California
RICH McCORMICK, Georgia              KATHY MANNING, North Carolina
JOHN JAMES, Michigan

Mary Vigil, Staff Director
C O N T E N T S

----------
Page

INFORMATIONA SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD

Information submitted for the record.............................

WITNESSES

Neuer, Hillel C., Executive Director, U.N. Watch.................
Schanzer, Jonathan, Senior Vice President for Research,
Foundation for the Defense of Democracies......................
Lincoln, Jonathan, Interim Director, Center for Jewish
Civilization at Georgetown University..........................     4

APPENDIX

Hearing Notice...................................................    XX
Hearing Minutes..................................................    XX
Hearing Attendance...............................................    xx

UNITED NATIONS' BIGOTRY TOWARDS ISRAEL: UNRWA ANTI-SEMITISM POISONS
PALESTINIAN YOUTH

Wednesday, November 8, 2023

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Global Health, Global
Human Rights, and International
Organizations,
Committee on Foreign Affairs,
Washington, DC.

The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:03 a.m., in
room 2200, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Christopher H.
Smith (chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Mr. Smith. The subcommittee will come to order. And good
morning to all.
This hearing, ``United Nations Bigotry Toward Israel: UNRWA
Anti-Semitism Poisons Palestinian Youth,'' will come to order.
Make no mistake, anti-semitic bigotry is at the root of the
UN's hostility to Israel, which is ugly, evil, and manifests in
almost every U.N. entity. The United Nations is unquestionably
the world's foremost legitimizer of anti-semitism, including in
its most virulent and violent forms.
The monstrous and genocidal atrocities we have seen coming
out of Gaza since October 7th, or anti-semitic hate crimes, the
logical consequence of the unbridled anti-semitism fomented and
enabled by the United Nations.
Today, Israel is defending itself from a cowardly invasion
and massacre by Hamas. It has an absolute right to defend
itself. We have all seen the evidence of ugly images of Hamas'
crimes, of psychotic terrorists butchering innocent civilians,
rape, hostage-taking, the beheading of babies, and daily
indiscriminate missile attacks reminiscent of Nazi buzz bombs
and V-2 rockets.
Yet, yesterday, as Charles Hilu of the Washington Free
Beacon reported, Francesca Albanese, who serves as the Office
of the U.N. High Commissioner for Human Rights Special
Rapporteur for Palestinian Territories, employed torturous
logic to say that Israel has no right to self-defense against
Hamas under international law, which is absolutely absurd.
We are here to talk about yet another, another set of
images that has been seen on the news, U.N. diplomats like
Francesca Albanese and many, many others, and minions of U.N.
agencies engaged in the work of licensing, encouraging,
legitimizing this demented hatred of Israel. What is going on
at the U.N. may look civilized but, in fact, what is going on
is morally ugly.
The activities of the U.N. entities are, of course, the
genocidal attacks of the past month are an effect, of course,
of that cause.
I have been in the fight against anti-semitism for all of
my 43 years in the U.S. Congress, including an early trip in
1982 to Moscow and Leningrad on behalf of Soviet Jews.
I have chaired 14 congressional hearings focused
exclusively on anti-semitism, and many more focused on
religious freedom, of which anti-semitism is a part, and wrote
the law that created the special envoy to monitor and combat
anti-semitism in the U.S. Department of State in 2004.
Later, I wrote another law to upgrade and to strengthen the
special envoy to the rank of Ambassador reporting directly to
the Secretary of State.
Kathy Manning and Rob, who is with us today, I want to say,
Rob, when that bill was hung up in the Senate, could not get
passed, I want to thank you because you are the one who made it
happen over at the U.S. Senate. Thank you so much for that.
Kathy Manning and six other members and I co-chair the
Bipartisan Task Force for Combating Anti-semitism, and what we
see at the U.N. is anti-semitism in its most dangerous form, a
genocidal illuminated ideology.
At a meeting I chaired in June 2004, and at the Berlin
Conference, Natan Sharansky powerfully articulated his
insightful 3D test for identifying anti-semitism as relates to
Israel and said that it often hides behind a veneer--and this
is his words--of legitimate criticism of Israel. He said, of
course you, if you want to be successful in the struggle
against anti-semitism, as against any other evil, there must be
more clarity on the issue.
What are we talking about? It is important to define the
line between legitimate criticism of Israel and anti-semitism.
Israel is a strong democracy, and the only democracy in the
Middle East. And it is built on the criticism from within and
from without.
He went on to say, of course we support all forms of
legitimate criticism, but it is very important to see the
difference and draw that line.
According to Natan Sharansky, who testified for the third
time before our subcommittee just as recently as June, his 3D
test is nothing less than the--the criticism of Israel is
nothing less than anti-semitic when it passes over into
demonization of Jews and Israel, delegitimizing the Jewish
State, or applying a double standard that is one standard for
Israel and one standard for every other country on the globe.
A few words now about U.N. entities most involved in
promoting anti-semitism. UNRWA, the U.N. Relief and Works
Agency, as we all know was set up in 1949 to provide aid to
refugees. Seventy-four years later it is still going, which is
absurd in itself since nearly every Arab nation will not permit
the former to integrate into their society. Why do not they
welcome the Palestinians? They simply will not.
UNRWA provides education in hatred of Jews to the vastly
expanded number of children, grandchildren, and great
grandchildren of the original refugees. UNRWA's textbooks,
curricula, summer camps, official media, are all infamous
incubators of hatred. Aspects of its propaganda are so twisted,
and is publicly available, you can read it, you can go online
and read what they have to say.
They encourage children to martyrdom as suicide bombers.
What a, what a form of child abuse is that, to tell little kids
to kill themselves and to blow up innocent people on buses and
elsewhere throughout Israel.
A June report by U.N. Watch and Impact SC--and they are
here both today, thank you--from March this year carefully
document that ``UNRWA deliberately and systematically hires
teachers who publicly praise Hitler, glorify terrorist attacks
against Israeli children, and spread globalist-like conspiracy
theories against the Jews.''
You can put your hands down. Why do you support that kind,
that kind of hatred toward Jews is unthinkable and
unconscionable.
A new Impact SC report just released exposes an absolutely
deplorable fact: UNRWA staff celebrated Hamas' massacre.
Similarly, Impact SC has published three reports analyzing
``hundreds of pages of teaching materials revealing that
content glorifying terrorism, inciting violence, and promoting
anti-semitism is actually included in UNRWA's own materials,
created by UNRWA staff, for UNRWA students.''
UN Watch has published many, many pages of documentation of
over 100 UNRWA teachers and their Facebook pages inciting anti-
semitism and praise of jihadi terrorism. And it makes very,
very great reading.
UN Watch just released a new report 2 days ago, on November
6th, documenting how as soon as news of the horrific slaughter
broke, which was live streamed on social media by some of the
terrorists, United Nations Relief and Works Agency, or UNRWA,
staff immediately celebrated and justified it on Facebook.
Celebrated the slaughter of innocent people.
As the report states, ``this is a symptom''--and this is a
quote from U.N. Watch, ``of a much larger systemic problem, the
fact that UNRWA hires anti-semitism terrorist-supporting staff
in the first place.''
UNRWA bears a hidden moral responsibility for the
perversity we saw performed by Hamas in its October 7th
invasion of Israel. I would point out that in 2018, because of
all this President Trump ceased all funding to UNRWA.
Regrettably, President Biden reversed that policy and has given
UNRWA approximately a billion dollars. Where are the strings?
Where is the reform? Has not happened.
UN Human Rights Council is a hypocritical institution. And
I was there when we tried, you know, we went from the
commission to the council. Everybody talked about how it would
be so much better, transparent, and really focus on egregious
violations of human rights. Well, it is a place where the
world's worst human rights abusers have made Israel a permanent
agenda item so as to be able to demonize it at every meeting.
Its commissions of inquiry on Israel and reports are beyond
biased, based on unsubstantiated reports and strained logic.
Their only purpose is to put a mantel on apparent authority on
wild accusations of Israel's worst enemies.
We are fortunate to have three wonderful and very effective
leaders. We are also very, and I would welcome, would welcome
U.N. Watch, Hillel Neuer, who is the world's leading authority
on the U.N. Rights Council, who will testify today in part,
because his testimony is very, very comprehensive. And he
points out that ``since the creation in June 2006 to June 2023,
the council has adopted zero resolutions on serial human rights
abusers such as China.''
I chair the China Commission. It is a bicameral, bipartisan
commission. I have chaired 81 commission hearings and hearings
in this committee. The egregious abuses committed by Xi Jinping
are beyond the pale. You name it: genocide against the Uyghurs,
all of the terrible abuses. And yet, crickets, nothing in the
Human Rights Council.
Again, going back to Hillel Neuer's statement, he points
out zero resolutions on abusers like China, Pakistan, Qatar,
Saudi Arabia, Turkey, Zimbabwe, and Cuba. It has adopted two
condemnatory resolutions on Sudan, three on Venezuela, 12 on
Eritrea, 14 on Iran, 16 on North Korea, 42 on Syria and, guess
what, 103 on Israel. China, nothing. Israel, 103.
It is absurd.
Shockingly, Iran chaired the U.N. Human Rights Council's
Social Forum on November 2d and 3d. I mean, what is that all
about, put them at the helm, at the chair of that forum?
UN General Assembly is into this for annually adopting
between 60 to 20 resolutions condemning Israel. Again I thank
Hillel Neuer for his reporting on this. But an average of 12
country-specific resolutions on the rest of the world combined.
That is incredible.
One of the worst was in 1975 when UNGA, the U.N. General
Assembly Resolution 3246 addressed the Palestinians and, quote,
and I quote it, ``Reaffirms the legitimacy of the people's
struggle for liberation from alien subjugation by all available
means, including armed struggle.''
That was from the UN
This was written to legitimize Palestinian terrorism, and
Hamas, and other terrorist organizations. And they do it
regularly, and incite it regularly.
It must be repealed. Just as Zionism is racism resolution
was repealed.
I remind members, we were on the floor discussing Hamas,
read the Hamas Charter of 1988. Clearly, it talks about openly,
aggressively killing Jews. It says Israel has no right to exist
and needs to be eviscerated from the face of the Earth. It is
right there in black and white. And they are doing it. Why are
we surprised?
The U.N. Security Council has been, since October 7th,
unwilling to condemn Hamas or to acknowledge Israel's right to
self-defense.
And we all remember because, again, I was here, that Yasser
Arafat could not even come here because he refused to recognize
Israel's right to exist. He gave some very, very weak statement
and then was allowed to come to the United Nations. But that,
Israel's right to exist, has still not been accepted by so many
at the U.N.
The U.N. Secretary General has done even worse, saying
Hamas' atrocities did not happen in a vacuum. And then pointed
to 56 years of suffocating occupation.
Secretary General Antonio Guterres claimed he was not
justifying Hamas but, in fact, he is relativizing and excusing
them. Thankfully, Israel has an ambassador to the United
Nations, Gilad Erdan, who had the strength of character to call
out the Secretary General.
I would note, parenthetically, he was scheduled to be here
today. He will come at a future hearing. But the situation in
New York requires his presence there, and could not make it.
The relative context for understanding Hamas' genocide
atrocity, is provided by the U.N. itself in its persistent
morally bankrupt policy of promoting anti-semitic grievances
and justifying anti-semitic violence.
Finally, there is a web of bodies dedicated solely to
harming Israel. I mentioned one a moment ago with Ms. Albanese
and her statements. The Special Committee to Investigate
Israeli Practices Affecting the Palestinian People, the
Committee on the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People,
they are funded by the General Assembly, which means we are
funding them, and function solely as propaganda channels for
anti-semitism grievances and maligning Israel.
There is no similar committee on any other country in the
world.
So, again, I want to thank you. I would like to yield to my
very distinguished and good friend Ms. Wild for any opening
comments.
Ms. Wild. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
I am glad we are having this hearing. I thank all of you
for being here, particularly the witnesses for taking time, and
the people who are here to give witness to this, this hearing
and the substance of it.
As we know, this is an incredibly difficult time for so
many people across our Nation, across the world, and in my own
community in Pennsylvania. And that includes Jews, Muslims,
Arab Americans of different faiths, people of other faiths, and
all of those who have been overcome by grief since October 7th
and over the subsequent weeks. I think we are all in a period
of collective mourning to some extent or another.
And let me first say may we all think of the 240 hostages
and work for their release as soon as possible. That must be
foremost in all of our minds.
We cannot find the words to express our grief. And far too
often we find ourselves divided in our pain rather than united
in our common humanity.
As a Jew myself, I value the existence of the State of
Israel, and I condemn all forms of anti-semitism. But, time and
again I have said to my many constituents of many different
faiths that no human life is worth more than any other to me.
I hold in my heart every life that hangs in the balance.
And I am ready to work with anyone to make any degree of
progress in addressing this devastating crisis.
We all need to work together to bring about a peaceful
existence and a place to live for everyone. But, sadly, this is
a time of war. And I will say, parenthetically, I reject any
claim that Israel caused or instigated this war.
Having said that--having said that, while this hearing will
shine a light on many issues and challenges that the United
States and the United Nations face to improve the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine refugees in the
Near East, colloquially known as UNRWA, we also need to
recognize that UNRWA and other partners are working to deliver
essential humanitarian aid to meet the emergency needs of
innocent civilians in Gaza.
We know that the humanitarian needs are only going to rise,
and we must be cognizant that UNRWA is the backbone of the
humanitarian response in Gaza, and that without UNRWA,
assistance simply cannot be delivered.
Right now UNRWA is working and coordinating responses with
other excellent agencies like World Food Program, an agency
that I am very familiar with, have seen up close and personal
in other countries, and am very impressed by. And to ensure
that civilians are able to receive critical humanitarian
assistance consisting of food, water, shelter, and medical
care.
And I think we all know that the humanitarian crisis is, is
huge. It is not being completely addressed by any means. May
not even be possible to completely address the humanitarian
crisis that is happening there. But we must try, UNRWA must
try, and its partner organizations.
So, in this challenging moment when it is really hard to
feel any kind of hope for the future we have a responsibility,
I feel, for the sake of future generations to engage in robust,
proactive diplomacy on the international stage. That means
working to strengthen and improve agencies, including UNRWA and
the U.N. system across the board, not walking away from our
international commitments. And, together, I feel that we must
find a way forward.
And so, I look forward to this hearing, Mr. Chairman. And
with that, I yield back.
Mr. Smith. Thank you.
Ms. Manning.
Ms. Manning. Thank you, Chairman Smith and Ranking Member
Wild. And thank you to all of our witnesses for joining us
today.
Mr. Chairman, thank you for your leadership as the co-chair
of the House Bipartisan Task Force for Combating Anti-semitism,
which met yesterday, and all of your efforts over many years to
bring important focus and attention to this fight.
And thank you, Representative Wild, for bringing the issue
of the hostages front and center to this hearing.
As you know, we have been meeting with hostage families for
the last 3 weeks. And much like the stories of Holocaust
survivors, each story of a hostage family is unique, each story
is heartbreaking. And we must continue to do everything we can
to bring the hostages home.
Anti-semitism is on the rise here in the U.S. and around
the world. And we must stand up to anti-semitism in all of its
forms.
As ADL CEO Jonathan Greenblatt said yesterday, before the
Hamas attack on Israel, anti-semitism was at a crisis level.
Since that horrific Hamas terrorist attack on October 7th,
anti-semitism is a catastrophe.
There is no question that certain U.N. member states,
bodies, and the General Assembly have a negative,
disproportionate focus on Israel, and routinely support
singling it out more than any other country in the world. This
single-minded negative focus on Israel undermines the
credibility of the United Nations, and it distracts from
serious challenges facing the world.
One-sided U.N. resolutions do not advance peace, they
single out one side of the conflict for blame while encouraging
the other side to reject direct negotiations in favor of a
unilateral strategy.
It also removes any sense of agency or responsibility from
one side. And that removes the incentive to work assiduously
toward peace. A lasting peace agreement will only come from
direct negotiations from two sides. It cannot be imposed by an
international organization such as the United Nations.
I am glad that the United States has regularly vetoed
biased and one-sided resolutions at the United Nations,
including a recent U.N. Security Council resolution on the
situation in the Middle East which failed to mention Israel's
right of self-defense.
And in response to the recent absurdity that a country that
slaughters girls and women for failing to wear their head
scarves properly, Iran, would chair the U.N. Human Rights
Council Social Forum, the U.S. has rightly boycotted this 2-day
meeting.
My colleagues and I have also long raised concerns about
the problematic context--content in textbooks used by UNRWA, by
UNRWA schools in the West Bank and Gaza where biased and
discriminatory curriculum is determined by the host government.
We will continue to insist that this content be removed.
At the same time, many U.N. agencies provide essential
services, such as vaccines for children, and other critical
services around the world, including in countries where neither
the host government nor any alternative can or will provide
those services.
The U.N. General Assembly last year approved an Israeli-
sponsored resolution condemning Holocaust denial. And agencies
like UNESCO support Holocaust education and programs to counter
anti-semitism, which we can agree are important and worthwhile.
UN agencies are imperfect. And in certain cases they are
even seriously flawed. At the same time, the United States
tends to have more influence when we have a seat at the table.
So, I am looking forward to hearing what we can do to push
for reform, to fix the flaws, and ensure that intolerance,
incitement, and bias against Israel, the Jewish people, or any
people, will not be permitted.
Thank you. And I yield back.
Mr. Smith. Thank you very much.
Dr. Bera.
Dr. Bera. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and Ranking Member.
This is a challenging time in the world right now. And I
have been to Israel twice in the last few months this past
summer. I have been to Sderot, have had lunch at some of the
kibbutzes in the past that were attacked.
You know, for those of us that believe in Israel's right to
exist, for those of us that believe in Israel's right to defend
itself, but also firmly believe in a two-State solution, and as
the only path to peace and stability, it seems so far away
today.
You know, I talked to one of my Palestinian constituents
last week who has lost relatives and friends in Gaza. I hear
the same anguish and pain that I heard after October 7th from
my Jewish constituents in their deep grief and deep loss. And
that is the tragedy here.
Israel has a right to prosecute a war against Hamas. They
were attached, and they have a right to defend themselves, they
have a right to make sure this never happens again, they have a
right to dismember, dismantle and, to the best extent,
eliminate Hamas. But, you know, when you see tragic loss of
innocent civilian life you also feel that pain.
And I do support President Biden's call for a humanitarian
pause to get food, water, medicine in to civilians that, that
need that. Again, that is not talking against Israel's right to
defend itself; that is not talking about against Israel's right
to exist; that is an American position and we will firmly
support that position.
But when you think about a two-State solution, when you
think about a future, is a future ever possible at this
particular point in time where Palestinians and Israelis can
live side by side, we have got try to hold on to that
possibility, otherwise I fear, you know, my Israeli friends
will never be able to live in peace. And certainly, you know, I
do not know what occupation looks like in Gaza. I worry about
that.
So, challenging time. We will stand with Israel. But this
is a time where I would hope Arab nations and others around the
world work with us to find peace, find a path forward where
Israelis and Palestinians can live side by side but, again, a
place where Israelis can feel comfortable that the heinous
attacks of October 7th will never happen again.
I yield back.
Mr. Smith. Mr. Schneider.
Mr. Schneider. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to thank the
Chairman and Ranking Member for having this hearing.
Let me in advance thank the witnesses not just for your
testimony today, which of course I know will be informative,
but for your work, long work in addressing the issues we face,
in particular, Mr. Neuer, your work on the U.N. and the long
historic bias we have seen. Grateful for all of you being here.
We were able to host last month, we were visited by Irwin
Cotler, another strong voice from Canada. And he talked about
the attack on October 7th. It is insufficient to call it
attack. The massacre, the invasion into Israel of thousands of
terrorists seeking to kill, torture, rape, kidnap innocent
people with the intention, declared intention of the
destruction of the State of Israel and the murder of Jews.
And I may not get the words exactly right, but the idea he
shared is that what happened on October 7th is
incomprehensible. If you try to watch the videos--good news by
the way, taken by the attackers--and it is impossible. He said
it was incomprehensible but it was not impossible because we
saw it happen. We know what happened.
I was looking at the response from the United Nations, and
the tragedy is it is not incomprehensible, it is totally
expected. It is what they have been doing for literally
decades. And I think that is what we are here to talk about
today.
And, specifically, when we talk about UNRWA, with I think
everyone on this panel I have had the privilege of visiting
Israel at different times. Ms. Manning and I had a chance to
talk to young students in Ramallah, students who shared the
dreams that our kids have in the United States, that kids in
Israel have, wanted to be doctors, and engineers, and
scientists, and change the world for the better.
And then the question was asked of them, What do you think
of the Israelis? And their answer tone and view changed
completely. And they began to describe to us the very things we
see and know are being taught in the schools, in the UNRWA
schools.
The education of our kids is the most important thing that
we do. It not only determines their prospects for success as
adults, determines the prospects in the future of the country
educating those children. Decades of educating children to hate
is how you achieve a situation like October 7th when people
literally killed children in front of their parents, killed
parents in front of their children. Literally burned people
alive.
And that is why I think the conversation we are about to
have today is so important. The need for peace is greater today
than it has ever been. The challenge for peace in the immediate
moment seems all but impossible. But the important is to have
the conversations today.
When it comes to the time for questions I am going to ask
you why are there refugee camps in Gaza after 75 years? We will
talk about that. It does not make any sense.
But, imagine after this war is over, after Gaza is free
from the control of Hamas, a genocidal, nihilistic terrorist
organization seeking the destruction of Israel, when the Gazans
are free to rebuild their society and their community, and
instead of tunnels and terror cells they are building a shiny
city like Doha or Abu Dhabi, giving their kids the prospects of
a future, like I said, we all want for all of our children.
That is what we need to see.
And with respect to calls of a cease-fire. If you watched
the news today, Israel has encircled Gaza City, has taken
control from Hamas from the perimeter. And what is the first
thing that happens? The first thing that happens is Israel
allows civilians to flee to safety in the south.
Why are they fleeing now? They are fleeing now because they
are able to. They did not flee before because Hamas prohibited
it. And that is what we need people to see.
So, I heard their dream for the future. And I continue to
pray for the safety of all the civilians.
I will say that those who were silenced, silent on October
7th, their silence then drowns out any protest they may have
today. We have to be clear in our condemnation of what Hamas
did, in our focus on a peaceful future. But it cannot happen
until Hamas is defeated.
I yield back.
Mr. Smith. Thank you so very much.
Without objection, testimony that is being submitted for
the record by Duvi Honig, who is the founder and CEO of the
Orthodox Jewish Chamber of Commerce, will be made a part of the
record.
Mr. Smith. And also testimony by Debbie Soffen, who has
been providing me and my staff for years information on UNRWA.
And I thank her for that.
That will be made a part of the record as well.
Mr. Smith. And I do want to recognize Marcus Sheff, who is
here, from Impact SC. We look forward to your testimony in a
future hearing. Because I read your reports, they are very,
very incisive. And I thank you for it.
And we did invite Deborah Lipstadt, who is our Ambassador-
at-large. And she had a genuine conflict of interest and could
not be here. So, the invitation is open, and I know she will
avail herself of it and will come at our very next hearing,
which will be very, very soon.
So, I would like to introduce Hillel Neuer, who is
Executive Direct of U.N. Watch, a human rights NGO in Geneva,
Switzerland. He is also an international lawyer, diplomat,
writer, and activist.
He has testified often before the United Nations and the
U.S. Senate and the House.
Mr. Neuer taught international human rights at the Geneva
School of Diplomacy, and served as Vice President of the NGO
Special Committee on Human Rights in Geneva.
He is frequently quoted as an expert. And I sure he is. I
read his website all the time on the United Nations and human
rights by leading newspapers, including The Wall Street
Journal, Telegraph, Le Monde, New York Times, and has appeared
in debates on CNN, BBC, and Al Jazeera.
Without objection, his full bio, and all of our witness',
will be made a part of the record.
Mr. Smith. And then we will hear from Jonathan Schanzer,
who is Senior Vice President for Research at the Foundation for
Defense of Democracies, where he oversees the work of the
organization's experts and scholars.
He is also on the leadership team of FTD's Center on
Economic and Financial Power, a project on the use of financial
and economic power as a tool of statecraft.
Jonathan previously worked as a terrorism finance analyst
at the U.S. Department of the Treasury where he played an
integral role in the designation of numerous terrorist
financiers. He has held previous think tank research positions
at the Washington Institute for Near East Policy, and The
Middle East Forum. He has written hundreds of articles on the
Middle East.
We will then hear from Jonathan Lincoln, who is the
Director of the Center for Jewish Civilization. Prior to
joining CJC he worked with the United Nations in a variety of
capacities since 2005.
Most recently, Jonathan served as the Senior Coordination
Officer for the U.N. Special Coordinators Office based in
Jerusalem, working on the coordination of U.N. and
international development assistance to Palestinians in Gaza
and the West Bank.
Previously, from 2012 until 2017, he was Senior Political
Officer at the UN's Department of Political Affairs in New York
where he converted--covered political developments in North
Africa and supported U.N. interventions in Algeria, Libya,
Morocco, Tunisia, and Western Sahara.
Mr. Neuer, the floor is yours.

STATEMENT OF HILLEL C. NEUER, EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR, U.N. WATCH

Mr. Neuer. Thank you.
Chairman Smith, Ranking Member Wild, members of the
committee, thank you for inviting me to testify at this
important hearing. I have come here from Geneva, from the
Headquarters of the United Nations Human Rights Council, to
report to you on how that and other key U.N. bodies, as well as
high U.N. officials, are engaged in the systematic demonization
of Israel, even in the aftermath of last month's massacre by
Hamas.
Mr. Chairman, the United Nations was founded in the wake of
the Nazi atrocities. This year marks the 75th anniversary of
the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, which was created in
response to barbarous acts which had outraged the conscience of
mankind.
One month ago, on October 7th, Hamas sent thousands of
terrorists to infiltrate into Israel. They broke into more than
a dozen communities, massacred entire families, committing
horrific and sadistic acts. They slaughtered 260 young people
at a music festival. On that day in total, Hamas murdered more
than 1,400 people.
``There are moments in this life,'' said President Joe
Biden, ``when pure unadulterated evil is unleashed on this
world. The people of Israel lived through one such moment this
weekend. This was an act of sheer evil.''
British Prime Minister Rishi Sunak likewise said, ``The
attacks in Israel shocked the world. Over 1,400 people murdered
one by one. The elderly, men, women, children, babies in arms
murdered, mutilated, burned alive. We should call it by its
name, it was a pogrom.''
Mr. Chairman, one would expect the United Nations likewise
to speak clearly and denounce barbarous acts which have shocked
the conscience of mankind, yet, this is not what has been
happening. Instead, over the past month, despite some
condemnations of Hamas, the overwhelming majority of statements
by U.N. bodies and officials have been pointing the finger at
Israel, expressly or by application.
The most excited and emotive declarations by the UN's
highest officials describing suffering in Gaza are directed at
Israel. Never does the U.N. blame Hamas for launching the war,
for embedding themselves inside hospitals, homes, schools, and
mosques. There are almost no such posts about the massacre of
October 7th, about millions of Israelis subjected even now to
rocket attacks, hundreds of thousands of Israelis displaced,
more than 200 hostages being held by Hamas. All of these are
not being championed in the UN's dramatic social media and
statements. The target is always Israel.
Now, often this is done by misrepresenting basic facts,
such as falsely accusing Israel of bombing a hospital when the
culprit was actually the Islamic Jihad; falsely characterizing
Israel's legitimate self-defense aimed at targeting terrorists
as ``collective punishment'' or other crimes; creating false
moral equivalence between such self-defense and the terrorists;
misusing numbers of Gaza dead and not telling us the source of
the data is Hamas; not telling us how many of those dead are
terrorists, including those killed in Israel; and pretending
that proportionalities about comparing death tolls when, in
fact, it is about using proportional means to achieve a valid
military objective.
The U.N. Charter guarantees the equal rights of nations
large and small. Yet, nowhere is this principle more violated
than when it comes to the UN's treatment of Israel.
At the U.N. General Assembly last year there was one
resolution on Iran, one on Syria, one on North Korea, and 15 on
Israel. Zero resolutions were adopted on China, Venezuela,
Zimbabwe, and 180 other countries.
At the UNGA any resolution targeting Israel is passed by
automatic majority. This was on display 2 weeks ago when the GA
adopted an Arab-drafted resolution calling for a cease-fire
after outrageously it rejected a Canadian amendment that would
have condemned Hamas for the massacre and demanded the release
of over 200 Israelis hostages, including children, babies, and
elderly grandmothers.
So, the text adopted by the GA failed to even mention the
word Hamas, failed to recognize Israel's right and duty to
defend its citizens against terrorism.
Now, at the World Health Organization, every year its
annual assembly deviates from global public health for a
special debate singling out Israel. There is no such focus on
Syria where hospitals are repeatedly bombed by Syrian and
Russian forces, nor on North Korea, one of the worst health
systems in the world. On the contrary, the WHO recently elected
North Korea to its executive board.
Since the Hamas massacre, the vast majority of statements
by the WHO have targeted Israel. Hamas is seldom mentioned. The
director, Dr. Tedros, is posting numerous statements falsely
implying that Israel targets hospitals. He fails to say that
Israel's military abides by the law of armed conflict, extends
enormous efforts to avoid harming civilians. While Hamas'
strategy, on the contrary, is to embed itself inside hospitals,
homes, schools, and mosques, to use Gaza civilians as human
shields.
So, on October 17th, Dr. Tedros rushed to quote on Twitter
to strongly condemn the attack on Al-Ahli Arab Hospital in
Gaza. ``Early reports indicate hundreds of deaths and
injuries,`` he wrote.
He called for Israel's evacuation order to be reversed in
that area. And he ended with the hashtag,bNotATarget.
Now, in truth, Israel never targeted or even attacked that
hospital, and there were no hundreds killed. The U.S., France,
Britain, and Canada all confirmed Israel's analysis showing the
explosion was caused by a failed rocket attack--a failed rocket
launched by Islamic Jihad. Dr. Tedros never corrected his false
accusation, never deleted his tweet.
Likewise, 2 days ago he posted a call for a cease-fire
without any mention of the word Hamas. Israel's right to self-
defense to stop Hamas from carrying out their stated intentions
of one of their top officials to repeat the massacre of October
7th was nowhere mentioned.
At the UN's Human Rights Council most of the world's serial
abusers get a free pass. Many sit on the council, including
Qatar, Kazakhstan, and Pakistan. Last month they reelected the
regimes of China and Cuba. None have ever been censured.
Last week when the Human Rights Council opened its social
forum, the chair was the Islamic Republic of Iran.
Now, while dictators are honored, a democracy is
scapegoated. The only country in the world with a standing
agenda item at the council is not China, which denies basic
human rights to 1.5 million people, as you well know, Mr.
Chairman, nor is it Iran, which beats, blinds, and poisons
women and girls for protesting, and which sponsors Hamas
terrorism. Instead, the agenda item is on Israel.
From the council's creation until today it has adopted more
resolutions on Israel than on Iran, Syria, and North Korea
combined.
In May 2021, after Hamas and the Jihad fired 4,000 rockets
at Israeli civilian centers, they created at the council a
Commission of Inquiry targeting Israel. It is the first that
has no end dates. It is mandated to report in perpetuity. Its
unprecedented scope includes a mandate to examine root causes
of the conflict, which include alleged systematic
discrimination based on race.
As chair of the inquiry the council appointed Navi Pillay,
someone who has signed petitions lobbying governments to
``sanction apartheid Israel.'' She is the chair.
Human Watch has documented her bias in a legal request that
we submitted to Ms. Pillay demanding that she recuse herself.
She ignored our petition.
Another commissioner is Miloon Kothari. Last year he gave
an interview where he ranted about the Jewish lobby and
questioned Israel's right to be a member of the U.N. He was
condemned by numerous countries, and even U.N. officials, for
anti-semitism, yet he remains in his post.
Not surprisingly, in the inquiry's most recent press
statement on October 16th they create a false moral equivalence
between Israel and Hamas, refusing to treat Hamas as a
terrorist organization, refusing to affirm Israel's right to
self-defense.
In a recent Al Jazeera interview, Navi Pillay effectively
explained away Hamas' atrocities as somehow inevitable. And she
made false comparisons with Nelson Mandela.
Now, other officials need to be examined.
Last year, the council named Francesca Albanese as its
Special Rapporteur on Palestine. The mandate is to investigate
only Israel's violations. U.N. experts are obliged to be
objective. Before she was appointed, I informed the counsel
that Albanese has repeatedly equated the suffering of
Palestinians with the Nazi Holocaust, and accused Israel of war
crimes, apartheid, and genocide.
In a 2014 Facebook post she said America is ``subjugated by
the Jewish lobby.'' Still, the council went ahead and appointed
her. Ever since, Albanese has used her U.N. post to legitimize
terrorism.
Last November she addressed a Hamas conference where she
said, ``You have a right to resist.'' This is a U.N. human
rights expert encouraging Hamas last November.
Six days ago she led six other supposed U.N. experts to
accuse Israel in attempting ``genocide.'' This insane charge
was also made a few days prior by Craig Mokhiber, the outgoing
head of the U.N. Human Rights Office in New York, in a
manifesto that he published as an open letter to the U.N. where
he implied he was quitting as an act of conscience.
Now, this supposed moral protest was covered immediately by
The Guardian and Al Jazeera. What they did not report was that
Mr. Mokhiber actually had to leave his job now, that he was
under an investigation since March, after we exposed his litany
of social media posts describing Israel in terms of infinite
evil.
Finally, we need to address UNRWA, which in 2022 alone
received $344 million in U.S. funding.
Under the slogan ``Peace Starts Here'' UNRWA tells donor
states that they educate Palestinians about human rights and
peace, that they promote stability. Yet, today we have released
a new report, ``Hate Starts Here: How UNRWA Teachers
Indoctrinate Palestinian Children and Incite Anti-semitism.''
It can be found at unwatch.org.
Our last report documented how UNRWA staff regularly call
to murder Jews, and create teaching materials that glorify
terrorism, encourage martyrdom, demonize Israelis, and incite
anti-semitism. We have identified over 100 UNRWA teachers and
staff found to promote hate and violence in social media.
Our new report today examines how UNRWA staff reacted to
the Hamas massacre. As soon as news of the slaughter broke,
they immediately celebrated it on Facebook. ``Allah is Great,
Allah is Great, reality surpasses our wildest dreams,'' posted
UNRWA Gaza teacher Osama Ahmed.
UNRWA principal Iman Hassan justified the massacre as
restoring rights and redressing grievances.
Rawia Helles, Director of Khan Younis Training Center,
featured in an UNRWA video, glorified one of the terrorists as
a hero and a prince.
UNRWA English teacher Asmaa Rafiq Kuheil called to
``sculpture the date,'' adding the emoji of a heart.
UNRWA School Administrator Hmada Ahmed posted, ``Welcome to
the great October.''
Finally, there is an UNRWA official Mohammed Al-Shaikh
Ali--he features on our report on page 16--he recently posted
the following: ``Anyone who talks about taking refuge in Sinai
is a traitor. Anyone who tries to flee to the south should be
treated the way we ought to treat traitors.''
Mr. Chairman and others, we have someone identifying
himself on Facebook as an UNRWA official with prominent photos
of him receiving UNRWA awards, calling on Hamas to execute
Gazans who want to go south to flee for safety to get away from
Hamas.
In closing, Mr. Chairman, members of the committee, on the
75th anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights
key bodies and officials of the United Nations are exploiting
and distorting the language of human rights and the basic
concepts of international law in order to cast Israel as a
racist and genocidal State, as the manifestation of infinite
evil, even as it is trying to defend itself from one of the
most horrific mass terrorist attacks of our time.
At a moment when the world needs moral clarity and
leadership, the U.N. has failed. Its actions only incentivize
Hamas to continue their strategy of using Palestinians as human
shields, and maximizing casualties. The United Nations will
never live up to its founding premise so long as this pathology
endures.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Neuer follows:]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5685.009

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5685.010

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5685.011

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5685.012

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5685.013

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5685.014

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5685.015

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5685.016

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5685.017

Mr. Smith. Thank you so very much, Mr. Neuer, for that
testimony. Dr. Schanzer?

STATEMENT OF JONATHAN SCHANZER, SENIOR VICE PRESIDENT FOR
RESEARCH, FOUNDATION FOR THE DEFENSE OF DEMOCRACIES

Mr. Schanzer. Chairman Smith, Ranking Member Wild,
distinguished members of this subcommittee, on behalf of FDD I
want to thank you for the opportunity to testify, and I want to
thank my fellow panelists here as well for their leadership.
[Disturbance in the hearing room.]
Mr. Schanzer. OK, anyway, thank you for the opportunity to
testify. The UN's anti-Israel bias, as you just heard, is out
of control. It's not just a problem of anti-semitism, and it
hasn't just diverted resources from other serious problems
around the world. It has created the conditions for a regional
war that is now threatening the Middle East. In other words,
the U.N. has actually undermined its own mission of protecting
the rules based international order.
In my written testimony, I take aim at several U.N.
organizations that waste taxpayer funds or exhibit a demented
obsession with Israel. But no organization exemplifies the UN's
failures better than the U.N. Relief and Works Agency,
otherwise known as UNRWA. The agency was originally created to
assist Palestinians displaced by the 1948 war that the Arab
states raged against Israel and subsequently lost.
Early on, however, it was clear that UNRWA viewed the
Palestinians as clients. They refused to permanently resettle
them, and then they became the rationale for additional funding
year after year. Over time, UNRWA's clients grew old and passed
on, but that was bad for business. So, UNRWA expanded the
definition of Palestinian refugees to include the descendants
of refugees.
So, as a result, UNRWA's registry has ballooned from
700,000 in 1948 to 5.9 million today. Mathematically
impossible. Despite the fact that only few of the original
refugees are alive today, the UNRWA's roster continues to grow.
And all of them claim the so-called right of return to lands
inside Israel. In other words, UNRWA has extended the
Palestinian-Israeli conflict deliberately and indefinitely.
UNRWA today also identifies 2.3 million Palestinians in
Gaza and the West Bank as refugees. I'll remind you, these are
people living in the Palestinian territories, so this hardly
qualifies them as being refugees. UNRWA today has a whopping
30,000 employees, and in case you're wondering, the U.N. High
Commissioner for Refugees serves more than 90 million people
around the world with 19,000 on staff.
So, it's almost as if the U.N. is trying to say that the
Palestinian issue is more important than any other problem
anywhere around the world. UNRWA employees have been exposed as
members of Hamas, the terrorist group that slaughtered 1,400
Israelis in cold blood on October 7th. This might explain how
UNRWA's educational materials refer to Israel as the enemy,
teach math by counting martyred terrorists, and include the
phrase jihad is one of the doors to paradise in grammar
lessons.
Now, of course, there are some that might argue that right
now is the wrong time to criticize UNRWA, given that there is
an actual refugee crisis that is going on in Gaza right now.
So, let me be clear, criticizing UNRWA need not ignore the
needs of destitute Palestinians or those in crisis, and it need
not ignore the intentions of well-meaning relief workers, some
of whom have died during the current Gaza conflict.
UNRWA may yet have an important role to play in this
crisis, but UNRWA must begin to acknowledge its serious
problems, and it must begin to enact meaningful reform. The
agency, however, continues to deny its dysfunction. In fact,
UNRWA has an office, I believe right here on K Street, that
tries to convince legislators such as yourselves that it is
doing a great job.
If you ask me, this sounds like a lobby. So, now what?
Congress has some hard work ahead. The first step is to
actually apply refugee status to only people who are refugees
from 1948 and 1949, this would right size UNRWA's mission right
off the bat. From there, an impartial board of directors must
be installed to conduct effective oversight. UNRWA actually
does not have one, they do not have oversight of themselves.
After that, there should be a full screening of UNRWA
employees for terrorist affiliations, we know there are many.
Then educational material must be scrubbed of anti-semitism and
incitement against Israel. We've heard already that our friends
from Impact SC are here, and they've done a great job of
exposing a lot of what is in those materials. Finally, there
needs to be plans for the phasing out of UNRWA over time.
It may not be now, given the crisis that we're watching,
but there needs to be a plan for handing off the mission of
UNRWA to the U.N. high commissioner for refugees. There should
be only one agency that deals with refugees worldwide, the
Palestinian one has failed. I should also just note that I
think that shutting down that D.C. office might also be a good
idea.
Before I conclude, I would like to add a few words about
the U.N. International Forces in Lebanon, otherwise known as
UNIFIL. The agency's mandate, as you probably know, is
preventing non-State actors from acquiring weapons in Lebanon.
Yet it did nothing for 17 years while the Iran backed Hezbollah
amassed an arsenal of some 200,000 rockets, as well as
precision guided munitions, lethal munitions, and drones.
Since October 8th, the day after the massacre in Southern
Israel, Hezbollah has fired more than a dozen anti-tank
missiles at Israel every day. A full blown war could erupt at
any moment. And I think it's fair to ask at this point whether
the U.N. failed, or whether it was a partner in the current
crisis. Either way, Washington must seriously consider ending
UNIFIL's mandate.
Something else can be created if a mechanism for dialog
between Israel and the Hezbollah backed government in Lebanon
as needed. But change is desperately needed. I'll end here. Mr.
Chairman, I thank you for holding this hearing. I thank you for
allowing me to speak today, and I look forward to your
questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Schanzer follows:]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5685.018

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5685.019

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5685.020

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5685.021

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5685.022

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5685.023

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5685.024

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5685.025

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5685.026

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5685.027

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5685.028

Mr. Smith. Thank you so very much, Dr. Schanzer. Mr.
Lincoln?

STATEMENT OF JONATHAN LINCOLN, INTERIM DIRECTOR, CENTER FOR
JEWISH CIVILIZATION AT GEORGETOWN UNIVERSITY

Mr. Lincoln. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member Wild,
members of the committee. Thank you for inviting me to testify.
With your permission, I'll summarize the written testimony. I'm
not here to defend every aspect of the U.N. system, far from
it. But based on 15 years working with the United Nations,
including in Gaza, Jerusalem, and Ramallah, also on post
conflict arrangements in 2006 after Israel's war with
Hezbollah, I'm in a position to perhaps help explain the
political and operational environment on the ground.
To start with of course, as many have mentioned, the scope
and brutality of the October 7th terrorist attack on Israel,
and the kidnaping of some 240 Israelis including children and
the elderly by Hamas has forever changed the country, its
relations with the world, and brought the longstanding conflict
with the Palestinians into a new era.
With the war now entering new phases, Palestinian civilians
in Gaza are facing a calamity of historic proportions. The
United Nations, and UNRWA in particular, are not just the best
placed entities to provide the urgent, lifesaving assistance
needed on the ground, they are the only option. The numbers are
no doubt familiar, but they are staggering. More than 10,000
reported killed, including more than 4,000 children.
Of course, according to Gaza's Ministry of Health, there
are some 725,000 internally displaced persons at 149 U.N.
facilities. These numbers grow as Israel calls on the
population to flee the areas of heaviest fighting around Gaza
City. Medical supplies, fuel, food, water are running low.
Facilities for sewage treatment, water desalination have either
been damaged, shut down, or are working at reduced capacity.
In coordination with Israel, aid has started to flow from
Egypt, but in insufficient quantities according to the UN's
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs. Secretary
Blinken and the Administration have been calling for
humanitarian pauses, which are the least of what is urgently
required. There is no other way to ensure increased aid, other
than with United Nations, and in particular, UNRWA support.
UNRWA is for all intents and purposes, the State. It cannot
be compared to any other U.N. agency, no other U.N. agency
functions in that way. It plays a vital stabilizing role in the
context of the fighting, and of course will do so with regard
to any day after scenario. The alternative is chaos, and
possible systems collapse posing a danger first and foremost
for the Palestinian civilians, but clearly for Israel as well.
From an operations perspective, UNRWA is considered a
reliable partner for many donors, and has always maintained a
close and relatively trusted relationship with the Israel
Defense Forces with regard to its operations. Eventually, in
the context of post conflict arrangements, there will be a need
to review, and in some cases I would even go further than what
the others have said with regard to an overhaul concerning the
structure, political, operational shortcomings of the United
Nations and UNRWA in particular.
This must include an examination of anti-semitism and bias
against Israel. But to be sure, efforts to de-fund UNRWA, as
happened from 2018 to 2021, have failed, as the agency managed,
with relative ease, to make up for the shortfall with other
donors. It's hard to imagine a different result, especially in
the current context. The existing agreements between the U.S.
and UNRWA need to be expanded and strengthened.
In addition to the concerns about bias presented here
today, many donor countries have additional concerns about
UNRWA's management, accountability framework, that was raised
today as well, its financial stability that need to be
addressed. Replacing UNRWA with other U.N. agencies is
unrealistic, if not impossible, due to its unique, entirely
unique operational structure and direct assistance model.
Substantial change can happen only in the context of a
multi-lateral approach between the U.S., European Union, Gulf
States, and other donors. The more connected the post conflict,
and any effort to reform the U.N. are to the renewal of a
viable peace process, the greater the chance of success.
In conclusion, the late Kofi Annan famously stated quote,
``A United Nations that fails to be at the forefront of the
fight against anti-semitism and other forms of racism denies
its history and undermines its future. That obligation links us
to the Jewish people and to the State of Israel, which rose,
like the United Nations itself, from the ashes of the
Holocaust.'' He also said ``When we seek justice for the
Palestinians, as we must, let us firmly disavow anyone who
tries to use that cause to incite hatred against Jews in Israel
or elsewhere.''
Current U.N. leadership and parts of the system have
certainly failed to grasp the magnitude of the October 7th
attacks for Israel, and much of the Jewish world, and in doing
so, have failed to live up to these standards. But despite its
shortcomings, the U.N. is far too important an organization for
the U.S. to disengage from. This is both for the sake of
Palestinians, Israelis, and the world.
For now, the priority must be to support urgent relief and
lifesaving assistance to civilians in Gaza. There will also
soon be an opportunity to make the U.N. a more effective
organization, and one that can better live up to the legacy of
Kofi Annan. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Lincoln follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Mr. Smith. Thank you. Thank you all for your testimoneys.
To begin the questioning, you mentioned a moment ago how Dr.
Tedros has not in any way, shape, or form retracted his false
statements. Just for the record, I've met with Dr. Tedros when
he was the minister for health in Ethiopia, and he often lied
on behalf of Meles, who was then the head of State there when
they had cholera outbreaks.
So, he had a very checkered background going into that
position as director general of the World Health Organization.
He got his job by way of the Chinese Communist Party and Xi
Jinping, he was their candidate. And we saw that there was a
great deal of disinformation, if not outright lying, when COVID
broke out, as he did the work of the Xi Jinping's dictatorship
in putting out a false narrative.
So, I am no great fan at all, I supported the Brit who ran,
who was all about reforming the WHO. But, you know, again,
these people need to be held to account when they make
statements, and for him to smear Israel, and not retract it,
and frankly offer a fulsome apology, again goes to his
integrity, and integrity matters. And I've been shocked at the
fact that he has not come forward and said wait, I got it
wrong, let me just correct that, and apologize to the Israelis.
Nothing of the sort, just goes on to the next
disinformation campaign. So, you might want to speak to that.
The issue of diversion of aid, we know that so much of the aid
from the European Union, as well as from us, gets diverted by
Hamas. What should have gone into infrastructure went into
tunneling, and even a lot of the aid, we believe, that is being
sent to UNRWA is diverted in other ways.
It's hard to say because there's no independent
accountability whatsoever. And, you know, Mr. Lincoln, maybe
you could speak to the issue of if a UNRWA employee took a pro-
Israeli position, and said we want nothing to do with anti-
semitism, what would happen to him or her should they take that
position?
One, they wouldn't get the job in the first place, but say
they hit it. And they say it's about time we got to tolerance,
and treated our Israeli, and our Jewish friends with respect.
What would happen to that person? Would they last the day?
Would they be--would terrible things happen to them? And on the
textbooks, you know, I have met with the lobby forces, they've
come around over the years for UNRWA.
And they're very good at putting pretty much what we saw
throughout the 80's and 90's when it came to communist
dictatorships. I took on Nicolae Ceausescu in Romania in the
Securitate, and every year the lobbyists in K Street would
bring, because they wanted most favored nation status, and they
had page after page of nice bullets of lies. And you would look
at it and say--but it worked.
They kept MFN for years, most favored nation status, even
though they were doing horrible things, in that case, to
Christians in Romania as part of their dictatorship. My point
is a lobby firm, and a lobby effort done here, and elsewhere,
can put a gloss on the most egregious human rights abuse. So,
diversion, if you maybe could speak to that issue of funding.
And what is taught? I've had briefings and hearings in the
past. I had one witness once read from the textbooks in
English, and it was not only anti-Jewish, and anti-Israel, it
was also anti-American, and it went page, after page, after
page of that. They tell us that they cleanup the textbooks, and
we hear, you know, you do not get a 15 year old who is
fanatically anti-Jewish and anti-Israel without starting at a
very young age to inculcate that hate into that little boy and
that little girl, and it works.
You know, I've worked on the Charles Taylor issue, I've had
hearings with the special prosecutor with regards to David
Crane here in this room, with what Charles Taylor did to hype
up the young people to cutoff arms and do horrible things,
that's child abuse of the worst kind, and Hamas, and the PLA
does it every single day. And maybe you could clarify for the
record.
With regards to the content, the U.N. does not say what
goes into those books, or the U.S., or the donor nations, it
comes from the PA if I'm not mistaken. And again, that's
highlighted again in the testimony in the most recent report
that was put out. So, I just want to underscore that. A hand
off of UNHCR, you indicate, I think, Mr. Lincoln, you do not
think that would happen.
I mean UNRWA is so flawed, I mean if this was racism based
on color of someone's skin, surely, and I was one of those
republicans who supported apartheid sanctions during the Reagan
Administration, and for a while I was pretty much alone in that
position, finally we all came to that position. So, you know,
because that was based on racism. Well, here we have a group
that is all about racism against Jewish people.
We've got to find some other entity it would seem to me.
Because reform, and the falseness of the reform in the past is
numbing. Also, if I could pay to slay, if that isn't an
indicator of, I mean we have Taylor Force, an American, who in
2006 was killed with a knife, ten others were wounded. And what
does his family get as he's languishing in prison, what do they
get, and all others?
They get a stipend, a lot of money from the Palestinian
authority. I mean I still, my mind boggles at how cruel that
is, and that's backed by Abbas, who has not gotten rid of pay
to slay. I mean the U.N. has been silent on that one for far
too long as well. So, if you could maybe speak to the
textbooks, and I said this yesterday in a meeting we had with
the ADL.
The famous song You've got to be Taught from South Pacific,
Rodgers and Hammerstein, hatred is taught. And it's being
taught with aggressiveness every single day to the youngest of
Palestinians, and that is child abuse of the worst kind.
Because they grow up loaded for bear to kill Jews, and to end
the State of Israel. They do not just come by that when they're
15, they grow into it, and UNRWA is the major conduit to that.
Mr. Neuer. Mr. Chairman, you mentioned the WHO.
Mr. Smith. Yes.
Mr. Neuer. Mr. Chairman, you mentioned the WHO, it is
indeed shameful that Dr. Tedros has neither retracted nor
deleted his false tweet accusing Israel of attacking a
hospital, that is a horrific accusation, and it's false, and
never happened. You mentioned the role of China in the WHO,
that is significant, has never been properly addressed in
Geneva, where I'm based.
The WHO, the previous director was also China's candidate,
literally China was campaigning for her, she was their
candidate. And they have substantial influence, you know even
symbolically, two of the good will Ambassadors of the WHO, one
is James Chao, who works for Chinese State TV, and is a paid
propagandist of the Chinese regime. He's a WHO good will
Ambassador.
During COVID he was publishing a lot of stuff praising
China's methods of dealing with COVID. So, outright propaganda,
we exposed him, we had a hundred NGO's complain about him,
nothing happened. Another good will Ambassador is Peng Liyuan,
she is the first lady of China, the wife of Xi Jinping, she's a
WHO good will Ambassador. In 1989 she's a singer, she was
serenading the perpetrators of the Tiananmen Square Massacre,
she's a WHO good will Ambassador.
So, WHO has a lot to answer for. You spoke about UNRWA, two
issues, the aid, and the education. On the aid, it's hard to
get information on aid being diverted, but UNRWA itself a
couple weeks ago reported that both fuel and medical equipment
were removed from one of their warehouses and taken by the
health authorities, which is Hamas, and they deleted their
tweet an hour or two later.
But Haaretz reported, which Haaretz is a newspaper that is
extremely critical of the Netanyahu government, and generally
supports UNRWA. They reported that according to their sources
this theft of U.N. humanitarian fuel and medical equipment did
happen. According to the Israel Broadcasting Authority's
Channel Eleven, 36,000 liters of fuel were taken.
That is fuel that can run a hospital for a week and a half,
it can run a water desalination plant for a long period, stolen
by Hamas terrorism. UNRWA education, and we released our
report, Impact SC has their report, and they talk about
graduates of UNRWA who have committed terrorist attacks. And
this is over the past 20 years, and they cite numerous
graduates of UNRWA schools who commit terrorist attacks.
So, we as the donor states, because all of our countries,
whether you're American, Canadian, Swiss, French, British,
we're all paying for UNRWA. America is the largest donor. We're
told that it's an investment for peace. What UNRWA never says
is of the 3,000 or so terrorists who infiltrated into Israel,
how many of them were UNRWA graduates?
One of them apparently had an UNRWA certificate from a
vocational school that was found in Israel, and it was
published on the internet, and this person had it on their
person, this terrorist. So, UNRWA does not reveal those
statistics, but obviously they're substantial. So, it's a
question whether UNRWA is really educating for peace. You
asked, Mr. Chairman, about what would happen if a U.N. official
would say I oppose anti-semitism.
Well, we've never seen it, so it's a valid question, and I
hope that our colleague will answer it. But, you know,
unwittingly certain things happen. A couple years ago the
director of UNRWA in Gaza, a German national by the name of
Matthias Schmale, no friend of the Jewish people, no friend of
Israel, someone who tolerated lots of anti-semitism when he was
head of UNRWA in Lebanon, he was interviewed on TV.
And they asked him, can you tell us about Israel's attacks?
This is in May 2021 ``can you tell us about Israel's attacks on
Gaza?'' And he said yes, but you know, they've been very
precise, they're only hitting there, the terrorists, and
haven't been hitting us, civilians, UNRWA. And he did not
realize what he was saying, but he effectively acknowledged in
very clear terms that Israel's attacks are precisely aimed at
the terrorists.
And Israel uses quotes, and publishes quotes that the
director of UNRWA confirms what we've been saying. Immediately
he became persona non-grata in Gaza because he just said the
truth. He was not trying to praise Israel, but he just said the
truth. Became persona non-grata, suddenly there were protests
sprang up outside his office, he had to leave Gaza, he was
fired, he had to get another job.
So, that is a partial answer to your question. Finally--no,
I'm going to leave it there. Thank you.
Mr. Schanzer. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I just want to make
note when we talk about the WHO, every year during their annual
conference they devote a significant chunk of time just to
excoriating Israel. This is part of their annual process, even
at the height of the pandemic, there was a full day dedicated
at the WHO conference to talking about Israel, as if that had
anything to do with the global pandemic.
So, you just get a little bit of a sense of the priorities
of this particular U.N. agency. I would also note that right
now, we all heard about the Al-Ahli Hospital, and the attack,
an errant rocket by the Islamic jihad that created the
explosion there. What we're not talking about yet, but what we
will be talking about very soon is the Al-Shifa Hospital, which
is based in Gaza City.
Underneath the Al-Shifa Hospital is the Hamas command
center. It is several stories deep, we believe that there could
be Israeli hostages held there, we believe that there is fuel
that's been diverted there, we believe there are rockets down
there. And of course there is the command center that Hamas
uses for whatever is left of its fighting force in Gaza right
now.
How is it that the WHO has not come out and condemned Hamas
for what we already know exists beneath this hospital? This
would be the time that the WHO should be speaking out, and it
makes one wonder why it is that they exist in the first place
if they cannot come out and speak about something as abhorrent
as that. Now, as far as diversion of aid, we are hearing right
now, the best reports that I'm getting from Gaza from Israel is
that the aid that is coming through to the south, which is what
the international community has carved out.
It is being diverted to the north, where Hamas' military
command center is. It is happening in the underground tunnels.
UNRWA has not said a thing about this. There is, and I think as
you just heard from Hillel, this is a certain amount of self-
censorship, right? The story of Matthias Schmale, is that how
you pronounce his name? Yes, we remember that he actually, I
mean he ended up having to leave Gaza, he was persona non-
grata.
There is a lesson in there that UNRWA cannot speak out
about these sorts of things if they want to maintain the
access, right? And so, what they've done is they've prioritized
the mission over the revelation of a lot of key details that I
think the world needs to know about. UNRWA has to stop that
self-censorship.
And by the way, I can just tell you, as just an anecdote, a
few years ago when I went to visit the southern communities
around the Gaza strip, we actually were able to go into some of
the tunnels that had already been exposed, and you could see
that there were the bags of cement with the UNRWA logo littered
on the floor of these tunnels. So, you get a sense of where the
building material may have come from.
UNHCR, I do believe that this is the only way forward. I
know there will be resistance to it. But the point is, is that
for the legitimate refugees that need to get the assistance,
let's work through UNHCR. For those that are destitute, for
those that are in need of services that right now UNRWA is
providing, let's move them over to the Palestinian Authority.
Why are we still using the U.N. when these are basic
services that any other government should be providing? It
makes no sense, why do the Palestinians have this, and no other
people do? The textbooks, I'm going to leave that to people who
follow this a lot more closely than I do. The excuse though,
that these are textbooks that come from other places and
therefore they do not have influence.
That is absolutely not something that anybody should
accept. What is taught comes down to the teachers, it comes
down to the staff, and of course we know that many of the staff
in UNRWA have an affiliation or an affinity for Hamas that has
to change.
Mr. Lincoln. Thank you. Just a quick maybe word on a couple
of these points. On the aid diversion, from 2017 to 2021 I was
the manager of something called the Gaza Reconstruction
Mechanism, which was a mechanism that was created in the wake
of the 2014 war, which to date was the most destructive in
Gaza, of course pales in comparison to what's happening now.
But essentially we worked with the Palestinian Authority,
and with the Israeli authorities to facilitate the rebuilding
after 2014. The mechanism was functional, and in fact even
after May 2021, the Israelis moved to actually try and
strengthen it as part of their response. So, just to say that
that accounted for the bulk of the reconstruction materials
that came in after 2014 for the express purpose of rebuilding.
And it had to do with U.N. doing end use monitoring, et
cetera, by no means a perfect system, but there were no
complaints from the Israelis about that, and about the
diversion. It's understood that the cement and other materials
come from other sources, including a completely unregulated and
unchecked border between Egypt and Gaza that has been open
since 2018, just as one example, so that's important to
mention.
Also, just out of interest, interestingly, and it was of
great annoyance to me as a U.N. official working with the U.N.
Special Coordinator's Office at the time, UNRWA maintained its
own mechanism, direct mechanism with the Israelis on the entry
of materials. Again, not something that was raised by the
Israeli security establishment as an issue.
Later on of course, as part of its now, these efforts that
have come under great scrutiny on the part of the Netanyahu
government to try and support the economy, and particularly,
try and engage indirectly with Hamas, there were efforts to try
and support the economy. And this included creating certain
economic conditions on the ground. But this came from, again,
from the Netanyahu government, from the Israeli government.
And so, there were definitely excess materials on the
ground. Now, whether or not Hamas used any of this for its
tunnels, whether they were able to smuggle the goods in, I have
no idea myself. We were only able to account, and pretty well,
for the materials that came in for the U.N. and internationally
funded projects. Just on the employees, UNRWA needs to
investigate this and act swiftly if these----
Mr. Smith. If you'd suspend.
Mr. Lincoln. Sorry.
Mr. Smith. UNRWA investigate? How about an outside,
independent0minded body? I mean, here, in this place,
everything is about checks and balances. So, everything, House,
Senate, Republican, Democrat, GAO, which does independent
analysis----
Mr. Lincoln. To bring it all together, to combine that with
the textbooks, and again, I am no expert on education
curriculum, I have not worked in that in the past. UNRWA says
that in cooperation with the U.S. and other donors it takes
measures to address racism, and bias. I understand that there's
some skepticism here.
If they are insufficient, I would imagine that a coalition
of the top donors, which includes the United States, European
Union, Germany, as just the top three could influence the
required change. It's a question of political will more than
anything, and it needs to be done in a multilateral fashion
just because of the nature of UNRWA and the way it works. There
should be no obstacles within the U.N. to this, I would be
surprised.
Mr. Smith. Can you tell us how you account for young people
being so anti-Jewish, and anti-Israel who have gone through the
UNRWA schools? Is UNRWA anti-semitic?
Mr. Lincoln. I would say that you have to understand what
UNRWA is. UNRWA----
Mr. Smith. I know what it is.
Mr. Lincoln. Is taking, is providing services to seventy
percent of the population of Gaza.
Mr. Smith. Including schools.
Mr. Lincoln. UNRWA, I think we need to focus more on the
problem, which is Hamas. UNRWA is deeply flawed, it is not
Hamas.
Mr. Smith. Your view on the pay to slay?
Mr. Lincoln. In terms of----
Mr. Smith. Which is PLA?
Mr. Lincoln. There are a host of issues that are of deep
concern regarding the governance of the Palestinian Authority.
Mr. Smith. Can you condemn that? I mean killing Jewish and
Americans, and then committing terrorism, and then getting paid
for it by the government.
Mr. Lincoln. Again, I'm putting it just in--of course
condemn that. But just putting it into the context of a broader
necessity for reform. Within the Palestinian Authority there
have been many voices that are calling for this, and in
particular I would draw your attention to an article by Salam
Fayyad in Foreign Affairs, former Palestinian prime minister.
Who has outlined a number of the vital reforms that are
required in order to reinvigorate the Palestinian Authority if
there is ever going to be any sort of future peace process, or
day after scenario that stabilizes the situation. Sorry, Mr.
Chairman.
Mr. Smith. If a UNRWA teacher were to be pro-Israel, what
would happen to that person, and do you know of any who show a
tolerance, at least toward Jewish people?
Mr. Lincoln. I do not know any UNRWA teachers, and I cannot
answer the question, Mr. Chairman. But, you know, I do know
that any of these, you know, horrible instances that have been
raised by these reports should be dealt with immediately.
Mr. Smith. Thank you. Ms. Wild?
Ms. Wild. OK, well, I'm going to take up where you just
left off. Dealt with in what manner, these horrible instances
that have been outlined, tell us.
Mr. Lincoln. Teachers need to be fired.
Ms. Wild. OK. I want to go back to something that is
actually beyond the scope of your testimony, Mr. Lincoln, and I
apologize in advance for that. But my colleague, Ms. Manning,
raised it in her--I think it was Ms. Manning raised it in her
opening remarks, and it's one that I think--thank you, by the
way, for your 15 years on the ground, and for the time that you
spent in Gaza and the West Bank, and the work that you've done.
I think that that gives you a firsthand view, that it makes
you a very knowledgeable witness, and we can benefit from that.
But my question is why are there still refugee camps in Gaza?
Mr. Lincoln. As I mentioned in my testimony, it's a bit
strange to say, but the easiest way to get rid of UNRWA and
consign it to history is of course in the context of a
negotiated two State solution. This was certainly what the
framers of the Oslo process perhaps naively, perhaps wishfully
thought when they formed this process around 30 years ago.
But ultimately the status of refugees has always been
considered one of the final status issues related to the peace
process between Israel and the Palestinians. In terms of the
existence of refugee camps on the ground in places like West
Bank and Gaza, of course these refugee camps actually have the
appearance more of neighborhoods or towns than anything else.
They've been there on the ground, as mentioned, for some
seventy-four, seventy-five years.
But in terms of the--it's more an issue of the status of
these people pending a political resolution to the Israeli
Palestinian conflict. This is, for better or for worse, the
mandate that has been given by the United Nations.
Ms. Wild. OK, I understand that's your view. The idea that
the refugees of 1948 and 1949 are continuing to be served by
UNRWA, I think is preposterous. And so, what we're talking
about is successive generations of people who are essentially
born into refugee status, is that what we're talking about?
Mr. Lincoln. Yes.
Ms. Wild. OK. And you said that seventy percent of the
population of Gaza is provided services by UNRWA?
Mr. Lincoln. Around 1.5 million beneficiaries in Gaza.
Ms. Wild. You also made reference in answer to my question
about why there are still refugee camps, which you described as
neighborhoods, fair enough, but they're neighborhoods
consisting of people who are registered refugees, yes?
Mr. Lincoln. Correct.
Ms. Wild. And you described it as being part of the final
political process of creating peace in the Middle East, which
who knows whether that will ever come. But I'm not here to
argue with you by any means, you are here as our witness, but I
want you to shed some light on why it is that Israel, which was
willing to accept this two State solution, is now suffering
from the effects of the anti-semitism that even you acknowledge
exists in the United Nations, and in UNRWA.
And I'm just going to leave that there, you do not need to
actually answer that, that's more of a rhetorical question. But
I am deeply concerned about the anti-semitism that we see in
the United Nations, and U.N. agencies. You speak glowingly, and
I would agree with you on the role of former U.N. Secretary
General Kofi Annan, and his fight against anti-semitism.
You quoted his statement, which I thought was a beautiful
one. But what I'd like to know from you, since you've obviously
studied the United Nations, and you've studied Secretary
General Annan's shepherding of it, what can be done to
eliminate that anti-semitism as he called for so many years
ago?
Mr. Lincoln. Thank you, thank you for the question.
Ms. Wild. The softball question.
Mr. Lincoln. Sure, no, absolutely.
Ms. Wild. Not really, not really.
Mr. Lincoln. Leadership matters in any organization, it
matters at the United Nations as well. And Kofi Annan's words,
although they were written some time ago, echoed very strongly
throughout the system. And also set an example for the member
states, and for the member State bodies. It will never, you
know, the sort of dichotomy between the United Nations as both
the stage in the member State bodies and the actor is one that
the stage unfortunately is a reflection of the world, and a
reflection of at least opinions of states.
So, when we talk about these entities for example, Special
Rapporteurs, Human Rights Council, you know, as Hillel and
others have very rightly, and very strongly brought up some of
the deep concerns about how they function. Again, when we say
that these are U.N. opinions, U.N. thoughts, or somehow U.N.
resolutions, it's important to understand where they come from.
And the leadership that was demonstrated by not just Kofi
Annan, but other secretary generals in this regard, and Kofi
Annan of course had no problem calling this out in a very
similar way that we heard from the colleagues here today. And
he lamented it not only for the anti-semitism, and for the
concern that it is, but also that it brought us no closer to
peace, and it ultimately did nothing for the Palestinians and
their search for self-determination as well.
Ms. Wild. When is the last time the United Nations had a
secretary general who called out anti-semitism? I'm not trying
to----
Mr. Lincoln. Are you asking me?
Ms. Wild. Yes, I'm not trying to give you a trick question,
I'm just curious if you know.
Mr. Lincoln. Antonio Guterres has made some statements to
that effect. I think definitely speaking, definitely from a
historical perspective Kofi Annan sets the standard, and then
of course it was continued by his successor, Ban Ki-moon. You
have seen similar statements, especially during visits of the
current secretary general to Israel, in which he was of course
hosted by Prime Minister Netanyahu, I was on the ground
supporting him that trip, where he made some very clear
statements, I do not have them at hand.
So, you do hear this, but again, I think that the standard,
and the ability to relate it specifically to the ongoing
conflict, and to separate some of these issues out was
definitely set by Secretary General Kofi Annan.
Ms. Wild. I'm going to ask one other area, and then I'll
pass to my colleagues, but I may come back and ask some more.
Obviously your position is that we need to work to reform and
improve UNRWA, not abolish it. And I'd be interested to know if
you have any specific thoughts about what we do to improve and
reform it. I'll just end there.
Mr. Lincoln. Sure. I think that the best place to start
with regard to UNRWA is to sort of understand that it's this
creation of the General Assembly, and it's, to me, the root of
a number of these flaws are that it falls between the cracks
with regard to accountability in general, and this is what we
heard from some of the other colleagues as well. I do see the
secretariat, the secretary general in particular being able to
take on more of a role.
There's also the, and I'm sure the colleagues would have a
lot to say about it, but within the Department of Peace
Building and Political Affairs, there is also the Division of
Palestinian Rights within. And again, with a view to clarifying
accountability frameworks, who is in charge, who is in charge
of UNRWA? And then also with a goal to try and sharpen its
humanitarian and development roles on the ground.
I think would go a long way to addressing a number of the
key shortcomings of the agency, including some of the issues
that the colleagues raised, very real, and serious issues that
the colleagues raised today. In my opinion this cannot be done
bilaterally, the United States has tried both ways. Either as
the biggest donor, to exercise the leverage in that respect, or
to de-fund.
Neither will work, it's a multi-lateral entity, this is the
United Nations, we need to work with allies, and there is a lot
of common ground. But if we do it just solely based on one
particular issue, or one particular set of issues, then it will
likely be less successful is my view.
Ms. Wild. Sorry, I said that was my last, I have one last.
So, with your focus on improving the actual humanitarian
rebuilding efforts on the ground in Gaza, my question to you is
how does that get done with Hamas present?
Mr. Lincoln. Two sets of issues. One is I can tell you from
my experience how we did it after the 2014 war, and you're
hearing----
Ms. Wild. If you think it's applicable now, sure.
Mr. Lincoln. Yes, because you're hearing a lot of the same
things, and again, we do not know how this particular conflict
is going to end, we do not know. And what will be on the
ground----
Ms. Wild. Let's even talk about prior to October 7th, OK?
Mr. Lincoln. OK.
Ms. Wild. So, before this conflict started, UNRWA was on
the ground, but not providing the focused level of humanitarian
support that you think is optimal, right? And I guess my
question is, so how is that--I mean let's talk about before
October 7th.
Mr. Lincoln. It is largely because of Hamas, because of
Hamas' presence that UNRWA is actually strengthened on the
ground. Because a lot of donors would prefer to give to a U.N.
agency that has some degree of accountability rather than
working with ministries that are some have closer ties with
Hamas than others. The problem has always been that, and we saw
this, and it's applicable to the current context, and it's a
lesson learned for the future.
After 2014 you saw a reinvigorated sense from the
Palestinian Authority that they were going to play a role in
the reconstruction on the ground. This was what the Gaza
reconstruction mechanism was all about, and this was what the
political efforts were. Because of Hamas' continued existence
on the ground, and because of its own internal divisions, and
its own political problems within the Palestinian body politic
between the Palestinian Authority and the Hamas de facto
government, in Gaza it broke down.
And the engagement of the Palestinian Authority wavered
over time, because they felt that it was working too much to
support, or sorry, not to support necessarily, but to take the
Hamas government off the hook with regard to governance.
Ms. Wild. I'm going to stop you there. Mr. Schanzer, you
want to intervene?
Mr. Schanzer. Yes, I want to just point out something, and
it should be obvious, but maybe it isn't. UNRWA helped
perpetuate Hamas rule starting in 2007 when Hamas took over the
Gaza strip by force in a brutal civil war in which they toppled
the Palestinian Authority. Hamas remains, has been the
sovereign basically for 16 years. It failed to provide basic
services to its own people because surprise, terrorist groups
do not care about providing basic services----
Ms. Wild. Mr. Lincoln, do you disagree with what he just
said? Sorry.
Mr. Lincoln. It's not just UNRWA, it's, you know----
Ms. Wild. No, what he just specifically said. Do you
disagree with that?
Mr. Lincoln. That terrorist groups are not interested?
Ms. Wild. No, before that. What----
Mr. Schanzer. That UNRWA helped perpetuate Hamas rule.
Ms. Wild. That.
Mr. Lincoln. I do not think that that's completely
accurate. I think it's far more nuanced.
Ms. Wild. OK, I'm going to lead to my colleague, Mr.
Schneider.
Mr. Schneider. Yes, I'll yield too.
Mr. Smith. And frankly, we'll go to a member of the
committee, Ms. Manning.
Ms. Manning. Thank you very much. Mr. Lincoln, UNRWA is
meant to provide certain basic services to the population that
it serves, such as education and healthcare. However, in
meetings with members and staff, some UNRWA officials seem to
believe that they are there to perpetuate the right of return.
In your view, what is the proper role of UNRWA?
Mr. Lincoln. UNRWA is not there to perpetuate the right of
return. If some of the individuals are from the organization
are stating so, then that's not correct. Of course there has
been over time a politicization of its mandate exactly as you
have laid out. And again, this is something that has been
perpetuated through the Palestinian Authority's textbooks, and
other means.
Ms. Manning. So, what should we be doing to focus UNRWA on
what its mandate is, and not what its mandate should not be?
Mr. Lincoln. As I laid out in my testimony, I believe that
a multi-lateral effort toward looking at the shortcomings of
the United Nations with regard to this conflict in general,
which includes UNRWA, is required. I think that also just on a
broader sense, there are many other issues. The current
iteration of the United Nations on the ground stems back from
the Oslo peace process from 1993 and 1994. There are aspects of
it that no longer make sense.
Ms. Manning. So, let me go a step further, how would you
assess UNRWA, UNESCO, the U.N. Human Rights Council, other
agencies in terms of their fidelity to the UN's own principles
of neutrality and tolerance?
Mr. Lincoln. I'm not familiar with all of them, we're
talking about some actors on the ground, some member State
bodies whose positions are defined by states like UNESCO. So,
it's a little bit difficult to compare all of those together.
The problem, as I mentioned, and I think that again, we're
talking about somewhat of a systemic problem, is that in 1994
there was a division of responsibility more or less for the
peace process.
The United States was in charge of the negotiations, the
European Union and others, including the United Nations, were
asked by the parties and the United States to engage on the
ground, and support the development of Palestinian
institutions, and support the Palestinian people. Now with the
peace process collapsed, especially in light of the current
conflict, the United Nations has the appearance, less of a
conflict resolution mechanism and more of an advocate perhaps
of one side.
This needs to be updated because of the situation. But
again, if and when, and you hear this also from the
Administration on the need to reinvigorate a peace process in
the wake of all of this horrible carnage that we see on the
ground. You can better believe that the U.N. will be asked to
play a role, what role that is, whether it's a circumscribed
role, whether it's a greater role or not of course depends on a
number of factors, including how the war continues and how it
ends.
Ms. Manning. So, there were remarks that were made by a
Hamas political wing leader that were shown on TV on the news
where he stated that it was the responsibility of Hamas to
fight against Israel, and to protect its fighters with their
underground tunnels. And in response to questions he said that
they did not have a responsibility to allow the people, the
Palestinian people, to get shelter from attacks in those
tunnels.
That the responsibility of the Palestinian people was
solely held by the United Nations. Can you comment on that, and
can you also help us understand, has there ever been a
comprehensive review of the population that UNRWA serves to
identify how many people actually meet the U.N. high
commissioner for refugees' definition of a refugee?
Mr. Lincoln. Just on your last point, I'm not familiar with
that aspect. And again, I should clarify for the committee. I'm
not, and have not ever been a staff member of UNRWA, I worked
for a different part of the U.N. But I will say that the
comment that you mentioned from the, I believe it was Mousa Abu
Marzook from Hamas, this is a very common perception held not
just by Hamas, but by Palestinian political bodies in general.
And it's primarily a misunderstanding of the UN's role on
the ground. Of course, there are a number of U.N. agencies that
operate similar to how U.N. agencies operate anywhere in the
world, that support systems on the ground to provide services
to the population, and in the West Bank and Gaza you have 22 of
them. UNRWA is a little bit different. And I think that again,
if we go to the heart of it, UNRWA's mode of operation and its
sort of direct service model is what sets it apart.
And in some ways is what is at the root of some of the
issues that a wide array of donors have been concerned with for
many years.
Ms. Manning. So, you would agree that the comment made by
that Hamas leader of the political wing is wrong? That it is
the responsibility of the elected government to take care of
the Palestinian people who live in Gaza?
Mr. Lincoln. That's correct, and of course in a context
like Gaza, and as in many other places in the world, the work
of U.N. agencies is often conflated with the work of
governments.
Ms. Manning. Thank you, thank you. Mr. Schanzer, what are
the best ways we can now support targeted humanitarian
assistance to make sure that it gets to the people of Gaza who
are actually the victims of Hamas?
Mr. Schanzer. It is a good question. During the war itself,
you know, what we have right now is the southern part of the
Gaza Strip, which has been sort of cordoned. The problem right
now is diversion from the south to the north. And
unfortunately, there is probably going to need to be some sort
of military solution to destroy those tunnels so that the aid
stays in the south and does not get diverted to Hamas and the
north. I do not know how else to do it, because UNRWA is not
stopping it, nor are the people on the ground. So there is a
huge problem I think. I cannot even tell you what the
percentage is of the goods that are coming through that are
being passed underground to the north. But it is a serious
problem right now.
Ms. Manning. And does UNRWA have the ability to stop the
confiscation of those goods by Hamas?
Mr. Schanzer. This is what we were talking about. I mean,
first of all, you do not see people walking around sort of
armed, right, from UNRWA. They are not there to confront
anybody. That is not their job, right. Their job is to just
simply provide services to the people that they deem to be
qualified as Palestinian refugees, which, of course, has
ballooned beyond any reasonable expectation.
But the question really is whether UNRWA can speak out
about it. And again, I mentioned this during the prepared
remarks. There is a tendency among UNRWA staff to want to sweep
these sorts of things under the rug in order to continue their
mission. So, in other words, in order to continue to provide
the goods and services that they want to provide to the people
of Gaza, they will pretend not to see these sorts of crimes
taking place. And this makes UNRWA complicit in everything that
Hamas is doing. And that is why it needs to be dismantled.
Ms. Manning. Mr. Neuer, what has the U.N. done to condemn
Hamas and call for the release of the 240 hostages, including
citizens of dozens of countries? These are not just Israelis.
These are not just Americans. These are citizens of dozens of
countries. What has the U.N. done to condemn that, to call for
the release of the hostages, and frankly, to work for the
release of the hostages?
Mr. Neuer. Thank you, Member of Congress. I have heard a
number of U.N. statements that have condemned Hamas' actions.
But these really have been the tiny minority. And they have not
had the vigor and prominence and energy that the UN's other
statements on the situation have had. So there have been
certain statements. But they really have been the tiny
minority.
The bulk of their statements, as I mentioned in my initial
remarks, have been focused at pointing the finger at Israel,
expressly or by implication. Certainly the U.N. has tremendous
ability and leverage to press for the release of the hostages.
The Secretary General has a bully pulpit. The other U.N.
agencies are present on the ground in Gaza and in the
territories. So they actually have enormous opportunity to
speak out, to press Hamas. And it has certainly not been their
priority.
So one can find statements here and there, including by Dr.
Tedros. But sometimes they were only in reaction when they were
criticized by Israel for not having spoken out. So I certainly
think U.N. leaders, including Guterres, including the High
Commissioner for Human Rights, Volker Turk, who should be in
the region now, should be taking much more significant action,
if they have been doing anything, to see that the hostages are
released.
Ms. Manning. Mr. Lincoln.
Mr. Lincoln. Thank you. Just to respond, although some of
his statements might leave a little bit to be desired,
Secretary-General Guterres I think in every single one of his
statements has mentioned the hostages and not just mentioned
the hostages but called for their immediate and unconditional
release. And he used the word now repeatedly in his last
statement. So he----
Ms. Manning. Now, are there additional steps he could be
taking?
Mr. Lincoln. With regard to those steps, again, the United
Nations Envoy, the Special Coordinator, the office that I used
to work for, is engaged, you know, I do not know to what degree
in the sort of broader discussions that are taking place
between, with the U.S. Administration, Qatar, and others on the
ground. But from what I understand, and again I, you know, just
am getting information from press reports like everybody else.
Again, the U.N. is playing, you know, that supporting role.
But----
Ms. Manning. But he----
Mr. Lincoln [continuing]. To what degree----
Ms. Manning. He hasn't put together a task force or called
special meetings or emergency sessions to discuss the freeing
of the hostages.
Mr. Lincoln. I have not heard of that. But I imagine that
the U.S. is firmly in the lead on this issue right now.
Ms. Manning. Mr. Chairman, if you would indulge me for one
more question. Thank you.
Mr. Neuer, like many on this panel, I strongly support the
Abraham Accords. In fact, we have the father of the Abraham
Accords Caucus with us, one of them, with us today. And we all
believe that this could be transformative for the region. Since
they were signed, has there been any positive movement in terms
of the voting patterns of these countries that are part of the
Abraham Accords or in their approach toward Israel at the UN?
Mr. Neuer. Thank you. That is a question actually I get
often asked by different audiences, a very important question.
I would say in terms of voting the Abraham Accords
countries, such as Bahrain, the United Arab Emirates, Morocco,
have for the most part not changed their voting, with one
exception. A year or two ago, Bahrain was absent during a vote
against Israel, and the Palestinians were upset about that. And
I think some went to the Bahraini Ambassador to complain about
that. So that was maybe one instance. But in general, we have
not seen voting changes. And these countries vote with the Arab
world consistently against Israel, which is unfortunate.
However, there have been a number of instances that are
less than voting but which are significant actions that have
showed a change of tone. I will speak from my experience in
Geneva.
At least once, and I believe already twice, there have been
statements made, for example, by the Deputy Ambassador of the
United Arab Emirates, who took the floor at the U.N. in Geneva
to give a statement on behalf of all the Abraham Accords
countries, the Emirates, Bahrain, Morocco, American, and
Israel, a joint statement dealing with some technical matters.
But that was something that for me was unprecedented, to see an
Arab country take the floor and give a joint statement with
Israel on something positive, which was a very welcome
development.
So there have been a few statements and other atmospherics
I would say both in New York and Geneva. And certainly
bilaterally those countries have improved their approach toward
Israel in various other meetings and so forth.
Ms. Manning. Thank you very much. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I appreciate it. And thank you to all of our witnesses today.
Mr. Smith. I yield to my good friend and colleague, Brad
Schneider.
Mr. Schneider. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And again, I want
to thank the witnesses for being here today and your patience
throughout this hearing.
Maybe to just demonstrate that I paid attention in Sunday
school but also to make a historical point, because I do want
to talk about history, in synagogues around the world this week
two things are going to be universal. On the one hand, there
are going to be armed guards outside every one of those
synagogues for fear of anti-semitism and violence. We saw it in
Pittsburgh in the horrific attack that killed people as they
prayed. But we are now seeing it around the world. And you are
going to have that security. And that is part of what we are
talking about here.
But inside those synagogues, every single one, they are
going to be reading from the Torah. And the Torah portion they
will be reading from is Chayei Sarah. And it is an ironically
named section of the Torah, the five books of Moses, because
Chayei Sarah means the life of Sarah. But it starts with the
death of Sara.
And why it is interesting in the context of this hearing,
upon Sarah, the wife of Abraham, dying, Abraham buys in the
Torah, it tells the story of Abraham buying a place to bury his
wife. Mr. Neuer, you are nodding your head, so I think I am
going to ask this question. Where is that place?
Mr. Neuer. It is in Hebrew called the Ma'arat ha-Machpelah
in Hebron. And it is, indeed, I read the Torah last week in
advance of this week during Minchah Shabbat and saw how lengthy
that portion is, describing when Abraham purchases that portion
of land in Hebron.
Mr. Schneider. There was a deed. That is not what I am here
to go through. My point I want to make is that the Jews have
connection to this land. Hebron, for those who aren't aware, is
a city in the West Bank. Jews lived in that city from the time
of Abraham until 1929. I do not know. Does anyone want to
answer what happened in 1929? Mr. Schanzer?
Mr. Schanzer. A pogrom.
Mr. Schneider. A pogrom. Arabs massacred the Jews of
Hebron. Those that weren't killed left. We can talk about all
those things. And I am not using it to make one side or the
other.
My point is that Jews have lived in the land of Israel for
3,000 years. And I think that is an important thing to note.
These are not colonialists who came from Europe. In fact, today
many of the Jews, the majority of Jews who live in Israel can
trace their roots not to Europe but to countries like Libya and
Iraq, Yemen, other places. But they have a connection that
dates back 3,000 years.
Now, you go through the history, talk 1917. When I say
that, we are talking about the Balfour Declaration. I can talk
about 1947, and while I pause there for a second, because in
November 1947, Mr. Lincoln worked at the U.N. What happened in
November 1947?
Mr. Lincoln. The General Assembly passed the Resolution
181.
Mr. Schneider. Which General Assembly?
Mr. Lincoln. The U.N. General----
Mr. Schneider. The United Nations General Assembly,
partitioning the land for a Jewish State and an Arab State. And
what happened was the Jews of the time, though that State did
not include Jerusalem, did not include Hebron, the Jews said
yes and the Arabs said no.
So jump ahead a few months, May 15, 1948, Jews declared
their State when the British left and turned over the mandate.
That is the State of Israel. Palestinians who were offered a
State instead declared war. There is a pattern here that I am
going to get to in a second. The war that ensued, that
proceeded over the years 1947 to 1949, defined what we consider
the borders of Israel today, an armistice line.
In 1956, there was another war. Israel occupied territory
and returned that territory. In 1967, importantly, there was
another war between Israel, Egypt, Syria. Israelis said to King
Hussein of Jordan please do not attack, if you do not attack
us, we will not attack you. But King Hussein felt the pressure
from the Arab world and attacked. The outcome of that was
Israel control over the West Bank and Gaza. It is important to
get us to where we are today.
But there was a conference of the Arab League in Khartoum,
famous for three responses. Mr. Schanzer, you are shaking your
head, so I will turn it to you. What were the three responses?
Mr. Schanzer. They were the three noes, no recognition, no
diplomacy, no peace.
Mr. Schneider. Israel offered to return the West Bank and
Gaza. And the Arabs said no, not once but three times.
I remember very well when Anwar Sadat went to Jerusalem,
made peace with Israel, a peace that stands today. I remember
September 1993 when Yitzhak Rabin and Yasser Arafat signed the
Oslo Accords on the White House lawn. A year later Israel
signed a peace agreement with Jordan.
As my colleague talked about, we have the Abraham Accords,
the Abraham Accords, which for the first time--and I have been
talking about this a lot. And these aren't my words. They are
the words of Tal Becker, one of the negotiators. He said the
Abraham Accords recognize that both Israelis, or both Jews and
Arabs belong to the same land. Jews, going back thousands of
years, Arabs, going back thousands of years, they belong to
this land.
And what the Abraham Accords recognize is that by embracing
each other, by recognizing the humanity and the connection that
both have to the same place, both can elevate the place and
their peoples. And that is what the Abraham Accords were about.
And that is what was happening as Israel was making
progress with Saudi Arabia. And there were certain groups and
states that said no, we cannot do this, namely Iran and its
proxies. The attack on October 7th, the heinous attack on
October 7th had as much to do about scuttling the progress
being made with Saudi Arabia as anything else.
And that is why it is so depressing to me that the U.N. has
been virtually absent in its role. And, Mr. Lincoln, you have
talked about this. The U.N. could be doing so much. But it has
failed to step up at a time of great need.
If I come back to what we are talking about and we have
said here, Mr. Lincoln, you said UNRWA is the only option. My
colleague, Ms. Wild, asked why are there refugee camps in Gaza.
I ask the same question. Why are there refugee camps in Gaza?
Israel did not occupy Gaza in 1948. Egypt did. And yet the
Palestinians were left to be in squalor in camps.
Israel controlled Gaza from 1967, not until October 2023,
but until August 2005. In August 2005, Israel left, not leaving
a single soldier or civilian inside Gaza and turned complete
control over to the Palestinian Authority. And, Mr. Schanzer,
you pointed out very clearly in the civil war, a brutal civil
war in which people were thrown off of buildings and executed
in front of their families, Hamas took over Gaza. And those
that weren't killed from Fatah left to go to the West Bank.
But since 2007 when Hamas took over, Israel hasn't
controlled Gaza. Egypt hasn't controlled Gaza. The U.N. hasn't
controlled Gaza. And yet there are still refugee camps. I think
the number I saw is 1.7 million of the 2.2 million people who
live in Gaza are considered refugees. How is that possible in a
place controlled by first the Palestinian Authority and then
Hamas since 2005 that these people are still refugees? I think
that is the question we have.
And, Mr. Schanzer, you said it very well. Hamas is
empowered by the fecklessness of UNRWA. I think UNRWA has to
go. But I think the work UNRWA is charged to do has to be done.
So I am not calling for the immediate elimination of UNRWA.
What I am saying is let's find people who are willing to do the
necessary work to help and lift up the people of Gaza to take
them out of the squalor of refugee camps, to put them into
cities and communities with schools, hospitals, playgrounds,
jobs that will give them the same thing we want for all of our
kids.
So, Mr. Neuer, I will ask you, what is it going to take to
make sure that the services UNRWA is supposed to be providing
get provided in a way that does not threaten Israel and lifts
up the Palestinian people?
Mr. Neuer. Thank you. You know, I think that, well, first,
I agree with everything that you just said. And one of the
challenges is that although my colleague, Mr. Lincoln, said
that UNRWA is not meant to promote the right of return, that is
certainly not what the entire spectrum of Palestinian factions
believe. They have said continuously that they see UNRWA as
having a political purpose. So, while the U.N. says it is a
humanitarian agency, for the Palestinians, it is a political
purpose and it is to sustain their grievance.
And there have been Israelis who thought, and I mean the
Israeli establishment, who thought that UNRWA was a solution
because it provided short-term stability. But the message of
UNRWA is indeed return, that all the Palestinians will go back
to undo Israel.
And I think what we saw on October 7th was if we thought
that UNRWA was providing short-term stability, it may have, it
seems very likely to have promoted the idea that when
Palestinians get aid, whether it is cement, they are not going
to build the playgrounds that you mentioned, the homes, the
hospitals and schools in Gaza, because that is not their home.
What they are told, and we saw it with the 3,000 terrorists who
infiltrated to Israel, they have been told that their home is
in Tel Aviv, in Jaffa, in Haifa, and so forth, going back to
1948, to undo Israel.
So I think there is a core problem with UNRWA. The
Palestinians see it as something that sustains their political
grievances. And on October 7th, I think we saw what it leads
to.
How we are going to make change on the ground going forward
to see that aid will not get diverted, I do not have the
answer. I think we are going to have to see what the situation
looks like. Obviously, the Palestinian Authority is being
mentioned. Let's not forget that Abbas just about a month ago,
maybe a bit more, was condemned by the international community
for justifying Hitler. So the PA is no great solution. But
Israel may have to pick between several bad solutions.
So we are going to have to wait to see what happens on the
ground. But I do not know how we are going to prevent aid from
being diverted certainly as long as Hamas is alive and
functioning.
Mr. Schneider. Mr. Lincoln, you mentioned Salam Fayyad.
Before I asked you what he did before. What's he doing now?
Mr. Lincoln. I do not know.
Mr. Schneider. He is a professor at Princeton----
Mr. Lincoln. OK.
Mr. Schneider [continuing]. Isn't he? You mentioned the
name Salam Fayyad. And many of us who have been around this
place for a long time will start nodding our head. And many of
the people who have been watching the situation in Israel start
nodding our head. What was Mr. Fayyad's position in the PA?
Mr. Lincoln. He was prime minister.
Mr. Schneider. He was the Prime Minister of the PA. What
did he focus on during his time as prime minister?
Mr. Lincoln. Institutional reform.
Mr. Schneider. Creating the institutions of democracy and
governance that would lift up the Palestinian people. What
happened?
Mr. Lincoln. He left after he was more or less pushed out
by President Abbas.
Mr. Schneider. He was pushed out. And that is the challenge
we face.
So, Mr. Neuer, you talk about the PA, which I believe if we
are going to see a future, it has to be one that involves the
PA in Gaza. Abbas is a problem. There are two Abbas' right.
Mahmoud Abbas is a problem. Mansour Abbas, the Israeli Abbas,
is a hero. If you--thank you. If you have watched what he has
said and the courage he has demonstrated, the moral clarity
that he has demonstrated, and by the way, Mansour Abbas is a
Israeli Arab who identifies with the Islamist movement but
believes that Jews and Arabs can live together, Jews and
Muslims can live together.
And I believe that, too. I have spent my entire life
focusing on ways to find peace and looking for stories, this is
where I am coming to you, Mr. Schanzer, and stories that may
challenge some of our assumptions. So you wrote about a
personal experience this summer. I hope your leg is better. But
you hurt your leg. You had to go to the hospital in Israel. Do
you want to share a little bit about that story?
Mr. Schanzer. Sure. Thank you. My leg is doing much better,
not 100 percent better but better.
The story is that I had been traveling. I was tired. I was
jet lagged. And I took a bad fall and broke my leg. Had to go
to Shaare Zedek hospital on a Friday night. And five out of six
of my doctors were Israeli Arabs. And they were incredible
people, incredibly warm people, incredibly professional people.
I still to this day believe that they set it 100 percent the
way it was supposed to. That is how I have been able to make
the progress that I have.
But actually what was even more remarkable after that, I
went back to my hotel that night. And when I checked out of the
hospital, they did not have crutches. They just do not give out
crutches at Israeli hospitals. I never knew that before, never
had a reason to know that before. Yes, just actually the nurse
told me just go ahead and hop, which was kind of remarkable.
But at any rate, I woke up the next morning in a bit of a
panic because I needed to get home. And so I asked the people
downstairs at the front desk if they could get me crutches. And
they said they could not. They did not know what to do because
it was Shabbat in Jerusalem where nothing is open.
So, after hitting a few brick walls, I called a friend of
mine in East Jerusalem, an Israeli Arab. And he called a friend
in Ramallah. And his friend walked into a pharmacy, bought my
crutches, took them through I am guessing four or five
checkpoints in the West Bank, and dropped them off to me so
that I could get on a plane and go home.
And that episode taught me a lot about the people-to-people
connections that I think is really what we probably need to be
focusing on right now. There is obviously a lot of terrible
news out there about, you know, the Israeli military and Hamas
and Iran and all of the actors that have thrust the Middle East
into really a terrible crisis. But at the end of the day, if
this is ever going to start to work, we are going to need those
people-to-people contacts.
Mr. Schneider. I am going to close with another story. We
need to keep the hostages in our mind and call for the
immediate, unconditional release of every one of those
hostages.
One of those, who has a Chicago connection, is Hersh
Goldberg-Polin. Hersh's story is he was at the concert. He fled
the concert and ended up taking shelter in a bus stop, which
is, in Israel bus stops are bomb shelters. And there were about
40 young people in this bus stop when the terrorists came.
And with them was a Bedouin, who happened to be taking
shelter as well in this. As the story is related by Hersh's
mother, Rachel Goldberg, at the U.N. by the way, and if you
haven't seen it I commend the speech she gave at the United
States. She tells the story about this Bedouin who steps out
and says it is all my family in here. Doesn't know these
people. Doesn't who they are. Just knows that they are in
danger. And this Muslim sees these people as his brother or
family and says this is my family, we are OK.
And the terrorists then, as Rachel tells the story,
proceeded to beat this person. We do not know what happened to
him, if he survived or was killed. Threw grenades into the bus
stop. Most of the people were killed. Hersh lost his arm, was
able to tie off a tourniquet, and has been taken hostage into
Gaza.
I am one of the founders of the bipartisan, bicameral
Abraham Accords Caucus. If you look at my record, I have spent
much of my time in Congress and long years before that striving
for peace between Israelis and their Palestinian neighbors and
the broader region. I believe it is possible. I believe that we
need to see the humanity of the people in Israel, the people in
Gaza, the West Bank, and the entire region.
War puts civilians at the center. War is the victims.
Through the course of the past month, one of the things that
reminded me was a scene from M*A*S*H. It was my favorite TV
show. And Hawkeye made the comment war isn't hell, war is war,
and hell is hell. He was asked, well, what do you mean by that.
And he says in hell there are only sinners, but in war it is
the innocent people, the people who want nothing but to live,
to raise their children, to look to a future, who have no voice
in deciding whether or not Hamas was going to violate an 870-
day-old cease-fire with a horrific massacre of 1,400 innocent
people in Israel and holding the population of Gaza as human
shields as Israel does what it must to secure its border and
rescue its hostages.
Mr. Schanzer, thank you for your story, because what we
know is that good people striving for peace can find a way to
help each other, to go through difficult challenges in the
pursuit of making a difference in someone else's life. I pray
we get to a peace in Gaza as soon as possible.
But there will be no peace as long as Hamas holds 240
people hostage, no peace as long as Hamas continues to see over
the population of Gaza as they have since 2007, and no peace as
long as Hamas is able to threaten Israel with their vision of
the destruction of the State and the murder of Jewish people.
We need the U.N. to step up.
Mr. Chair, thank you for having this hearing and making
sure we can get this message out. Madeleine Albright said a
long time ago, I heard her say it is, as bad as the U.N. is I
can only imagine how much worse the world would be without it.
I pray we can replace UNRWA with groups, governments, people
who can do the important work and can stand up to the
terrorists and the people who are holding the Palestinian
people back. With that, I yield.
Mr. Smith. Thank you. Thank you, Brad, so very much.
Let me just ask a couple of final questions and then thank
you for your time but above all for your expertise and
leadership.
The first, and I mentioned this earlier about the
Washington Free Beacon story and you mentioned Francesca
Albanese as well, an article by Charles Hilu. And she points
out, he points out I should say, that this Special Rapporteur
for Palestinian Territories has said Israel has no right to
self-defense and talks about how it is contrary to Article 51.
It does not include the right to defend itself against Hamas.
And without objection, I would ask that this article be
made part of the record because it just highlights, you know,
you are supposed to just sit there and allow people to be
slaughtered without taking an effort to counter it, which is
what Israel is doing. So I am wondering how all three of you
might respond to Albanese's what I think is a very, very
horrible statement that she has made.
Second, I remember when Yasser Arafat, it was discovered
that he had hoarded all kinds of finances, moneys. The IMF even
found that he had $900 million that had been donated he put
into his own bank accounts between the year 1995 and 2002. And
now we find, and I would ask unanimous consent without
objection, that this article, Hamas Top Three Leaders Are Worth
a Staggering $11 Billion. Now, at a time, as Brad said, you
know, and others have said and I am saying it too, you know,
people are living in squalor and poverty, at or below poverty
level in Gaza, how is it that these three individuals are worth
a staggering $11 billion? Why isn't that money being conveyed
to the people in Gaza and elsewhere, other Palestinians? Your
thoughts on that, because I think that is outrageous.
And again, it follows the line of Arafat. I mean, when that
came out about him, I did not expect that. You know, I did not
like a lot of his policies, but I never thought he was hoarding
money and making money from donations that were coming in.
Let me ask you again, do UNRWA schools--Mr. Lincoln, if you
could answer this--do they promote violence against Jews? Do
UNRWA schools promote violence against Jews? I remember when
Ms. Soffen years ago brought to my attention a pep rally that
had been held where UNRWA teachers, like we do a football game
and have a pep rally, they were celebrating suicide bombers and
applauding and, you know, very loudly, the students were all
getting worked up about putting on the vest to kill Jews. I was
appalled by it. Your thoughts on that, if you would.
And then finally, I am going to request another GAO report.
And I know we will get a number of members in a bipartisan way
to join me in it. There was one done in 2018 and 2019. It did
not get to the point, I mean, State kept the information that
they did not share about the textbooks, for example. And, you
know, that was disappointing. I think there has to be absolute
transparency even with our own government and the United States
knows about this. But even in the United Nations, you know,
there was concerns about what was raised as well. So we will be
asking for that.
And I do want to again thank, I only did it very quickly
before. You know, I am the author of the bill that established
the, it is H.R. 221, the Special Envoy for Combating Anti-
semitism. Deborah Lipstadt now is the leader as the Ambassador
at large. But Rob Davidson, who is sitting right there, that
bill with 87 cosponsors, and Brad who just left was one of the
cosponsors as well, that language for almost 2 years in the
Senate we could not get it out. He got it out. So I want to
thank him publicly at this hearing for doing that, because I
was frustrated. We all were, all the cosponsors, beyond words
that it was being held up in the Senate. So thank you, Rob, for
doing that.
But on those questions, if you could, yes, Mr. Lincoln.
Mr. Lincoln. Thank you again. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Perhaps on the Special Rapporteur, problematic and
unhelpful to say the least. Again, this is part of a general
dysfunction that you see with regard to this conflict that I
think that is something that, again, in the context of a
renewed, maybe reinvigorated approach to the United Nations
that can be dealt with. But again, these are the comments of a
Special Rapporteur coming from the Human Rights Council. So I
think we just need to narrow it down on the root of that
problem. These are not the statements of an official from the
U.N. Secretariat, for example. So we just need to----
Mr. Smith. UN system.
Mr. Lincoln [continuing]. To put that into context.
Mr. Smith. But it is the U.N. system and----
Mr. Lincoln. It is a member State, members states
appointed. I think we need to get to the root of it. We have a
diplomatic service. We have a State Department that needs to
engage with the different entities that are making these votes
and making these appointments.
Mr. Smith. Actually, I think that is a distinction without
a difference when you talk about it. I mean, when the average
person and even somebody who is very well acquainted----
Mr. Lincoln. Of course.
Mr. Smith [continuing]. With all this hears that, that
becomes like a, you know, that is coming out, she is the
Special Rapporteur.
Mr. Lincoln. No, of course.
Mr. Smith. And from Human Rights. I mean, to me that is
appalling that she would say that.
Mr. Lincoln. The article on Hamas, I am not aware of that.
I would, interesting to read it. It is very shocking. I share
your sentiments.
In terms of, again, on the education curriculum, I am not
an expert. I know nothing of the education curriculum. I do
know that this is a decades-long discussion that we have been
having here. And I have suggested that through a multilateral
engagement, again, with the top donors of UNRWA that their, and
a concerted effort on changing these textbooks to me would seem
possible. It seems----
Mr. Smith. And I would say----
Mr. Lincoln. It seems we have never tried that.
Mr. Smith. You have to have people to monitor the
classrooms, because the teachers themselves are so full of hate
toward Jews that even if you had the right textbooks it would
be conveyed. Thank you.
Mr. Lincoln. Thank you.
Mr. Schanzer. I will just address two things that you put
into that multifaceted question. Maybe it is just instructive
to just read a small passage from my written testimony about
Francesca Albanese. She blamed Israel for a Palestinian
terrorist attack that left six Israelis and one Ukrainian dead
in February 2023. In July, she released a report where she
dismissed Israeli security needs, called for punitive actions
against Israel, and justified terrorism against Israelis. And
this, of course, won the praise of Hamas. She wrote that
Palestinians continuously rebel against their prison wardens.
And she justified the October 7th attack, framing it as a
response to Israeli aggression.
I could go on. But the point is that we knew her ideology
before she was appointed to this position. And, I mean, she has
said back in 2014 that she believed that the United States was
``subjugated by the Jewish lobby.' ' This is the person that
was just named and is in this position of power. She needs to
be removed. And I think----
Mr. Smith. Fired----
Mr. Schanzer. Yes, 100 percent. There is no reason to keep
her. I do not care what the process was of getting her into
that chair. She needs to be moved out of it.
Now, as for the $11 billion, I have seen a lot of reports
on this. I am a former terrorism finance tracker. That number
has gone up significantly over the years. For a while, it was
at the tens of millions. And then it was hundreds of millions.
And now we are up to billions.
The key to all of that, if you want to know how these guys
even maintain bank accounts, they live in Qatar, a major non-
NATO ally that has a huge amount of lobby power that they
deploy here on Capitol Hill. The Qataris have been exposed
during this most recent conflict. We can see them for exactly
who they are. They try to play arsonist and firefighter. They
host a large headquarters of Hamas in their country. And now
they are trying to work with the United States and use their
good offices to try to get the hostages released.
I do not buy it for a minute. They are part of the Hamas
axis. And they need to be called out. I would even suggest here
that they be stripped of their major non-NATO ally status here
in the United States.
Mr. Neuer. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Concerning Francesca
Albanese, I certainly agree that she needs to be removed. She
is in violation of the U.N. Human Rights Council's own code of
conduct regarding special rapporteurs. They are meant to be
impartial and objective. And she is nothing of the sort. She
has even acknowledged it at various points.
Now, it was said by my colleague on the panel that she is
not a member of the Secretariat. She is appointed by the
Council. And that may be true. Certainly, I believe she should
be removed. But the problem that she demonstrates is also found
regrettably within the Secretariat itself.
I mentioned in my remarks the case of Craig Mokhiber, who
is based in New York but had been previously in Geneva and
previously also worked for the Secretariat in Gaza. He is
someone on his social media accounts, who was supposed to be a
neutral U.N. official, that is his solemn commitment,
repeatedly accused Israel of apartheid and genocide, ethnic
cleansing, you name it, portrayed Israel as evil. He is a
leading member of the U.N. Secretariat in New York.
And in addition, I would say that in the current conflict
we are seeing members of the Secretariat based in East
Jerusalem, based in Gaza, who are extremely partisan. I have
spoken with members of U.N. Secretariat who are appalled to see
how many of their colleagues are not neutral in the slightest,
people who have been in other duty stations who did not see the
same kind of levels of partisanship. And that is something that
needs to be investigated.
Finally, I would say that, you know, U.N. officials, you
know, regarding whether Israel has the right to self-defense,
Albanese said Israel does not have the right to self-defense.
We have seen repeatedly how certain U.N. officials have created
a separate interpretation of international law for Israel.
There is international law how it works for the world and then
for Israel. And the notion that Israel does have a right to
defend itself from a Hamas massacre of thousands of its own
people is absurd.
And likewise, we saw for many years that after Israel left,
Israel took out every one of its soldiers, every one of its
civilians from Gaza, they were still accused of being, of
occupying Gaza, which again is absurd. This happened in no
other place in the world. So there is like a special
international law that is used just to target Israel.
And we have seen U.N. officials recently, the Secretary-
General, it is true that he has spoken out on the hostages. But
if you look at his statements that are seen by millions on his
tweets, on his Instagram posts, his social media, the vast
majority, if not all of them, are focused on Palestinian
suffering, where Israel is blamed expressly or by implication.
The statements about the hostages which he has made do not get
by far equal amount of prominence. It is not where his
emotional energy is invested.
And what we do see is that U.N. officials have repeatedly
said yes, 1,400 people were massacred by Hamas, but now
thousands of Palestinians are killed. And, you know, that
argument was made before. It was made actually in the Nuremberg
trials. When the Einsatzgruppen, the Nazi death squads that
moved around in Europe and killed a million Jews and a million
others, when they were brought to justice at Nuremberg, they
said, one of their arguments was the Dresden defense, say yes,
we may have done these killings, but you, the allies, you
killed civilians when you bombed Dresden and other cities.
And that was wholly rejected by the Nuremberg court. The
notion that, which this Nazi defendant was trying to make that
the deliberate and purposeful killing of civilians was equal to
the taking of civilian lives that is undesired, unintended, and
unavoidable was absolutely rejected. Those are completely two
different things. And that is the essence of civilization is to
distinguish between those two.
And sadly at the United Nations we are seeing this
scandalous Dresden defense being brought up again and again to
equate the purposeful, deliberate killing of civilians, which
is a crime, to equate it with to taking civilian lives, as I
said, that is undesired, unintended, but unavoidable. That
should be rejected completely.
Mr. Smith. Thank you very much. Just one final question to
you, Mr. Lincoln. You heard Dr. Schanzer and Hillel Neuer say
that Francesca Albanese ought to be fired. Do you agree?
Mr. Lincoln. As I said, I found her statements deeply
problematic. And so, you know, if this was, you know, again it
comes to the question of accountability. So I do not even know
how you go about firing. You would have to ask the Human Rights
Council to do----
Mr. Smith. But if you had the ability to do it.
Mr. Lincoln. If I had the ability, yes, absolutely.
Mr. Smith. Thank you so much. Anything else you would like
to add before we close? Thank you so very, very much. And thank
you for this time commitment you have given, which you do all
the time, but for the sake of our subcommittee.
This hearing is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 12:29 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]

APPENDIX

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
