- GOING NUCLEAR ON ROSATOM: ENDING GLOBAL DEPENDENCE ON PUTIN'S NUCLEAR ENERGY SECTOR

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

GOING NUCLEAR ON ROSATOM:
ENDING GLOBAL DEPENDENCE ON
PUTIN'S NUCLEAR ENERGY SECTOR

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON EUROPE

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

March 12, 2024

__________

Serial No. 118-88

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Foreign Affairs

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available:  http://www.foreignaffairs.house.gov/, http://
docs.house.gov,
or http://www.govinfo.gov

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
56-230XPDF                  WASHINGTON : 2024

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS

MICHAEL T. McCAUL, Texas, Chairman

HRISTOPHER H. SMITH, New Jersey     GREGORY MEEKS, New York, Ranking
JOE WILSON, South Carolina               Member
SCOTT PERRY, Pennsylvania      BRAD SHERMAN, California
DARRELL ISSA, California      GERALD E. CONNOLLY, Virginia
ANN WAGNER, Missouri      WILLIAM KEATING, Massachusetts
BRIAN MAST, Florida      AMI BERA, California
KEN BUCK, Colorado      JOAQUIN CASTRO, Texas
TIM BURCHETT, Tennessee      DINA TITUS, Nevada
MARK E. GREEN, Tennessee      TED LIEU, California
ANDY BARR, Kentucky      SUSAN WILD, Pennsylvania
RONNY JACKSON, Texas      DEAN PHILLIPS, Minnesota
YOUNG KIM, California      COLIN ALLRED, Texas
MARIA ELVIRA SALAZAR, Florida      ANDY KIM, New Jersey
BILL HUIZENGA, Michigan      SARA JACOBS, California
AUMUA AMATA COLEMAN RADEWAGEN,       KATHY MANNING, North Carolina
American Samoa      SHEILA CHERFILUS-McCORMICK,
FRENCH HILL, Arkansas           Florida
WARREN DAVIDSON, Ohio      GREG STANTON, Arizona
JIM BAIRD, Indiana      MADELEINE DEAN, Pennsylvania
MICHAEL WALTZ, Florida              JARED MOSKOWITZ, Florida
THOMAS KEAN, JR., New Jersey         JONATHAN JACKSON, Illinois
MICHAEL LAWLER, New York      SYDNEY KAMLAGER-DOVE, California
CORY MILLS, Florida      JIM COSTA, California
RICH McCORMICK, Georgia              JASON CROW, Colorado
NATHANIEL MORAN, Texas      GABE AMO, rhode Island
JOHN JAMES, Michigan      BRAD SCHNEIDER, Illinois
KEITH SELF, Texas

Brendan Shields, Majority Staff Director
Sophia Lafargue, Minority Staff Director

Subcommittee on Europe

THOMAS KEAN, JR., New Jersey, Chairman

JOE WILSON, North Carolina           WILLIAM KEATING,
DARRELL ISSA, California                 Massachusetts,Ranking Member
ANN WAGNER, Missouri      DINA TITUS, Nevada
BILL HUIZENGA, Michigan      MADELEINE DEAN, Pennsylvania
MICHAEL LAWLER, New York      JIM COSTA, California
NATHANIEL MORAN, Texas      SUSAN WILD, Pennsylvania
KEITH SELF, Texas      GABE AMO, Rhode Island

Katie Earle, Subcommittee Staff Director

C  O  N  T  E  N  T  S

----------
Page

WITNESSES

Albright, David, President, Institute for Science and
International Security.........................................     7
Ruggiero, Anthony, Adjunct Senior Fellow, Foundation for Defense
of Democracies.................................................    17
Sabonis-Helf, Professor Theresa, Concentration Chair for Science,
Technology, and International Affairs..........................    31

APPENDIX

Hearing Notice...................................................    48
Hearing Minutes..................................................    50
Hearing Attendance...............................................    51

MATERIALS SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD

Materials submitted for the record...............................    52

RESPONSES TO QUESTIONS SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD

Responses to questions submitted for the record..................    65

GOING NUCLEAR ON ROSATOM: ENDING
GLOBAL DEPENDENCE ON PUTIN'S
NUCLEAR ENERGY SECTOR

Tuesday, March 12, 2024

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Europe
Committee on Foreign Affairs,
Washington, DC.

The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 2:23 p.m., in
room 2172 Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Thomas Kean, Jr.
(chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Mr. Kean. The Subcommittee on Europe of the House Foreign
Affairs Committee will come to order. The purpose of this
hearing is to discuss how to use U.S. sanctions to ramp up
pressure on Russia's state-owned nuclear energy monopoly,
Rosatom, and prevent Vladimir Putin from using it as a tool for
malign influence.
I ask unanimous consent to enter a statement in the record
from Ukrainian Energy Minister Herman Halushchenko on the
threat Rosatom poses to Ukraine and the world, including the
Zaporizhzhia Nuclear Power Plant. In his statement, the
minister makes the plea for tougher sanctions to slash the
Kremlin's profits from Rosatom's operations, reduce Russia's
share of the global civil nuclear market, and to spur western
countries to step up and to replace Rosatom's nuclear goods and
services.
I also ask unanimous consent to enter a statement into the
record from the Uranium Producers of America. Their statement
commends the subcommittee for holding this hearing, highlights
the malign activities of Rosatom and the Russian Federation,
and supports our efforts to implement robust sanctions against
Rosatom. Without objection, so ordered.
I now recognize myself for an opening statement.
Unfortunately, last month, we marked the 2-year anniversary of
Russia's unprovoked war of aggression against Ukraine.
President Biden's sluggish policies have consistently prevented
Ukraine's victory, given Putin room to breathe, and dragged out
this conflict. He has slow-walked the critical weapon systems
that Ukraine needs to win, like long-range ATACMS missiles. His
Administration has only recently started pushing our European
allies to transfer frozen Russian sovereign assets to Ukraine,
which should have been done long, long ago.
Finally, the sanctions against the Putin regime have not
convinced him to end this gruesome war. For example, last
year's Russian GDP growth of 3 percent exceeded all of the G7
economies and is forecasted to do so again in 2024.
This hearing will examine how to strengthen U.S. sanctions
by ratcheting up pressure on one of the most nefarious tools of
Russian malign influence: Rosatom. Let us review some of
Rosatom's worst behavior: Its personnel are engaged in the
Russian military occupation of Ukraine's Zaporizhzhia Nuclear
Power Plant. It is working to help Putin's war machine evade
western sanctions. It is supporting China's nuclear breakout.
It has created dangerous dependencies around the globe that
allow Putin to exert influence over U.S. and our allies. Like
Nord Stream 2 and concerns over the west's dependence on
Russian LNG, Putin has created a similar scenario with Rosatom
and dependence on Russian nuclear fuel. It has played a key
role in helping to develop Iran's nuclear program.
Unfortunately, despite this litany of threats to U.S.
national security, the U.S. has sanctioned only a handful of
Rosatom's subsidiaries and corporate officers, while Rosatom
itself remains untouched. We must get serious, and that is why
I am holding today's hearing. I am in the process of drafting a
tough sanctions bill that will mandate the Administration to
decouple the U.S. and our allies from Rosatom; and U.S. and
allied companies, from Westinghouse to Urenco, are taking big
steps to providing western alternatives to Rosatom. Ukraine,
for example, has freed itself from Rosatom's grip. Other
allies, from Sweden to Finland to the Czech Republic, are doing
the same.
But tougher sanctions are needed to hasten this decoupling
from Rosatom. Importantly, my sanctions bill will be
complementary to my colleague's Chair McMorris-Rodgers' House-
passed bill, the Prohibiting of Russian Uranium Imports Act.
Her bill prohibits the U.S. from importing Russian low enriched
uranium with a waiver authority that terminates after 2027. My
sanctions bill will certainly have a waiver authority to
responsibly and rapidly and address dependencies, such as those
related to medical and industrial isotopes, that will take
slightly longer to unwind. But this authority will be narrow.
These two bills together will send a much-needed market signal
to the civil nuclear industry. The result will be a safer
supply of nuclear fuel for the U.S. and its allies. That is why
the Uranium Producers of America are aptly supporting our
efforts to sanction Rosatom and Chair McMorris-Rodgers' bill.
Every penny that Rosatom earns directly finances Putin's
genocide in Ukraine and contributes to China's growing nuclear
arsenal. The time to act is now.
The chair will now recognize the ranking member, the
gentleman from Massachusetts, Mr. Keating, for any statement
that he may have.
Mr. Keating. Well, thank you, Chairman Kean, for holding
this hearing today, and thank you to our witnesses for being
here and for your testimony.
Over 2 years ago, on February 24th, 2022, Russia launched
its unprovoked full-scale war of aggression against Ukraine.
Thankfully, due to a global coalition formed by U.S. leadership
and, most importantly, a determined and resolute Ukrainian
population, Russia failed in this effort. Despite its failure
on the battlefield, Russia has continued to succeed in its
goals of spreading malign influence and undermining democratic
governance.
Today, we focus specifically on Rosatom, Russia's state-
owned corporation responsible for its civil nuclear program and
military nuclear enterprises and an agent of influence headed
by the Russian government. For decades, Rosatom has spread its
malign influence through contracts in Europe and around the
world to build nuclear reactors and provide nuclear fuel at
cheaper prices. More recently, Rosatom's complicity and support
of Putin's war of aggression against Ukraine, its occupation of
Zaporizhzhia Nuclear Power Plant, and its continued market
share in the nuclear fuel establishment and fabrication
sectors, have enabled Putin to recklessly use Rosatom to spread
Kremlin malign influence and to push its imperialistic goals.
Recognizing the threat of Rosatom, the Biden Administration
and Congress have taken action, including by sanctioning
Rosatom subsidiaries and cutting off key revenue streams. Putin
uses these revenue streams directly for his war and his effort
in aggression against Ukraine.
For example, last year, President Biden worked with G7
partners in Sapporo, Japan to mobilize $4.2 billion in
government-led investments to develop a secure, reliable
nuclear energy supply chain. Furthermore, in February 2024, the
Administration initiated a critical minerals dialog with
Central Asian partners through the C5+1 mechanism to increase
Central Asia's involvement in global critical mineral supply
chains and strengthen economic cooperation.
These arguments followup historic partnerships between U.S.
companies and governments, including Poland, Romania, and
Bulgaria. Yet, while the world acts to lessen Russia's global
sphere of influence, Putin and the Kremlin continue their
brutal war in Ukraine, targeting energy supply lines, critical
infrastructure, and holding Zaporizhzhia Nuclear Power Plant
and its workers hostage.
As Ukrainian prosecutor general Andriy Kostin told me,
these attacks hit at the heart of Ukraine's environmental
stability, as well. They seek to undermine and poison the
bountiful and prosperous land Ukraine sits on and starve the
Ukrainian people of the resources they need to thrive.
As part of the efforts to seek out solutions to combat
Russia's malign influence in the nuclear energy sector, I have
worked with a ranking member of the full Committee, Meeks, on
legislation to sanction the Rosatom officials who undermine
Zaporizhzhia's stability and hold them accountable for the
destabilizing actions they conduct. In addition to implementing
further sanctions, where appropriate, we must also go on the
offense and promote continued investment in capacity-building
for alternative sources of nuclear energy and next-generation
reactor designs, areas of the nuclear supply chain in which
Russia has a significance presence today. These alternatives
must be cost effective with competitive prices that will ensure
their long-term success.
We must also followup on Congress's investment of $700
million in the Inflation Reduction Act in the development of
High-Assay Low-Enriched Uranium, known as HALEU. This HALEU
fuel is used in many small modular and advanced reactors.
Historic investments in infrastructure will pay dividends
abroad and support not only Ukrainans' war effort but also
combat Russia's malign influence.
Finally, tomorrow marks 1 month since the Senate passed the
national security supplemental package by a wide bipartisan
margin. As the president said during his State of the Union
address, history is watching. Yet, our most recent former
president, Donald John Trump, told Hungary's autocratic leader,
Viktor Orban, this week that he would not support a nickel for
Ukraine. Even more, the Hungarian government welcomed Rosatom's
CEO to Budapest today, on the 25th anniversary of Hungarian's
membership in NATO, to discuss shared priorities. The contrast
between this president's support for democracies and our former
president's support for autocracies could not be clearer.
It unfortunately bears repeating: the quickest and most
direct way to combat Rosatom and Russia is to pass the
supplemental request immediately, which includes almost $3
billion to boost domestic nuclear fuel production and
enrichment. If the House is truly serious about combating
Russia's malign influence, we have no alternative. It is
inexplicable that Speaker Johnson continues to hold up this
spending package, which has the majority of support among
members. We cannot defend democracy abroad when this single
individual denies it at home.
With that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Kean. I ask unanimous consent that the gentleman from
North Carolina, Mr. Murphy, be allowed to sit on the dais and
participate following all other members in today's hearing.
Without objection, so ordered. Other members of the
subcommittee are reminded that opening statements may be
submitted for the record.
We are pleased to have a panel of distinguished witnesses
before us today on this important topic. Mr. David Albright is
the President of the Institute for Science and International
Security. Mr. Anthony Ruggiero is a senior fellow and senior
director of the Nonproliferation and Biodefense Program at the
Foundation for Defense of Democracies. And Professor Theresa
Sabonis-Helf is the Concentration Chair for Science,
Technology, and International Affairs at Georgetown
University's School of Foreign Service.
Thank you all for being here today. Your full statements
will be made part of the record, and I will ask each of you to
keep your verbal remarks to 5 minutes in order to allow time
for members' questions.
I will now recognize Mr. Albright for his opening
statement.

STATEMENT OF DAVID ALBRIGHT, PRESIDENT, INSTITUTE FOR SCIENCE
AND INTERNATIONAL SECURITY

Mr. Albright. Chairman Kean, Ranking Member Keating, and
members of this subcommittee, thank you for holding this
hearing and inviting me to testify. Rosatom, its subsidiaries,
and its senior personnel deserve far greater sanctions today.
Rosatom is not just a benign commercial nuclear energy
supplier.
As has been pointed out, Rosatom has actively participated
in the illegal seizure of the Zaporizhzhia Nuclear Power Plant,
a seizure that we all recognize is causing an increased risk of
a major nuclear accident. Rosatom officials are not authorized
to operate these reactors. IAEA Director General Raphael Grossi
has called the situation 'not sustainable`` and risks nuclear
safety and security. Rosatom is also complicit in the human
rights violations of Ukrainian plant personnel, violations that
include torture.
Rosatom actively contributes importantly to the production
of Russian weapon systems used against Ukraine. A case in point
is the Shahed 136 kamikaze drone that Russia has used to
destroy much of Ukraine's civilian energy infrastructure and
terrorize its population. Rosatom helps build the Shahed 136
drones via its important subsidiary JSC Umatex at the Alabuga
Special Economic Zone. JSC Alabuga, which runs the special
economic zone, produces the Shahed 136 drones under a contract
with the Russian Defense Ministry with extensive aid from Iran.
Umatex is involved in providing carbon fiber to this plant that
is making the Shahed 136 drones.
Umatex is rightly sanctioned by the United States for its
supply of carbon fiber to Russia's military industrial complex,
as is JSC Alabuga and its subsidiaries. However, Rosatom has
not been sanctioned for its support of Shahed 136 production
or, more broadly, for its support of Russia's military
industrial complex, which is growing by the day.
Iran's Bushehr nuclear power reactor stands out as an
example of the type of risk Rosatom and its predecessor
organizations have undertaken to obtain lucrative contracts in
countries not prepared institutionally or culturally to deal
with the complex array of issues involved in operating reactors
safely, preventing reactor accidents and preparing to deal with
them if they occur. Russia's nuclear export enterprises also
have shown their willingness, in their hunt for contracts, to
ignore the Iranian regime's secret drive for nuclear weapons
and its violations of International Atomic Energy Agency
safeguards.
In the case of Iran, Rosatom provided a reactor with
multiple safety deficiencies to a country with infrastructure
too weak to support it. These deficiencies and the difficulty
of fixing them have been well documented by the IAEA's
operational safety review team's analysis and multiple
assessments by the World Association of Nuclear Operators. One
has to wonder if Iran's Bushehr power reactor is safe enough to
operate today, despite years of intensive safety modifications
and improvements. It should be noted that a major reactor
accident risks spreading radiation over nearby Gulf states
after only about 12 hours, and that is based on assessments by
Rosatom companies.
Many problems have resulted from Russia's and Rosatom's
less-than-acceptable designs and parts. At Bushehr, the Iran
reactor. This has necessitated years of replacement of faulty
parts, creation of new operating manuals, and changes in
operation, and creation of safety and emergency procedures, all
aimed at bringing Bushehr up to something approaching modern
safety standards. Yet, after more than 10 years since the
Bushehr reactor started, the task remains incomplete.
So from my point of view, countries should avoid Rosatom.
For countries contemplating or building nuclear power reactors
for the first time, Rosatom reactors, while economically
appealing on the purchasing side, may turn out to be huge
economic liabilities on the operational side, effects that
would be aggravated enormously in the case of a serious reactor
accident.
While Russia has learned about handling severe nuclear
reactor accidents the hard way, many of the developing
countries contemplating nuclear power reactors do not have
adequate supporting infrastructure and emergency response
capabilities to deal with a major nuclear reactor, accident.
And Rosatom seeks customers without proper regard for a
country's stability or its ability to ensure the safety and
security of the reactor.
Now, moving from warning to sanctioning Rosatom may seem
harsh, even with the necessary and appropriate waivers. These
should include nuclear reactor safety, operating nuclear
reactors, and a wind-down period for other existing foreign
contracts with Rosatom. However, combined with Rosatom's role
in illegally occupying the Zaporizhzhia Nuclear Power Plant and
contributing importantly to outfitting Russia's illegal
military attacks against Ukraine, sanctioning Rosatom, its
subsidiaries, and its key personnel today is deserved and
overdue. Thank you.
[The statement of Mr. Albright follows:]

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Kean. Thank you, Mr. Albright. I now recognize Mr.
Ruggiero for his opening statement.

STATEMENT OF ANTHONY RUGGIERO, ADJUNCT SENIOR FELLOW,
FOUNDATION FOR DEFENSE OF DEMOCRACIES

Mr. Ruggiero. Thank you, Chairman Kean, Ranking Member
Keating, and distinguished members of the subcommittee. Thank
you for the opportunity to address you today on this important
topic. My testimony is informed by my work on sanctions and
proliferation issues at the Departments of State and the
Treasury, as a foreign policy fellow for Senator Rubio, and in
the White House National Security Council where I served as
senior director for counterproliferation and biodefense.
Russia invaded Ukraine more than 2 years ago, and Russia's
state-run nuclear corporation, Rosatom, boasted that its export
revenue increased 15 percent in 2022 with a 10-year portfolio
of foreign orders worth $200 billion. The company forecasts
that its 2023 revenue would increase by 40 percent.
There are two main drivers for how the nuclear company of
an aggressor State has expanding revenue while the country is
largely shunned from the international community. First, the
Biden Administration has not yet articulated a strategy for
ensuring that America and its allies end their reliance on
Russia's nuclear sector; and, second, Washington saw Russia as
a partner in civil nuclear cooperation, allowing Rosatom and
Moscow to undercut and decimate U.S. and western companies
competing in the same market.
Rosatom and Russia are also engaged in activities contrary
to American foreign policy and national security interests. In
my written testimony, I detailed how Rosatom and Sino-Russian
nuclear cooperation plays a critical role in enhancing
Beijing's nuclear weapons capabilities, including China's
effort to build 1500 nuclear weapons by 2035. I also reviewed
Rosatom's role in a potential nuclear disaster at the
Zaporizhzhia Nuclear Power Plant, the largest nuclear plant in
Europe.
The Biden Administration started to use sanctions in
February 2023 against a few Russian nuclear and Rosatom-linked
individuals and entities, but these were not part of a
coordinated strategy. For example, I note in my written
testimony that the Administration has not sanctioned a single
member of Rosatom's management board, even though the United
Kingdom has sanctioned the entire board in March 2023.
The Biden Administration understands the problem. A senior
Energy Department official noted recently that it is 'gravely
concerning`` that Russia supplies about 20 percent of the fuel
used by U.S. nuclear reactors. Recent promising reports
suggests that the Administration and the U.S. nuclear industry
are warming to the idea of a ban on imports of Russian fuel.
In my written testimony, I offered three recommendations
for Congress and three recommendations for the Biden
Administration. Specifically, Congress should mandate a
strategy to end reliance on Rosatom. It should require the
Administration to make a sanctions determination within 60 days
on Rosatom, its management and supervisory boards, and related
entities and individuals. The strategy should also include
plans to respond to potential Russian retaliatory actions,
including ending the export of enriched uranium and other
products to the United States and its allies. Congress could
also require a review of the U.S.-Russia civilian nuclear
cooperation agreement to ensure that it is consistent with the
new approach to civil nuclear cooperation with Russia.
For the Administration, I recommend using existing
sanctions authorities to prohibit activities with Rosatom,
including purchases of reactor fuel, reactor services, and
reactor construction, as well as other related services, over a
one-to 4-year wind-down period and then using that time to work
with allies in the nuclear industry to facilitate a transition
to alternative suppliers. We need a coordinated strategy, an
effort to reinforce that Washington and our allies will not
return to business as usual with Russia when the war in Ukraine
ends. This effort should incentivize a transition to U.S. and
allied nuclear industries as alternative suppliers over a 4-
year period to end Russia's domination and ensure that China
does not fill the void. If the Biden Administration is
unwilling to pursue this path, Congress should mandate it
through legislation.
Thank you for inviting me to testify, and I look forward to
addressing your questions.
[The statement of Mr. Ruggiero follows:]

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Kean. Thank you, Mr. Ruggiero. I now recognize
Professor Sabonis-Helf for her opening statement.

STATEMENT OF PROFESSOR THERESA SABONIS-HELF, CONCENTRATION
CHAIR FOR SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY, AND INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS

Ms. Sabonis-Helf. Chairman Kean, Ranking Member Keating,
members of the subcommittee, thank you for this opportunity to
testify today on Russia's Rosatom Corporation.
The Russian government's behavior in Ukraine and at home is
shocking and infuriating. We struggle to find useful levers
that might limit Russia's reach and ambition. Alas, sanctioning
Rosatom may not be such a lever. Most sanctions against
Rosatom, however intuitively appealing, will neither constrain
Russia significantly, nor will they address the current nuclear
fuel imbalance that the world faces. Sanctions could disrupt
markets in ways that would boost Rosatom's revenue, while
disadvantaging ourselves and our allies. Some sanctions, if
applied incautiously, could even threaten nuclear power plant
safety. Regarding your future moves against Rosatom, I urge you
to consider three key factors: security of supply, the safety
of nuclear energy, and the need to focus our efforts on
developing a more resilient pool of nuclear fuel sources.
Let's begin with security of supply. The EU shift to
American natural gas was possible only because the U.S. had
available supply. We do not have that kind of flexibility in
nuclear fuel. Eighteen percent of European Union reactors are
Russian or Soviet design. For these reactors, fuel rods are an
issue. Westinghouse has developed substitute fuel rods for
Ukraine but does not yet have capacity or licensing to supply
all of Europe.
Rosatom and its affiliates are also deeply embedded in fuel
production and other services. Reliance on Rosatom is
widespread globally, not only in Europe. Even the United States
purchases 20 percent of its low enriched uranium from a Rosatom
subsidiary. We are not yet in a position to meet all of our
domestic nuclear fuel needs. We are definitely not in a
position to extend nuclear energy supply security to our
allies.
Let us also consider the safety of nuclear energy.
Criticisms of Rosatom are justified. It has been complicit with
the Russian State in nuclear piracy, and it illegally manages
the Zaporizhzhia Nuclear Power Plant in Ukraine. In spite of
this, Rosatom's sustained relationship with the International
Atomic Energy Agency plays an essential role in keeping Russian
nuclear energy and the world safer.
Rosatom's director general, Alexey Likhachev, met with the
IAEA director eight times since March 2022 for discussions
regarding Zaporizhzhia. Rosatom has certainly not responded to
all of the IAEA's concerns, but it has taken measures to harden
the facility; it has provided mobile diesel fuel boilers to
enhance safety; and, most importantly, it has complied with the
IAEA insistence that Zaporizhzhia not be used to generate
electricity, a measure that both enhances safety and reduces
the gains to Russia of occupying the facility.
In a broader sense, using sanctions to isolate Rosatom is
bad for global nuclear safety. Remember the tragedy of
Chernobyl. Since the early post-Soviet era, the nuclear power
community has made integration of Russian plant operators and
leaders a high priority, raising standards and promoting a
culture of safety. Because an accident or major incident
anywhere affects confidence in nuclear power everywhere,
keeping Rosatom and Russia tightly engaged in the international
community of nuclear professionals is a safety imperative.
At this time, our best path to enhance energy security in
the nuclear sector comes from diversification of fuel sources.
Concern about Russia has already sparked substantial innovation
here and abroad. In the United States, our once-shuttered
capacity to process enriched uranium is now licensed and
produced 7,000 tons of uranium hexafluoride last year. Our
production of HALEU fuel for the next-generation reactors is
also underway. Overseas, Westinghouse is leading the way to
replace Russian fuel rods. In a more distant region, Kazakhstan
is finding a new path to market. Kazakhstan has long been the
lead producer of world uranium but dependent on Russia for
refining, enrichment, and transport. Now, France is expanding
mining operations in Kazakhstan, increasing French enrichment
capability, and shepherding an ambitious consortium to
strengthen the Middle Corridor route, reducing the region's
dependence on Russia for transport.
Infrastructure realignment takes time. Reducing Rosatom's
relative role in world nuclear energy production is essential
but can best be accomplished not by sanctions but by
aggressively expanding the field of viable, competent nuclear
energy material producers. With China rising in this sector,
the discipline of managed competition will serve us well for
the next contest over nuclear energy's future. We should strive
to engage that competition together with our European allies.
Thank you.
[The statement of Professor Sabonis-Helf follows:]

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Kean. Thank you, Professor Sabonis-Helf. I now
recognize myself for 5 minutes of questioning. Mr. Ruggiero,
can you characterize Rosatom's support for China's nuclear
weapons program?
Mr. Ruggiero. Yes. They have delivered fuel to some of
China's nuclear reactors. The Department of Defense, the
Assistant Secretary, I believe, for Space Policy testified
before Congress about the role of those reactors in producing
plutonium. And the department was so worried about this
particular subject that it actually took that part of his
testimony out and published a press release to highlight it for
the public.
Mr. Kean. Thank you. Mr. Albright, do you believe that a
mandatory sanctions bill from the U.S. Congress is necessary to
push the Biden Administration to ramp up pressure on Rosatom,
its subsidiaries, and its corporate officers, and to help the
U.S. and our allies reduce dependence on Rosatom? I'm sorry. If
you can--please turn your mike on.
Mr. Albright. Is it on now?
Mr. Kean. Yes.
Mr. Albright. OK. I think legislation would be very
helpful. I think the Biden Administration has been slow to
pursue this issue, and I think Congress can play a very useful
role in increasing the sanctions on Rosatom and its
subsidiaries and also play an important role in boosting our
capabilities to replace Rosatom.
Could I add one thing to Anthony's answer?
Mr. Kean. Sure.
Mr. Albright. Russia is supporting the construction of a
breeder reactor in China. As far as we can determine, that will
be China's only way to produce the plutonium it needs to
increase its arsenal up to a thousand, let alone 1500. And as
far as we can determine, we're still investigating it, Russia
has not said that its assistance, peaceful in nature as it is,
cannot be used, misused to produce plutonium for nuclear
weapons. The U.S. has always taken that kind of position in
supplying nuclear assistance, but Russia has not. And so,
through Russia's assistance, China may be getting the only way
it can to dramatically increase its nuclear arsenal.
Mr. Kean. OK. Mr. Ruggiero, your answer to that question.
Mr. Ruggiero. Sorry. Your first question----
Mr. Kean. Regarding the necessity to push the Biden
Administration to ramp up pressure on its subsidiaries, on
Rosatom and its subsidiaries.
Mr. Ruggiero. Right. As I noted in the oral testimony and
the written testimony, this is all about a strategy. It really
starts with a strategy, starts with the alternative suppliers
that the professor mentioned. I wish this was easy. I wish it
was as simple as just putting Rosatom and people on an entity
list or, excuse me, on the SDN list. You could do that with
some of the senior leadership, but it is going to require a
plan, and it seems that the Administration is not on that
pathway right now.
Mr. Kean. To continue with you, any serious sanctions
effort against Rosatom will require responsible but narrow
waiver authority. How long do you assess such waivers need to
be for different parts of the nuclear supply chain,
specifically enriched uranium?
Mr. Ruggiero. Right. You know, we have seen different
reports about what that time line would look like. I have seen
some reports of 2028 is one of the dates that is out there.
There is more parts of the supply chain, unfortunately, that
Rosatom is in. There is also carve-outs in the U.S. sanctions
already that might be used by, whether it's the IAEA or other
U.N. organizations, to continue working with Rosatom.
Mr. Kean. Mr. Albright, in general, how would you assess
Rosatom's commitment to nuclear safety and security, and what
safety concerns exist over Rosatom-built plants still in
operation in Europe and around the world?
Mr. Albright. Well, I think, you know, we recently did kind
of an in-depth look at safety concerns at the Bushehr reactor
in Iran, and so it is a little hard for me to talk about
Europe, but, at Bushehr, you could clearly see immense safety
problems that were being pointed out by WANO teams, were
pointed out by the IAEA investigatory teams. And it was based
on Rosatom providing a deficient reactor.
And so I think Rosatom lags behind modern safety
considerations that are applied to western reactors, and so I
think that Rosatom presents a safety problem. And with Bushehr,
you do have to wonder if it could have a major nuclear reactor
accident.
Mr. Kean. Thank you. I now recognize Ranking Member Keating
for any questions that he may have.
Mr. Keating. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The Senate-passed,
House-held national security supplemental bill includes $2.72
billion to support domestic uranium enrichment, $149 million
for the National Nuclear Security Administration's ability to
respond to the security situation in Ukraine, $98 million for
investments in the development and production of isotopes.
Professor Sabonis-Helf, how important is that work to this
issue? How important is that bill to this issue?
Ms. Sabonis-Helf. So I would say, particularly, the
appropriations for the HALEU fuel is something we have to take
very seriously. The United States is unable to move ahead with
our small modular reactors without access to HALEU fuel, which
we, up until now, have imported from Russia. So being able to
ramp up our capacity to take leadership in this next generation
of reactors is absolutely urgent.
I would also concur that the other pieces of what you just
described are critical components. And, sir, I also concur that
releasing the resources for the actual defense of Ukraine is
also an urgent piece of this puzzle.
Mr. Keating. Thank you. And I spoke yesterday with the U.S.
Ambassador to Poland, and we were commenting on what he termed
one of the largest, you know, private-sector investments that
we have been involved with in recent history with Poland in
terms of their nuclear investment and how important that is.
And similar activities going on with the U.S. and our European
allies in Romania and Bulgaria, as well. Companies like
Westinghouse have taken a lead in this regard. And this shift,
you know, on the basics of suppliers for nuclear reactors is
critical.
So can you just comment, anyone, how important it is for
the U.S. engagement itself, how important that is as a
necessity in dealing with Russia's malign influence? Because we
can sanction, but we can also control better, as well
Professor, if you want to----
Ms. Sabonis-Helf. Sir, the United States, under older OECD
requirements, the amount of economic support we could lend to
countries in developing nuclear was limited in an effort to
keep European nations from competing against each other. The
unfortunate longer-term downside of that was that both Russia
and China offer substantial packages, which enable, in many
cases, countries that are not ready for nuclear to embrace it.
Our cooperation with Poland is absolutely essential. It is
a new-to-nuclear nation that is ready for nuclear power, that
experiences the kind of governance stability and the grid
membership needed for nuclear to be successful. I think our new
relationship with Poland on this next-generation nuclear is
absolutely the model for how the United States can recapture a
meaningful role in the export of essential nuclear energy
technologies.
Mr. Keating. And, also, I just want to comment, too, that,
for those people that think this issue is remote somehow and it
is not important to the U.S., which I just fail to understand,
in terms of our own domestic security, could you comment, too,
on the fact how important this is and the benefits we get from
this kind of investment for jobs right here in America and
America economic interests?
Ms. Sabonis-Helf. We cannot treat nuclear energy as purely
a commercial operation because it is so strategically critical.
But in terms of the jobs that it represents, this entire new
sector is rather extraordinary. We have just recently
relicensed the largest facility in the United States. We are
building new facilities. We are talking about jobs and not only
good high-paying jobs but spread throughout the United States,
rather than concentrated in one place. And I think that what we
see here the importance of jobs my colleague's recommendation
that we need a clear strategy here, that strategy needs to
incorporate how we harness American expertise to recapture a
role in this industry.
Mr. Keating. Yes. And being a member of this committee, as
well as a member of the Armed Services Committee, I'm also
keenly aware of what our military has been telling us in terms
of the effects of climate change and how important that is, as
well. It is one of the existential threats we have in our
country and in the planet, and it's also a very big military
danger that we have to address. So this will do that, as well.
I wish we could have some more time, but my time has run
out, and I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Kean. Thank you, Ranking Member Keating. I now
recognize Mr. Self of Texas for 5 minutes.
Mr. Self. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. This is the legislative
branch. We have been looking for a way to change the behavior
of the executive branch on several national security issues, to
include the southern border. So I hear as background sanctions
on Russian gas and oil have not worked. You, sir, mentioned
discretionary sanctions authority that the executive branch has
today that they have not used. They are not using what they
have available to them today, so we are considering executive
branch action, which I am not sanguine will change the
executive branch behavior in this manner.
I hear a lot about sanctions in this discussion. My concern
is, according to the World Nuclear Association, my concern is
how are we going to replace the sources? Because as of 2020,
when we look at Russia is going to go down between now and 2030
a substantial amount of their capability. Urenco, basically the
west, is going to go down in their capability. That includes
the U.S. France is going to stay steady. Others are going to go
up eight times, and that includes such allies--excuse me,
that's facetious--as Argentina, Brazil, India, Pakistan, and
Iran are going to increase eight times, as I said. The big one
is China. China is going to go up three times.
So while we talk about sanctions, how are we going to keep
our nuclear industry viable if the only people that are going
up subsequently in their capability to enrich are basically
people who do not agree with us. Some are actual classified as
adversaries. So please. Now, that's 2020 figures, but while we
discuss sanctions, if we sanction this, how are we going to
replace the needs of our own industry? Microphone, sir.
Mr. Albright. The discussion is that two tracks are needed.
I think Chairman Keating pointed out, or, I'm sorry, Chairman
Kean pointed out that the sanctions can build a pressure to
create the space and the incentive to create the alternatives.
So I think they work together.
Mr. Self. I appreciate your word strategy, sir. I really
do. But a strategy has got to have something just beyond
competition. Are we looking at Defense Production Act? What do
you suggest? And I've read your three recommendations to the
legislative branch, but, more than a strategy, how would we get
there? Because a strategy has to have some capability backing
it up.
A long time as a military planner. A strategy is worthless
without the capability to execute the strategy.
Ms. Sabonis-Helf. Sir, I think that's why I emphasize
replacement capacity over sanctions. I think that what has
happened recently in Kazakhstan and, to a lesser extent, in
Uzbekistan is extremely important. Kazakhstan produces more
mined uranium for the world market than any other nation. Until
recently, it has been fully captive to Russia because Russia
does the enrichment, Russia does the transport.
In the current situation, France has opened new mines, and
together with both Kazakhstan and Uzbekistan is handling the
transit route to France, and France is ramping up enrichment.
That's one example of what has changed in the past 2 years, I
think very much for the better.
I do think that our pursuit of critical materials with
Central Asia is a very important part of thinking about the
future because bringing enrichment and processing back to the
United States is more urgent, in my estimation, than enhancing
mining in the United States. But I would also call your
attention to the fact that, as you noted, China is very much on
the rise. Now, we know that in, an earlier era, Chairman Mao
Zedong was much more interested in nuclear weapons than in
nuclear energy. But in recent years, beginning with its 11th
five-yea plan in 2005, China as moved into a hyper-development
phase of nuclear power. China now has 55 operable reactors and
27 under construction, and so a lot of China's effort to
buildup in this sphere is to meet its own rising demand.
They're still finishing building their grid. They still have
huge expansion----
Mr. Self. My time is up. They are building not only nuclear
plants, coal plants every week, solar, everything. Mr.
Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Kean. Thank you, Mr. Self. I now recognize Mr. Costa
from California for 5 minutes.
Mr. Costa. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. So, Professor
Sabonis-Helf and Professor Theresa--excuse me--and Mr.
Ruggiero, you both talk about a strategy, and it seems clear
from your comments that a strategy involves totally eliminating
our need to rely on Russia for any future uranium enriched if
we are going to maintain our own ability to have independence.
Am I correct?
Mr. Ruggiero. That's correct. In my recommendation, yes.
Mr. Costa. Would you agree, Professor?
Ms. Sabonis-Helf. Yes, I would.
Mr. Costa. And I assume, Mr. Albright, you would agree, as
well. What is a time line for those of us who are laypersons
that it would take to develop this ability to remove our
dependence from Russia and to develop our own capacity with
ourselves and maybe in conjunction with some of our allies in
Europe that use nuclear power?
Mr. Ruggiero. Right. It also goes to the previous question,
as well. I mean, in my view, these are mutually inclusive
efforts, increasing alternative suppliers and getting smarter
on sanctions. I think right now we're going after some of what
we call the low-hanging fruit on sanctions. We're not focused
on things that will have a real impact on the sanction side.
And the sanctions will also give a market signal to the
industry, as well. As I noted previously, 2028 is a date that
has been put out there by industry in some circles, and that's
only 4 years away. So that's why we have focused on the sort of
one-to 4-year timeframe, depending on----
Mr. Costa. That's by talking to people like Westinghouse
and others that have experience and expertise in this in terms
of developing our own independence. I'm sorry?
Mr. Ruggiero. Urenco, Orano, what was mentioned previously,
their increases, some of those are scheduled to come online----
Mr. Costa. But we have to give the signals to the private
sector, in fact, if we're going to develop this strategy to
develop this independence, right?
Mr. Ruggiero. Correct.
Ms. Sabonis-Helf. To a certain extent, sir, that signal was
already received before the full-scale invasion of Ukraine. The
largest facility in the United States, which is marketed by
Conver Dun, was mothballed. It was relicensed in 2021, and by
the end of the past year succeeded in posting 7,000 tons of
uranium hexafluoride. When that facility was at full capacity,
the United States produced 20 percent of the world's
hexafluoride, which is more than we need. So getting that
facility fully up and running is one of the critical components
here.
Mr. Costa. And that's one of the steps on the way to
developing the pellets?
Ms. Sabonis-Helf. Yes, sir.
Mr. Costa. So when you say in your comments that sanctions,
if they are implied incautiously, what do you mean by
incautiously?
Ms. Sabonis-Helf. Sir, I mean that, as soon as Russia was
convinced that Europe was taking strong measures in gas, they
began manipulating prices significantly. Most nuclear power
plants store two-to 3-years' worth of fuel at their site, and
none of them will tell you exactly how much fuel they have
stored. But the war has been unfolding for over 2 years now, so
we have some real concern about the ability of the nuclear
power plants in Europe to stay open.
Mr. Costa. What concerns the three of you the most about--I
mean, under the category of lessons learned, Russia's invasion
of Ukraine, I think, besides the immediate need, in my view,
and I associate my comments with the ranking member, Mr.
Keating, about what we need to do to provide this supplemental
package for Ukraine and for the other elements that are in that
supplemental package, but what lessons do you think this has
taught us in the last 2 years?
Mr. Albright. Well, lessons learned, I think one is that it
is critical to defeat Russia.
Mr. Costa. We cannot be dependent.
Mr. Albright. Well, and also that we should not be
dependent----
Mr. Costa. I've said it on the floor. I think President
Putin is a war criminal for all the things that he's done, and
I think Russia today is a syndicate masquerading or pretending
to be a country run by a mob boss.
Mr. Albright. And a mob boss who is ramping up its military
production infrastructure in a very frightening way. I spend
much of the year in Europe, in Germany, and we feel it deeply
that lack of U.S. support for the Ukrainians is directly
threatening Europe's security.
Mr. Costa. It threatens Europe. It threatens all of us. It
is a seminal moment in American and world history, and we are
playing politics with this. My time has run out, but I will
submit further questions, Mr. Chairman, for the record.
Mr. Kean. Thank you, Mr. Costa. I now recognize Mr. Moran
from Texas for 5 minutes.
Mr. Moran. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you all to
your, for your testimony here today. Very important subject. I
am very concerned about the dependency on Russian uranium and
on Rosatom being a major player across the globe in this area.
Mr. Albright, I want to start with you and ask you a
question. Then I will come over to Mr. Ruggiero--is that how I
say it? Good deal.
Mr. Albright, in your opinion, what are the strategic risks
of the U.S. and Europe's continued reliance on Rosatom for
nuclear energy products and services? And would you compare
this reliance to Europe's crippling dependence on Russian oil
and natural gas before the war in Ukraine began?
Mr. Albright. I would compare it. I mean, at some point,
Russia will probably play games with its supply, and it has
been mentioned the need to start stockpiling critical resources
in anticipation of that. But I think Europe will be facing
similar struggles as it faced with Russia's cutoff of natural
gas.
Mr. Moran.  And what strategic risks do you think that
poses both in Europe and the United States when we look at
beyond just the economy, when we look militarily?
Mr. Albright. Well, to deal with the situation is
expensive, and it causes a lot of understated discomfort to the
public. It was a tough winter after Russia cutoff the natural
gas. So, I mean, it is absolutely necessary to prepare for
that, and it causes effects that are hard to deal with
politically and expensive to deal with.
Mr. Moran. So, Professor, do you agree that we need to work
toward independence from Rosatom as it relates to uranium
production and provision?
Ms. Sabonis-Helf. Absolutely. I think Russia's behavior
will be greatly moderated if it is a much less important player
in this game.
Mr. Moran. Mr. Ruggiero, in your opening testimony, you
referenced several efforts to increase U.S. and allied
enrichment capacity. Companies in the nuclear fuel cycle will
need to commit to investing potentially billions of dollars to
replace Russian supplies. Would you agree that it is important
for those companies to have certainty moving forward in the
form of clear government policy and tough sanctions that a
flood of Russian exports will not strain their assets in later
years once they make this investment?
Mr. Ruggiero. I agree. And that goes back to Congressman
Costa's question of what do you worry about. What I worry about
is we do not develop this strategy, and the war somehow ends,
and then we go back to our reliance on Russia and we do not
give that market signal. And they either invest things that are
not needed or they wind up not investing it. I think that is
why right now is the time to develop this strategy with both
the sanctions and the alternative suppliers working together.
Mr. Moran. Yes. Because this uranium production is not like
making a peanut butter and jelly sandwich in my kitchen. It
takes a lot of capital up-front, capital investment. It takes a
lot of time, and it takes a lot of effort and risk, frankly, to
enter that market. Would you agree with that?
Mr. Ruggiero. That's right. And we have to get the balance
between what we want here in the U.S. and what we want to work
with our allies both in Canada and Europe and elsewhere.
There's a good mix there, and it is going to take some time to
get that right.
Mr. Moran. Back to you, Mr. Albright. Stakeholders have
predicted that building capacity in the United States and fully
replacing Russian nuclear is a long-term project expected to
take years, just like what I just referenced. What regulatory
burdens stand in the way, and what are ways Congress can reduce
the barrier to entry? And I will ask you the same question,
Professor, once we get an answer. If you'll press your button,
please.
Mr. Albright. I am not sure I can address the regulatory
issues, but, certainly, there needs to be support from the
executive and the legislative branch that this is a priority
and there will be some support, financial support, for these
activities so that companies can be incentivized to take the
risk. And so I think that's the critical part of it.
And we have done this before. I mean, our nuclear industry
has always, when it was growing, had tremendous support from
the Federal Government.
Mr. Moran. Professor, do you have a comment on the
regulatory burdens that stand in the way?
Ms. Sabonis-Helf. Actually, I would like to highlight one
huge breakthrough, and that is that small modular reactors are
licensed under the Nuclear Regulatory Commission, and it is the
first time we have licensed a new design of reactor in a very
long time. I do not think the United States is a credible
salesman of these reactors in other countries if we do not have
them on our own territory.
So I think that the fact that we have made that move
forward is an extremely important one, and I think that removes
what would otherwise have been a huge barrier in terms of next
generation.
Mr. Moran. Mr. Ruggiero, real quickly, my last question.
What global market implications do you predict during the
process of winding down dependence on Russian nuclear fuel and
sources?
Mr. Ruggiero. Well, I think they understand, the industry
understands that this is a conversation that is happening, and
that is why I think you could do some sanctions now and some
smarter sanctions in the short term to reinforce that, as well.
Mr. Moran. Thank you all. I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Kean. Thank you, Mr. Moran. I now recognize Mr. Wilson
from South Carolina for 5 minutes.
Mr. Wilson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you to the
witnesses for being here today. And, Mr. Ruggiero, the Biden
Administration has repeatedly waived sanctions against Rosatom
in order to facilitate Rosatom's work with Iran's nuclear
program. This is despite the fact that Rosatom has been
credibly accused of providing material support to aid war
criminal Putin's military invasion of Ukraine, which is
sanctionable by U.S. law. Would you classify this scheme as a
sanctions evasion?
Mr. Ruggiero. Well, if they are getting waivers, I mean,
there is always a question of why the Administration is still
issuing the Iran waivers, you know, given the Iran subject.
But, you know, we continue to work with Rosatom even though, as
you noted, they work with the China nuclear program, they work
with ZNPP. So, yes, I think moving along the pathway of ending
reliance on Russia and Rosatom is the best way forward.
Mr. Wilson. And I appreciate you clarifying. Thank you very
much. And approximately how much money is the Biden
Administration allowing the Kremlin and war criminal Putin to
make through Rosatom's operations in Iran?
Mr. Ruggiero. I am not sure about the specific number, but
I am certainly happy to take that as a question for the record.
Mr. Albright. My understanding is it is certainly not a
public number, but we have been investigating internal Bushehr-
related documents that we found on the internet, and it is
millions of dollars just in proving some of the safety
conditions at the plant and writing manuals. But it is
substantially larger than millions of dollars every 2 years or
so.
Mr. Wilson. It would probably be in, like, trade, too, of
military equipment and----
Mr. Albright. But also I should add they are building
Bushehr 2 and 3 and that project is valued at about $8 billion.
So it will probably be significantly higher. On Bushehr 1,
which is operational, it is fixing the problems that came with
buying that particular reactor and Iran coming to terms that
its safety culture was woefully inadequate. It has a very poor
regulatory environment, and so, as Iran tries to, in a sense,
create a safer reactor, it is having to spend a considerable
amount of money on that.
Mr. Wilson. It is inconceivable to me that there would be
waivers that could, in any way, benefit the regime in Tehran,
particularly in light of just 6 weeks ago Iran provided drone
attacks on American military, killing three Army reservists
from Georgia, wounded another 40 people, Americans, and then
over 150 drone attacks in the last 6 months. I just cannot
visualize that a waiver would be in any way allowed by this
Administration and with just 6 weeks ago three young Americans
were murdered by the regime in Tehran.
With that in mind, Mr. Albright, the Zaporizhzhia Nuclear
Power Plant contains sensitive export-control American nuclear
technology. According to CNN, last year, the Biden
Administration asked Rosatom not to touch the technology. Do
you trust that Rosatom will respect the export control rules?
How would that benefit them if they actually did?
Mr. Albright. Just to reinforce your point, it was horrible
with these drone attacks. And with Iranian assistance, they are
happening all the time in Ukraine and terrorizing the
population. And so Iran's drone program deserves much more
attention.
Now, on the technology, we work on sort of the more
criminal side of nuclear supply chains, and I would assume
Russia has already investigated whatever they could find, as
much as they could. Regardless of what they say, they probably
are trying to benefit from our technology----
Mr. Wilson. Well, I just sincerely hope, bipartisan, that
we can face that we are, sadly, in a war we did not choose, and
that is with the dictators with rule of gun invading the
democracies with rule of law beginning February 23, 2022 with
war criminal Putin invading and then October 7th the Iran
puppets invading and slaughtering the people of Israel. And so
this should be bipartisan that we are working together because
they do have a goal: death to Israel, death to America. I yield
back.
Mr. Kean. Thank you, Mr. Wilson. I have one followup
question to Mr. Albright regarding Rosatom's role in the Iran
nuclear sector. Is this cooperation limited entirely to the
civilian nuclear energy program?
Mr. Albright. As far as I know, I do not know any evidence
that Russia would convey nuclear weapons-related technology to
Iran. Part of the problem, though, in Iran is that Bushehr is
very, it is a modern, semi-modern nuclear reactor, and Iran is
using that knowledge and will openly say to be able to build
smaller research reactors, which could, in the future, produce
plutonium for nuclear weapons.
So I think Russia's technology is not well protected or
controlled and----
Mr. Kean. So it could, by that definition, be assisting,
Rosatom could be assisting Iran in its goal of creating a
nuclear weapon.
Mr. Albright. Well, in the sense of producing plutonium for
nuclear weapon and a future reactor in Iran, yes.
Mr. Kean. Thank you. With no further questions--yes, do you
have anything? With no further questions from members, I want
to thank our witnesses for their valuable testimony and the
members for their questions. The members of the subcommittee
may have additional written questions for the witnesses, and we
ask that you respond to these promptly in writing. Pursuant to
committee rules, all members may have 5 days to submit
statements, questions, extraneous materials for the record
subject to the length limitations.
Without objection, the subcommittee stands adjourned. Thank
you.
[Whereupon, at 3:24 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]

APPENDIX
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

MATERIALS SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

RESPONSES TO QUESTIONS SUBMITED FOR THE RECORD
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
