- THE SAHEL IN CRISIS: EXAMINING U.S. POLICY OPTIONS

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

______

THE SAHEL IN CRISIS: EXAMINING U.S.
POLICY OPTIONS

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON AFRICA

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS
U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

December 5, 2023

__________

Serial No. 118-116

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Foreign Affairs

GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT

Available: www.foreignaffairs.house.gov, docs.house.gov,
or www.govinfo.gov

_______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
56-746 PDF          WASHINGTON : 2025

COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS

MICHAEL T. McCAUL, Texas, Chairman

CHRISTOPHER H. SMITH, New Jersey     GREGORY MEEKS, New York, Ranking
JOE WILSON, South Carolina               Member
SCOTT PERRY, Pennsylvania             BRAD SHERMAN, California
DARRELL ISSA, California              GERALD E. CONNOLLY, Virginia
ANN WAGNER, Missouri                  WILLIAM KEATING, Massachusetts
BRIAN MAST, Florida                   AMI BERA, California
KEN BUCK, Colorado                    JOAQUIN CASTRO, Texas
TIM BURCHETT, Tennessee               DINA TITUS, Nevada
MARK E. GREEN, Tennessee              TED LIEU, California
ANDY BARR, Kentucky                   SUSAN WILD, Pennsylvania
RONNY JACKSON, Texas                  DEAN PHILLIPS, Minnesota
YOUNG KIM, California                 COLIN ALLRED, Texas
MARIA ELVIRA SALAZAR, Florida         ANDY KIM, New Jersey
BILL HUIZENGA, Michigan               SARA JACOBS, California
AUMUA AMATA COLEMAN RADEWAGEN,        KATHY MANNING, North Carolina
American Samoa                    SHEILA CHERFILUS-McCORMICK,
FRENCH HILL, Arkansas                       Florida
WARREN DAVIDSON, Ohio                 GREG STANTON, Arizona
JIM BAIRD, Indiana                    MADELEINE DEAN, Pennsylvania
MICHAEL WALTZ, Florida                JARED MOSKOWITZ, Florida
THOMAS KEAN, JR., New Jersey          JONATHAN JACKSON, Illinois
MICHAEL LAWLER, New York              SYDNEY KAMLAGER-DOVE, California
CORY MILLS, Florida                   JIM COSTA, California
RICH McCORMICK, Georgia               JASON CROW, Colorado
NATHANIEL MORAN, Texas                BRAD SCHNEIDER, Illinois
JOHN JAMES, Michigan
KEITH SELF, Texas

Brendan Shields, Majority Staff Director

Sophia Lafargue, Minority Staff Director
------

SUBCOMMITTEE ON AFRICA

JOHN JAMES, MI, Chairman

CHRISTOPHER SMITH, New Jersey        SARA JACOBS, CA, Ranking Member
YOUNG KIM, California                SHELIA CHERFILUS-MCCORMICK,
JIM BAIRD, Indiana                       Florida
THOMAS KEAN, New Jersey              COLIN ALLRED, Texas
CORY MILLS, Florida                  JONATHAN JACKSON, Illinois

Joe Foltz, Subcommittee Staff Director
C  O  N  T  E  N  T  S

----------
Page

REPRESENTATIVES

Opening Statement of Subcommittee Chairman John James............     1
Opening Statement of Subcommittee Ranking Member Sara Jacobs.....     3

WITNESSES

The Hon. Molly Phee, Assistant Secretary, Bureau of African
Affairs, U.S. Department of State..............................     5
Prepared Statement...............................................     7
The Hon. Celeste Wallander, Assistant Secretary of Defense for
International Security Affairs, Office of The Secretary of
Defense for Policy, U.S. Department of Defense.................    12
Prepared Statement...............................................    14
Robert Jenkins, Assistant to The Administrator, Bureau for
Conflict Prevention and Stabilization, U.S. Agency for
International Development......................................    17
Prepared Statement...............................................    19

APPENDIX

Hearing Notice...................................................    42
Hearing Minutes..................................................    44
Hearing Attendance...............................................    45

Material for the Record

Submission for the record: testimony from Beatrice Odountan
Abuoya.........................................................    46
Material for the record: Sudan Atrocity Determination Letter.....    51

Responses to Questions for the Record

Responses to questions for the record for The Honorable Molly
Phee from Representative James.................................    54
Responses to questions for the record for The Honorable Molly
Phee from Representative Jacobs................................    65
Responses to questions for the record for The Honorable Molly
Phee from Representative Allred................................    85

Responses to questions for the record for The Honorable Celeste
Wallander from Representative James............................    91
Responses to questions for the record for The Honorable Celeste
Wallander from Representative Jacobs...........................    96
Responses to questions for the record for The Honorable Celeste
Wallander from Representative Allred...........................   100

Responses to questions for the record for Mr. Jenkins from
Representative James...........................................   102
Responses to questions for the record for Mr. Jenkins from
Representative Jacobs..........................................   104
Responses to questions for the record for Mr. Jenkins from
Representative Allred..........................................   112

THE SAHEL IN CRISIS: EXAMINING U.S.

POLICY OPTIONS

----------

Tuesday, December 5, 2023

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Africa,
Committee on Foreign Affairs,
Washington, DC.

The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 2:59 p.m., in
room 210, House Visitor Center, Hon. John James
(chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Mr. James. The Committee on Foreign Affairs Subcommittee on
Africa will come to order.
The purpose of this hearing is to examine the current State
of United States foreign policy in the Sahel. The chair
announces that he may recess the committee at any point.
Without objection, so ordered. I now recognize myself for an
opening statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF CHAIRMAN JOHN JAMES

The Sahel region of Africa is undeniably in crisis and has
become the global hotspot for Islamist extremism. In 2022, the
region accounted for 43 percent of global terrorism deaths, up
from 1 percent in 2007. Roughly one out of every three people
who call this region home need humanitarian assistance.
Rule of law is floundering and there have been no fewer
than seven military power grabs since 2020. Russia has
exploited this instability, primarily through the Wagner Group,
to gain geopolitical influence, expand access to the de-
dollarized assets like gold mines, and pressure NATO's southern
flank.
At the same time, United Nations-led peacekeeping missions
are failing to deliver while anti-French sentiments driven by
missteps in French policies and magnified by adversaries have
created a crisis of confidence about Paris' future role and
policy toward the region.
We have seen that a military response alone will not
address counterterrorism, democratic backsliding, and rising
anti-Western sentiment. We must have a strong coordinated U.S.
response that appropriately balances our diplomatic,
development, and defense efforts to build partner countries'
capacity to address the root causes of their growing list of
problems.
We know that retrenching and an isolationist policy will
not make these problems go away. In fact, it will make them
worse, which is why I've called this hearing today to speak
about the increasingly dire situations in Sudan, Chad, Niger,
Mali, and Burkina Faso.
Sudan is perhaps the most concerning country in Africa now.
Conflict has raged for 7 months and U.S. diplomatic efforts
have consistently proven unable to curb the fighting. Many
prominent media and Sudan experts have warned that genocide has
returned to the Darfur region where survivors have reported
mass slaughter, murdered babies, and kill lists.
The world is watching to see if the United States will
stand by as Al-Fashir, the only capital city in Darfur not yet
captured by the RSF, becomes a site of refuge or slaughter.
I note the announcement yesterday of sanctions against
Bashir-era Islamists who have contributed to Sudan's
destabilization but I'm concerned that they do not appear to be
part of a strategic framework.
Sanctions are effective only as a means to a clearly
articulated end goal and are not--excuse me, not sufficient
policy in and of themselves.
The administration must articulate a clear and coherent
policy. It is not enough simply to issue periodic statements of
condemnation as to how its current actions are contributing
positively to achieving a return of civilian rule and end
fighting in Sudan.
Fragility in Chad is creating hard bedfellows for the Deby
government and internal fissures within the ruling Zaghawas.
Despite being one of the poorest countries in the world Chad
hosts 1.3 million forcibly displaced persons as of September
2023.
Multiple reports suggest that United Arab Emirates is using
an airfield in eastern Chad to funnel weapons and supplies to
RSF who are a direct evolution of the Janjaweed militias from
the Darfur genocide 20 years ago.
The palace coup in Niger caught everyone by surprise and
the current leadership in Niamey appears stuck, unable to move
forward, and credible solutions that would see sanctions
relief, allow safe relief of the democratically elected leader
Mohamed Bazoum, and instead is looking to Moscow for solutions.
Just yesterday the Russian Deputy Minister of Defense was in
Niamey signing a military cooperation agreement among Niger,
Burkina Faso, and Mali.
The junta in Mali has doubled down on reliance on Wagner
and Russia following the withdrawal of the United Nations
peacekeeping operation in the country.
The junta kicked out peacekeepers following an
investigative report detailing a massacre that took place by
the malign Russian personnel. In August 2023 Russia vetoed the
renewal of the U.N. sanctions program for Mali which focused on
the conflict in the north. Jihadists in Mali have almost
doubled the territory they control in Mali in less than a year.
This sows the seeds for the emergence of the Islamic State
that exercises territorial control over west Africa. Burkina
Faso experienced two military coups in 2022. Successive
governments have been unable to contain the spread of violence
by insurgents affiliated with al-Qaeda and the Islamic State.
In November 2023 Burkina Faso upgraded its relationship
with Russia and 20 Russian soldiers arrived in the country.
Russia's growing entrenchment across the Sahel and Africa as a
whole is extremely concerning, testing Western influence on
several fronts.
I have yet to see a comprehensive strategy from this
administration to combat Russia's influence and address the
shortcomings of our economic and diplomatic tools.
I would like to thank the witnesses for their appearance
today and for their frank assessment of the security vacuum
that's being filled by our adversaries in these countries.
The descent into chaos in the Sahel is far from over and
there is urgency to develop a comprehensive approach to
stabilizing the region, not just containing it.
The chair will now recognize the ranking member, the
Congresswoman from California Ms. Jacobs for any statements she
may have.

OPENING STATEMENT OF RANKING MEMBER SARA JACOBS

Ms. Jacobs. Thank you, Chairman James, and Assistant
Secretary Phee, Assistant Secretary Wallander, and Mr. Jenkins
for testifying before the subcommittee today on U.S. policy in
the Sahel region.
The past few years have shown that U.S. policy and that of
the international community toward the Sahel region have come
up short. We have seen a string of coups and democratic
backsliding across the Sahel region and the broader continent
including in Burkina Faso, Chad, Guinea, Mali, Niger and Sudan.
As a result, over 4 million people have been displaced in
the Sahel alone adding to global migration levels while the
climate crisis and violence continue to affect food crops and
food prices, and we have started to see insurgent violence
spread its way toward the coastal West African states,
particularly Benin, Cote d'Ivoire, and Togo, which are working
to secure their northern borders and address vulnerabilities to
violent extremism.
It is clear the United States needs to prioritize this
region of the world, which is why I'm so focused on the
implementation of the Global Fragility Act and the resulting
10-year strategy to prevent conflict in coastal West Africa.
We know that a key driver of violent extremism is lack of
responsive governance. In many places that have experienced
coups young and marginalized populations don't feel like they
have a voice in their governments and aren't properly
represented.
This is especially important on the African continent where
young people are the majority. Africa has the youngest
population in the world with 70 percent of sub-Saharan Africa
under the age of 30.
So we need to make sure that national, regional, and
international government responses to violent extremism address
governance instead of prioritizing a security first response.
Too often security forces have responded with a heavy hand
and caused civilian harm, which only fuels underlying
grievances against the State more.
I saw this when I worked at the State Department. Security
forces' abuses and human rights violations are some of the
biggest drivers of violent extremism.
So as we provide support to security forces working to
address violent insurgents and secure their borders we need to
emphasize human rights and professionalization.
With thoughtful implementation the Global Fragility Act has
the power to modernize our foreign policy and center conflict
prevention and peacebuilding into the heart of our strategy.
But one of the biggest tactics that we can't overlook in
addressing conflict is the importance of locally led
peacebuilding and development.
Bringing in people who are involved and most affected by
violent conflict to create solutions is the most effective,
efficient, and equitable way to do development and conflict-
related work.
We need to empower local people, not to tell them what to
do and perpetuate harmful cycles of colonialism, and this is
increasingly relevant in light of the civil war in Sudan where
young people have led the democracy movement and heroically
stepped in to provide for their communities when the
international community has been unable to operate.
Even before the fighting started 16 million people were
already in need of aid. Many civilians lacked the basics for
life, food, water, shelter, medicine, and security, while SAF
and RSF continue hostilities and make clear that they are not
serious about peace.
I'm glad to see the Biden administration designate three
former Bashir officials for their role in threatening peace,
security, and stability in Sudan. But let's be clear, more is
needed to bring this war to an end and enable a viable pathway
to peace and democracy for the Sudanese people.
I'm horrified by the mass atrocities committed by the RSF,
particularly in Darfur but also in Khartoum, and look forward
to hearing from the administration on what they're doing to
prevent further atrocities, hold the RSF accountable, and
recognize these atrocities for what they are.
It is also clear there is more pressure the United States
can bring to bear on the UAE and its role in providing weapons
to the RSF, violating the U.N. arms embargo, and enabling mass
atrocities.
Any path to peace in Sudan must be inclusive, credible, and
transparent and I hope to hear more from the administration
today on its strategy to meet these standards.
So I'm looking forward to hearing from you all today about
the path for the U.S. policy in Sahel and Sudan and especially
how the U.S. can work with local communities to create long-
term peace, stability, and security.
Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. James. Thank you, Madam Ranking Member. Other members
of the committee are reminded that opening statements may be
submitted for the record.
We are pleased to have a distinguished panel of witnesses
before us here today. Once again, Hon. Molly Phee is the
Assistant Secretary in the Bureau of African Affairs at the
U.S. Department of State.
The Honorable Celeste Wallander is the Assistant Secretary
of Defense for International Security Affairs in the Office of
the Secretary of Defense for Policy.
Mr. Rob Jenkins is the Assistant to the Administrator in
the Bureau for Conflict Prevention and Stabilization at the
U.S. Agency for International Development.
Thank you each for being here today. Your full statements
will be made a part of the record and I'll ask each of you to
keep your spoken remarks to 5 minutes in order to allow time
for member questions.
I now recognize Assistant Secretary Phee for her opening
statement.

STATEMENT OF THE HONORABLE MOLLY PHEE, ASSISTANT SECRETARY,
BUREAU OF AFRICAN AFFAIRS, U.S. DEPARTMENT OF STATE

Ms. Phee. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member Jacobs.
We appreciate this opportunity to together, the three Ds,
discuss the Sahel and other issues of concern.
As you know, the Biden-Harris administration recognizes
Africa as a major geopolitical force and seeks to be a partner
on shared values and interests.
The recent coups in the Sahel can be attributed to the
enormous challenges facing the region, notably a tradition of
weak democratic governance, an acute terrorist threat,
insufficient economic and educational opportunities for the
region's young population, and climate-related water and land
shortages which lead to conflict over resources and contribute
to food insecurity.
We also know that Africa is disproportionately affected by
upheaval in the global world order. When similar global
disruptions occurred, for example, in the 1960's and the 1990's
civil wars and coups proliferated then. Today the ongoing
destabilizing impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, Russia's war in
Ukraine, the surge in climate shocks, and the global contests
between democracies and authoritarian regimes, these are
driving instability in Africa.
While each country in the Sahel is unique we assess weak
governance is the core vulnerability that opens the door to
poor choices by military leaders and malign actors like the
Wagner Group.
We are adapting our response to these coups to promote
responsive governance. For example, following the July military
coup in Niger we suspended nearly $140 million in security
assistance programs, more than $300 million in our MCC compact
and our security cooperation.
To bolster the regional African body known as ECOWAS, which
shares our alarm at the proliferation of coups, we are actively
supporting their negotiations with the junta in Niger by
enabling them to leverage our assistance to craft actionable
terms for a democratic transition timeline and for the release
of former President Bazoum.
The objective is to employ the prospect of resumed U.S.
assistance to demonstrate that embracing the path to democracy
is in Niger's interests. And we remain steadfast in our support
for the people in Niger by maintaining our humanitarian,
health, and essential food programming.
Mali and Burkina Faso are challenging cases, as you both
noted. In Mali, prospects for the return of democracy are
increasingly grim as the Wagner-supported transitional
government once again has chosen to delay elections and is
forcefully seeking to exert control in northern Mali.
The deterioration in security, the rise in civilian
casualties, and the exploitation of the country's natural
resources illustrate convincingly the dangers of the Wagner
role.
Burkina Faso faces a dramatic security and human rights
crisis. We are urging the Burkinabe to employ a
counterterrorism strategy that prioritizes civil security
institutions.
We know an overly militarized approach to counterterrorism
like the one adopted in Mali is bound to fail. To address
Burkina's ongoing political instability we are pressing for a
democratic transition in line with a publicly declared
timeline.
In Chad, we are pushing the transitional government to
adhere to its transitional timeline and to preserve political
space for opposition and civil society groups so they can
freely participate in next year's election.
As Chad, confronts surging refugee flows from Sudan, we are
mobilizing humanitarian support to minimize the resulting
security risks.
To promote good governance, we have eagerly embraced the
tool Congress provided us with the Global Fragility Act.
Drawing on those resources we are acting to help insulate
neighboring countries in coastal West Africa vulnerable to
democratic backsliding.
As we support our African partners in navigating these
challenges we believe leading with our values will best support
our national security strategy.
I want to turn to a topic that is of grave concern to us
all, the military conflict in Sudan, which threatens to destroy
the unity of the country and destabilize the region.
The escalating violence, especially attacks by the RSF in
Darfur, have included, as you know well, mass killings, ethnic
targeting of non-Arab communities, widespread rape, and
obstruction of humanitarian aid.
By their actions the two forces have disqualified
themselves from a role in governance and demonstrated there is
no acceptable military solution to the conflict. Following the
inspirational 2019 overthrow of the military led by a broad-
based popular movement there have been two serious attempts to
achieve a civilian-led transitional government through a joint
negotiation process between civilian and military leaders.
Twice the security forces have trampled on these democratic
aspirations, first in October 2021 when the military conducted
a takeover and second in April 2023 when they went to war.
As a result of these hard lessons, Sudanese civilians now
seek to negotiate among themselves to resume and complete the
democratic transition.
These discussions are taking place in Addis Ababa with our
active support. The conflict in Sudan is too big for any one
country or any single platform to resolve.
Our diplomacy is based on close coordination with African,
regional, and international partners to build on our
comparative strengths and those of our partners.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Phee follows:]
GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT

Mr. James. Thank you, Assistant Secretary Phee. Your time
has expired.
In the interest of time I now recognize Assistant Secretary
Wallander for her opening statement.

STATEMENT OF THE HONORABLE CELESTE WALLANDER, ASSISTANT
SECRETARY OF DEFENSE FOR INTERNATIONAL SECURITY AFFAIRS, OFFICE
OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE FOR POLICY, U.S. DEPARTMENT OF
DEFENSE

Ms. Wallander. Chairman James, Ranking Member Jacobs,
members of the committee, thank you for having me here today to
discuss the situation in the Sahel and Niger in particular, as
well as the continuing importance of U.S. presence, operations,
and security force assistance to our African partners.
Security in the Sahel has steadily declined since the
Libyan crisis of 2011. Violent extremist organizations--VEOs--
affiliated with both al-Qaeda and the Islamic State have taken
advantage of weak governments and failed states.
These VEOs have overstretched the defense and security
forces of many regional governments and carved out safe havens
to progressively expand their operational reach.
This has allowed these VEOs to expand their influence and
operations toward the littoral countries along the Gulf of
Guinea. The Department of Defense's strategy focuses on two
main lines of effort.
In the short and medium term we will support African-led
counterterrorism operations to disrupt the most acute terrorist
threats with a particular emphasis on those targeting U.S.
interests.
In the long term we will emphasize bilateral security
assistance to African defense and security forces in order to
build their own homegrown capacity to counter these threats
without excessive external assistance.
Over the last 3 years significant changes in the political
environment in the Sahel have affected our ability to work with
both African and international partners. Successive military
coups in Mali in 2020, in Burkina Faso in 2022, and now in
Niger in 2023 have resulted in restrictions on DOD's operations
and assistance programs.
Other international allies and partners have also
reconsidered their presence in the region, requiring us to
reevaluate our own posture.
We remain concerned that these developments will provide
more space for VEOs to operate and make it more challenging to
address those threats. VEOs survive and thrive in areas of
instability and seek to leverage that instability for their own
ends as evidenced by the attacks we have seen in Niger since
the coup.
Within this context our strategic competitors have seized
the opportunity to increase their own access and influence.
Russia has been particularly active in stoking anti-Western
sentiment and presenting its military contractors or Russian
private military companies--PMCs--such as the Wagner Group as
practical alternatives to Western trainers.
We are at a crossroads. On one level we--on the one hand,
we cannot afford to ignore the sustained challenge to democracy
by military juntas nor turn a blind eye to their misuse of
power.
As Secretary Austin noted during his recent trip to Africa,
when generals overturn the will of the people and put their own
ambitions above the rule of law security suffers and democracy
dies.
We also cannot afford to compromise our regional influence
and security partnerships which are threatened by competitors
who are less concerned with democratic values and human rights
and threatened by the fragility of Sahel states.
There is also a significant risk that VEOs might expand
their influence or capabilities in the region if
counterterrorism pressure remains at reduced levels.
Given this elevated threat environment the Department of
Defense is committed to working with our interagency partners
to continue to monitor and disrupt VEO threats emanating from
the Sahel while constructively engaging with regional states to
restore productive democratic governance in those countries.
In doing so we are consistently working to strike a balance
between offering the practical assistance that our African
partners need to face emergent threats while reinforcing our
professional values to help them build strong, resilient
institutions that will be reinforce not only their physical
security but their democratic stability.
Our success depends on continued investment in West Africa.
To do this, we must maintain some continuity with past efforts
while adjusting our approach to reflect changes in the
environment as well as the actions of our African partners,
international allies and partners, and strategic competitors.
DOD's requirement to monitor indications and warnings of
VEO activity in the Sahel and prevent threats to U.S. interests
emanating from the region has not changed. For the last 10
years our posture in Niger has proven critical to this effort.
Moving forward, we have worked side by side with the
Department of State and other interagency partners to define
conditions for restoring our activities and partnership in
Niger.
Nigerien officials must quickly and credibly transition
back to a democratically elected civilian government.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Wallander follows:]
GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT

Mr. James. Thank you, Madam Assistant Secretary.
Mr. Jenkins, I now recognize you for your opening
statement.

STATEMENT OF ROBERT JENKINS, ASSISTANT TO THE ADMINISTRATOR,
BUREAU FOR CONFLICT PREVENTION AND STABILIZATION, U.S. AGENCY
FOR INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT

Mr. Jenkins. Thank you for inviting me to testify and for
your support of this vital region whose peace and stability is
deeply intertwined with that of the United States and of the
world.
To address the root causes of violence and conflict in the
Sahel we need to support peaceful transitions back to democracy
and lay the foundations for improving governance and building
trust between citizens and their governments.
Improved governance is critical to promoting stability. It
is as important to focus on the delivery of basic services as
it is to focus on inclusive, fair, and transparent institutions
and political processes.
Democracy needs to deliver. For example, in Mali USAID
works with local governments on the development of community
plans for water, sanitation, and hygiene, and ensures that
local civil society participates in planning.
The region's population is among the youngest in the world.
Youth can be champions of democracy and reinvigorate economies
or can serve as foot soldiers for extremist organizations and
further destabilize the region.
This will be determined by their education, agency, and
opportunities. When youth can seek an education and gain the
skills they need for life and work they can build more hopeful
and prosperous futures.
The U.S. has been the third largest contributor to the
Global Partnership for Education, a multilateral organization
providing education services in several countries across the
Sahel.
To build trust in good governance USAID works with people
in country who are most impacted. We can't solve the problems
in the Sahel alone. We're working with communities on the
ground and with other bilateral, multilateral, and private
sector partners such as the reenergized Stabilization Leaders
Forum.
We're seeking solutions by integrating our efforts more
strategically across the U.S. Government with long-term shared
goals. This is the paradigm shift that Congress envisioned in
the landmark Global Fragility Act and strategy to prevent
conflict and promote stability.
We have developed 10-year whole of government plans that
are guiding our development, diplomacy, and defense in five
partner geographies including Libya and coastal West Africa, a
country and a region inextricably linked to the Sahel.
Peace and stability in the Sahel requires bringing peace
and stability to Libya, which has served as a source of and
destination for weapons and armed fighters. The 10-year plan in
Libya is working in the southern part of the country to
increase legal economic opportunity, invest in community
advocacy to counter militia influence, and build local capacity
to deliver public services to Libyans.
Much of our work under this innovative strategy is
concentrated in critical northern regions of coastal West
Africa that border the Sahel. This includes a joint U.S.-German
initiative, the Coastal States Stability Mechanism, which
leverages shared funding and partners with local communities.
Through it and other USAID programs we're hearing directly
from communities about what they need. Based on community
feedback in Togo, for example, we partnered to build a new
bridge, a youth center, and a community radio station to
improve economic opportunities in disconnected towns, foster a
sense of belonging, and promote access to credible information.
We are grateful for the congressional leadership and vision
that passed the bipartisan Global Fragility Act. Congress can
continue to lead us in realizing this vision by enacting
legislative reforms to reduce bureaucratic challenges and help
us work across the U.S. Government to address root causes and
prevent conflict before it starts.
We must continue to work creatively with people in the
Sahel. We must support timely democratic transitions in Burkina
Faso, Chad, Niger, Guinea, and Mali so that critical political,
social, economic, and governance reforms can be realized to
reduce corruption, prevent further democratic erosion, and
rebuild a social contract.
None of this work will take root without strengthening and
expanding the role of African institutions in balancing
regional threats and opportunities. The U.S. is improving its
coordination to increase burden sharing and synchronization
across development, humanitarian and peacebuilding programming
while also countering propaganda and disinformation from
strategic competitors.
In addition to our conflict prevention work USAID is
providing life-saving humanitarian assistance and early
recovery, risk reduction, and resilience programming, almost
$390 million in the Sahel during Fiscal Year 2023.
Through our development and humanitarian assistance we can
make the United States a partner of choice. We can demonstrate
that democracy delivers by partnering to tangibly improve the
lives of the millions in the Sahel searching for hope and
opportunity, opportunity they deserve.
Thank you again for the opportunity to speak and for
convening this important meeting. I look forward to your
questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Jenkins follows:]
GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT

Mr. James. Thank you, Mr. Jenkins. I now recognize myself
for 5 minutes of questioning.
I'm just going to go off of--Ukraine has a population of
approximately 43.79 million people. Sudan has a population of
approximately 45.66 million people.
Yet, the nonmilitary assistance that has gone to Ukraine is
$12.4 billion and the humanitarian assistance to Sudan is $620
million. I've heard things like we need to do everything we
possibly can.
But what I see is you have almost identical population
sizes but 20 times the commitment financially to the people of
Ukraine than the people in Sudan. Are the lives in Sudan less
important by 20 times?if not how are we going to address that
gap?
Let me rephrase it. Are you receiving support from the
administration as much to do your jobs as your colleagues are
doing theirs?
Ms. Phee. Mr. Chairman, the situation in Sudan is
commanding much time and attention from the administration. For
example, we are seeking to help the civilians be in a position
to take power when the conflict has abated.
So that is why Ambassador Godfrey and the embassy that was
previously located in Khartoum is now in Addis Ababa where the
preponderance of Sudanese civilians are meeting to support them
in that effort.
Ambassador Rubenstein is in Jeddah working to try and----
Mr. James. Madam Assistant Secretary, that sounds great.
You've been to Africa and spent a lot of years in Africa and
you understand that part of the reason why the Russian
misinformation is working is because for a large population in
Africa they see it as true in their lived experience.
They see it as true that America is not showing up. They
see it as true that America doesn't care and they see it as
true that we're sending billions of dollars to Ukraine and
they're getting pennies on the dollar.
They see that America's commitment is not there to their
plight and so part of the reason why we're experiencing these
issues and the backslide in democracy in governance, the
economic and educational opportunities that we're able to
participate in, is because they see us as hypocrites.
How are we changing that narrative through action?
Ms. Phee. Mr. Chairman, my contacts with the Sudanese
people tell me that they believe that we are the best friend to
the Nation. It is not Russia or China who showed up to try and
help end this conflict. It was the United States.
We are perceived to be disinterested and care about the
civilians and care about the stability of this State. That is
not the position of other partners in the international
community. The strength we have is that they want to have a
partnership with us and they want our help to resolve the
conflict.
Mr. James. OK. Just before Thanksgiving Kenya's President
Ruto and the SAF leader General Burhan met in Nairobi and
issued a joint statement which called out the general process
for being too slow.
Assistant Secretary Phee, how realistic is it to expect
that Jeddah produces anything of value when one of our
strongest partners in the region meets with a belligerent
leader and calls for an alternative fora?
Ms. Phee. We work very closely with the Kenyan president.
In fact, he has invited the United States to join an IGAD
summit that will be held this coming weekend. I speak with him
regularly. The Secretary speaks with him regularly.
We are working very closely with our partners in the East
African regional organization of IGAD of which he is a leading
member as well as with the African Union.
Mr. James. Is the UAE a friend or foe in ending this
conflict diplomatically?
Ms. Phee. We share the concerns that Ranking Member Jacobs
identified about UAE's support to the RSF and that is a topic
of conversation including most recently during the Vice
President's visit to the UAE for COP.
Mr. James. What are some ways that we can hold the UAE--
those actors in UAE who are fomenting this conflict
accountable?
Ms. Phee. I think the publicity of this hearing and your
statement and request to the UAE to consider the detrimental
impact of their support to the RSF would be very helpful.
Mr. James. Absolutely you'll have our support.
Mr. Jenkins, please describe how programs in your bureau
continue to work with partners in support of a democratic
transition in Sudan and where. Addis? Cairo? Jeddah.
Mr. Jenkins. So thank you. Those of us that have been
working in Sudan for generations--a generation or more our
heart has broken quite a few times.
But we stand firmly with the people of Sudan and we
strongly, strongly, strongly support civil society including
the movements that got us to the moment in 2019 and are going
to be the hope for Sudan once they get out of their current
nightmare.
We're currently located temporarily in both Egypt and in
Nairobi and are in the process of having a footprint of formal
expat positions in both Egypt and in Nairobi, and our DART
team--the Disaster Assistance Response Team--is 12 people
that's based in Nairobi right now.
Mr. James. Thank you. So my time is expired. I now
recognize Ranking Member Jacobs for 5 minutes.
Ms. Jacobs. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
This hearing is incredibly timely particularly after Niger
became the latest in a string of coups across the Sahel.
In Niger in particular the United States was invested
heavily, particularly militarily and particularly in their army
and their special forces, and despite that, despite all of that
investment and apparent influence and the security gains from
those joint operations the coup in Niger was ultimately
successful and revealed some deep-seated grievances among
Nigeriens toward the democratically elected government and the
United States was, frankly, caught off guard.
So, Assistant Secretary Phee, Assistant Secretary
Wallander, what happened? Besides not having an ambassador why
do you think the State Department did not have a good
understanding of grievances toward the Bazoum government? What
lessons can we learn from this to apply toward U.S. policy in
the Sahel and coastal West Africa?
And Assistant Secretary Wallander, how do you explain the
Department of Defense not seeing this coup coming, given the
vast amounts of training and cooperation that the U.S. military
did with our Nigerien counterparts?
And, again, what lessons can be learned on the DOD side
especially as the interagency is implementing the Global
Fragility Act?
Ms. Phee. We share your disappointment in the outcome in
Niger. I think the statistics, which you know well, in terms of
the security incidents and civilian casualties that we have
seen in Mali and Burkina--in contrast to the very positive
progress that was underway in Niger by the efforts of the
Nigerien as well as the U.S. and other European partners it
makes the coup confusing and perplexing.
What we understand is that the President--I'm sorry, the
commander of the Presidential guard, who was in a dispute with
President Bazoum, is the one who initiated this action and then
persuaded other members of the military to join him.
It does not appear to us at this time that this was a well-
prepared or well-thought-out action. He was also able to
successfully exploit anti-French sentiment as well, as you
noted, concerns about the leadership--the democratically
elected leadership.
In terms of lessons learned, absolutely we need to have an
important team on the ground, a team led by a confirmed
Ambassador to engage. But in this particular instance it does
seem as if it was a specific grievance that mushroomed.
Ms. Wallander. Thank you, Ranking Member Jacobs. I would
share, of course, Assistant Secretary Phee's analysis and to
your point about how could this happen when the United States
trained and worked with the Nigerien armed forces.
The experience at the working level was positive in the
interests in reducing violence against civilians in the country
and pushing back against--and containing violent extremist
organizations.
The rates of violence had fallen in the years of our
successful cooperation and since these select leaders of the
Nigerien military leadership chose to violate their country's
constitution and overthrow democratic rule in fact incidences
of violence and their ability to live up to their duties to
protect their country have been eroded because of their actions
and their failures.
One of the lessons learned is exactly to reinforce that
message with our partners that it is only with stability and
democratic civilian control of the military that they have
effective governments and we believe that those of our partners
who are trained and respect the importance of civilian
leadership and democratic government are best positioned and
demonstrate their ability to provide for security for their
nations.
Ms. Jacobs. Thank you.
Assistant Secretary Phee, yesterday I sent a letter with my
colleague Congresswoman Omar requesting information on the
status of an atrocity determination in Sudan in response to
RSF's horrific atrocities and ethnically targeted killings in
Darfur.
At the end of October you testified in front of the Senate
Foreign Relations Committee and committed to making an official
determination. So can you commit here today that the State
Department will make this determination and let us know when we
can expect to see this?
Ms. Phee. First of all, thank you very much for the letter
to highlight the need for an atrocity determination. As you
know, one of the reasons it's a powerful tool is because of the
rigorous research undertaken to investigate and document
including by our attorneys.
I had the opportunity to speak yesterday with Secretary
Blinken who, as you know, just returned from a trip abroad and
I'm pleased to report that you should see action on that
shortly.
Ms. Jacobs. Wonderful. Thank you all. I yield back.
Mr. James. Thank you, Madam Ranking Member.
I now recognize Rep. Kim for 5 minutes.
Mrs. Kim of California. Thank you, Chairman and Ranking
Member, for holding today's hearing on the Sahel. Thank you,
witnesses, for joining us today.
As the author of a resolution condemning the conflict in
Sudan I'm interested in hearing from you about our policy
toward the civil war in Sudan.
In recent weeks, the crisis in Sudan has worsened and the
Rapid Support Forces led multiple offensives during which it
indiscriminately killed those in the Masalit ethnic community
in West Darfur. European officials have also characterized
those operations as part of a wider ethnic cleansing campaign
by the RSF. These attacks happened while the U.S. was
facilitating the last round of talks in Jeddah.
I want to ask you, Ms. Phee, given the ethnic violence
occurring in Darfur are you concerned that another genocide is
happening?
Ms. Phee. We share the concern and the horror that all of
us feel about the atrocities being committed by the RSF as well
as the problematic behavior by the SAF in terms of reckless
disregard for civilian fatalities, and as I mentioned I think
the Secretary will address that shortly.
Mrs. Kim of California. Can you tell me at what point would
the State Department determine the ethnic violence occurring
constitutes it--declaring the violence as a genocide?
Ms. Phee. That determination is based on legal criteria and
would be best answered by our Global Criminal Justice leader
Beth Van Schaack. But I know that the lawyers in reviewing the
components of the atrocity determination have reviewed those
matters closely and that should be announced in detail shortly.
Mrs. Kim of California. As I said, those attacks happened
while the U.S. was facilitating that talk in Jeddah. So what
was the United States doing during the Jeddah talks to try to
stop the RSF's ethnic violence?
Ms. Phee. I can confirm that we have regularly engaged and
pressed the Sudanese parties themselves as well as African and
Arab partners to try and convince them to desist from this
destabilizing behavior, which not only is horrific in terms of
the human impact but also genuinely threatens the unity of the
country.
So we are using that platform to convey that message
forcefully.
Mrs. Kim of California. Thank you.
You know, during the last or latest Jeddah talks the
warring parties made commitments with respect to improving
humanitarian access. So what changes if any has that led to?
Ms. Phee. Our judgment is that the changes have been
insufficient. We are engaged in discussions and there will be a
meeting this week led by the U.N. OCHA and other partners
including partners funded by the U.S. Government to try and
implement those agreements--those confidence-building measures.
Mrs. Kim of California. So if the talks in Cairo lead to
any commitments can we trust the RSF to maintain any of those
commitments?
Ms. Phee. We do not trust the RSF or the SAF. We trust the
civilians and the focus of the--or the balance of discussions
are actually being held in Addis Ababa and we are working hard
with our partners in USAID with the OTI office as well as with
Ambassador Godfrey and others to help them complete the
democratic transition and be prepared to assume governance of
the country once the conflict has ended.
Mrs. Kim of California. Thank you.
You know, the recruitment for a violent extremist
organization is not always driven by ideological affinity and
often is caused by youth disillusionment associated with a lack
of economic alternatives and a resentment toward the status
quo. It has been reported that atrocities committed by State
forces, militias, and Russian personnel may drive some VEO
recruitment.
So Ms. Jenkins--Mr. Jenkins--there you are--how is USAID
seeking to balance the urgent here and there and now need to
support the fight against the violent extremism with the need
to also address some of the longer-term structural factors that
continuously cause VEO recruitment?
Mr. Jenkins. Thank you very much.
Our humanitarian assistance provides life-saving assistance
as urgently as we can but that does not provide solutions. The
long-term solution will take longer, and as you noted it's not
just about a job for youth. It's not just about ideology.
It's about finding meaning in their life. It's about having
agency and opportunity, and we have programs across the Sahel
that work within communities to do exactly that, to provide
youth a reason to believe that tomorrow might be better than
today, to provide them with a group of--they can search out and
find belonging and not have to turn to a violent extremist
group.
Mrs. Kim of California. Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. James. Thank you, Madam.
I now recognize Rep. Kamlager-Dove for 5 minutes.
Ms. Kamlager-Dove. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
You know, I was heartened to hear the chair reference the
mass shootings and murdering of babies across the Sahel. I
would note that these atrocities are also happening in the
Ukraine by Russia and I would hope that I would hear the same
outrage from my colleagues on the other side of the aisle.
I think our concern about and focus on Russia needs to be
as consistent as their reign of terror.
I have a few quick questions. Assistant Secretary Phee, so
last week actually Ambassador Hammer talked about State
capacity being stretched, which I think also compromises our
ability to be successful with diplomacy.
Can you talk to me about the personnel vacancies at the
State Department and also with USAID at U.S. embassies in
Burkina Faso, Chad, Mali, and Niger, and what you all are doing
and what the plan is going to be if we can't get our act
together?
Ms. Phee. Thank you for allowing me to request all of you
to support the administration's budget which would provide us
with badly needed personnel and budget resources.
Also, although many of the countries you identified now
have a confirmed Ambassador we did not have a confirmed
Ambassador in Niger when the coup took place. We do not have a
confirmed Ambassador in Nigeria, which is the president of
ECOWAS.
I do not have a confirmed Ambassador in Gabon where another
coup took place. I do not have a confirmed Ambassador in the
African Union.
I also need one in Somalia and Djibouti where we have U.S.
forces and significant events in the upcoming year. So that
would be the first way that we could drive forward our policy
more effectively.
Second, as I've discussed before with the chairman and the
members, we lost a lot of staff during the previous
administration when there was a freeze on hiring. We are
working to improve that and the budget request would help.
We do have shortages particularly in the Sahel. That is
sometimes in part because there are not adequate educational or
health facilities and certain family members might require
those, and then we get into a difficult dynamic where the great
people who are there are working so hard they get burnt out.
So we're trying to figure out ways to avoid that and to
provide more incentives to attract more bidders to these
challenging, important, and consequential countries.
Ms. Kamlager-Dove. Thank you for--USAID, yes?
Mr. Jenkins. Thank you for the question. Yes, we have had
challenges in the past. In the last 12 to 18 months the picture
has improved considerably. We are now fully staffed--USAID--in
both Chad and in Mauritania.
We're 83 percent staffed in Mali and we're 72 percent
staffed in Burkina Faso. Earlier this year both Niger and
Burkina Faso were added to the list of countries--it's about 13
countries including Mali that receive a difficult to staff
differential in their pay.
Basically, they receive 15 percent more per year if they
agree to stay for 3 years and that's helped considerably.
Thank you.
Ms. Kamlager-Dove. Thank you. I would also add, I guess,
not just a freeze on hiring but also a disdain for the
continent of Africa by the prior administration.
So next question. This crisis has been ongoing in the Sahel
and I think that it requires some engagement at the highest
levels of U.S. Government. Obviously, we have hot spots all
around the world and Secretary Blinken is challenged because
he's only one person.
So Assistant Secretary, how are you going to elevate this
to his level so that we can get that kind of daylight on the
crises that are happening here, especially in the Sahel?
Ms. Phee. As I mentioned earlier, I had the opportunity to
speak with Secretary Blinken and Acting Deputy Secretary Nuland
yesterday. They will be engaging leaders of ECOWAS member
states.
ECOWAS is hosting a summit this weekend and I will be
participating representing the United States so they're calling
in advance of that discussion. They remain available to help at
all times.
In September at UNGA Secretary Blinken hosted a meeting of
his foreign ministry counterparts--foreign minister
counterparts of ECOWAS member states. So we have support and
attention from the leadership.
Ms. Kamlager-Dove. Thank you. I have a quick question maybe
for Assistant Secretary Wallander. Just what's going to happen
if this conflict expands? How will it continue to destabilize
the region?
Ms. Wallander. Thank you for the question.
Well, we have already seen an increase in violence of VEOs
against the Malian and the Wagner forces which then expands to
violence against civilians in Mali.
We have seen an uptick in--a considerable increase in
violent incidents in Niger as the military is not focused on
its real mission which is to provide for the security of the
country.
We are concerned that as the space for VEOs to operate and
operate freely in territory in the Sahel may expand as a result
of this security vacuum, that those VEOs may be tempted to act
and strike and expand into critical West Africa----
Mr. James. Thank you. The gentlelady's time has expired.
Thank you.
The chair will now recognize Rep. Kean for 5 minutes.
Mr. Kean. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I want to thank our witnesses for being here with us today
and you, Mr. Chairman, for holding this important hearing.
First, terrorist groups have engaged in hostilities over
control of U.N. bases after the junta in Bamako ended the
U.N.'s peacekeeping mission.
The U.N. had sought to transfer the bases to State control.
Some separatist rebel factions have coordinated with one
terrorist group, JNIM, to challenge the military expansion into
former U.N. bases.
With Russian tactical support Mali's military seized Kidal
in mid-November, a goal that has eluded successive Malian
governments for over 11 years.
Assistant Secretary Wallander, how do you expect the
capture of Kidal to affect African leaders' perception of
Russia defense cooperation?
Ms. Wallander. Thank you for that question.
We--this is clearly why the Malian government asked MINUSMA
or ordered MINUSMA to leave to enable their forces and the
Russian forces to have greater running room in seizing
territory, controlling locations in order to improve their
ability to operate for their own ends.
It is a concerning development because, as you noted, we do
not want other African partners to see benefit in allowing
Russia allowing Wagner free rein.
So we work with African partners for them to understand is
that, again, this is not enhancing the security of their
country.
It's actually increasing the activities and the
vulnerabilities of their countries to the VEOs, to the drawing
of these violent extremist groups, and that that is a model
they absolutely should not follow.
Mr. Kean. Thank you. Over the last two decades the United
States Sahel policy has been in concert and often backstopping
the foreign policy of France.
The status quo is no longer possible as the French have
been kicked out of Mali, Burkina Faso, and Niger in the last
year and a half.
Assistant Secretary Wallander, as France's policy in Africa
is being forced to change how is the Department of Defense
ensuring that U.S. strategic interests continue to be met in
the Sahel?
Ms. Wallander. First and foremost, we work closely with the
State Department and with our colleagues in USAID for a 3D
approach--democracy, development, and defense--because that is
ultimately the solution that will bring stability and security
anywhere in Africa but especially now in the Sahel.
In terms of partners we are still working with European
partners and other partners globally who want to contribute to
counter VEO operations to building capacity. Different
countries have different relationships with different countries
in the region.
By working with an array of partners in Europe and
elsewhere from across the region we believe that we can
continue to build capacity for those partners that seek it and
continue to be committed to a democratic path.
Mr. Kean. And how is the Department of State and USAID
ensuring the anti-French sentiment across the Sahel does not
become anti-U.S. sentiment?
Mr. Jenkins. So thank you very much. Information
manipulation, sometimes called disinformation, is now a plague
throughout the region and we have upped our game significantly
in the last 18 months with quite a few programs throughout the
region and the continent to make sure that we get better
information out there about what we're doing, something we have
always been a little bit bad at, and make sure that we help
people be more--better generators of real information and
better consumers of false information so they know what it is
when they can spot it and to keep a distance between the false
information and the truth as we stand by it.
Over.
Mr. Kean. The juntas in Niger, Mali, and Burkina Faso have
all recruited the services of the Russia/Wagner Group security
personnel and attempt to ensure regime strength.
On November 27th, Niger's junta signed a decree revoking a
2015 law that was enacted to curb smuggling migrants traveling
from African countries to create migration routes in Niger en
route to Europe.
Curbing illegal migration and Russian influence are two of
the biggest policy priorities of our European allies. French
withdrawal from these countries creates a real risk of security
vacuums forming, which will only exacerbate these issues while
providing increased space for violent extremist organizations
to strengthen.
The Accra initiative, while promising in concept, has
failed to gain support from all the involved countries. So can
you talk to us in my remaining time about how we create more
cooperation--U.S. and European cooperation to strengthen
security in the region?
Mr. Jenkins. In the small time we have we are actively
engaged with quite a few bilateral partners in a multilateral
and bilateral way in coastal West Africa, exciting partnerships
with the German government, the Dutch government, the British
government, to do everything we can to prevent the spread and
the overflow of the violent extremism into coastal West Africa.
Mr. Kean. Thank you, and I yield back my time.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. James. Thank you. I now recognize the chairman of the
House Foreign Affairs Committee, Chairman Mike McCaul, for 5
minutes.
Chairman McCaul. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thanks to the
witnesses for being here.
I've been focused on this area for a while in my career--
the Trans Sahara Partnership Act. But, obviously, the Sahel is
getting very dangerous. I mean, it's always been problematic
but with the latest events in Sudan----
I had called for a special envoy previously that would
report to the President. Would that be a helpful office to
have?
Ms. Phee. Hello, Mr. Chairman. It's good to see you.
Chairman McCaul. You too.
Ms. Phee. Thank you for the advocacy for an envoy. We
would--we would agree that having a U.S. Government envoy to
focus on Sudan would uplift the already considerable efforts by
three Ambassadors who are focused full time on Sudan as well as
the Africa Bureau, and I want you to know that's under active
and serious consideration by the administration.
Chairman McCaul. Great. Well, I look forward to working
with you and my colleagues on the other side of the aisle to
perhaps move that process forward.
It's been about--I guess about 7 months since we withdrew
and abandoned our embassy in Khartoum. That's of grave concern.
I think this conflict is getting worse, not better.
I'm worried about the atrocities committed by the Wagner
Group and their Rapid Support Forces formerly known as the
Janjaweed. These horrendous crimes include--motivate killing in
Darfur that echoes the genocide 20 years ago.
And, further, western Niger, Mali, and Burkina Faso there
have been hundreds of recorded terrorist attacks by ISIS in the
Sahel. They appear to be coordinated with a foreign terrorist
organization known as JNIM, a French acronym stands for Union
for Support of Islam and Muslims.
As I mentioned, I championed the Trans-Sahara
Counterterrorism Partnership back many years ago. Can you give
me an update on how that is working and how that's being
applied to this situation?
Ms. Phee. Mr. Chairman, when that program was first
developed with support from leaders like you it was an
innovative approach to addressing the problems in the Sahel.
But over time it became less effective, in part because of
the changing conditions on the ground and in part because the
way the program was structured we didn't optimize, I think, the
interoperability that you see here.
We have suggested to Congress that we would like to talk
with you about how to update that program. I can tell you that
both the benefits and the drawbacks of that program were
considered in the design of the Global Fragility Act and in the
policy that we developed on the basis of the GFA, the Strategy
to Promote Stability and Prevent Conflict, which--where we're
focused in coastal West Africa to prevent the expansion of the
problems in the Sahel to our friends and partners in coastal
West Africa.
Chairman McCaul. Okay. Can you tell me about--because you
have the Wagner Group trying to provide stability sort of like
a military police force and then you've got the radical
Islamists in the Sahel.
Then you have the French. What does--what does it look like
for the French now in that part of the world?
Ms. Wallander. France--French forces have been withdrawn
from Mali. They've been withdrawn from Burkina Faso and now
they are undergoing--they're in the last weeks of their full
withdrawal from Niger at the requirement of the Nigerien junta.
So that leaves----
Chairman McCaul. A vacuum.
Ms. Wallander. That leaves--well, worse than a vacuum it
leaves Wagner. It leaves Russian influence and it leaves
leaderships, certainly in Mali, that are not respecting
civilian security, safety, and in the excuse of fighting VEOs
often get civilians in their sights.
Chairman McCaul. So that vacuum is basically filled by
Wagner and the Islamic extremists?
Ms. Wallander. I think that is clearly solidly the case in
Mali. It is still on the--it's not fully developed in Burkina
Faso and in Niger. It is very concerning that we have seen
Wagner officials in speaking to the leadership in Burkina Faso
and then we are seeing Russian defense--ministry of defense
officials in Niger.
Chairman McCaul. You know, it's interesting. Prigozhin, I
think--well, when--actually the merchant of death that we
traded for the basketball player--the vape pipe--he--the
Russians sent him down to negotiate with the Wagner Group in
Africa to swear their allegiance to Putin and after they did
that within a matter of days Prigozhin was shot down out of the
sky about 2 months after his unsuccessful coup. I found that
interesting.
Do you--are you concerned about--you know, when I chaired
the Homeland Security Committee it was during the rise of ISIS
and the caliphate. Are you worried about that phenomenon
happening in the Sahel right now, and how sophisticated could
they be in terms of external operations?
Ms. Phee. One of the reasons why we have had a long-
standing security cooperation relationship with the Nigerien
armed forces was exactly because of the concern that control of
territory, freedom to operate, would--could create an even more
complicated situation if the ISIS forces and the JNIM forces in
the region believe they then have the ability to operate
externally and it's the reason why we need to continue to work
with those partners that we can work with to counter that.
Chairman McCaul. Have you seen any designs or plans of them
to aspire to external attacks or is it just more focused on in
the Sahel?
Ms. Wallander. At this point the focus of those groups is
assessed to be in the Sahel.
Chairman McCaul. Right. I just met with a lot of the top
Ukrainian military leaders and I have to say I'm always amazed
at their strength and courage and their tenacity and their
fighters.
They envision a time where moving into the future,
hopefully, when there's more success on the battlefield where
they could take the place of the Wagner Group and replace them
then I think that would be a change for the better.
But I just throw that out to you as an interesting side
note. But, anyway, I appreciate the work you do. This area has
always been tricky and troublesome and I worry that our Belt
and Road Initiative has not been successful in Africa and if
they don't have an alternative they're going to turn to other
groups like Wagner, like China, who obviously does participate
quite a bit in the African continent, and this will be the
largest continent in the world population wise in the next
decade and I think it's very important we keep our eye focused
on it.
And, finally, you know, I'll give you an update, Mr.
Chairman, on our PEPFAR negotiations. We're very committed to a
reauthorization of PEPFAR and it's a tricky process up here but
I've been up here long enough to get--to know how to get things
done and it's my intention to get this one done, too.
So with that, I yield back.
Mr. James. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I would like to
echo the chairman's sentiments. He is personally committed to
reauthorizing PEPFAR and so am I, and he is personally
committed to supporting your efforts in the African region--in
the continent of Africa to the benefit of the American people.
The chair will now recognize Ranking Member Jacobs.
Ms. Jacobs. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
So under the GFA the interagency is required to align and
integrate all relevant diplomatic, development, and security
assistance of the U.S. Government.
I understand State and USAID have not used all the
flexibility Congress has provided under existing earmark
requirements. What are the barriers to additional alignment and
what more help do you need from us?
Mr. Jenkins. Thank you very much.
I believe you're referring to the 10 percent variance on
earmarks, which we are working with our lawyers and others
across AID and State on how we can better utilize that and as
we're working right now through the budgets for the next year
we're taking that into account.
There are a lot of things that we're learning under the GFA
implementation. One of them is we still need some changes to
the authorities particularly with the peace and security
funding so that we can then actually meet the mandate of the
act and use that funding to monitor and evaluate things other
than just foreign assistance.
And one of the key things we need is a reauthorization of
both the PSF funding and also the complex crisis fund.
Ms. Jacobs. Thank you.
So support for Mali's 2015 peace accord between the
government and northern ethnic separatist groups has been a
cornerstone of U.S. policy toward the Sahel.
Yet, the accord now appears to be moribund, especially
given the resumption of hostilities in northern Mali in mid-
2023 and the Malian military seizure of Kidal, a rebel
stronghold, a goal that has eluded successive Malian
governments over the past 11 years.
Assistant Secretary Phee, do you expect the Malian military
to continue to expand its footprint in northern Mali with
Russian support? What other scenarios might emerge? What
opportunities exist for U.S. diplomats to support a political
process that could actually deliver greater stability in Mali?
Ms. Phee. I regret to tell you that I'm not very optimistic
about the situation. I believe that FAMa, the Malian armed
forces, with support from Wagner will continue to prosecute a
military campaign in Kidal and other areas of northern Mali
against Tuareg rebels.
Their inattention and actual actions to undermine the
Algiers Accords is one of the factors that affected our shift
in position toward the transitional government.
We are speaking to the Algerians and other partners to see
how we can address this challenge. But I do expect it to
continue and to worsen.
Ms. Jacobs. Thank you. Members of the committee have
received outreach from humanitarian NGO's and Sudanese civil
society about concerns about potential drastic cuts in
humanitarian assistance to Sudan.
Either Assistant Secretary Phee or Mr. Jenkins, can you
speak to that and outline how a significant cut to assistance
would impact the Sudanese people?
Mr. Jenkins. Thank you very much. As you know, for the last
few years because of supplementals the--we have been the
benefit of on humanitarian assistance particularly of a very
generous Congress.
Looking at a new reality budgetary wise, moving forward, we
also have grave concerns about what will be necessary cuts not
just in Sudan but in many if not almost all places around the
world where we have had the benefit of increased levels that we
aren't anticipating looking forward to that in the future.
Ms. Jacobs. Thank you.
Ms. Phee. May I just add? May I use this opportunity to
please ask for congressional support for the administration's
request for humanitarian assistance? The crises that we're
discussing here in the Sahel are also present elsewhere in the
globe and we urgently need the continued support of the
American people.
Ms. Jacobs. Mr. Chairman would like to know how much.
Mr. Jenkins. I would refer you to the President's budget
request on that one.
Ms. Jacobs. And last, Assistant Secretary Phee, how is the
State Department adjusting the GFA strategy in coastal West
Africa in light of the coups in the Sahel?
Ms. Phee. We are shifting the security assistance which had
initially been conceived to focus on the challenges from the
Gulf of Guinea to help them engage more effectively with the
communities on the northern border.
Ms. Jacobs. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. James. I now recognize Rep. Baird for 5 minutes.
Mr. Baird. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank the witnesses
for being here and sharing your perspective on the region and
that will be an asset for us making legislative decisions.
But my first question deals with the fact that there's been
some media reports that indicate a small Russian security
detachment of, roughly, 20 men arrived in the Burkina Faso in
November.
So, Assistant Secretary Phee, what is known about this unit
and its mission and what might such a deployment mean for U.S.
engagement?
Ms. Phee. Thank you, sir, for the question.
Since the coup occurred--the second coup, if you will,
occurred last year about this time we have been trying to
convince the Burkinabe authorities to choose a different path
than the path chosen by Mali where we can see the deteriorating
security situation.
We also are convinced that supporting what is effectively
the second coup government in Burkina Faso would not be helpful
in terms of our lessons learned about the need for a durable
solution which would require a democratic government that looks
after the rights and concerns of its citizens.
So we have been trying to have a conversation to say if
they move back to the path of democracy we're going to be able
to be a better partner on the security situation and not to
follow the Russian example.
This--so, in short, the visit of these Russian soldiers is
not welcome news and we will continue to try and press the
Burkinabe to avoid going down the Mali path.
Mr. Baird. Anyone else have a comment?
Ms. Wallander. I would just--the DOD fully supports the
Department of State in this approach and we stand ready. We
continue to hold off on security assistance but should the
leadership in Burkina Faso follow that path we would be ready
to reengage with them.
Mr. Baird. Thank you. I also serve on the Agriculture
Committee, so, Mr. Jenkins, in the past 3 years, how much U.S.
humanitarian aid has Mali, Sudan, Niger, and Burkina Faso all
received, and who determines how much aid is spent and where?
Mr. Jenkins. Thank you very much. For all of sub-Saharan
Africa in Fiscal Year 1923, USAID spent approximately $12.5
billion. Of that, $7.5 billion is development assistance and
over $4 billion of that was humanitarian assistance.
Now, how we determine how much humanitarian assistance goes
into which countries when is a rather complicated art more than
it's a science. Things are constantly changing, constantly
shifting, and especially right now with the movements of people
the way they are throughout the region we often find that with
our partners we have to chase the displaced to where they're
going.
In Sudan right now you have 7 million people displaced
alone in Sudan. You have over 3 million IDPs in the five
countries of the Sahel, all of them badly in need of
humanitarian assistance.
But it also goes beyond that. There's people that are not
displaced that also need life-giving assistance that they're
receiving right now.
Mr. Baird. So in your opinion do you feel that our USAID is
competing well with Belt and Road Initiative from China?
Mr. Jenkins. So we are the largest humanitarian donor in
the world, we're the largest humanitarian donor in Africa, and
we're the largest humanitarian donor in the Sahel.
When you look at what the Chinese provide for humanitarian
assistance it is a rounding error. So they've preferred to go
on a different tack, asking and demanding loans for long-term
development that already many on the continent have realized
that they should not have gotten into the agreements they got
into.
Meanwhile, we lead with values and principles, as the
assistant secretary said. We are the most generous humanitarian
donor on Earth by way of dollars and we'll continue to do that
with the support of Congress.
Mr. Baird. So you feel the recipients are aware of where
this support is coming from?
Mr. Jenkins. We make very, very, very sure that all of our
assistance is branded from the American people unless it's in
those rare circumstances where that puts our partners at risk.
Mr. Baird. I guess my time is up so I yield back, Mr.
Chairman.
Mr. James. Thank you, Mr. Baird.
Just a couple last questions and we'll conclude.
All witnesses, to your knowledge what U.S. security
assistance or counterterrorism cooperation remains ongoing, if
any, in countries subject to Section 7008 aid restrictions in
Mali, Niger--excuse me, or Burkina Faso?
Ms. Wallander. There are no security assistance programs
subject to 7008 ongoing in those three countries.
Mr. James. Assistant Secretary Wallander, I would actually
appreciate your feedback here. The ranking member addressed
this earlier but I just want to put a finer point on it. You've
expressed regret at the fact that forces we train may end up a
part of these coups.
But how are we changing the strategy on how we have trained
or how we're training and what are some of those lessons
learned? Because this is not only something that we have seen
in the continent of Africa but we see it around the world, that
folks who have been trained with U.S. tax dollars by U.S.
forces seem to miss the memo when it comes to the next steps.
What are we doing better? What are we learning and what do
we have to change in how we train?
Ms. Wallander. Thank you for that question. I want to
reassure you and reassure the American people that we do not
believe there is a causal relationship between the quality of
the training that our U.S. military provides to partners in--
globally and also in Africa.
In fact, in Africa since 2008 the United States between--
I'm sorry, between 2010 and 2022 the U.S. trained 21,000
African military personnel in IMET and other senior military
education programs and of those 20 were involved in coups,
which is .01 percent of those who were trained.
The focus of those training programs is not just on
military capability and leadership but on civilian control of
the military, on respect for rule of law and constitutional
order, on the requirements to serve the interests of the
people.
And so I believe the lesson learned is to refocus and
recommit to serving--for our U.S. military to serve as both a
model and as a mentor and to ensure that that is the focus of
every training program--senior military education training
program that the United States develops and executes with our
partners.
Mr. James. Yes, hopefully that will be sufficient to end
what many Americans see as a revolving door of coup leaders and
despots that are trained by American forces.
As a United States Army veteran myself it does pain me to
see my brothers and sisters put in harm's way to train who we
intend to be allies and then end up going in the opposite
direction of good governance, democracy, and human rights.
So I look forward to continuing to work with anyone--my
colleagues, the administration--for the purpose of peace and
stability, which will have a direct positive effect on the
security of American people at home and abroad.
So with that, I'd like to conclude by thanking the
witnesses for their valuable testimony and the members for
their questions. The members of the committee may have some
additional questions for the witnesses and we ask that you
respond to these in writing.
Pursuant to committee rules, all members may have 5 days to
submit statements, questions, and extraneous materials for the
record subject to the length and limitations.
Without objection, the committee stands adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 4:16 p.m., the committee was adjourned.]

APPENDIX

----------

Material Submitted for the Hearing Record

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
