- THE AGENTS OF ANTISEMITISM IN LATIN AMERICA

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

THE AGENTS OF ANTISEMITISM IN LATIN AMERICA

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON WESTERN HEMISPHERE

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

MARCH 7, 2024

__________

Serial No. 118-87

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Foreign Affairs

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available: http://www.foreignaffairs.house.gov/, http://docs.house.gov,

or http://www.govinfo.gov

____________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
56-231PDF          WASHINGTON : 2024

COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS

MICHAEL T. McCAUL, Texas, Chairman

CHRISTOPHER H. SMITH, New Jersey     GREGORY MEEKS, New York, Ranking
JOE WILSON, South Carolina               Member
SCOTT PERRY, Pennsylvania            BRAD SHERMAN, California
DARRELL ISSA, California             GERALD E. CONNOLLY, Virginia
ANN WAGNER, Missouri                 WILLIAM KEATING, Massachusetts
BRIAN MAST, Florida                  AMI BERA, California
KEN BUCK, Colorado                   JOAQUIN CASTRO, Texas
TIM BURCHETT, Tennessee              DINA TITUS, Nevada
MARK E. GREEN, Tennessee             TED LIEU, California
ANDY BARR, Kentucky                  SUSAN WILD, Pennsylvania
RONNY JACKSON, Texas                 DEAN PHILLIPS, Minnesota
YOUNG KIM, California                COLIN ALLRED, Texas
MARIA ELVIRA SALAZAR, Florida        ANDY KIM, New Jersey
BILL HUIZENGA, Michigan              SARA JACOBS, California
AUMUA AMATA COLEMAN RADEWAGEN,       KATHY MANNING, North Carolina
American Samoa                   SHEILA CHERFILUS-McCORMICK,
FRENCH HILL, Arkansas                        Florida
WARREN DAVIDSON, Ohio                GREG STANTON, Arizona
JIM BAIRD, Indiana                   MADELEINE DEAN, Pennsylvania
MICHAEL WALTZ, Florida               JARED MOSKOWITZ, Florida
THOMAS KEAN, JR., New Jersey         JONATHAN JACKSON, Illinois
MICHAEL LAWLER, New York             SYDNEY KAMLAGER-DOVE, California
CORY MILLS, Florida                  JIM COSTA, California
RICH McCORMICK, Georgia              JASON CROW, Colorado
NATHANIEL MORAN, Texas               BRAD SCHNEIDER, Illinois
JOHN JAMES, Michigan
KEITH SELF, Texas

Brenda Shields, Staff Director
Sophia Lafargue, Staff Director
------

Subcommittee on Western Hemisphere

MARIA SALAZAR, Florida, Chair
MARK GREEN, Tennessee                JOAQUIN CASTRO, Texas, Ranking
BILL HUIZENGA, Michigan                  Member
WARREN DAVIDSON, Ohio
KEITH SELF, Texas
JOHN JAMES, Michigan

GREG STANTON, Arizona
JARED MOSKOWITZ, Florida
SYDNEY KAMLAGER-DOVE, California

Ricardo Pita, Staff Director
C O N T E N T S

----------
Page

WITNESSES

Lipstadt, Hon. Deborah, Special Envoy to Monitor and Combat Anti-
Semitism, Office of the Special Envoy to Monitor and Combat
Anti-Semitism, U.S. Department of State........................     8

APPENDIX

Hearing Notice...................................................    25
Hearing Minutes..................................................    27
Hearing Attendance...............................................    28

RESPONSES TO QUESTIONS SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD

Responses to questions submitted for the record..................    29

THE AGENTS OF ANTISEMITISM IN LATIN AMERICA

Thursday, March 7, 2024

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on the Western Hemisphere,
Committee on Foreign Affairs,
Washington, DC.

The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 2:54 p.m., in
room 2172, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Maria Elvira
Salazar (chair of the subcommittee) presiding.
Ms. Salazar. The Subcommittee on the Western Hemisphere
will come to order and the purpose of this hearing is to
discuss the rise of antisemitism in Latin America and the
responses of the governments in the region to the ongoing war
in Israel and the impact of these responses on our U.S. foreign
policy objectives in the region.
And now I'm going to recognize myself for an opening
statement. So October 7th of 2023 is the day that we live in
infamy in the history of the Jewish people.
October 7th was the deadliest day for the Jews since the
Holocaust in 1945--when it ended in 1945. Since that fateful
day Latin America, what's happening in the continent, what we
are seeing is an explosion of antisemitism.
Specifically, three Latin American countries--Colombia,
Honduras, and Chile--recalled their Ambassadors to Israel
shortly after Israel began defending itself.
Bolivia cutoff diplomatic relations with Israel, completely
accusing Israel of crimes against humanity. Colombia--President
Gustavo Petro compared Israel to the Nazis saying that they
treated Gaza like the Warsaw Ghetto. In addition, Mr. Petro
said Colombia will stop buying weapons from Israel.
Honduras. The shadow president of the country Manuel
Zelaya, the husband of the actual president, said that you are
not human and a criminal if you take the side of Israel.
Brazil. President Gustavo Lula da Silva said that Israel is
repeating the Holocaust and that Israelis are the new Nazis of
this era.
Chile. President Gabriel Boric just banned Israel from
Latin America's largest aerospace fair.
Mexico. President AMLO--Lopez Obrador--recalled the Mexican
ambassador to Israel and it is supporting the persecution of
Israel in an international court.
It's obvious that for what we have--it's obvious that for
what we have seen and to what's happening in the hemisphere the
fact that in Brazil alone there has been a 1,000 percent
increase in antisemitic attacks in the last few months.
This is not the first time that these leaders,
unfortunately, have spoken or have shown their prejudice
against the State of Israel. Let me just give you another
couple of examples.
In 2014 President Petro from Colombia retweeted a comment
calling someone a Jud!a asquerosa. That means in Spanish a
disgusting Jew.
In 2019 Gabriel Boric--again, the president of Chile--
returned a jar of honey the Jewish community of that country
had sent to him in a gesture of friendship and he said, ``Why
don't you stop stealing the land of the Arabs instead?''
It is despicable, as I'm sure you agree, that the heads of
State have these type of opinions but it's even more concerning
to us that these leaders or these leaders that I just mentioned
are the favorite partners of the Biden Administration in the
Western Hemisphere.
In the meantime, other countries like Paraguay, Guatemala,
and the Dominican Republic they have condemned the Hamas attack
in the most forceful terms and have stood with Israel at
international forums around the world.
But, unfortunately, they have received little thanks from
the Biden Administration. Now, what does that say? What type of
message does that send that some of the enemies of Israel are
the friends of the American White House and that standing with
Israel does not get you too much gratitude or too much
friendship under the Biden Administration?
It is worrisome that under this administration being on
board with the woke agenda seems a little bit more important
than being on board with the right side of history.
We're supposed to support Israel around the world. Let's
fix this starting right here in our own hemisphere with our own
White House.
I yield back.
Mr. Castro. Thank you, Chairwoman.
Good afternoon, everyone.
Ms. Salazar. Now I recognize the ranking member, the
gentleman from Texas Mr. Castro, for any statements that he may
have. Thank you.
Mr. Castro. Thank you. Thank you, Chairwoman, for convening
this very timely hearing to discuss the work of the Department
of State in monitoring and countering antisemitism in Latin
America and the Caribbean, and thank you to Ambassador Lipstadt
for your important work and your service at the State
Department.
Latin America, like the United States, has been a place of
refuge for so many fleeing persecution across the world and
that shared history is reflected in the robust and deeply
rooted Jewish communities across our Western Hemisphere, in the
United States, Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Mexico, Colombia, and
so many other countries, many of whom fled persecution and
antisemitism in other parts of the world.
Too many of those Jewish communities continue to face
persecution, discrimination, and antisemitism, and I appreciate
the department's work in monitoring and combating antisemitism
in the region.
This year marks the 30th anniversary of the AMIA bombing in
Buenos Aires, Argentina, where Hezbollah killed 85 people and
injured hundreds more. This attack, at the time the deadliest
attack against the Jewish community since the Holocaust, has
left a deep and tragic legacy.
These families and the larger Jewish community deserve
justice for these acts of terror and the United States must
continue to support efforts to hold perpetrators accountable.
And in the wake of the October 7 attacks by Hamas and
Israel's subsequent response antisemitic rhetoric in Latin
America has been used recently by a variety of government
officials and social groups on both the right and the left of
the ideological spectrum.
It's, sadly, a global trend that during times of domestic
and international turmoil the scapegoating of and hatred toward
Jewish people is exploited for political gain.
Officials from both the United States and the Organization
of American States have publicly raised the alarm on rising
antisemitism in the region, calling it, quote, ``a tsunami.''
In Peru, right-wing extremists have targeted a prominent
Peruvian Jewish journalist by screaming antisemitic chants
outside his home including showing posters of rats holding bags
of money.
Just a few years ago a right-wing movement almost
catapulted a far-right candidate, the son of a German Nazi
Party member who fought in World War II and then fled to South
America, to the presidency--almost to the presidency of Chile.
Just this December Argentina's new president Javier Milei
appointed although Mr. Rodolfo Barra to be the country's lead
prosecutor. Mr. Barra is a man with a neo-Nazi past who
belonged to a right-wing group responsible for hundreds of
antisemitic actions including attacks against synagogues, a
violent riot in a Jewish neighborhood, and the murder of a
Jewish lawyer. He will now be responsible for prosecuting any
individuals involved in antisemitism or violence against
Argentina's significant Jewish community.
We have also seen left-leaning leaders in the region make
inflammatory statements as well.
Last May the Biden Administration also announced the first
ever national strategy to counter antisemitism which includes
collaboration with the Office of the Special Envoy to Monitor
and Combat Anti-Semitism, which our witness now leads.
The strategy laid out two issues for the State Department,
a report documenting promising overseas programs, policies, and
actions that counter antisemitism and working with the Treasury
Department to financial institutions to prevent hate groups
from raising money through crowdfunding websites.
During this hearing I look forward to hearing how the State
Department is working to implement the President's interagency
strategy. In drafting the interagency strategy the President
also made an important decision to acknowledge that, quote,
``there are several definitions of antisemitism which serve as
valuable tools to raise awareness and increase understanding of
antisemitism.''
The national strategy to counter antisemitism recognize
that, quote, ``in order to confront and counter antisemitism
Americans must recognize and understand it.''
It noted that, quote, ``there are several definitions which
serve as valuable tools to raise awareness and increase
understanding.''
But, critically, the strategy focused on action to counter
antisemitism rather than debate over definitions that sap
energy from urgent action.
I understand that your office, which was established before
President Biden's interagency strategy was released, solely
uses the International Holocaust Remembrance Alliance's working
definition of antisemitism and does not use other definitions
such as the Nexus document that may be appropriate to the
context of the countries that you're working in.
A core function of your office is helping other countries
including in Latin America establish mechanisms and law to
counter and effectively counter antisemitism.
I asked that in your and your office's work to follow the
President's lead and focus on holding other governments
accountable for concrete action to combat antisemitism instead
of codifying definitions.
Myself and several of my colleagues worry that countries
can take advantage of the outsized focus on definitions to
avoid taking concrete and practical action to protect Jewish
people in Latin America.
In preparing for today's hearing I was reflecting on the
diversity of cultures, races, religions, ethnicities--and
ethnicities that exist in our hemisphere and how Jewish
communities are an important pillar of our society that deserve
to live in peace and security and I look forward to working
with you on that effort.
I yield back, Chairwoman.
Ms. Salazar. Thank you, Mr. Castro.
Now, other members of the committee are reminded that
opening statements may be submitted for the record.
Today we have a witness from State Department who works on
the issues of combating antisemitism globally including Latin
America.
The Honorable Deborah Lipstadt is the special envoy to
monitor and combat Anti-Semitism for the Office of the Special
Envoy to Monitor and Combat Anti-Semitism at the State
Department, or at the Department of State.
Thank you very much for being here with us. Your full
statement will be made part of the record and I'll ask each of
you to keep your spoken remarks to 5 minutes and to the rest of
my colleagues in order to allow time for member questions.
I now recognize you, Madam Ambassador Lipstadt, for your
opening statements.

STATEMENT OF HON. DEBORAH LIPSTADT, SPECIAL ENVOY TO MONITOR
AND COMBAT ANTI-SEMITISM, OFFICE OF THE SPECIAL ENVOY TO
MONITOR AND COMBAT ANTI-SEMITISM, U.S. DEPARTMENT OF STATE

Ms. Lipstadt. Thank you very much, Chairwoman Salazar,
Ranking Member Castro, and members of the Subcommittee. I
really welcome this opportunity to discuss the increase of
antisemitism in the Western Hemisphere and the State
Department's active engagement in the region.
Anti-Semitism is more than solely a threat to Jews and
Jewish communities. But if it were just that that would be
enough. Governments have the responsibility to protect their
citizens and protect particularly members of minority and
vulnerable groups from discrimination and violence.
But antisemitism is more than just a threat to Jews. It is
a multilevel threat to well-being--to national well-being to
democracy, national security, and stability.
Today I want to talk specifically about our many efforts in
the Western Hemisphere to monitor and combat antisemitism,
which has become even more urgent, as you mentioned in your
opening statements, since October 7th.
The Jewish community organizations in Brazil recorded,
again, as you mentioned, a 961 percent increase in antisemitic
incidents during October 23 compared to the same period in
2022.
In Argentina there were more than a hundred reported
antisemitic incidents in January 2024 alone, representing a 600
percent increase compared to the same period in 2023.
The ADL also reports that synagogues, grocery stores,
streets, restaurants, and schools in Brazil, Canada, Chile,
Mexico, and Peru, amongst others, were defaced, vandalized,
received bomb threats, and targeted with gunfire.
This is only the beginning of a long list of recorded
antisemitic incidents in the region within the past few months.
The Western Hemisphere has become a key focus of our efforts,
my and my team's efforts, to combat rising global antisemitism
for quite some time.
My deputy Aaron Keyak and I have visited numerous countries
in the region since my swearing in to convey the message that
the U.S. Government takes antisemitism seriously and urges
governments, communities, law enforcement to do the same.
As part of my first international trip in office I traveled
to Argentina in July 22 to be present for the 28th anniversary
of the attacks against the Argentine Israel Mutual Association,
AMIA, a Jewish community center in Buenos Aires, which killed
85 people and injured hundreds.
We also went to Chile to meet with Jewish community
representatives, government officials, and participated in
interfaith dialog.
I might mention that until October 7th the bombing of the
AMIA building in Buenos Aires was the largest and most
significant attack on any Jewish community since the Holocaust.
Sadly, that's been eclipsed.
This past December I traveled to Canada and my deputy
finished an extensive trip to Argentina, Chile, and Brazil. I
plan on returning to the region later this year.
In Canada I met with my Canadian counterpart Special Envoy
in Preserving Holocaust Remembrance and Combating Anti-Semitism
Deborah Lyons. I met with local law enforcement, university
representatives, and the Jewish community.
In short, Jews throughout the hemisphere are not only
feeling unsafe but are now taking active measures to ensure
their safety.
For example, a third-generation Jewish deli owner in
Montreal shared that his partners implored him not to decorate
the windows of the deli for Hanukkah because they feared the
restaurant being vandalized.
A Jewish student asked me what he should tell fellow
students when they ask if it is safe to come--for them to come
to campus. We and our mission in Canada continue to work
closely with our Canadian partners.
But I also want to talk and stress our on-the-ground
observations and efforts in Latin America. Although overall
levels of violent incidents reported in Latin America are far
lower than in Europe and the United States the Jewish community
in Latin America has faced a rise in antisemitism since the
October 7th Hamas terrorist attacks.
We have seen and heard from leaders in the--from community
members--Jewish community members in the region of their deep
concern.
We have seen leaders in the region perpetuate antisemitic
tropes online and conflate criticism of Israel's policies with
anti-Jewish hatred, singling out local Jewish communities.
Now, I stress, of course, that criticism of the policies of
the state--of the government of the State of Israel are not, of
course, necessarily antisemitic.
However, holding all Jews responsible globally for policy
disagreements with Jerusalem is antisemitic. In October 2023 we
publicly called out Colombian President Petros' offensive and
inflammatory remarks comparing the Israeli government's actions
to the Hitler regime.
Recently my deputy met with a top Venezuelan opposition
leader who has faced decades of antisemitism by Maduro
supporters because of his Jewish roots. We publicly called this
out and declared support for him and others who face hatred
because of their religious or ethnic background.
We are deeply disappointed that some Latin American
countries including, as you mentioned, Bolivia have chosen to
suspend or cut diplomatic relations with Israel since the
Israel-Hamas conflict and that some others including Honduras,
Chile, and Colombia recalled their respective Ambassadors to
Israel for consultations.
We do not believe that reducing diplomatic channels works
toward our shared goal of promoting a long-term solution to the
crisis. When my deputy traveled to Chile in December 2023 he
had conversations with high-level government officials and
urged them to engage with the local Jewish community at the
highest level.
While the need for vigilance remains essential there are
also some signs that some are moving in the right direction.
Argentina has shown leadership in the fight against
antisemitism.
In addition to being the only Latin American country that
is a full member of the International Holocaust Remembrance
Alliance--IHRA--Argentina is also the first country in the
region to appoint a special representative for the fight
against antisemitism, Ambassador Fabiana Loguzzo.
My deputy had the honor of speaking alongside her and
Fernando Lottenberg, Organization of American States--OAS--
commissioner to combat antisemitism at the American Jewish
Committee Conference in Santiago in December 2023.
Their voices to educate the public and combat antisemitism
in the region are vital, especially now. We meet frequently
with Commissioner Lottenberg, the OAS and our U.S. Ambassadors
to see how we can work together.
Unfortunately, Commissioner Lottenberg does not have the
designated funding, which limits the reach of his office.
Nonetheless, I want to commend him because even with such
limited resources----
[The prepared statement of Ms. Lipstadt follows:]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6231.005

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6231.006

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6231.007

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6231.008

Ms. Salazar. Madam Ambassador, sorry I'm interrupting. You
are 3 minutes over.
Ms. Lipstadt. OK.
Ms. Salazar. And I would like to--and I have your remarks.
We can always submit them for the record.
Ms. Lipstadt. Fine. No problem.
Ms. Salazar. But we would like to give the opportunity to
the other members and to myself to start a line of questioning.
So thank you.
Ms. Lipstadt. You're welcome.
Ms. Salazar. And I have been following--I just--I'm going
to recognize myself for 5 minutes and then give the opportunity
to the rest of the committee. OK.
When you travel to these countries in Latin America you are
the American representative. You know, American--the United
States is highly regarded by all these countries. Whether they
like us or not they need us, right.
So you are the American representative. So what is it--what
are the consequences for a Petro or a Lula or a Zelaya to be
insulting Israel, one of our most important allies in the
Middle East?
Do they think that there is going to be any type of
consequences from the American government if they were to
behave that way? Because when the president of a country speaks
then that gives license, gives a patent or an open door to all
the other members of that society that hate Israel to come up
and say something or do something.
So what are the consequences?
Ms. Lipstadt. It's an excellent question.
First of all, when I go to these countries, my deputy goes
to these countries, or when I meet with their representatives
here we unequivocally indicate that such statements are out of
bounds.
When President----
Ms. Salazar. What do they respond?
Ms. Lipstadt. They listen----
Ms. Salazar. For instance, in Brazil--you went to Brazil.
You went to Chile. You didn't go to Colombia.
Ms. Lipstadt. Not yet.
Ms. Salazar. So what happened with Brazil, the most
important Latin American country in size?
Ms. Lipstadt. When President Lula made his statement
comparing Israel's actions to Hitler's----
Ms. Salazar. That's pretty bad, isn't it?
Ms. Lipstadt. I would say it's almost as bad as it gets. I
can't think of it getting much worse.
Ms. Salazar. All right. So what did you say?
Ms. Lipstadt. Well, at that point he was in Africa as was
the Secretary of State Antony Blinken.
Ms. Salazar. What did his people say?
Ms. Lipstadt. And they met, and I know that in their
meeting Secretary Blinken called him out for having said that
and in fact he did so within the context of his personal
history because as you probably--you may well know his
stepfather was a survivor of the Holocaust, the very
prominent----
Ms. Salazar. But, apparently, he has forgotten.
So cutting to the chase so what are the consequences coming
from the United States to these countries if they continue
attacking and creating this antisemitism situation in the
countries?
Ms. Lipstadt. We continue to call them out.
Ms. Salazar. That's all we do, call them out. Call them
out.
Ms. Lipstadt. Well, I'm not sure. I think privately we
indicate that this is something that is very troubling to us
and very disturbing, that we disagree with it.
Often we will call it out as having crossed the IHRA
definition and therefore being anti--no question that they are
antisemitic, and the further consequences my colleagues in the
State Department, I hope, followup--we expect followup on that.
But we let them know that this is something we take
seriously. You can't just make statements like these and think,
OK, I can get away with it.
In fact, one of the things we say in combating antisemitism
when other heads of State, foreign ministers, Ambassadors, ask
us what they should do one of the primary things we say is the
head of the government--the leaders--have to call it out
unequivocally, immediately, and without reservations.
Ms. Salazar. And you understand that those--and I agree
with what you're saying but they have been invited to the White
House and they have been treated very nicely even though some
of those leaders in Latin America, even though you're sending
that message.
So it's contradictory.
Ms. Lipstadt. Well, I would hope----
Ms. Salazar. Have you advised the White House?
Ms. Lipstadt. I don't want to speak specifically on what
advice I've given privately but what I would say is that when
we encounter them, especially if they have made such outrageous
statements as they have made and as you have indicated and I've
indicated as well, that this is not something that we find
acceptable and, in fact, as I like to talk about it--and I've
been meeting also with members of our intelligence community to
help educate them about antisemitism--that when you see
antisemitism think of it like the camel's nose under the tent.
It may seem like a small thing but there's a lot of camel
behind it. In other words, it may seem like----
Ms. Salazar. But they are the camel. They are--the
presidents are the camel.
Ms. Lipstadt. Well, they are----
[Simultaneous speaking.]
Ms. Lipstadt [continuing]. That statement--that little
statement is indicative of bad things to follow.
Ms. Salazar. All I'm saying is, and I'm sure that you
agree, is that Israel is our number-one ally. I'm not saying
that we want peace in Israel and that we want peace in the
region and that we understand that the Palestinians are going
through a very hard time at the time. We understand all that
and we--no one has the monopoly on compassion.
But I think the United States should send the message to
our allies in the Western Hemisphere that we need to be on the
same page when it comes to Israel and what we have seen lately
it's completely--a complete divergence. It's completely moving
away from what we have established for the last 50 years toward
Israel.
So is--aren't you concerned?
Ms. Lipstadt. I am--I'm deeply concerned. I'll tell you I'm
deeply concerned not just about the region but we have seen it
in Europe. We have seen it in other places.
Ms. Salazar. But let's stay with Latin America.
Ms. Lipstadt. OK. Same with Latin America. Many of the
statements which you have referred to, which I have referred
to, cross the line from criticism----
Ms. Salazar. Thank you. Cross the line. Cross the line.
Ms. Lipstadt. Cross the line from criticism----
Ms. Salazar. There are consequences when you cross the
line--that's what I'm saying--not just scolding.
Ms. Lipstadt. Well, I would hope that there will be--that
they will get the message that this is something--if they want
to work with the United States closely this is not something
that redounds to their benefit.
But it's important to recognize that criticism of Israel,
even severe criticism of Israel, is like severe criticism of
any other country. But too often in the in the recent past we
have seen that criticism morph into pure and unadulterated
antisemitism as in the examples you cited.
Ms. Salazar. Thank you very much. I'm so happy that someone
recognizes this, what's happening in the Western Hemisphere
within the State Department.
Now I recognize my friend the ranking member Mr. Castro for
5 minutes.
Mr. Castro. Thank you.
Ambassador, once again, thank you for your testimony today
and thank you for your work.
As I mentioned in my opening remarks, the Biden
Administration released the U.S. National Strategy to Counter
Anti-Semitism last May and can you give us a status update on
where we are in implementing the parts of the strategy that
refer to the State Department and to your office?
Ms. Lipstadt. Yes. We are--the strategy, as you probably
well know, not only was an extensive strategy but came with
calendar benchmarks of when certain things should be done.
My office submitted our report to the White House
indicating where we are and what we have done is we have
conducted very extensive travel to these various countries, and
when I go--I was--just recently I returned from Germany and
from London.
When we go to these countries we meet with government
officials, we meet with NGO's, and we meet with members of the
Jewish community. We meet with students--Jewish students on
campus, non-Jewish students, et cetera, and we indicate to them
we take this seriously.
We take this seriously because I said--as I said in my
opening statement, first of all, every person has a right to
live in security.
A job of a government is to be, if I can draw a parallel,
like a parent in loco parentis. Keep the kids safe. That's what
a parent's job is, to make sure that your child is safe.
Everybody has different definitions of safe and you've got to
keep the Jewish community safe.
But recognize that when you see antisemitism it's not like
the camel's nose. It's like the yellow flashing amber light
before the light turns red.
If there's antisemitism chances are there's going to be
other hatreds. Chances are there are going to be bad things
that follow.
We have taken that on. We do it very vigorously and we do
it unapologetically.
Mr. Castro. Thank you.
Ambassador, the President's National Strategy to Counter
Anti-Semitism states that, quote, ``There are several
definitions of antisemitism which serve as valuable tools to
raise awareness and increase understanding of antisemitism,''
unquote.
Your work is international and there may be expressions of
antisemitism in other countries that are rarely seen in the
United States and it's important that we recognize that.
Is your engagement with countries in Latin America--in your
engagement with countries in Latin America how are you working
with partners to identify how antisemitism manifests itself in
the local context of those nations?
Ms. Lipstadt. Whenever we travel to any country including
to Latin America--as I mentioned, I'll be returning to
Argentina specifically to be present on the 30th anniversary of
the AMIA bombing. I was there on the 28th anniversary. I saw
what an impact my presence had on the community.
I've been going. I've been urging others to go. I said this
is a forgotten tragedy. This is something that we recognize,
and 2 years earlier there was the bombing of the Israeli
embassy in Buenos Aires.
It's been too easily forgotten and it's got to be
acknowledged, especially since we know--we know pretty--in
various certitude who brought it about and the persons who have
never been brought to justice and that's something that
disturbs America greatly.
We go to these countries but before we go we talk
extensively to embassies and to consulates--our embassies, our
consulates, our locally employed staff. We very often reach out
to the Jewish community. We want to hear before we go.
Before I went to Chile I met with members of the Chilean
Jewish community who were here in Washington. I met--one of the
first meetings I had was with them when I arrived there. What
are their concerns--what are they seen on the ground.
We don't want to just meet in, you know, the rarefied
atmosphere of government offices but we want to meet with
people on the ground and hear their experiences.
Mr. Castro. Ambassador, you made two very important and
related points, first, that there can be legitimate criticism
of the Nation of Israel just as there is criticism of nations
around the world for different policy reasons and other
reasons, but, second, that disagreement or discontent, even
strong disagreement with Israel, should not translate into
antisemitism or hatred or violent actions against Jewish
people, whether it's in New York City, in Paris, in Buenos
Aires, Mexico City or anywhere around the world.
So can you speak to how your office addresses
distinguishing between antisemitism and legitimate criticism of
the actions of the government of Israel?
Ms. Lipstadt. Again, I'd buttress your point and the
chairwoman's point. Legitimate criticism--if legitimate
criticism of the State of Israel was antisemitism those
hundreds of thousands of Israelis who spent every Saturday
night on the street protesting the proposed judicial reforms
would be anti-Semites which, of course, is ludicrous.
It's when people march on the street, whether it's in
London or New York or any other major city--I just came back
from London so that's why--and chant ``Globalize the
Intifada.''
Globalize? You know, global, that means go after Jews. When
they say things like happened in Hunter College in New York
City on the Upper East Side, the city university college, just
a few days ago students stood in front of the entrance to the
campus and chanting ``Jews, Jews, you must decide--do you
support genocide.''
They didn't make a pretext--you know, Israel, Zion. They
called them Jews. You know, they were quite obvious. When
synagogues are trashed, when girls basketball teams from a
Jewish school that when the game has to be called because the
other team is shouting and pushing to free Palestine that's not
being pro-Palestinian.
That's not even being pro-Hamas, though I don't--I have a
hard time that someone could be pro-Hamas. That's been
antisemitic, and we have seen this conflict allow for the anti-
Semites to crawl out of their holes to engage in overt
antisemitism and it is very disturbing.
Most disturbing, as I said in my opening statement, is it's
forcing Jews in many places including in our own country to
change their lifestyle.
Parents say to kids, don't go in the street with the
yarmulke--put on a baseball cap. Take off your Jewish star and
put it under your shirt.
In October supporters of Hamas and groups affiliated with
Hamas called for a day of rage on a Friday--it was about 2
weeks after the beginning of the war--and parents who sent
their kids the Jewish schools kept their kids home.
In France it was some--over 70 percent. In England it was a
little less than that. In this country too there were people
who decided to keep their children home.
I'm not criticizing them. It's one thing for me to give
testimony; it's another thing for me to decide on the safety of
my children. And nothing happened on the day but from the
perspective of the people who called for a day of rage it was a
roaring success because people felt, can I depend on my
government to support me? Are we a failed state?
It created doubts about democracy. It created doubts about
stability. It's a very disturbing development. We see it in
this country. We see in other countries.
I'll give you an example from this country and from this
atmosphere. In the beginning--end of December, beginning of
January approximately 200 American synagogues received phone
calls that there were bombs and threats. Many sent the--
especially if they had a preschool they sent the kids home.
The FBI determined that those phone calls came from outside
the United States. In Paris there were paintings of Jewish
stars on apartment buildings where Jews lived or just random.
We now know that those instructions came from people from
Moldova who then left Paris and went back we assume to Moldova.
In other words, antisemitism has become a tool in the hands
of countries that hate democracies, in the hands of
authoritarian countries to stir up doubts. In Yiddish they call
it a kochleffel, a cooking spoon, to stir up the pot.
And if I can destabilize your country, if I can make not
just Jews but others feel there's something wrong here I've
accomplished what I wanted to do and that's one of the
objectives in my office because, of course, we are at the State
Department and our remit is overseas. We focus overseas.
But the other things we have learned for many of the
organizations that track this online and in other ways that
there's a very quick highway between overseas and our country.
Ms. Salazar. Thank you for answering that question.
I would like every single witness to be this willing to
speak. I mean, it's a rare occasion. So thank you for sharing
with us your thoughts and your opinions and your experiences.
I now recognize Representative Huizenga for 5 minutes.
Mr. Huizenga. Thank you, Madam Chair, and Ambassador, I'm
sorry you're employed, quite honestly. I wish it wasn't the
case.
My colleague from Texas--I wrote this down, and I know you
don't view this exclusively--but he said, you know, sometimes
we're seeing things overseas that are rarely seen here in the
United States.
Interestingly enough, on my way over to this hearing I
walked outside and had to go through the barricades that have
gone up where I witnessed some pro-Palestinian protesters on
the corner screaming ``F you'' to some Jewish protesters across
the street. That was half an hour ago.
And you were just talking about what's happening on our
U.S. campuses. I've got a very good friend, a former colleague
who I used to work with, who was employed up here on the House
at one point where his two daughters who are in college or
college age they put their--they've put their star of Davids
away and no longer wear them on their necklaces because they're
afraid of what's happening on their college campus.
We are seeing a woeful lack of education that's both here
and in the United States, and pulled some numbers. It's 31
percent. This is according to the Conference on Jewish Material
Claims Against Germany survey on awareness of the Holocaust.
Thirty-one percent of respondents here in the United States
did not know that 6 million Jews were murdered in the
Holocaust. Twenty-two of Millennials had never even heard of
the Holocaust, and in Canada--you had mentioned Canada--it's
even worse.
Fifty-four percent of all respondents did not know that 6
million Jews had been slaughtered and the same 22 percent of
Millennials had never heard of the Holocaust.
I mean, clearly, there's a lack of education happening
whether it's here in the United States and Canada and other
places. And Canada kind of cuts home--close to home for me and
here's why. My wife was born in Canada. Her parents fled the
Netherlands after World War II after German occupation.
I happened to be the chair of the U.S.-Canada
Interparliamentary Group and in fact I'm going to be meeting
with the government of Quebec here in a little while after this
hearing.
And when you--you brought up the Jewish deli owner in
Montreal. It brought me back to college. Early in my college
career I had made friends with a couple of folks on a trip.
They invited me to come up to Montreal. They were Jewish.
I'm forever--they were in the textile business--I'm forever
thankful to them because they taught me what a really truly
good bagel was for the first time and Montreal is sort of the
center of that, right. I mean, they claim they----
Ms. Lipstadt. Don't tell that to a New Yorker.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Huizenga. I know. I know. But they claim they invented
them but really perfected them.
But in all seriousness, you know, how can we counter these
apparent surges in Holocaust denial and distortion here in the
Western Hemisphere?
And clearly, clearly, we have got young people that are
susceptible to this and I'm curious what your assessment is on
actors like Hamas and Hezbollah and Iran and others that for
this--using a spike in antisemitism as an opportunity to engage
in the Western Hemisphere here especially with young people.
Ms. Lipstadt. First of all, I'm glad you started by saying
I'm sorry you have a job or I'm sorry you engage. I sometimes
say that I work in a growth industry. Business is booming and
I'm the only one in the U.S. Government hoping for a recession.
You know, and I say it only minimally jocularly because
it's a very bad time. What we are seeing most disturbing--you
know, in many places it's violence, attacks.
But when a people feels compelled to go underground, to
camouflage themselves if they can, then something is very, very
wrong. How do we counter----
Mr. Huizenga. Can I ask--I'm going to ask this. So what are
you seeing as when you're traveling and your deputies are
traveling with the media? You know, both local media there--I
mean, a lot of us have opinions about our media here in the
United States.
But are they really portraying these antisemitic incidents
by both State and nonState actors? I mean, are they--is it an
active conversation in a number of these countries?
Because I'm extremely disturbed, and the chair had brought
up, you know, Brazil and Honduras and other places throughout
Latin America. You know, we just talked about Canada as well
and I have family in Canada yet. My wife's family is still
there.
Ms. Lipstadt. My answer would be it depends where you go,
and to focus back on Latin America we have seen--in fact, the
State Department issued a report in November or a statement in
November 2023 on the Kremlin's effort to covertly spread
disinformation in Latin America.
And in conversations with--I was just at the Munich
Security Conference and someone said, ``Well, why are you at
the security conference,'' and I said, ``It's very simple.
Anti-Semitism is a threat to the security particularly of
democracies but virtually to any country, but certainly of
democracies.''
And what we have seen and according to the State Department
report and in conversations with executives from various online
companies who were at the conference that Russia has bought up,
taking control of legitimate--you know, various places where
the local media has collapsed, as it's happened in many parts
of our country--small newspapers, local newspapers--and they
publish the weather and the sports results and whether the Main
Street is being paved over but then they also publish anti-
American, pro-Iran, whatever it might be, propaganda.
Mr. Huizenga. Yes. And I know--I appreciate the light gavel
from the chair. I know the ranking member went a little long,
too, but this is an important issue and I want to touch on one
last thing. I think I wrote it down.
I believe you said you meet with our U.S. Ambassadors as
you travel, correct?
Ms. Lipstadt. I do.
Mr. Huizenga. Yes. OK. Great. I'm glad to hear that. I'm
concerned about our own Ambassador to Brazil Elizabeth Bagley.
She has had some documented very hateful comments she's made
about Jews and my understanding from my Senate friends it
nearly derailed her Senate confirmation.
Does her track record of those types of comments--has that
somehow affected her ability or the U.S. ability to forcefully
condemn da Silva's comparison of Gaza to the Holocaust?
Ms. Lipstadt. What I've seen from our posts is that post
Brazil--that embassy Brazil takes this issue very seriously. I
know that Ambassador Bagley addressed some of these issues in
her confirmation hearings and I don't want to--you know,
that's----
Mr. Huizenga. I guess I'm more concerned about we having a
forceful voice when we see this, when trade partners and allies
and certainly the economic activity that we have between
these--our countries.
We should have some influence over that. I want to make
sure our Ambassadors are not just speaking out. I want them to
be forcefully screaming about this.
Ms. Lipstadt. I think--I think they are. I think they also
are meeting privately. I'll give you an example of a case I
know better, Chile.
Our Ambassador there, Ambassador Meehan arrived in Chile on
just the day after, I believe it was, but very close proximity
to when President Boric refused to--when the Israeli--new
Israeli Ambassador came to the palace to present his
credentials and Boric refused to see him--an action not just
don't come now, come later but of major political significance.
Our then newly arrived Ambassador before she had even
presented her papers had a Friday night dinner with him and
with our charge d'affaires----
Ms. Salazar. Thank you, Madam Ambassador. Sorry I'm
interrupting but I need to recognize Representative Manning for
5 minutes. Thank you.
Ms. Manning. Thank you so much to my friends Chairman
Salazar and Ranking Member Castro, and to my dear friend,
Ambassador Deborah Lipstadt, for your incredible service and
for being here today.
As co-chair of the House bipartisan Task Force to Combat
Anti-Semitism I deeply appreciate the commitment of the members
on this committee on both sides of the aisle to address the
shocking rise of antisemitism we're seeing not just in our own
country but around the world including the Western Hemisphere.
What we are seeing around the globe is shocking. It's
pervasive. It is terrifying.
And, Ambassador, you and I have been working on this issue
for many, many years and I have to tell you the task has never
seemed more daunting.
As you and I both know, many countries in the Western
Hemisphere and around the world look to the United States for
leadership in the fight for human rights and against hate and
antisemitism and we in this country took a major step with the
release of the first ever U.S. National Strategy to Counter
Anti-Semitism last May and this was done with bipartisan and
bicameral support.
And given the rise of antisemitism--it was bad before
October 7th. It has been catastrophic since October 7th. Would
you agree that Congress should now codify and enforce the
National Strategy on a bipartisan basis to ensure that future
administrations continue to pursue a national level approach to
countering antisemitism?
Ms. Lipstadt. Thank you, Representative Manning.
You stressed--and I know the bipartisan nature of this
fight. Both in this chamber on this side of the Hill and on the
other side of the Hill I have found tremendous bipartisan
support from members and I think what it demonstrates is their
recognition, yours as well as members of this subcommittee, the
ubiquitous, the free-flowing nature of antisemitism.
Anti-Semitism shouldn't be looked at, like, on a spectrum
from right to left but as a horseshoe where the extreme--the
two extremes come and meet together and what I have discovered
in my work and long before I entered the diplomatic corps was
that I have friends who are on the left, progressives, and they
see antisemitism on the right and what they're seeing is
accurate. And I have friends on the right who see it on the
left and what they're seeing is accurate.
The problem is neither one sees it standing next to them
from their compatriots who share all their other views, and I
think it's really important if we're not going to weaponize and
turn antisemitism into a political weapon that we continue the
bipartisan work that we have seen both here in the House and in
the Senate and the bipartisan support that I've received.
Ms. Manning. Thank you. I think what you've said is so
important for all of us to hear and let me just say I have
drafted a comprehensive bill to codify the portions of the
National Strategy that are assigned to Congress.
I would love to see my colleagues on both sides of the
aisle co-sponsor my bill so that we can do more than just
condemn antisemitism in hearings.
I want to go back to the Western Hemisphere. I was shocked
by the Brazilian President Lula's comments speaking at the
African Union summit in Ethiopia when he said, as you know,
what is happening in the Gaza Strip with Palestinian people has
no parallel in historical moments. In fact, it did exist when
Hitler decided to kill Jews.
As you know, the State Department has for years used the
IHRA definition which includes contemporary examples of
antisemitism such as drawing comparisons of contemporary
Israeli policy to that of the Nazis.
I'm concerned about President Lula's statement. What does
the State Department have to say about this sort of antisemitic
rhetoric?
Ms. Lipstadt. Well, it's clear that his statement tripped
the IHRA definition of what constitutes antisemitism. I know
that the Secretary spoke to him directly when they were at the
summit and I know that the spokesmen at the State Department
amplified the State Department--the Secretary's comments and
repeated them.
I also know that there--on the ground there has been a
significant body of people--of political leaders, government
leaders--who have taken issue with this statement. But it's
very disturbing. It's a trope that we're hearing and it's
antisemitism, as is denial.
You know, someone earlier mentioned Holocaust denial.
Holocaust denial took two decades to get any traction at all.
October 7th denial took 2 days, 3 days, before people were
saying it didn't happen, it's a lie, it's made up and that's
extremely disturbing.
Ms. Manning. Thank you. Let me close by saying I have been
to the site of the AMIA bombing in Argentina. I have seen what
antisemitism can do to destroy lives and communities.
It cannot be tolerated and I think it's important to note
that those who perpetrated that bombing have never been held
accountable, and although their actions have been traced to
Iran, Iran has never been held accountable for that bombing
either.
Thank you so much and I yield back.
Ms. Lipstadt. Maybe you'll join me in July at the 30th
anniversary. Let's get a double date.
Ms. Manning. Just invite me. I'm always happy to travel.
[Laughter.]
Ms. Salazar. Thank you.
I now recognize Representative Stanton for 5 minutes.
Mr. Stanton. Thank you very much, Madam Chair, Ranking
Member Castro, my friend Representative Manning, who's a leader
in this Congress on so many issues but especially on
antisemitism.
Thank you for your leadership and thank you to Special
Envoy Lipstadt for being here today. Your job is critically
important now more than ever.
Special Envoy, in your statement you said that the
antisemitic incidents since October have increased by over 900
percent in Brazil, over 600 percent in Argentina. It's tragic.
To what extent have political leaders in Latin American
countries committed to protecting Jewish communities or spoken
out against antisemitism and violence?
Ms. Lipstadt. Certain countries have and have spoken out
directly, as was mentioned earlier, but other countries have
not and have engaged in statements that if not overtly
antisemitic come very close to the line of antisemitism and we
have been--we are disturbed by this.
We take issue with it publicly and privately and sometimes
private admonitions, though they're not seen by the public, are
even stronger to acknowledge that this is unacceptable.
Mr. Stanton. Thank you.
And has been discussed throughout this hearing we know that
antisemitism is not a new phenomenon in Latin America.
Tragically, this year does mark 30 years since the truck bomb
destroyed the AMIA Jewish Community Center in Buenos Aires
killing 85, wounding 300 people.
Iran has been accused of directing Hezbollah to carry out
this attack yet no one has been brought to justice. Since that
time Iranian influence in Latin America has only grown through
its economic and political ties to--with Bolivia, Cuba,
Nicaragua, Venezuela. More recently Iran has looked to bolster
its outreach through media content geared for regional
audiences.
Special Envoy, what can be done to inhibit Iran's effort to
install its narrative in Latin America?
Ms. Lipstadt. I'm glad you're asking about this. The United
States is committed to countering Iran's malign influence and
Iran's agent Hezbollah, which brings us back to the Middle
East.
The single--as we have mentioned earlier, the single
deadliest attack in more than half a century, the AMIA bombing,
underscored Hezbollah's global ambitions and is a clear example
of Iran's support of international terrorism.
High-level Iranian government officials were directly
implicated in the attack and Hezbollah carried it out at the
direction of the Iranian government, and it is deeply
disturbing to us at the State Department particularly but not
only in my office no one responsible for the attack has been
brought to justice.
The United States believes all Argentines deserve to have
those responsible held accountable for this despicable and
cowardly act.
When I was in Argentina and I spoke with government
officials I called on them. I said, you'll never--it hangs like
a lodestone over you, this unresolved--we know who did it. You
know who did it. They must be brought to justice even or
especially 30 years after it happened.
Mr. Stanton. What are the implications of Iran and
Hezbollah's alliances with certain governments and political
groups in Latin America, especially for local Jewish
communities?
Ms. Lipstadt. It's very disturbing--very, very disturbing.
We see the tentacles of these relationships, this--whether it's
overt. More often than not it's undercover, online.
Media influences terrorism and it is a threat to the Jewish
community and it is a destabilizing force particularly, as I
said earlier, but not only for democracies. They are not
interested in seeing thriving democracies and antisemitism
becomes the pincer, the arrowhead for that attack.
Mr. Stanton. The 2023 U.S. National Strategy to Counter
Anti-Semitism require that the State Department and your office
report on promising overseas programs and actions that counter
antisemitism.
The report was issued in September 2023. Whether from the
report or from your own work in the region please share some
notable programs, policies, and actions countering antisemitism
from Latin America that you would like to highlight.
Ms. Lipstadt. Let me focus on something I mentioned earlier
but I want to stress it again because it's possible that this
committee and members of this committee could have an influence
here.
The OAS has appointed a commissioner, Fernando Lottenberg,
to handle this. He is very active. He is terrific. He's become
a real partner to my office. We consult with him all the time
to get a feel for what's going on on the ground. He suffers
from virtually no budget and virtually no staff. He needs
support.
We have met with the secretary general of the OAS--I just
met with him about 2 weeks ago--who committed to furthering
that support and enhancing his staff, enhancing his support.
The Secretary General of the OAS said to me antisemitism is
not only an attack but it works against. He said if you have an
economic problem in a country and you blame it on the Jews,
first of all, you've enhanced the threat to Jews. Second of
all, you haven't solved the economic problem.
So I would urge that in your meetings, your consultations
with members of the leadership of the OAS, you, A, compliment
Commissioner Lottenberg for the work he's done on this and urge
that his position be institutionalized and he get the proper
support.
Mr. Stanton. Thank you very much. I hope there's a strong
bipartisan showing at the recognition of the 30 years since
that tragic bombing in Argentina.
So thank you for your leadership. I yield back.
Ms. Salazar. Thank you, Representative.
And I want to thank the Ambassador for a magnificent job
that you're doing. We very much appreciate the fact that you
are not only an ambassador in title but you're an ambassador in
words and in actions and that you are sending a very strong
message to those who may not feel it.
But the only thing that we could do is force them to behave
well and not to send the wrong message to their populations in
Latin America that being antisemitic or anti-Jew is OK. So I
think it's----
Ms. Lipstadt. Thank you. Thank you very much. I appreciate
this opportunity.
Ms. Salazar. No, the opportunity to talk to you and to
please continue sending that right message because, as I said
at the beginning, I know how the Latin American countries feel
when they have an American representative from the U.S.
Government and even though they may not agree with what you're
saying or what you're demanding from them they think about it
twice before not going in favor of what the message that you're
sending.
So it's a duty from the Biden Administration and you being
the representative of the White House and sending that message
to Latin America. It's despicable what's happening with Petro
or with Lula or with Boric.
You can simply--you cannot say that about our number-one
ally, and we understand that the Palestinians do have their
rights, too. We're not saying that.
But you cannot solve one--you cannot help one by attacking
the other. We have got to help both. So I thank----
Ms. Lipstadt. My office looks forward to working with you
in any way we can.
Ms. Salazar. Of course, and we are delighted to do that,
Madam.
Ms. Lipstadt. Thank you.
Ms. Salazar. I thank the witnesses for their valuable
testimony and the members for their questions. The members of
the subcommittee may have some additional questions for the
witness so we will ask them to respond to them in writing.
I now recognize my friend, the ranking member Mr. Castro,
if he has any closing remarks at this hour.
Mr. Castro. I just want to say, Ambassador, thank you so
much for your work and please let us know how we can support
you in a bipartisan way.
Ms. Lipstadt. Thank you.
Ms. Salazar. So pursuant to committee rules all members may
have 5 days to submit statements, questions, and extraneous
materials for the record subject to the length limitations,
obviously.
Without objection, the committee stands adjourned. Thanks
again.
[Whereupon, at 3:53 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]

APPENDIX
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

RESPONSES TO QUESTIONS SUBMTTED FOR THE RECORD
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
