- EXAMINING THE FISCAL YEAR 2024 STATE DEPARTMENT DIVERSITY EQUITY INCLUSION AND ACCESSIBILITY BUDGET

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

EXAMINING THE FISCAL YEAR 2024
STATE DEPARTMENT DIVERSITY
EQUITY INCLUSION AND
ACCESSIBILITY BUDGET

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT AND ACCOUNTABILITY

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

June 13, 2023

__________

Serial No. 118-30

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Foreign Affairs

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available: http://www.foreignaffairs.house.gov/, http://docs.house.gov,

or http://www.govinfo.gov

______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

53-286PDF                 WASHINGTON : 2024

COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS

MICHAEL T. MCCAUL, Texas, Chairman

CHRISTOPHER H. SMITH, New Jersey     GREGORY MEEKS, New York, Ranking
JOE WILSON, South Carolina               Member
SCOTT PERRY, Pennsylvania      BRAD SHERMAN, California
DARRELL ISSA, California      GERALD E. CONNOLLY, Virginia
ANN WAGNER, Missouri      WILLIAM KEATING, Massachusetts
BRIAN MAST, Florida      AMI BERA, California
KEN BUCK, Colorado      JOAQUIN CASTRO, Texas
TIM BURCHETT, Tennessee      DINA TITUS, Nevada
MARK E. GREEN, Tennessee      TED LIEU, California
ANDY BARR, Kentucky      SUSAN WILD, Pennsylvania
RONNY JACKSON, Texas      DEAN PHILLIPS, Minnesota
YOUNG KIM, California      COLIN ALLRED, Texas
MARIA ELVIRA SALAZAR, Florida      ANDY KIM, New Jersey
BILL HUIZENGA, Michigan      SARA JACOBS, California
AMATA COLEMAN-RADEWAGEN, American    KATHY MANNING, North Carolina
Samoa      SHEILA CHERFILUS-MCCORMICK,
FRENCH HILL, Arkansas          Florida
WARREN DAVIDSON, Ohio      GREG STANTON, Arizona
JIM BAIRD, Indiana      MADELEINE DEAN, Pennsylvania
MICHAEL WALTZ, Florida      JARED MOSKOWITZ, Florida
TOM KEAN, JR., New Jersey      JONATHAN JACOBS, Illinois
MIKE LAWLER, New York      SYDNEY KAMLAGER-DOVE, California
CORY MILLS, Florida      JIM COSTA, California
RICH MCCORMICK, Georgia      JASON CROW, Colorado
NATHANIEL MORAN, Texas      BRAD SCHNEIDER, Illinois
JOHN JAMES, Michigan
KEITH SELF, Texas

Brendan Shields, Staff Director

Sophia Lafargue, Staff Director

------

Subcommittee on OVERSIGHT AND ACCOUNTABILITY

BRIAN MAST, Florida, Chair

SCOTT PERRY, Pennsylvania            JASON CROW, Colorado, Ranking
DARRELL ISSA, California                 Member
TIM BURCHETT, Tennessee      DINA TITUS, Nevada
FRENCH HILL, Arkansas      COLIN ALLRED, Texas
MICHAEL WALTZ, Florida      ANDY KIM, New Jersey
CORY MILLS, Florida      SHEILA CHERFILUS-MCCORMICK, Florida
NATHANIEL MORAN, Texas      MADELEINE DEAN, Pennsylvania

Sophia Lafargue, Staff Director

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page

WITNESSES

Abercrombie-Winstanley, Gina, Chief Diversity and Inclusion
Officer, Department of State...................................     4

APPENDIX

Hearing Notice...................................................    45
Hearing Minutes..................................................    46
Hearing Attendance...............................................    47

EXAMINING THE FISCAL YEAR 2024
STATE DEPARTMENT DIVERSITY
EQUITY INCLUSION AND
ACCESSIBILITY BUDGET

Tuesday, June 13, 2023

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Oversight and
Accountability,
Committee on Foreign Affairs,
Washington, DC.

The committee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:04 a.m., in
room 210, House Visitor Center, Hon. Brian Mast (chairman of
the subcommittee) presiding.
Mr. Mast. All right. The Subcommittee on Oversight and
Accountability will come to order. The purpose of this hearing
is to examine the Fiscal Year 2024 State Department Diversity,
Equity, Inclusion, and Accessibility Budget, and I now
recognize myself for an opening statement.
What we are discussing is the budget of the office that is
essentially the filter for all hiring and retention at the
State Department, the Office of Diversity, Equity, Inclusion,
and Accessibility. I believe that this office has a clever name
that uses strong emotional words, diversity, equity, inclusion,
but, functionally, does the opposite of what America has always
stood for, which is very simply the best man, the best woman,
for the job. And I believe that because of what I have heard
from this office, what I have read from this office, and what I
hear about this office from employees at the State Department
that, instead of simply looking for the best man or woman for
the job, this office is giving people the impression or giving
many people outside of the State Department the sense that it
is looking for a preferred race or, at minimum, not white, that
it is looking for a preferred religion or, at minimum, not
Christian, or that it is looked for a preferred sexual
orientation or identity or, at minimum, not straight male.
This office tries to justify what I have literally heard
people call bigotry by saying the State Department needs to
look more like America. Let me be clear in my beliefs: no part
of our government, including the State Department, should look
any certain way. It should reflect hard work, loyalty to
America, patience, willingness to sacrifice, a sense of duty,
consistency, honor, discipline, confidence. Those are the
traits that all hiring should be based on. To hire or not hire,
to promote or not promote, based in any part upon appearance is
wrong and un-American.
Before Joe Biden was sworn into office, before he was even
elected, he made the decision that he would hire based on race,
gender, and sexual orientation. He said I'll appoint the first
black woman to the Supreme Court. He pledged I commit that I
will pick a woman to be vice president. There's nothing wrong
with appointing a black woman to the Supreme Court or as a
candidate for vice president, but there's something
fundamentally wrong by saying if you look Latino, if you look
Asian, if you look Native American, if you look white or male,
then you need not apply.
My life has been heavily influenced by my time in combat.
Thank God that we did not have a DEIA officer in my platoon.
The only requirement everyday was to be the best, and, if you
weren't, then you go back to the needs of the Army; it was that
simple. And we ranked among the United States Army's most
effective, committed, and lethal forces, and I could say that
about my colleague to my left, as well.
Today, we have before us Ambassador Gina Abercrombie-
Winstanley, the Chief Diversity and Inclusion Officer for the
State Department. Ma'am, I believe that your office is
mandating division within the State Department. I could spend
the next 2 hours sharing the statements that you have made or
that your office has made, but I am going to give just a couple
of the highlights. ``Diversity includes everything. The purpose
is not simply to put another group at the top of the pyramid,
but visible diversity is necessary but insufficient.''
Another quote, ``This is a European-American burden to get
rid of this poison.'' Another quote, ``We have to call spades
spades. Primarily, European American men, that is who have the
vast majority of senior positions, and that does not come about
through merit.'' Another quote, ``When you are putting together
panels of officers to consider for positions, that list better
be diverse.''
You said that we need to try to level the playing field to
get more candidates from a wider variety of backgrounds. State
Department, as a result, has decided to do away with the
requirement to pass the Foreign Service Officer Test. You
literally do not have to pass the FSO Test to become an FSO. I
would ask somebody to name to me another profession where you
can fail the qualifying exam and still get the job. By the way,
I have read practice FSO tests and the information question
given in there is not unimportant information.
In my opinion, you have made diversity or, as I will call
it, identity a core precept for Foreign Service officers that
is equal to their ability to demonstrate leadership, so
leadership is as important how you identify. You have decided
that a key factor for promotion at the State Department is how
well an individual falls in line with that agenda. If an
employee uses the wrong pronouns, good luck getting promoted.
Instead, you're going to get a mark on your record.
The supporting information of this is Stated in the DEIA
Strategic Plan saying this: Establishing the advancement of
DEIA as an element for all employees as a part of their job
performance criteria, their career advancement opportunities,
and senior performance pay. That's DEIA as an element for all
employees.
Ma'am, I know that you want good people working for the
State Department, but, to require that those good people first
look a certain way, it is not what I fought for, it is
certainly not what I have friends of any color that have died
for. And in that, I look forward to hearing your comments in
response to what I brought up and what other members of this
Committee will bring up.
In that, I would like to recognize Ranking Member Crow for
his opening statement.
Mr. Crow. Thank you, Chairman Mast. Well, I have some
prepared remarks here, but I am not going to read those
because, frankly, I was so appalled by the Chairman's opening
remarks, I need to address it.
Those who want to talk about merit also want to ignore
history of this country. They want to ignore the fact that the
playing field is not level for vast swaths of our country
because that is not a convenient fact for them. They want to
talk about merit as if our history and the institutional
barriers that exist for vast swaths of our country do not
exist. But they do.
We need to have an honest conversation here about the value
of diversity, about the barriers that exist for vast swaths of
our country, and how we can realize our full potential in every
respect. And that is the conversation that I look forward to
and am anxious to have.
None of this is a box-checking exercise. I do not view the
Office of Diversity and Inclusion, I do not view the role of
the first-ever Chief Diversity and Inclusion Officer and
certainly not your very long and important and incredible
career, Ambassador Abercrombie-Winstanley, as anything
tantamount to how it was characterized by the Chairman just
now.
I, too, served in combat. I led a platoon of paratroopers
in the invasion of Iraq, and it was a platoon that represented
this country: black, white, Asian, Hispanic, straight, gay,
rich, poor, rural kids, urban kids, farmers, ranchers. We came
from everywhere. And when we came together and tapped into the
full strength of that diversity, we were greater than the sum
of our parts. We were a team that trusted each other, that
fought together, that survived together, that represented
America, and as an illustration that when we do tap into our
full strength and potential as a nation we are at our best.
So, no, this is not a box-checking exercise. Whether we are
talking about our national security, whether we are talking
about our foreign policy, or we are talking about our
diplomacy, we do not serve the American people unless we reduce
institutional barriers, whether we recognize them, and whether
we tap into the full talent of our Nation. That is what this is
about.
The rest of the world sees it, too. Since this is a Foreign
Affairs Committee that has oversight of the State Department,
let's talk about that. The way we represent ourselves to the
world, the way we present ourselves to the world, and the
people that we send out to represent our Nation also matters
because the world sees themselves in so many ways in America.
And we have to ask ourselves are we presenting ourselves as we
are? Are we presenting all of America to the world? And if we
are not, we also are not realizing our full potential, we also
are not putting our best foot forward. That is what this is
about, and I will not allow this to be pulled into the weeds to
try to become a game of gotcha. There is a broader conversation
that can and must be had today and everyday about the important
role of this office, about the important work that you do, and
I am ready and willing to have that.
Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Mast. Other members of the Committee are reminded that
opening statements may be submitted for the record.
We are pleased to have the distinguished witness before us
today on this important topic. The Honorable Gina Abercrombie-
Winstanley is the Chief Diversity and Inclusion Officer for the
Office of Diversity and Inclusion at the U.S. Department of
State. Ambassador Abercrombie-Winstanley has served as a
diplomat for 30 years and, prior to her current role, she was
U.S. Ambassador to the Republic of Malta, Foreign Policy
Advisor to the Commander of the U.S. Cyber Forces, and Deputy
Coordinator for Counterterrorism.
Thank you for being here today. Your full statement will be
made part of the record, and I will ask that you keep your
spoken remarks to 5 minutes.
I now recognize Ambassador Abercrombie-Winstanley for her
opening statement.

STATEMENT OF GINA ABERCROMBIE-WINSTANLEY, CHIEF DIVERSITY AND
INCLUSION OFFICER, DEPARTMENT OF STATE

Ms. Abercrombie-Winstanley. Thank you, Chairman Mast,
Ranking Member Crow, and esteemed members of the Subcommittee.
Thank you for the opportunity to speak with you about the work
of my office and the Department of State's proposed Fiscal Year
2024 budget for Diversity, Equity, Inclusion, and
Accessibility, or DEIA.
As the State Department's first Chief of Diversity and
Inclusion Officer, I believe our Nation's values of inclusion,
equity, and our diversity contribute to our national strength.
They are a comparative advantage for our engagement and
leadership throughout the world. I am proud of what my team and
I have been able to accomplish so far. As I prepare to
transition, I am optimistic about the future, and I anticipate
that my successor, yet to be named, will build on our
achievements.
As you know, Secretary Blinken has an agenda to modernize
the State Department to address our national security
challenges with maximum effectiveness. Our modernization
efforts intend to build capacity and expertise in critical
mission areas; encourage innovation; modernize technology and
data usage; reinvigorate our relationship with risk; and
recruit, retain, and empower a diverse work force. The Biden-
Harris Administration believes diversity of thought,
background, perspective, and lived experience must be at the
policymaking table.
As we work to achieve our modernization goals, I focused on
transparency, inclusion, and accountability. So let me start
with transparency. We cannot achieve merit-based advancement
without data. I have worked to create a quantitative and
qualitative baseline for the Department against which to
measure future progress. We must make evidence-informed
decisions. My office has no published a demographic baseline
report that provides an unprecedented look at our bureaus
broken down by race, ethnicity, gender, status of disability,
grade, rank, and job series skill code. We plan to release an
updated report annually to show trend lines.
Now that we have a better sense of who we are, we can
better ensure that we tap the best and brightest among all
Americans to represent this great nation. We intend to attract,
hire, promote, and retain talent, and remove barriers that
might keep some from rising as far as their abilities can take
them. This goal is widely shared by our work force. And,
Congress, I thank you for your leadership and support in
improving DEIA and note that our goal is to fully implement
congressional intent.
My office sponsored a survey last year in which almost
9,000 employees participated, a full third of our direct hires.
Their top recommendation was to focus on removing barriers to
merit-based advancement. We are not conducting three barrier
analyses to inform possible procedural changes.
Second, let me address inclusion. To create a more
effective work environment, our Civil and Foreign Service
personnel are now evaluated, in part, by how their work helps
advanced transparency, inclusion, or accountability. We also
developed a policy to counter discriminatory treatment of our
U.S. employees abroad. For example, when employees experience
discrimination abroad by foreign customs and immigration
officials, our missions must now report it to the Department
and protest it to the host nation government.
Thanks to the work of this Committee, we have also
successfully converted select internship programs to paid
internships. This is another big win for inclusion. There are
many young Americans across the country who cannot afford to
offer free labor to the Department. To support greater
accessibility, we changed the typeface used by the Department
to one that is more accessible to those who are visually
impaired.
And, finally, accountability. In the survey I referenced,
too many of our employees reported discrimination, harassment,
or bullying, and little confidence the Department would address
it. We intend to fix that. We intend to take on toxic conduct,
and we have eliminated the confidentiality clause in settlement
cases where many employees felt it was akin to a gag order that
served to protect those who they allege had harassed or
discriminated against them.
Finally, let me turn to the budget that supports our
efforts. Until recently, the Department did not track DEIA's
spending and only established a budget code for DEIA in 2023.
The Department has a comprehensive DEIA budget request for
Fiscal Year 2024 of just over $76 million. Ninety percent of
the request is spread across other bureaus. My office closely
coordinates with the entire Department to successfully
implement the initiatives and ensure that there is no
duplication of effort.
A little under 10 percent of that funding will go to my
office. With that budget, we will fund our barrier analyses,
travel, demographic baseline reports, and special reports on
thematic issues. It also includes our small project initiatives
which fund projects that advance DEIA domestically or abroad
and would allow me to also increase my staff from 12 to 14
positions.
I want to express my thanks in advance for your broad
support for the Department's work force and our mission, as
well as my work to advance transparency, inclusion, and
accountability. I appreciate the opportunity to appear before
you today and respond to any questions you may have. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Abercrombie-Winstanley
follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Mast. Thank you, Ambassador Abercrombie-Winstanley. I
now recognize myself for 5 minutes of questioning.
I am just going to start by responding to my colleague, who
is somebody that I thank. I thank you for your service, if I
can speak to you directly. I thank you for your service. I am
very proud to call you a brother in arms.
But as I observe our units, we both served in diverse units
in the military, but it was never by demand, and that is the
argument that I am bringing up here as we talk about service in
the State Department or the military or anywhere else. There
are no quotas over qualification. We did not need an African
American or an Asian or a white sniper or bomb tech or K-9
handler. It was just simply who raised their hand, volunteered,
proved that they had what they needed to make it and be
effective in that role, and pursued it and reached their goal.
That is what it was all about. And to give the appearance at
any time that it is anything other than that, that is un-
American and that is the problem I have with the appearance
that this office is giving.
I will ask a couple of questions here. Is baldness,
somebody that looks like me, does that make you a better
diplomat, ma'am? I think I know the answer but----
Ms. Abercrombie-Winstanley. Not that I know of.
Mr. Mast. It does not. If somebody is 5'8`` like me or
6'3`` like somebody else, does that make them a better
diplomat?
Ms. Abercrombie-Winstanley. No, I do not believe so.
Mr. Mast. Likewise, does being white make somebody a better
diplomat?
Ms. Abercrombie-Winstanley. No, I do not believe so.
Mr. Mast. African American?
Ms. Abercrombie-Winstanley. No, I do not believe so.
Mr. Mast. Asian or Islander?
Ms. Abercrombie-Winstanley. Any specific group.
Mr. Mast. Native American? It does not. I would ask this:
can you tell me, am I white?
Ms. Abercrombie-Winstanley. I would allow you to tell me
how you characterize yourself.
Mr. Mast. That's exactly right. I would have to tell you
not just how I characterize myself but what I am. But I am
asking do you know if I am white?
Ms. Abercrombie-Winstanley. I do not know.
Mr. Mast. Half black?
Ms. Abercrombie-Winstanley. I do not know.
Mr. Mast. Asian, Islander?
Ms. Abercrombie-Winstanley. Do not know.
Mr. Mast. Brown, Latino?
Ms. Abercrombie-Winstanley. I do not know.
Mr. Mast. You cannot know. You cannot know without asking,
without asking somebody to disclose what they are. And we
cannot ask what somebody is, and it shouldn't matter. It
shouldn't matter that I am half Mexican. It shouldn't matter
whether I am able-bodied or ambulatory or not ambulatory. That
does not have anything to do with what my background is that I
served in these operations in the military, that I gained these
skills, that I studied this in school, that I proved that I
could pass whatever tests under stress and duress and be
effective in the field under situations that Foreign Service
officers might encounter, like the withdrawal of Afghanistan,
the enemy at the gates, people being targeted, trying to deal
with countless number of SIVs coming in. That has nothing to do
with how somebody looks. It has to do with did they volunteer
to do this? Do they have the skills to do this? Did we test
them to make sure they had the skills to do this? Do we hire
hard and have the ability to manage a little bit easier? And
that's the problem with what I see with what is taking place
here.
I'd ask you another question. Can you tell me what best
looks like?
Ms. Abercrombie-Winstanley. I am not sure I am fully
understanding what you are getting at----
Mr. Mast. What does the best candidate look like? The best
FSO officer, we'll use that, the best Foreign Service officer,
what does the best look like?
Ms. Abercrombie-Winstanley. I would say the best for the
particular job can look like any one of us, and that is the
American way. That is what we support.
Mr. Mast. Yes, ma'am. So in that, we cannot have it be that
first we look for a diverse basket of candidates, as is your
quote. And then, after we look for the diverse basket, then we
check the merit of that. The diversity cannot be the No. 1. I
want a diverse work force. I am glad that I served with a
diverse force in the military, diverse colleagues as Members of
Congress, but that cannot be the No. 1 filter because it does
create an inherent bias, an inherent quota system where people
look at it and say, well, I wasn't this, I did not have the
right religion or color or what they were looking for, so I did
not make that diverse basket No. 1, as you said, that it has to
be that, they better bring you a diverse panel.
My time is expired. In that, I now recognize Ranking Member
Crow for 5 minutes of questioning.
Mr. Crow. Thank you, Chairman. I agree with the Chairman
that it shouldn't matter what you look like, that it shouldn't
matter if you are bald or 5'8`` or 5'9`` or black or white. It
shouldn't. But in the United States of America, too often it
does. That's just the reality, right? And our history does not
really have a big history of systematic discrimination against
bald people or people that are 5'8``, but it does against
people of color. That is just the truth.
All of this is about reducing those barriers. It is not
about favoring one side or the other. It is about recognizing
our history, recognizing that all things have not been equal,
recognizing, with all due respect, Mr. Chairman, that we do not
exist in a perfect situation where what you outlined is true
because it is not in that not everybody has access. And if we
are going to be our best, then we have to have a level playing
field and we have to provide everybody with access. And then if
that level playing field exists and everybody has access, then
we can find the best. But we cannot do that right now, and that
is the charge of these efforts.
So in that vein, Ambassador, I would like you to just
explain very briefly some of the changes that I believe have
been unfairly characterized to the change in the Foreign
Service Officer Test and the hiring process because some people
will say that it used to be the case that applicants just had
to go through the Foreign Service Officer Test, and then they
would pass that gate, and then look at other criteria. But now
we have actually broadened the aperture is my understanding. We
look at more factors which actually increases the pool of
applicants, which seems like a good thing to me.
Is that accurate? And can you describe that for us, please?
Ms. Abercrombie-Winstanley. Absolutely. Thank you for the
question, and if I may respond to the Chairman's comments, as
well. That is exactly what has happened. We have broadened the
aperture to allow more Americans to have access to the ability
to serve, which is really what we want.
I think it is really important that we keep in mind that
how one gets into the Foreign Service has changed multiple
times over years. This is not the first change. Throughout all
of these changes, we need to keep in mind the reality is that
there are many people already in the Department of State before
this latest change who never took the written exam, never took
it, but are not questioned about it because people assume that
they have.
We have a number of fellowship programs, including
Presidential Management Fellows, Boren Fellows, AAAS Fellows
mid-level program that allows people to come into the Foreign
Service over time. No one touched the written exam to become a
Foreign Service officer, and these people have had successful
careers as Foreign Service officers. So the written test has
never been the be-all end-all of who is going to be a
successful diplomat.
A former boss of mine contacted me last week and talked
about his incoming class and how he had to take the Foreign
Service written exam a few times before coming in, and his
roommate passed it on the first try but mustered out within 2
years of joining the Department of State. One of the barrier
analyses we may need to do is who comes in which way and what
their careers look like. Some of the barrier analyses that we
are doing are going to follow career paths over time to see are
there barriers to success in the Foreign Service based on
demographics, but how you come in may be something we should
look at so that we can answer the question for those who have
concerns that the change in the Foreign Service written test
may lower our standards.
But, again, already many people have come in without taking
that test. I have heard no questions about them. Thank you.
Mr. Crow. Thank you for that. My time is expiring, and I
yield back.
Mr. Mast. Thank you, Ranking Member Crow. I now recognize
Mr. Issa for 5 minutes.
Mr. Issa. Thank you. Good morning, Ambassador.
Ms. Abercrombie-Winstanley. Good morning.
Mr. Issa. I want to followup right where we left off there.
Who made the decision to essentially jettison the requirement
for the Foreign Service exam?
Ms. Abercrombie-Winstanley. Jettison is----
Mr. Issa. OK. Did you participate the decision that led to
this change?
Ms. Abercrombie-Winstanley. It is not something I
participated in at all but fully support. And it's good to see
you, sir.
Mr. Issa. Good to see you. It has been a long time since--
--
Ms. Abercrombie-Winstanley. Since Balta.
Mr. Issa [continuing]. Balta. On my way to Libya.
Ms. Abercrombie-Winstanley. Yes.
Mr. Issa. But I want to ask because this is one of the
things that bothers me sometimes about government
bureaucracies. One, it is a big decision. There should be
transparency, I am sure you agree, as to who made the decision
and why. But following up on a couple of the last statements
you made, you said we probably should, we probably should, we
probably should, and, Ambassador, I couldn't agree more.
So the question is why did either your department with
small funding and so on or the State Department with its many
billions, why is it that you are not coming to us with a
comprehensive study showing the scores on these tests
historically and whether it shows better performance? Does
somebody who gets a minimum just as likely to succeed as
somebody who maxes it?
Additionally, as you know and I am proud to say it is a
good policy of the State Department, people enter the State
Department from all walks of life at all ages, sometimes even
having fully retired from a first career. Do you have facts on
how well they do?
Last, I am sure you have done a study and you know the
ratio of men and women, minorities of each category who serve
in the State Department; is that correct?
Ms. Abercrombie-Winstanley. Yes, we have a----
Mr. Issa. OK. And does it relatively, in most cases,
particularly as to African Americans and others, reflect
America with some accuracy, particularly when you consider
college graduation rates?
Ms. Abercrombie-Winstanley. Does the number of African
Americans in the State Department reflect----
Mr. Issa. If you look at the number of African Americans
who graduate from college and the number of white people who
graduate from college and consider them the base of all
applicants, is the ratio relatively similar or not?
Ms. Abercrombie-Winstanley. I would say probably not, but I
am going to take that question back because I do not want to--
--
Mr. Issa. I would appreciate----
Ms. Abercrombie-Winstanley. Yes.
Mr. Issa [continuing]. Yes, and I specifically asked from
the qualified pool of graduates because I think it is extremely
important that we are looking at the qualified pools, those who
can pass and get a security clearance, those who have met the
minimum requirements in other areas.
Ms. Abercrombie-Winstanley. Although, Congressman, I have
to add, of course, that you do not need a college degree to
join the Foreign Service.
Mr. Issa. It sure as hell helps.
Ms. Abercrombie-Winstanley. Well, it is not a requirement.
I just want to be clear on that.
Mr. Issa. Touche.
Ms. Abercrombie-Winstanley. OK.
Mr. Issa. Last, and there is always one zinger, Ambassador,
and we have known each other along time, so I hope you will
forgive this. In 2018, the New York Times did quote you using
terms like you knew you were among the reviled, referring to
yourself relative to President Trump's administration. You were
pretty harsh on him. My question to you is does your
organization now or is it in your future to balance,
essentially, those who would vote for President Trump or
President George W. Bush or President George H. Bush or any
other relatively conservative with those who would, and I am
not saying did, it is none of our business how somebody voted
per se, but do you feel you have a balance between people of a
more conservative view and of people of more liberal view and
is that part of your diversity and inclusion?
Ms. Abercrombie-Winstanley. So as you know, there is no way
to know who people vote for because----
Mr. Issa. Except, of course, we do know based on records
that show over 90 percent of State Department Foreign Service
people do vote in the Democrat primary, do vote for Democrats.
I mean, the press has reported pretty widely that it is not 50/
50 or even 60/40.
Ms. Abercrombie-Winstanley. Well, that is not part of the
purview of my office. We are not----
Mr. Issa. OK. But I ask you because the purview of your
office can and will expand with time. I ask you to beg the
question of do you already have an inherent bias toward
liberals, Democrats, overwhelmingly? And if so, is that, in
fact, part of balancing, if you will, America? And if not,
should it be? And you can answer for the record. I apologize
for running over.
But, Ambassador, it is good to see you again. I wish you
well in your future endeavors.
Ms. Abercrombie-Winstanley. Thank you.
Mr. Mast. The gentleman's time is expired. I now recognize
Ms. Titus for 5 minutes.
Ms. Titus. Thank you very much. I hardly know where to
begin, but let me start by saying, as I look at your resume, it
is so impressive. We are so honored and pleased to have you
here and appreciate what all you have done at the State
department and worry that, if you step down, who will continue
this good work within this division and in the Department
overall. So thank you for that. You said that the person hasn't
been appointed, but do you know who will be following in your
footsteps? How are you leaving a record for them to know, kind
of an exit memo perhaps?
Ms. Abercrombie-Winstanley. I cannot say. Keep me out of
trouble. However, I am leaving behind two incredible things: a
fantastic staff who are informed, dedicated, and have helped
bring us this far, a superb deputy who will stand in until my
successor is named, and I am leaving behind the entire work
force. Chairman Mast asked me the other day about what I was
proud of, and it is that this conversation about what American
stands for, about our need to level that playing field so that
everyone who wants to serve our country can to the best of
their abilities. That conversation is happening in offices and
missions around the world, and people are thinking about how to
further it, how to ensure that their colleagues can give their
best, do their best, and that I leave behind. So it is not a
one-woman job.
Ms. Titus. Well, thank you very much for that. They must be
very proud to continue that work and to have worked with you.
You know, today's questions are directed to the State
Department's Office of Diversity, but this isn't new. You are
seeing around the country offices of diversity and inclusion
being attacked. You see them in Florida, for example, where
universities that have such offices are now going to be denied
State funding. This is something that is part of the whole new
anti-woke or anti, I do not know, anti-everything agenda of
some of those on the other side.
We worked very hard last session to be sure that people
with disabilities were included, not only included within the
work force of the State Department but also in the policy of
the State Department, so we could lead by example when we are
dealing with other countries. Now the emphasis has shifted to
LGBTQ issues. I have the Globe Act which is another attempt to
say the State Department needs to be like the people it
represents, and it needs to set an example when people look to
us. It is not do as I say, it is do as I do, and I think that
is a big improvement.
You also said part of modernization was recruitment. I
wanted to ask you what your Ambassadors and residents are doing
or how your recruitment has expanded to include Historical
Black Colleges and minority-serving colleges. UNLV, where I
taught for 35 years, that is one of the most diverse campuses
in the country. We would like to have an ambassador in
residence. We would like to see the State Department there to
do recruiting. Could you address that?
Ms. Abercrombie-Winstanley. Thank you for the question. I
know that we have expanded the program a bit. Obviously, it all
comes down to funding. I have had the privilege of doing some
recruiting myself, every senior officer, everybody from the
Department, should be doing it whenever we are home, and going
down to a community college in Texas and doing it with the
Diplomat in Residence from our Diplomatic Security Bureau, and
it was fantastic to see her in action and the excitement of the
young people, because you do not need a 4-year degree to join
the Department or even a 2-year degree.
So we are doing it. I will also say that there are people
like me. When I left the Department in 2017, I set up my own
Diplomatic in Residence program because I wanted to make sure
that we were recruiting to support the organization and to do
it in the middle of the country, so I did it in Ohio. So we are
figuring out how we can expand that program, but it is very
active, very robust, and we are using technology to get to
places that we do not have enough people to get to in person.
Ms. Titus. I think that is great. You know, part of the
Globe Act that I mentioned is to make the special envoy for
human rights and LGBT rights a legislatively declared and
established position. Do you think that would help the State
Department both internally and with policy with other countries
and help our own diplomats abroad who have maybe same-sex wives
who are feeling discrimination from host countries because of
their own policies, and we have seen that certainly even
recently with discrimination. Would that be helpful?
Ms. Abercrombie-Winstanley. Yes. I would certainly bow to
the wisdom of Congress on that. I will say that our special
representative, the current one, is doing an amazing job. I
have done some programs with her and heard her speak and
advocate for what we know in this Nation, which is that
everybody should have the same rights and privileges and
responsibilities. And I have worked with prior ones. So it is
an important role.
Ms. Titus. Well, thank you so much. And I yield back.
Mr. Mast. The gentlewoman's time is expired. The Chair now
recognizes Mr. Waltz for 5 minutes.
Mr. Waltz. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I, too, like my
colleague, I do not even know where to begin from a different
perspective here. Ma'am, I represent one of the poorest
counties in Florida. It is predominantly white. There are whole
swaths that are rural, little access to internet, little access
to broadband, the only county that actually declined in terms
of its median income over time, and much like other counties in
middle America that have been gutted by the loss of
manufacturing, that have been overrun with fentanyl, that have
an opioid crisis.
Are these constituents of mine privileged? It's a primarily
Caucasian, I guess, county. Are they privileged systemically?
Ms. Abercrombie-Winstanley. I cannot speak to individuals
in your----
Mr. Waltz. Because I have to tell you, I think where you
see the pushback coming here is that people being told that
they're privileged because of their skin color or because of, I
guess, their ancestry from hundreds of years ago came from
Europe, they do not even know, I do not even know where my
ancestors came from, but am I white, as the Chairman asked? You
do not know, right? We have to self identify.
Ms. Abercrombie-Winstanley. You have to self identify.
Mr. Waltz. So I think the issue is multifold. One, we're
historically a country of merit; and, to hold people or to
provide additional resources to one group based on a skin color
because of things that have happened in the past and not to
another, it's a zero sum in terms of resources. So are we
excluding others because of their skin color or sexual
orientation or what have you and providing those resources to
other as just an underlying philosophy in your office?
Ms. Abercrombie-Winstanley. Thank you for the question. No.
I will absolutely agree that we are a country where our ideal
has been merit, but we have many, many examples of where that's
not been the case, that is not the case.
Mr. Waltz. Are we systemically a racist country? Is there
systemic racism in the State Department? We'll just keep it
within your purview.
Ms. Abercrombie-Winstanley. We certainly have policies,
processes, and procedures that we have to take a hard look at
to ensure that that is not the case. I will give you an
example----
Mr. Waltz. No, but--sure. Quickly, though, please.
Ms. Abercrombie-Winstanley. Yes. We have changed how we do
our selection of one of the most important senior positions in
the Department, deputy assistant secretary, which is senior. An
Ambassador comes back to that position, someone goes from that
position to be an ambassador.
Until the creation of our office where we could have a look
at and review the processes, those positions were not
advertised. They were not competed. You had to be in the know
or known and liked by someone to have even the knowledge----
Mr. Waltz. OK. So we're going to compete the position. Got
it.
Ms. Abercrombie-Winstanley. Right. But I'm just----
Mr. Waltz. Right. What does that have to do with diversity,
equity, and inclusion?
Ms. Abercrombie-Winstanley. Because the people who
traditionally have been in the know are largely from a single
group. It's knowledge----
Mr. Waltz. What group?
Ms. Abercrombie-Winstanley. According to the numbers from
GAO and our own demographic baseline, the majority of senior
positions in the Department of State, over 80 percent, are held
by European Americans, over 50 percent are held by men.
Mr. Waltz. Am I a European American?
Ms. Abercrombie-Winstanley. Is your heritage from Europe?
Mr. Waltz. I actually do not know.
Ms. Abercrombie-Winstanley. OK. Then I cannot answer that--
--
Mr. Waltz. I actually do not know. I can tell you that I
married into a Middle Eastern family. My son is half Arab. What
box does he check for your office?
Ms. Abercrombie-Winstanley. So we have expanded the
opportunities for self identifying in the Department of State.
There are now 16 options that include a Middle East North
African option, so if your son comes to work for the Department
of State----
Mr. Waltz. I got you.
Ms. Abercrombie-Winstanley [continuing]. He can identify
that way.
Mr. Waltz. So I think we are going to continue to
proliferate boxes, right, as we continue to have an interracial
country. I mean, we are the melting pot.
Ms. Abercrombie-Winstanley. As you know, identifying
Americans has been done from almost the very beginning of our
Nation, since 1790.
Mr. Waltz. I know. At some point, at some point, I do not
know when it stops. When are we there?
Ms. Abercrombie-Winstanley. Well, I think when we get our
level playing field. When people are not making decisions on
what----
Mr. Waltz. I do not know that we'll----
Ms. Abercrombie-Winstanley [continuing]. Background is,
we'll be fine.
Mr. Waltz. I yield back.
Mr. Mast. The gentleman's time is expired. The Chair now
recognizes Mr. Kim for 5 minutes.
Mr. Kim. Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you, Ambassador, for
coming out here. I was going to ask you a bunch of questions
about the challenges of recruitment, but I have to say, you
know, I have really struggled through this conversation so far
in this hearing.
I believe I am the only person in Congress that served in a
career capacity at the State Department, and it was a great
experience. I really enjoyed it. I had great opportunities to
do assignments both domestically and abroad. I had the chance
to go out to Afghanistan and serve as a civilian out there. And
I remember when I returned back from my tour in Afghanistan, I
was serving at the main State Department, and I showed up to
work 1 day and there was this white envelope on my keyboard and
I opened it up, and it was a letter that was now informing me
that I have now been banned from working on issues related to
the Korean Peninsula because I am Korean American and because
of my family's, you know, ties still there and things like
that.
And it kind of struck, I was quite shocked by it. I wasn't
even trying to work on anything related to Korea. I was very
happy continuing to work on the Middle East. And, you know, it
was something that really made me wonder whether or not I had a
future here at the State Department, whether or not I could
continue on if my employer, the U.S. Government, was
questioning whether or not I would be able to adequately
represent and loyally represent the United States. It made me
feel like they were saying that, when it came to the issues of
Korea, that they did not know what I would do. And that
questioning of my loyalty honestly made me feel like they did
not see me as 100-percent American, and I remember I talked to
some of my colleagues and others and they just told me, hey,
look, if you are not trying to work on Korea, just ignore it.
And I tried to figure out where I could go to remedy the
situation. There was really no place at the time that I felt
like I could be heard, and it made me wonder whether or not I
could, you know, I was thinking about maybe applying for a job
on the seventh floor to work for the secretary or the deputy
secretary, but could I even be competitive for a job if I am
not allowed to work on the issues of the Korean Peninsula,
which is obviously a huge issue but also, again, my question of
my loyalty was at stake there.
So I guess my question to you is I did not feel like I had
a place to go at that time. Is your office a place that, had it
been in existence at that time, a place I could have gone and
sought counsel, as well as try to find ways to remedy the
situation?
Ms. Abercrombie-Winstanley. It may well have been.
Certainly, we hear from a number of colleagues from around the
building on a number of issues. We do not resolve individual
problems. We look after systemic issues but----
Mr. Kim. But it is a place where, if I raised these types
of issues, you would be able to look into it and see how we can
make the State Department a place better attuned to these
different challenges and also understand the perspectives that
people bring; is that correct?
Ms. Abercrombie-Winstanley. Absolutely, that is correct.
Mr. Kim. There was another experience that I had when I
worked abroad. You know, I was, on occasion, kind of ridiculed
or teased by foreign officials in foreign governments and
foreign organizations that did not think I was American, did
not think I could properly represent America, and then kind of
would tease me and say, oh, maybe he can just represent the
Chinatowns of America. Is that a place where I could have gone
and potentially talked to somebody about how I was being
treated and how we could try to work to better remedy these
situations and make people feel more comfortable?
Ms. Abercrombie-Winstanley. Congressman, absolutely. I am
extremely proud that we led the change of policy in the
Department about how missions treat this sort of behavior that
many of our diplomats come across for one reason or another,
because of their ethnic background, their racial background,
their sexual orientation, their gender, disability, where
people question their role as a U.S. diplomat. And now----
Mr. Kim. Even domestically, you know, I had people in the
U.S. Government both at State Department and elsewhere, when I
talked about I worked on Middle East issues, they were confused
that I worked on Middle East issues and some said to me, oh, I
did not know your people would be interested in the Middle
East, I assumed you would want to work on Asia issues.
Is that something that I could have potentially raised to
an office like yours to be able to remedy and try to find ways
that we can address these issues, make people more aware of
that kind of challenge and what kind of hurtfulness that would
be driven from that kind of word?
Ms. Abercrombie-Winstanley. Yes, if it was something short
of an EEO complaint, because if it was, depending on the
circumstances, you might better go to the Office of Civil
Rights. But, certainly, that is one of the inclusion,
microaggression is what it is called and educating ourselves
that, you know, we are all on a journey, we can all
microaggress against someone else. Yes, we do try and help----
Mr. Kim. I just want to end here by just saying I was very
proud of my time at the State Department, but there is a lot
more work we need to do to try to fix these problems going
forward.
Thank you. And I yield back.
Mr. Mast. The gentleman's time is expired. The Chair now
recognizes Mr. Moran for 5 minutes.
Mr. Moran. Madam Ambassador, in your role as the Chief
Diversity and Inclusion Officer within the State Department,
who do you directly report to?
Ms. Abercrombie-Winstanley. I report to the Secretary of
State.
Mr. Moran. Do you have an executive team or a set of key
leaders that you rely on to fulfill your duties on a day-to-day
basis?
Ms. Abercrombie-Winstanley. My team in my office, yes.
Mr. Moran. How many would you say that is?
Ms. Abercrombie-Winstanley. Oh, everybody in the office, so
all 12 and as many volunteers I can find.
Mr. Moran. Do you agree that strict adherence to Federal
employment law is imperative to effectively performing your
duties in the role as Chief Diversity and Inclusion Officer?
Ms. Abercrombie-Winstanley. Absolutely.
Mr. Moran. This is simply because you want to lead by
example, correct?
Ms. Abercrombie-Winstanley. Absolutely.
Mr. Moran. I presume that the Office of Diversity, Equity,
and Inclusion has a zero tolerance policy when it comes to
discrimination, harassment, and a hostile work environment. Is
that true?
Ms. Abercrombie-Winstanley. That is true.
Mr. Moran. Has anyone in the Office of Diversity and
Inclusion or any of its key leaders, these 12 individuals you
referenced, been the subject of any EEO complaints?
Ms. Abercrombie-Winstanley. I would not be able to comment
on that.
Mr. Moran. Tell me why you would not be able to comment on
that.
Ms. Abercrombie-Winstanley. From knowledge. So when it is
in that process, then that is in that process and----
Mr. Moran. Aren't you notified when there's an EEO
complaint with respect to any of the 12 individuals you
mentioned?
Ms. Abercrombie-Winstanley. Yes. As a responsible officer,
yes.
Mr. Moran. So have you been notified of any EEO complaints
of those 12 individuals or yourself with respect to their
performance of duties in the State Department?
Ms. Abercrombie-Winstanley. Yes.
Mr. Moran. OK. Who was that?
Ms. Abercrombie-Winstanley. I am not at liberty to say
that.
Mr. Moran. Well, that is interesting because you said in
your commentary earlier, I wrote this quote down, ``I focused
on transparency, inclusion, and accountability,'' and you said
also, quote, ``We have eliminated confidentiality clauses.''
Ms. Abercrombie-Winstanley. That is correct.
Mr. Moran. Did I understand you correct?
Ms. Abercrombie-Winstanley. And if you continue with that
quote, it says in the settlement, what the outcome was. I have
not been informed of outcomes.
Mr. Moran. I did not ask about the outcome.
Ms. Abercrombie-Winstanley. OK. Right. But I am saying that
is where the removing the confidentiality provision, that is
where that obtains----
Mr. Moran. OK. So of those complaints that were filed, what
were the outcomes of those complaints?
Ms. Abercrombie-Winstanley. I have no idea. I have not been
informed.
Mr. Moran. You did not take it upon yourself to understand
how those complaints of EEO problems within your office were
actually resolved?
Ms. Abercrombie-Winstanley. So let me say this: my
responsibility and desire is to maintain a work force and an
office that is absolutely free of any sort of discrimination,
harassment, bullying, all of those things.
Mr. Moran. And I agree with that. I want to do the same
thing----
Ms. Abercrombie-Winstanley. Right. So I am saying that----
Mr. Moran. As a person that would oversee only 12
individuals in their office, if I was running that office, I
would want to know how those things were resolved.
Ms. Abercrombie-Winstanley. And I am saying to you that, by
law, by law, first I have to follow the law, that I have not
been informed of where the matter stands. The Office of Civil
Rights has the lead.
Mr. Moran. Were you the subject of any of those EEO
complaints?
Ms. Abercrombie-Winstanley. Not that I know of, no.
Mr. Moran. But you would know about that, would not you?
Ms. Abercrombie-Winstanley. Yes. So I'm just, I'm----
Mr. Moran. So are you 100-percent certain that you were not
the subject of----
Ms. Abercrombie-Winstanley. Yes, I am----
Mr. Moran [continuing]. Any of those EEO complaints?
Ms. Abercrombie-Winstanley. --100-percent certain.
Mr. Moran. Has any of your supervisors in the State
Department ever talked to you about changing your speech or
conduct with respect to those that you supervise so that you do
not get into a situation where you are in violation of the laws
with respect to discrimination, harassment, or hostile work
environment?
Ms. Abercrombie-Winstanley. No.
Mr. Moran. Have you ever been counseled to change your
speech with respect to the way you perform your duties at all?
Ms. Abercrombie-Winstanley. No.
Mr. Moran. Have you ever been counseled to change your
conduct at all?
Ms. Abercrombie-Winstanley. No.
Mr. Moran. Have any allegations with respect to any EEO
complaints or problems or allegations led to your departure
later this month?
Ms. Abercrombie-Winstanley. No.
Mr. Moran. Are you having any internal issues with any of
those 12 individuals that led to your departure later this
month?
Ms. Abercrombie-Winstanley. No.
Mr. Moran. You mentioned earlier that you talked about the
confidentiality clauses. Have you been a party to any
confidentiality agreements or settlement agreements with
respect to your speech or conduct while employed at the State
Department?
Ms. Abercrombie-Winstanley. No.
Mr. Moran. With respect to the budget, how much money is
budgeted to settle any claims internally with respect to
harassment, discrimination, or hostile work environment claims?
Ms. Abercrombie-Winstanley. Within my office?
Mr. Moran. Yes, ma'am.
Ms. Abercrombie-Winstanley. Absolutely none.
Mr. Moran. Was any money expended last year with respect to
that?
Ms. Abercrombie-Winstanley. Absolutely not.
Mr. Moran. All right. Thank you, ma'am. I appreciate your
time.
Ms. Abercrombie-Winstanley. Of course.
Mr. Mast. The gentleman's time is expired. The Chair now
recognizes Ms. Cherfilus-McCormick for 5 minutes.
Mrs. Cherfilus-McCormick. Thank you so much, Mr. Chair.
Thank you so much, Ambassador, for being here. It is truly an
honor to have you here, and thank you so much for your service.
I wanted to start off with talking about the pipeline and
recruitment. Congress and the Department has placed significant
focus on recruiting individuals from a variety of backgrounds
from across the United States with recruitment events all over
the country, fellowships that are designed to better attract
individuals in historically excluded groups, and, thanks to the
provisions passed into law by Congress, offering a large number
of paid internships at the Department to create more
opportunities for individuals from different socioeconomic
backgrounds. Data studies conducted by GAO and the Department
suggest that these efforts have a positive impact on diversity
at the entry level.
It seems like there's an underlying assumption by our
Republican counterparts that assumes that diversity and
inclusion somehow diminishes or undermines excellence and
merit. Could you please speak to the positive attributes, and
does it, in fact, undermine excellence and merit when it comes
to recruitment?
Ms. Abercrombie-Winstanley. Well, I look at this Committee
as a wonderful example of a range of diversity, of backgrounds,
of views, experiences, and how much richer the discussion has
been because of it. The Department of State is exactly the
same.
In order to bring the widest array of recommendations,
proposals, possibilities for solutions to the many, many
challenges that our Nation currently faces, we need a wide
array of perspectives and views and lived experience and
background to help us engage and serve the American people and
our national security interest. That is just fact.
Mrs. Cherfilus-McCormick. So then it is a fallacy that
diversity and inclusion undermines merit and excellence?
Ms. Abercrombie-Winstanley. Absolutely.
Mrs. Cherfilus-McCormick. Also, I wanted to talk about the
promotion and retention. Promotion and retention of lower-level
staff has repeatedly been identified as significant challenges
for the Department, including as contributing factors for the
lack of diversity at the mid and senior levels, challenges
posed by the diplomatic career on family and personnel,
insufficient opportunities for skills development and career
advancement, accountability for bullying and harassment, and
efforts by the previous administration to crack down on
employees perceived to have differing political views have all
contributed to this challenge.
In response, the Department set up a retention unit
specifically tasked with looking at the obstacles to retaining
talent and the Department's investment in significant resources
and developing the purpose-appropriate reforms. Promotion rates
have repeatedly been identified with the GAO and various think
tanks, and former diplomats as shortcomings that have hamstrung
the Department's ability to retain a more diverse work force
and ensure that there are ample opportunities to access.
Can you explain some of your work that the office is doing
for retention?
Ms. Abercrombie-Winstanley. So our office absolutely
supports the retention unit, which is housed in Global Talent
Management. It is in our H.R. department, as opposed to ours,
but we partner. Our climate survey certainly helped inform some
of the questions that the retention unit is working from and
on. We started a review of those who had already left the
Department that was funded by my office to help set that
baseline, what questions need to be asked, where are the
challenges that people leaving prematurely, what are they
finding, because the reality is, if people leave before we are
getting our full muster from them, we are not using taxpayer
money that it takes to train them, to house them, to send them
around, to have them be excellent representatives of the United
States. So are working hard to fix our retention problem.
Mrs. Cherfilus-McCormick. You started to speak a little bit
about how it is difficult to be promoted, especially through
the relationships. And as I have been traveling on different
codels and spoke to different people, specifically the women
have spoken about how difficult it is to be promoted. Now,
these women were of all different backgrounds, all different
colors. Could you please speak to why it is so difficult for
them?
Ms. Abercrombie-Winstanley. I cannot speak to individual
cases. We all have our own experiences and challenges. All of
us, male, female, et cetera. You know, it may be that women
traditionally take on that burden of managing family, as well
as profession, and in the Department of State and particularly
when you are traveling around the world, it is hard. We are
looking into that specifically and in cooperation with one of
our employee organizations, as well.
Mrs. Cherfilus-McCormick. Well, the women specifically
talked about the ability to know about opportunities, how to
execute jobs, just having the relationship with senior staff
members.
Ms. Abercrombie-Winstanley. Yes. So this is one of the ways
that, as a senior manager, when we talk about DEIA and what you
can do about it, it is ensuring that you are connecting and
supporting, developing your more junior staff, not because they
remind you of you or that you went to the same school or come
from the same State but that you are being equitable in your
counseling, in your mentoring, in your sponsoring, helping
people get jobs, helping people get the training that will set
them up for career progression.
So these are things that we are looking for from our
leaders and our mid-level managers.
Mrs. Cherfilus-McCormick. Thank you so much. Mr. Chairman,
I yield back.
Mr. Mast. The gentlelady's time is expired. The Chair now
recognizes Mr. Burchett for 5 minutes.
Mr. Burchett. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Ma'am, I was looking
at your name and I just couldn't help but ask you, when you
have to fill out those little forms, you have to put your
initials in the bubbles, do you run out of bubbles----
Ms. Abercrombie-Winstanley. I do, sir.
Mr. Burchett. What do you do? Do you just around to the
end----
Ms. Abercrombie-Winstanley. You know, I've stopped at
Abercrombie-Winstanle, Abercrombie with just B-I, et cetera,
yes.
Mr. Burchett. My best friend in high school or junior high
school, his name was Christopher, and they ran out of names and
they would always call him out as Christ and we always got a
big kick out of that.
Ms. Abercrombie-Winstanley. Well, that is not bad.
Mr. Burchett. Being Baptist, we could laugh about that.
Thank you, ma'am. Thank you for being here. I will go straight
to my questioning. I wonder, would you agree that, if this was
true, that this would be illegal discrimination if people were
not being hired at the State Department because they were told
they were the wrong religion, they were disabled, or they were
straight, white, men, that that would constitute illegal
discrimination?
Ms. Abercrombie-Winstanley. Absolutely.
Mr. Burchett. OK. Well, Chairman Mast actually wrote a
letter to, he was then the principal deputy assistant secretary
of the Bureau of Near Eastern Affairs--that is almost like
Congress, we give everybody these long titles, and I never
understand why--to the bureau's work force regarding new
assignments, and he reported that certain candidates could not
be hired because they had a disability, they were white men,
they were straight white men, or they were not of the right
religion.
None of that is legal and none of it seems to comport to
what the Department regulations are. Would you care to comment
on that at all?
Ms. Abercrombie-Winstanley. I would say that that was taken
out of context. That is not what it says, in fact. And the
email, I did have the ability to see the letter, does say that
those were things he had heard, not that those were things that
were happening.
Mr. Burchett. OK. Would you mind----
Ms. Abercrombie-Winstanley. And he corrected----
Mr. Burchett [continuing]. Corresponding with my office to
correct that issue, please? I would really--or somebody in your
group could do that.
Ms. Abercrombie-Winstanley. We will take it back.
Mr. Burchett. How much money does the State Department
spend on DEIA advisors annually?
Ms. Abercrombie-Winstanley. I would have to take that
question back to get you an exact figure.
Mr. Burchett. Because this is a budget hearing and I was--
--
Ms. Abercrombie-Winstanley. Understood. But the advisors
are often funded out of bureaus, not out of the central DEIA
funding, so they do not come out of my budget. And some
advisors have full-time positions and some advisors have 50
percent so----
Mr. Burchett. OK. If somebody could get that to me, that
would be great. I would really appreciate it because this is a
budget hearing I was told.
Ms. Abercrombie-Winstanley. Yes.
Mr. Burchett. You have requested $2.9 million for
unconscious bias training. Can you explain to me what that
would involve?
Ms. Abercrombie-Winstanley. Yes. That funding is being
requested by Global Talent Management. Again, it is not my
office's funding. It is out of--I am sorry. That would be--
sorry. The Foreign Service Institute, our training institute.
And so that would be for the development of training, and they
are doing a hard wash of everything that w are offering in the
DEIA space.
I can take it back and get from them specifically----
Mr. Burchett. OK. That would be fine. I would appreciate
you getting back to me again. Do the State Department employees
earn more money if they engage in unconscious bias training?
Ms. Abercrombie-Winstanley. No.
Mr. Burchett. OK. Is merit or race more important to
consider when hiring for a State Department leadership
position?
Ms. Abercrombie-Winstanley. We hire for merit. We hire for
merit.
Mr. Burchett. I have a saying, put the best player in,
coach.
Ms. Abercrombie-Winstanley. There you go.
Mr. Burchett. Does your office help counter some of the
diplomatic efforts of our enemies?
Ms. Abercrombie-Winstanley. Oh, I believe so, yes.
Mr. Burchett. All right. Would you say it is a goal of your
office to ensure State Department employees have access to
gender transitioning surgery?
Ms. Abercrombie-Winstanley. Your question is is it a goal
of my office?
Mr. Burchett. Yes, ma'am.
Ms. Abercrombie-Winstanley. No.
Mr. Burchett. OK. But it is occurring, I assume.
Ms. Abercrombie-Winstanley. I do not believe so, but I will
take that back for our medical unit to specifically respond.
Mr. Burchett. If you could, please.
Ms. Abercrombie-Winstanley. Yes.
Mr. Burchett. Mr. Chairman, I believe I am just about out
of time, and I will yield back the 32 seconds that you have so
earned so graciously.
Mr. Mast. Thank you, Mr. Burchett, for yielding that 30
seconds back to the Chair.
Mr. Burchett. It is a precious 30 seconds.
Mr. Mast. The Chair now recognizes Ms. Dean for 5 minutes.
Ms. Dean. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Ambassador, it is a
delight to have you here and to be talking about this important
topic and the important work that you are doing. I have to say
that, for decades, my husband is in the bicycle industry, and
for decades he has talked about what diversity has done for his
industry. Back in the day, when he first started out, it was a
mostly men's club. But through his own hiring over the course
of the last 25 years, he has said how his diverse work force,
more women, people of all different backgrounds, faiths,
experiences, riding a bike or not, has improved what they do
and has improved what they sell, frankly.
The corporate world has been learning this over time. I
have to say diversity in my own office has made my work better.
I am confident of it. The more diverse people and experiences
are around me, it just offers me such insights and such smarts,
and I am lucky to have a very diverse team. So you might
imagine that I am a little puzzled by some of the lines of
questions that you are receiving.
Let's start with budget. You have asked for, I think, the
budget line item is just over $76 million, and, as you say, I
think most goes to the bureaus, 10 percent would go to your
office directly. What would that budget look like and what will
it enable you to do, in addition to the two hires you talk
about? Specifically, what would that enable you to do?
Ms. Abercrombie-Winstanley. So our projected spending would
include $3.8 million on data projects. Some of the things that
we have heard today we might be taking a look at with that
money. We also have had about 24 requests from Congress on
various aspects of data, so we have got to put that together
and we want to be as responsive as possible.
About $200,000 will be used to conduct a followup climate
survey to see whether we have made improvements. I feel certain
we have, but we want to document that we have made improvements
from the first climate survey that we did.
We will be purchasing a position for a staff assistant in
the office. And $900,000 will cover additional data analysts so
that we can do the barrier analysis. At this time, we are at
the mercy of where the data analysts sit in other parts of the
building so in order to be as efficient and as effective as
possible.
It is about $200,000 we have for travel. As you know, most
of our work force is overseas. We do as much as possible town
halls via video but answering questions, making sure people
understand what this is about, that we are not trying to put
one group or a different group at the top of the pyramid, that
inclusion is for everyone. As we talk about the changes that we
have made, the travel is necessary.
We also fund a project called the CDIO's Small Project
Initiative, which is available to offices, to bureaus, to
missions around the world for innovative projects that support
DEIA. We have had things around the world like bystander
intervention training, something I am very enthusiastic about
because it can be used in many different ways and gives people
the tools in the moment to make a situation better.
And then about $2 million for a national ad campaign. My
deputy and I were both former, are former Peace Corps
volunteers. And I think she made the decision when she was 10,
I made the decision to join the Peace Corps when I was 11, and
I made that decision from a commercial I saw. They called it
the hardest job you will ever love and held that in my head
until I graduated from college and could join. We know the
importance of communicating the privilege to serve and how best
to do it.
Ms. Dean. I will have to show that commercial to my 11-
year-old granddaughter to inspire her. You talked about, with
the remaining time I have, the interviews of nearly 9,000
employees. What are some of the greatest takeaways in terms of
the barriers you are examining there?
Ms. Abercrombie-Winstanley. Well, transparency and
accountability are huge barriers for us that we are getting
after. We have made the change with the senior assignments. We
are changing, as best practice, how we do that hiring, that,
again, it is not because you know somebody or you worked with
somebody that you get the job, that they are advertised and
fairly competed, that we are clear and transparent about what
we are looking for in the individual positions so that people
know the playing field is level and that they can advocate for
themselves.
And I do want to say very quickly the first person to
benefit from the change in the senior assignments was a white
male who came to me and said I may not be your demographic, but
I benefited. I said you are. That I is inclusion, and it means
everybody.
Ms. Dean. I thank you for your service to our country at so
many different times in your career, and I yield back.
Mr. Mast. The gentlelady's time is expired. The Chair now
recognizes Mr. Mills for 5 minutes.
Mr. Mills. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you, Ambassador.
Do you feel that, in the role that you are in right now, do you
support self identification?
Ms. Abercrombie-Winstanley. Yes, yes, I do.
Mr. Mills. And in understanding that, if you were to have a
group of males of Caucasian or any skin color who identified as
a woman of color, would you describe that room as being a
diverse room?
Ms. Abercrombie-Winstanley. I cannot even wrap my mind
around that. I do not have an answer for that.
Mr. Mills. But that is actually what your department is
about is understanding diversity and equity and inclusion,
correct?
Ms. Abercrombie-Winstanley. Yes.
Mr. Mills. So, again, I ask my question. You believe in
self identification. If a group of males, Caucasian or any skin
color, identifies as a woman of color, do you see that as a
diverse room?
Ms. Abercrombie-Winstanley. I do not believe that they
would have to identify as a woman of color for it to be a
diverse room. They could have an invisible disability, yes.
Mr. Mills. So then to go followup on that, is diversity
defined by race and gender or by experience and ideology?
Ms. Abercrombie-Winstanley. It is defined by many, many
things. The executive order is a much broader definition than
simply the classes that are protected under U.S. law. So we
would start with the law, but it is much broader than that.
Mr. Mills. You see, you said that the Foreign Service
Officers Test, one of the things that our process does not do
is test for racists or sexists or homophobes, or ableists.
Those are things that we need to be screening for. But let me
be clear. I agree there shouldn't be any hateful in the ranks
of our State Department, our diplomatic services, or in
government as a whole. I would strive to say that our endeavor
would be to not have that anywhere in America. But what I would
say, however, and critically, is I think I speak for many
Americans who have a good reason to believe that the State
Department has a deeply misguided belief that hate is labeled
and applied to anyone who has a disagreement in their ideology
or their political affiliations. And, see, just to be clear on
that point, the differences in opinion or belief is not racist
or sexist or ableist or any other type of labeling. And what
you see is is that, when an individual disagrees, whether it be
on his political opinions or things like this, he is
immediately labeled based on his skin color that he is to have,
as my colleague was pointing out, white privilege, right, and
that is the immediate assumption.
So I want to know, because you talked about the fact, and
this is your quote, that we hire based on merit. If it is hired
on merit, then why would we even need an office to focus on
diversity, equity, and inclusion if we are hiring by those who
are most qualified?
Ms. Abercrombie-Winstanley. The issue is access and
inclusion and----
Mr. Mills. But access is granted by merit, correct?
Ms. Abercrombie-Winstanley. Access, no, no.
Mr. Mills. You submit your application and, if you are the
most qualified----
Ms. Abercrombie-Winstanley. No, sir.
Mr. Mills [continuing]. Then you should have it basically.
But that is what we are looking toward, right? The idea of
merit being the defining factor.
Ms. Abercrombie-Winstanley. When I say access, for
instance, one of the things that Congress has helped us do is
pay our interns. I could not afford to be an intern at the
Department of State. I come from Ohio. I had to work. So
access----
Mr. Mills. I completely get that, as well, ma'am.
Ms. Abercrombie-Winstanley. OK.
Mr. Mills. I came from a broken family who----
Ms. Abercrombie-Winstanley. OK.
Mr. Mills [continuing]. My mother and father, my dad spent
30 years in prison, my mom spent 7 years in prison. I bounced
house to house until I was raised and finally adopted by
grandparents after sleeping on couches of house neighbors and
things like this. And he was a welder. My grandmother did hair
as a beautician. We came from a below-the-average line of
economics, which guess what? I sit here as United States
Congressman of which 11,500, on average, has done in our entire
history, not based on diversity, equity, and inclusion but on
the ideas that equal opportunity exists thanks to America and
the things that we fight for.
I want to ask what is the definition and difference between
equity and equality?
Ms. Abercrombie-Winstanley. There are many wonderful
examples of how to describe the difference between the two.
Equality is that you each are in a place and you get a ball
with a target ahead of you. Equity is, if you are smaller,
weaker, you might be placed closer to the target.
Mr. Mills. See, I can answer that really quickly. My
opinion of equity and equality is equity is about equal
outcome----
Ms. Abercrombie-Winstanley. No.
Mr. Mills [continuing]. And equality is about equal
opportunity and that the bottom line is is that I would love to
find out, in my last few seconds, how DEIA helps us win
strategic competition when it comes to China or push back on
Russia's illegal war in Ukraine or prevents nuclear Iran. You
know, can you name one meaningful contribution that DEI efforts
would make toward those priorities?
And with that, I will yield back to you, Mr. Chair.
Ms. Abercrombie-Winstanley. May I answer?
Mr. Mast. Yes, ma'am, you may.
Ms. Abercrombie-Winstanley. OK, all right. To have a wider
array of experiences at the table as we grapple with these
problems is going to help us come up with a wider array of
options to address them. If you have the same people sitting at
the table with similar backgrounds, similar experiences, you
are going to have a very narrow range of options. That is why
we are trying to broaden the aperture in that fashion. That is
our belief, and, as I said, I think this rich discussion today
makes my point very, very well. Thank you.
Mr. Mast. The Chair now recognizes Mr. Lieu for 5 minutes.
Mr. Lieu. Thank you, Chairman Mast. Thank you, Ambassador
Abercrombie-Winstanley, for your public service. The State
Department has had and continues to have certain policies that
disproportionately and negatively impact minorities, and one of
those policies were assignment restrictions that Representative
Kim so eloquently talked about where a State Department
employee would suddenly be given a notice they could not work
on certain countries and, as far as Representative Kim could
tell, it was just based on his race. And when we looked at the
data, it did appear that certain groups, such as Asian
Americans, were negatively impacted.
I commend Secretary Blinken for eliminating all assignment
restrictions on an ongoing forward basis. I commend Secretary
Blinken for eliminating half, actually more than half of the
existing assignment restrictions.
So my first question to you is I assume you agree with
Secretary Blinken's policy changes?
Ms. Abercrombie-Winstanley. Yes, absolutely.
Mr. Lieu. And you would agree that having these policies
then would have a negative impact on the State Department to
attract the best and brightest because, if you believe that you
were hampered from being able to work on a certain area of the
world, you are never going to make it to the upper levels of
management, correct?
Ms. Abercrombie-Winstanley. I do not believe we have or
should have second-class American citizens.
Mr. Lieu. I appreciate your view and your comment on that.
So let me ask you this: why not remove all assignment
restrictions right now? There is still some that exist in the
State Department.
Ms. Abercrombie-Winstanley. I can take that question back
to the Department because my office is not involved in the
discussions with DS on this particular issue, so I would have
to take that question back.
Mr. Lieu. Thank you. We could do that. And then if you
could take another question back, which is this: the State
Department has a separate process called passthroughs, also
known as assignment reviews, which would also restrict someone
from working on a certain area or certain country for a
specific assignment. And I think some other employee groups
within the State Department are concerned that this is sort of
a backdoor way to simply implement assignment restrictions. So
if you could also take back the question of we would like to
know how these decisions are being made and why is this not
simply a backdoor way of implementing assignment restrictions.
And if we could get an answer to that, that would be greatly
appreciated.
Ms. Abercrombie-Winstanley. Absolutely.
Mr. Lieu. A question to you about trying to attract the
best and brightest at the State Department. Does your office
pay for advertising in media and so on to try to let people
know about openings, or is that another office that does that?
Ms. Abercrombie-Winstanley. Not my office, no.
Mr. Lieu. OK. But the State Department does do that,
correct? They pay for sort of advertisements to try to let
people know about openings?
Ms. Abercrombie-Winstanley. I do not know, so I will take
that question back. I assume everybody wants to come work for
us. I do not know that we pay for it. I assume we do, but I
will take the question back.
Mr. Lieu. OK. And the if you could take another question
back. If the State Department, in fact, has a policy of
spending money to try to get the word out, does the State
Department then also advertise in various ethnic media sources?
I'm just sort of curious how people know about State Department
open positions. Like you, I grew up in Ohio, never thought
about the State Department, had no idea what it was. And I do
not know how many Americans actually even know what State
Department means. If you just said those two words, I am not
sure a lot of folks would even have any understanding. And so
just curious how the State Department does outreach to try to
attract the best and brightest to the Department.
Ms. Abercrombie-Winstanley. I know that we do advertise, I
mean, I see our advertisements on LinkedIn and other places,
so, again, it is the funding of it that I am going to question.
But, yes, I think it is very important that we do, and it is
important that we get to Americans outside of our East Coast,
West Coast, that we need people from all 50 States. And so we
can do that.
Mr. Lieu. So I am glad you mentioned LinkedIn, which is
sort of interesting because you also said something that I did
not know which is you can join the State Department without a
college degree.
Ms. Abercrombie-Winstanley. That is right.
Mr. Lieu. I think LinkedIn has a sort of a certain
audience, and I am just curious how does the State Department
reach out to people who do not have college degrees or who may
not actually use LinkedIn or sort of traditional processes to
try to find jobs. If you could get that back to us, that would
be great. And I yield back.
Ms. Abercrombie-Winstanley. OK. Thank you.
Mr. Mast. Thank you. The gentleman yields back. The chair
now recognizes Mr. Perry for 5 minutes.
Mr. Perry. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. In keeping on the same
line of questioning, Ambassador, I wasn't really thinking of
it, but with Mr. Lieu's questioning regarding assignment
restrictions and I think his assertion that we seek the best
and brightest, and I think you agree with that. Is there a
potential, is there a potential that someone that came from
another country and wanted to work in the State Department at
the highest levels, like probably most people in the State
Department do aspire to, could potentially jeopardize America's
national security based on fractured allegiances? Is that a
possibility?
Ms. Abercrombie-Winstanley. So, sadly, I have to say that
we have had Americans from every background compromise national
security----
Mr. Perry. Yes, so it is a possibility. So there is a
rationale for assignment restrictions is what I think you are
saying.
Ms. Abercrombie-Winstanley. No, that is not what I said.
Mr. Perry. OK. Can you clarify that?
Ms. Abercrombie-Winstanley. I said there is already a
history of Americans from every background----
Mr. Perry. Right.
Ms. Abercrombie-Winstanley [continuing]. Compromising, so
what I would say about those who are either first-generation
Americans, second-generation Americans, tenth-generation
Americans is the same.
Mr. Perry. So there is a reason for assignment restrictions
based on the fact that people may compromise themselves in
allegiance to some other country?
Ms. Abercrombie-Winstanley. Yes.
Mr. Perry. Yes, I thought so. Ma'am, I am looking at your
quote here and I am assuming, it says your name on it,
Ambassador, so I am assuming it is yours. The one in the middle
there where it says primarily European American men, this is
who has the vast majority of senior positions, and then the
last line is that does not come about through merit. Is there
any empirical data that you can provide to the Committee that
aligns with your assertion, that proves that assertion?
Ms. Abercrombie-Winstanley. Well, as you will see from the
quote, it is not a full quote.
Mr. Perry. OK. That is why I am asking you----
Ms. Abercrombie-Winstanley. Does not come from merit alone.
Mr. Perry. OK.
Ms. Abercrombie-Winstanley. OK.
Mr. Perry. So you do have any empirical data to buttress
your assertion?
Ms. Abercrombie-Winstanley. Just common sense and knowledge
that women and minorities do not become less intelligent as we
go up the ladder, that there are, in fact, challenges----
Mr. Perry. But the assessment that you are making there is
primarily European American men. That is what you said.
Ms. Abercrombie-Winstanley. But I am stating a fact that
the vast majority of senior positions are held by----
Mr. Perry. By why is that? It is because they are European
American men, that is why? Because that is what you said. I am
just trying to hook cause and effect.
Ms. Abercrombie-Winstanley. Yes.
Mr. Perry. You are saying that the cause----
Ms. Abercrombie-Winstanley. That merit alone is not----
Mr. Perry. Again, do you have any empirical data whatsoever
to support that assertion?
Ms. Abercrombie-Winstanley. The surveys that we have done
that lay out the challenges----
Mr. Perry. No, not surveys, ma'am. Numbers. Numbers that
prove your point. You are very pleasant and you are very
knowledgeable, but that is a pretty stark statement there which
essentially advocates for discrimination of certain individuals
based on their heritage, and I am just asking. I do not think
you believe in that, but you said that, so I am asking if you
have any factual basis to make that judgment.
Ms. Abercrombie-Winstanley. I do not think there's anything
up there that says I intend to discriminate against anyone.
Mr. Perry. But that is what that says.
Ms. Abercrombie-Winstanley. That I intend to discriminate?
Mr. Perry. That does not come about through merit.
Mr. Mast. Will the gentleman suspend for one brief moment,
suspend time? They accidentally reset the clock in the middle,
so, just so you know, your time will end when the clock hits 2
minutes.
Mr. Perry. Two minutes.
Mr. Mast. Be aware that the clock got reset somehow.
Mr. Perry. I was wondering about that. I thought you were
making up for the time that the Ranking Member took time from
me when he was the chairman, but I have let that go along time
ago----
Mr. Mast. The gentleman may resume.
Mr. Perry [continuing]. Apparently. All right. Well, thank
you. Ma'am, I am wondering about the standards. I think you say
that we want the best and the brightest, and I would agree with
you. Last year, the State Department announced changes to the
Foreign Service standard, the test that most, well, everybody
took prior to that.
Ms. Abercrombie-Winstanley. No.
Mr. Perry. OK. So can you--not everybody took that test?
Ms. Abercrombie-Winstanley. Absolutely not. As I said
earlier, there are many within the Department of State who come
through fellowships, who do a lateral transfer into the Foreign
Service who do not touch the Foreign Service written exam.
Mr. Perry. OK. So fine. But for those who take the test,
for those who take the test, is there any way to take the test,
fail the test, and still be hired at the State Department once
you have failed the test?
Ms. Abercrombie-Winstanley. Absolutely and has been for a
long time.
Mr. Perry. It has been for a long time. So did this changes
to the test seek to ameliorate that situation, to fix that?
Ms. Abercrombie-Winstanley. For a detailed answer, I would
ask you to ask Global Talent Management, which led the changes
and did the research about why it was appropriate to change the
weight that the test has in someone proceeding with the process
of applying to the Department----
Mr. Perry. I would yield, but I would just State that
lowering the standard is not going to get us the best and
brightest. And, Mr. Chairman, I yield. I thank you.
Mr. Mast. The gentleman's time is expired. The Chair now
recognizes Ranking Member Meeks for 5 minutes.
Mr. Meeks. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I want to start out
by recognizing Ambassador Abercrombie-Winstanley's service to
our great country. I understand that, after more 30 years of
working on behalf of the American people, you are retiring. And
I also want to thank you for you coming back to serve the
country as the State Department's first ever Chief Diversity
and Inclusion Officer. So thank you for the work of the Chief
Diversity and Inclusion Office and the problem it has made
significant progress in advancing a more inclusive workplace.
We thank you for that. Your efforts benefit the entire work
force and its ability to deliver on behalf of the American
people by ensuring that people with different experiences and
histories are at the table, helping to develop more innovative
public policy solutions to the many challenges that the United
States faces around the world.
You know, since your appointment, we have seen renewed
focus on developing solutions to address longstanding
institutional barriers to establishing a State Department that
is more representative of the America it serves, the America
that I love, the America that I believe is still striving to
become a more perfect union, and that's the America that we
want to be represented throughout the world and throughout the
various continents and all the countries. This has been
something that has been tremendously important to me. I have
seen the progress that we have made in America. I can remember
as a kid going to see, knowing that my father could not get a
job in certain places just because of the color of his skin. I
have seen with my own eyes getting off of a train and seeing
whites only and Negroes only, colored only is what it said,
when I would travel south. So there has been improvement, but
there is a lot of work to do.
The challenges that is faced by our foreign affairs and
national security agencies in creating a more diverse work
force, they are not new. They are not new. They are persistent
for decades, and progress has happened, but it is slow. It is
slow. And as you know, one of my key priorities has been to
address recruitment challenges but also the barriers to
promotion to the mid and senior levels. These barriers have
created challenges to retention of a diverse work force and
limited the Department from fully leveraging their
contributions over time. And guess what? In my years in
Congress, I have worked with many administrations and many
secretaries of States. Not only has it been Madeleine Albright
or Hillary Clinton, but I have worked with Condaleezza Rice on
the same problem. I've worked with Colin Powell on the same
issues. Democratic administrations. I have worked with their
Trump administration; they acknowledged it. Congress has played
an important role in collaborating with the Department of State
in advancing diversity and equity and inclusion and
accessibility in various Democratic and Republican
administrations.
So the partnership has yielded real results. State now
offers, as you have indicated, paid internships. It has
expanded on how and where it offers the Foreign Service exam,
accessibility. State has begun conducting exit interviews to
understand why employees and has stood up a retention unit so
that it is able to retain the talent it has spent so much time
and money to cultivate.
Underpinning these changes is the use of comprehensive
data. And while I am pleased by the progress that has been
made, we know, you know, the work is not finished. Data
continues to show that African Americans and Americans of
Hispanic origin continue to be severely underrepresented at the
senior levels of the Foreign Service, and I am eager to hear
more, Ambassador, on how the efforts of the CDIO efforts are
advancing equity and inclusion at State and how we can address
that in Congress, but I am running out of time. And what I am
concerned of is, you know, what is happening throughout the
country and happening even at this Committee's oversight,
diversity, equity, inclusion work. What is happening, it is
becoming wrongfully politicized and increasingly
mischaracterized as progressive ideology or a contest between
supposedly woke and anti-woke forces.
Successive administrations have recognized the importance
of increasing diversity, as well as fostering a culture of
equity and inclusion to better enable the State Department to
deliver on its national security mission. That is what this is
about. That is making America better, moving better, showing
the world the example of the United States of America and its
inclusion and diversity.
And I thank you, and I yield back.
Mr. Mast. I thank the Ranking Member. The Chair now
recognizes Mr. Davidson for 5 minutes.
Mr. Davidson. Thank you, Chairman. Ambassador, you are here
today. I will just say, under your leadership, the State
Department has implemented its DEIA Strategic Plan last
September announcing that part of its implementation would be
``establishing the advancement of DEIA as an element for all
employees as part of their job performance criteria, career
advancement opportunities, and senior performance pay.'' Why do
you believe it is appropriate or necessary for every single
State Department employee to be evaluated on advancing the DEIA
framework?
Ms. Abercrombie-Winstanley. Congressman, thank you for the
question. I do want to acknowledge the truth of what
Congressman Meeks said was that this work started before this
administration. DEIA, as part of the measure of being prepared
for promotion, for leadership, in our organization has been
part of our precept since 2018. The prior administration had it
included. It was not a standalone. It was woven in and among
other aspects of good management----
Mr. Davidson. Well, I will grant you, I mean, some of the
ideas probably go back to Rudy Deutsch and a long march through
the institutions. But why do you believe it is important? I do
not want a history lesson. I want to know why you think it is
important that every single employee has this tied to their
employment at the State Department.
Ms. Abercrombie-Winstanley. To many members of our State
Department family have not felt the full value of their
contributions of belonging to our organization. As you know, we
have a well-earned reputation of exclusivity, and that means
excluding people. So everyone----
Mr. Davidson. I actually do not know that. Frankly, I think
that the 14th Amendment has applied for a long time. We have
had non-discrimination policies for a long time. We have merit-
based etnrance requirements for a long time. You were talking
to my colleague, Mr. Perry. OK. So he pointed out that, since
1924, there has been a Foreign Service Officer Test; and,
recently, the Department decided, yes, you do not actually need
to pass the test. Why do you believe that somebody that knows
that this is a test that is required, that has all kinds of
opportunity to prepare for the test, that fails the test, why
do you believe they are probably still one of the best and
brightest, maybe the right people to hire for the job, even if
they cannot pass a gateway test? It is supposed to assess
merit, right? Were they messed up from 1924 until your arrival
on your scene?
Ms. Abercrombie-Winstanley. The test has changed several
times since 1924, No. 1. No. 2, as I mentioned earlier, there
are many people for many years who have joined the Department
of State Foreign Service without taking the test. It has never
been something that every single person in the Foreign Service
has passed or even taken. We have had a variety of ways of
joining the Foreign Service.
So this change allows a more holistic----
Mr. Davidson. OK. So you want to give me more history on it
and the change is holistic. You did not talk about changing the
test, you talked about it is OK if you fail the test. You did
not say we need a test that actually incorporates things that
we are somehow missing. We have looked in the field and
apparently people do not realize that the State Department
actually needs to be focused on accomplishing the national
security interest of the United States of America, so we should
laser focus it. You might use the test to say, hey, maybe you
shouldn't pay attention to how many rainbow flags and BLM flags
you can fly on our pole. You might pay attention how that will
play with the Vatican. Instead, you guys fly these flags at the
Vatican. Did you coordinate with the Vatican prior to flying
flags that are hostile to the doctrine of the Catholic Church?
Ms. Abercrombie-Winstanley. The decision to fly or not fly
a flag is a chief-of-mission decision, but we should remember
that the written test is part always, it has always been part
of the exam, not the final.
Mr. Davidson. OK. Was the decision to fly the flag
coordinated with the Vatican?
Ms. Abercrombie-Winstanley. I will take that question back
for the record.
Mr. Davidson. Do you believe it should have been?
Ms. Abercrombie-Winstanley. We are a sovereign nation, and
we make our own decisions.
Mr. Davidson. Well, we have an embassy there that we are
supposed to build our relationship with countries, and you see
places like Guatemala or Hungary where the approach for the
United States is focused on diversity, equity, and inclusion,
every kind of ideology in terms of LGBTQ+ spectrum that is
hostile to the values of the cultures that we are trying to
reach. Is that advancing our national security interest?
Ms. Abercrombie-Winstanley. We adhere to our own values.
Mr. Davidson. You got your own values, not America's.
Ms. Abercrombie-Winstanley. America's values. When I say
we, I mean America.
Mr. Mast. The gentleman's time is expired. We'll roll into
a few more questions in a second round here for both sides. I
will begin by yielding myself 5 minutes, ma'am.
I want to ask this: on the State Department website, it
talks about expanding ways for employees to self identify in
the talent management system. Can you explain what that is, the
expanded ways for employees to self identify?
Ms. Abercrombie-Winstanley. Sure. By law, we have to
identify certain characteristics of our employees.
Mr. Mast. Which ones?
Ms. Abercrombie-Winstanley. Race, certainly. It may be
disability. I can double check for you for the record
everything that we have to ask, but race is certainly one of
them by law. People applying to the Department of State provide
that information. If they do not, then the agency is required
to supply the information.
Mr. Mast. If I do not answer what I am, you are going to
say what I am.
Ms. Abercrombie-Winstanley. By law, we are required----
Mr. Mast. Going back to my previous line of questioning----
Ms. Abercrombie-Winstanley. That is not my decision. Ask
Global Talent Management. That is not mine. So we want people
to be able to say who they are and----
Mr. Mast. But if we do not, then State will decide what I
am.
Ms. Abercrombie-Winstanley. By law, by law.
Mr. Mast. Certainly something for us to look at, no doubt.
I want to continue on this line of questioning. Again, going
off State's website, a core component of the Department's DEI
plan is establishing the advancement of DEI as an element for
all employees as a part of their job performance criteria.
Ms. Abercrombie-Winstanley. Yes.
Mr. Mast. How is DEI job performance criteria, how do you
evaluate--and let me ask this maybe a little bit more
specifically. I said it before. If somebody uses the wrong
pronouns, is that a negative hit on them? If an individual
believes that a man cannot be a woman or a woman cannot be a
man, is that a hit on their DEI job performance criteria? Am I
missing the mark on that? Tell me a little bit about it.
Ms. Abercrombie-Winstanley. I believe we either are working
on or have recently put out, OPM has put out a policy on the
use of pronouns and does urge that the desired pronoun of the
individual be used.
Mr. Mast. But is this a hit----
Ms. Abercrombie-Winstanley. There is no----
Mr. Mast [continuing]. On the establishment of job
performance criteria, an employee being evaluated, job
performance criteria, career advancement opportunities?
Ms. Abercrombie-Winstanley. It may be. I cannot say because
I would not--it does contribute to, it can contribute to a
hostile work environment according to OPM, so that is there. It
might be a performance, it might be a conduct issue, so I
cannot say definitively that that would have, I cannot say
definitively what impact that would have.
Mr. Mast. You used the term previously microaggression.
Ms. Abercrombie-Winstanley. Yes.
Mr. Mast. Is it microaggression to use a pronoun that
somebody is not but asks to be called?
Ms. Abercrombie-Winstanley. That would depend on the
individual. Some things that I do not get bothered by, other
people do, so it is an individual----
Mr. Mast. So this comes down to what somebody reports. If
somebody reports it as microaggression, I do not know that that
is a real report, but, OK, that would be----
Ms. Abercrombie-Winstanley. I urge people bring their best
selves to work, you know. The things that are going to help
people stay focused on the job at hand.
Mr. Mast. Have you made State Department more diverse?
Ms. Abercrombie-Winstanley. I hope I have made it more
inclusive. To become more diverse does indeed take time. You
know, the Civil Service, people do not turn over everyday,
every week, or every year for that matter.
Mr. Mast. Good things take time. Have you made it more
diverse?
Ms. Abercrombie-Winstanley. I cannot say that. I cannot say
that.
Mr. Mast. You do not know if you have succeeded in making
it more diverse?
Ms. Abercrombie-Winstanley. I do not know that the
Department, the work of the Department, again, it is not just
me, it is all of us, have made it more diverse. What I do hope
we have done is communicate clearly to every American who has
got the ability and desire to serve that we are a good place to
come and do it.
Mr. Mast. How will you know if you have made it more
diverse or how will your replacement know if they have made it
more diverse according to your metrics? Where will they----
Ms. Abercrombie-Winstanley. They will find it from our
demographic baseline report and our climate surveys, not only
who is working for us but how they feel about working for us.
Mr. Mast. OK. I thank you for answering my questions today.
My time is nearly expired. I will recognize Ranking Member Crow
for 5 minutes.
Mr. Crow. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I wanted to pick up on
the line of question and some of your answers about how a more
inclusive workplace and how leveling the playing field makes us
safer and actually furthers the mission of the State Department
in the best interests of the American people. And one of those,
there has been a lot of discussion around race and ethnic
background but also gender as a very important part of the
mission of your office. And there is a lot, there has been a
lot of efforts in Congress actually around this, and I will
give a lot of credit to my friend, Mr. Waltz, who actually is a
founding co-chair of the Women, Peace, and Security Caucus in
Congress. There is actually a recognition that getting women
involved in reducing some of the systematic barriers to getting
women involved in peace and security actually makes us
stronger, and I couldn't agree more with that effort and give
Mr. Waltz a lot of credit for helping lead that and open the
aperture, if you will, for women and peace and security.
So I would love to talk a little bit about that and hear
from you, Ambassador, on some of the efforts of your office on
gender equity within the Department and some of the successes
you have had in that regard.
Ms. Abercrombie-Winstanley. Yes. Thank you very much for
that, and thank you. Certainly, the role of women everywhere is
important and in the Department of State. So we support the
work of the retention unit because we do anecdotally believe
that we lose women in higher proportion than men, so we are
looking at that. We are looking at the drivers of attrition and
how we can retain women. We have also stayed in very close
touch with the Executive Women at State who focus on these
issues, as well.
A very recent policy, and it may seem small to those who do
not go and work in classified areas overseas, but we all do
when we go to missions, to embassies, to consulates, as well as
in the Department, classified work spaces and lactation
devices, motherhood, and making it easier to be a mom and take
care of your child while working, and that is a lactation
device that is allowed in to the classified spaces. This was a
huge push. It was something that was very clearly Stated by the
women in our organizations as something that either they have
needed, need now, or may need in future and want to make sure
that they do not have to make career decisions based on whether
they are going to be overseas or not. So that is something that
has been really important.
One of the things we are looking at, of course, is housing,
a couple of things, one, to ensure that every mission has a
house that is accessible depending on what our employees need,
and my staff has worked really hard on working with other
bureaus in the Department to put that together; bathrooms that
are accessible, that are all-gendered, you know, single-use
all-gendered, and also have water in them for ablution or other
purposes that can be used for any number of groups within the
Department that help them do their jobs better with fewer
distractions, fewer time delays.
So we will look for what comes out of the retention unit to
take additional steps from there. But absolutely making sure
that we all can do our jobs without additional burdens and
distractions is a focus.
Mr. Crow. I thank you for that. And you have had a career
that spanned over 30 years at the Department. I would love to
just hear from you in the final time that we have on how the
landscape has changed for women at the Department over the last
three decades.
Ms. Abercrombie-Winstanley. Oh, my goodness. Well, nobody
thinks I am their secretary anymore, so that is a wonderful
change, I must say. You know, one of the challenges still is
that you can walk into a room and see few women inside, so that
hasn't changed as much as I would have liked. But I also walk
into many rooms where half of the room is female, and that
means that we are really getting the people in place that
should be there. We have a lot to contribute.
You know, I am an NEA hand, so NEA has always been forward
leaning with sending women around the world, trusting our
capabilities, our language ability, our cultural effectiveness.
As you know from my bio, I was the first woman to lead a
diplomatic mission in Saudi Arabia. It was an amazing challenge
and one that the bureau, the Department of State, said you can
do this, you can represent us. And that privilege is something
that is unmatched, even by being a U.S. Ambassador, the top
job. But that ability to show who we are as a nation and that
we say your ability determines your destiny, it does not get
better than that.
Mr. Crow. Thank you. My time is expired.
Mr. Mast. The gentleman's time is expired. The Chair now
recognizes Mr. Waltz for 5 minutes.
Mr. Waltz. Thank you, Mr. Chair. And I thank the Ranking
Member for his words. I have served in countries all over the
world where woman aren't disadvantaged, they are brutalized.
And I have seen that where women thrive in societies and
villages and countries, so does that country. And grew up under
a single mom who broke barrier after barrier to provide a
better life for me. At the same time, that same woman who broke
all of those barriers was quite offended when a classmate of
mine, who is African American, got a scholarship, I did not,
she had a lower score than I did, even though this classmate
came from a very financially well-off background, and we
certainly did not. We used to have to sell things to afford
grocery money.
So I think what we are going back to and I think the
disconnect here and that you will find with the thrust of your
program and in my experience and Representative Mills is what
we are talking about really is poverty and how we address that.
So you mentioned 80 percent of the deputy assistant
secretaries for senior line of management were European
American. That was a problem, at least in how I characterize
your words. You now open it up, fully agree with that. What do
you do, what does your office do systemically then if you
compete those positions and you are still at 80 percent
European American?
Ms. Abercrombie-Winstanley. Well, we will know it is not
because we were secretive about how we put the position up----
Mr. Waltz. Sure, yes. Let's move beyond that. Competition,
good thing.
Ms. Abercrombie-Winstanley. Yes. But remember the I is
inclusion, so I am not saying equal outcome. I am not saying
that we are going to arrive at a specific number of people
anywhere. We just want to make sure the playing field is level.
Mr. Waltz. OK. I think one of the issues is Vice President
Harris, when asked about the difference in equality and equity,
said, I quote, ``Equitable treatment means we all end up in the
same place.'' So a lot of people in this space are saying
equity means equal outcomes, and, if some people aren't
starting in the same place, then we provide them more resources
than the others so that we all end up with equal outcomes. And
in an exclusionary environment and a lead environment, whether
it is in the military or the State Department where we need the
best of the best, you cannot square that circle to end up all
in the same place.
So do you disagree with that characterization? I take it
that you do from Vice President Harris that said, ``Equitable
treatment means we all end up in the same place.''
Ms. Abercrombie-Winstanley. That isn't how I would define
it. But let me tell you something I have learned because I sit
on the committee----
Mr. Waltz. But you have the first, I think she, I do not
know how she identifies actually but first vice president of
color saying this is her definition of equity as the president
signing DEI executive orders.
Ms. Abercrombie-Winstanley. Yes.
Mr. Waltz. So let's get that squared away because that is
my concern is that I do not see how you have everybody end up
in the same place. Frankly, a lot of the folks in this place
also have Marxist backgrounds. You can agree or disagree with
it. They do in terms of equal outcome for all is a key
definition of communism and Marxism, and that is a concern----
Ms. Abercrombie-Winstanley. I do not even know what to say
about the Marxist, but I will point out and something that I
say often is that everybody does not want to end up in the same
place. Everybody does not want to be a U.S. Ambassador. I never
wanted to be secretary of State. So it is never going to be we
end up in the same place. You will hear me say again and again
desire plus ability. You need both of those.
Mr. Waltz. So let's go back to the deputy assistant
secretaries.
Ms. Abercrombie-Winstanley. OK.
Mr. Waltz. You compete it. You end up with 80 percent. You
did not answer----
Ms. Abercrombie-Winstanley. No, no, no, no, 80 percent was
when it wasn't advertised and competed.
Mr. Waltz. And what is it now?
Ms. Abercrombie-Winstanley. So I will check.
Mr. Waltz. How would you not know? I mean, this was a key
achievement. I mean, you list it with your office.
Ms. Abercrombie-Winstanley. The key achievement was
transparency and leveling the playing field. Now, the results
of it, I will check and see----
Mr. Waltz. Let me posit this, and this, I think, gets part
of the crux of our issue. I grew up poor as dirt. He grew up
bouncing from home to home. Probably most people would describe
as, in your words, European American, white. But, yet, that was
an issue, that is an issue if something is overwhelmingly white
or people of color are underrepresented by ill-defined
statistics that I do not think we can get from you. And from
our perspective, we earned it. I mean, we exceeded all kinds of
odds, but, yet, a lot of people in this space would tell us we
are privileged because of our skin color. I did not feel
privileged growing up. People in the poorest country in Florida
do not feel privileged at all.
And so how long do we atone for the sins of the past with
the current generation is a very key question, and we cannot
fight discrimination from the past or even discrimination today
with more discrimination. And that is, you will always hear
from us, is a fundamental issue that we will seek to fight
against.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield my time.
Mr. Mast. The gentleman's time is expired. The Chair now
recognizes Mr. Mills for 5 minutes.
Mr. Mills. Thank you, Mr. Chair. Madam Ambassador, in an
interview with Foreign Policy magazine, you Stated that you are
going to reward it or you are going to hold people accountable
for not doing it with regards to DEI. Can you please explain
what that means and how is it being rewarded and how are people
being held accountable?
Ms. Abercrombie-Winstanley. So it is my strong belief that
DEIA is an essential element of good management and leadership.
It means getting the best out of all of your people. It means
putting in place a level playing field so that those with
desire and ability can serve and do it well without distraction
because that is what, whether it is microaggressions or
discrimination, harassment, bullying, all of these toxic work
issues, it is distraction from the job at hand.
Mr. Mills. Now, I noted that you continue to punt toward
the Office of Global Talent Management, and you list building a
diverse work force as a key focus and is demanding the bulk of
the Department's request. Again, you are asking in Fiscal Year
2024 for a $76 million, but you are actually allocating $55
million, the bulk of that, over to the Office of Global Talent
Management.
But my question is why should Congress fund an office that
many Americans believe is counterproductive to the mission of
the State Department, which is to protect and promote the U.S.
security, prosperity, and democratic values through
international policy?
Ms. Abercrombie-Winstanley. I would say probably lack of
understanding of what we do and how well we do it. We are a
convener. We bring together looking into issues. As I said, we
do not resolve specific problems, but we bring together the
different elements within the building, provide--an example, of
course, is this deputy assistant secretary change where it was
my office that led the improvement of transparency and
accountability, leveled the playing field for that. That
process has been in place presumably for many years. That is
what we found to be the case when we arrived.
Global Talent Management has been around forever, other
bureaus, and so they did not get after it. We are looking at
it. This is our job to ensure, to look after where the playing
field is not level. No one else has that specific focus and
portfolio.
Mr. Mills. And I apologize, but lowering the standards on
test evaluations, for example, isn't getting the best and
brightest, as has been pointed out. And I will also say that,
you know, I sit on the House Armed Services Committee, as well
as this committee here in the Foreign Affairs, and it is very
clear that the DoD, for example, has seen recruitment
shortages, and the Biden administration has continued to look
at their focus on being DEI in our military or in our
departments or ESJ with regards to corporations or CRT with
regards to our children. And we are seeing where this is a huge
deficit as a whole. I can tell you you cannot combat racism
with racism regardless of skin color, gender, or political
affiliation and ideologies. And I can tell you that, for me,
the Department of State should be focusing its security on the
ideas of prosperity, democratic values, international
diplomacy. And that is why I think that what they are trying to
do within your department and within the Office of Global
Talent Management is not only counterproductive and contrary to
American goals, but I, myself, would never vote in favor to
allocate a single dollar toward these types of things that I
find to be divisive.
I can tell you with my remaining time, which I will be
handing back over because I do not think there is any further
discussion to be had, I wish you well in your retirement. But I
can assure you that not a single American tax dollar will be
voted on by me to continue to fund diversity, equity, and
inclusion, as opposed to promoting meritocracy and America's
equal opportunities.
With that, I yield my time.
Ms. Abercrombie-Winstanley. May I answer?
Mr. Mast. Yes, please, ma'am.
Ms. Abercrombie-Winstanley. Thank you. I would ask or ask
the Congressman to consider that, since, factually, there are
many people who have come through to senior positions,
successful, productive careers without taking the written exam,
if anyone could be identified who knows who took the exam or
what score they got. It is not a predictor of success. It is
part of the process.
I have been an examiner. I led the oral assessment and so
know the people who got through the written exam, who got
through the essays, who got through the qualitative evaluation
paragraphs. I forget what the P stands for. It is a whole
process, not just a written exam. And I know that you do not
know who took it and who did not. You cannot judge someone's
success on that. You cannot judge it. Thank you.
Mr. Mast. The gentleman's time is expired. I thank you,
ma'am, for your testimony. I hope you take away from the
questions that we have asked as much as we take away from the
answers that you have given. Your testimony was valuable, and
members, they will have some additional questions for you, I
have no doubt. And we ask that you respond to those questions
in writing when you get those or your office.
I now recognize Mr. Crow for any closing remarks that he
may have.
Mr. Crow. Thank you, Chairman, for calling this really
important meeting, hearing today. I just want to address a few
points that were raised, a few themes that were discussed
today.
There was a lot of discussion by some of my colleagues
about their own personal struggles, which are real and I
understand those. You know, I actually share many of those. I
also grew up without a lot of money and bounced around from a
lot of different houses, and that is something that I have had
to overcome. But there is a lot of things I also have not had
to overcome that other people have had to that do not have a
background like me. And there is this notion that I think is
really important to this debate that we are having as a nation
right now, a larger national debate, about the nature of
struggle and rights. And I would just like to say that it is
just not true that when you recognize somebody else's struggle
or somebody else's rights, that does not detract from yours.
They are not a fixed pie. We can, as a nation and as a society,
recognize that other people have struggles and face barriers
that we do not and that does not detract from our own
individual struggles. It just does not. We can do that. They
are not mutually exclusive. And I think that's really important
as a society that we come to a better understanding of that
point so that we can actualize our full potential.
The other theme was about what some people have classified
as, and I'll quote, ``sins of the past.'' I wish they were of
the past, but they are not. And I know so many people know that
and, Ambassador, you know that better than I do. But we are
still dealing with so many of these things. We see it day-in
and day-out. That struggle is very much a part of our present,
and we need to have an honest discussion about it.
So, no, this is not the sins of the past. We have not dealt
with so much, and we need to. And the work that you have done
over your career and in your office has been at the forefront
of that.
The third is just the national security component here and
actually the foreign policy component. There were a lot of
folks who say this is a distraction, this is money that is not
well spent, it's somehow diverting our ability to deal with
great power competition or address Iran or China or Russia, and
I couldn't disagree more with that assertion. And you outlined
it very well, Ambassador, that the more experience we have at
the table, the more lived experience, the more people that will
fully represent the diversity and the power of this country,
the more options we will have, the more ideas we will have, and
the better results we will achieve in meeting those threats.
And I thank you for outlining that in a very compelling way.
So thank you for your over three decades of service to your
country. I admire that, I respect that. You have served the
Nation and the Department with dignity, with respect, and have
advanced our foreign policy, our national security, and the
lives of people within the Department. And I wish you well in
your well-deserved retirement.
Thank you, and I yield back.
Mr. Mast. Pursuant to Committee rules, all members may have
5 days to submit statements, questions, and extraneous
materials for the record, subject to the length limitations.
Without objection, the Committee stands adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 12:07 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]

APPENDIX

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
