- CLEAN POWER PLAN 2.0: EPA'S LATEST ATTACK ON AMERICA'S ELECTRIC RELIABILITY

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

CLEAN POWER PLAN 2.0: EPA'S LATEST ATTACK ON AMERICA'S ELECTRIC
RELIABILITY

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON ENVIRONMENT, MANUFACTURING, AND CRITICAL MATERIALS

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION
__________

JUNE 6, 2023
__________

Serial No. 118-41

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Published for the use of the Committee on Energy and Commerce

govinfo.gov/committee/house-energy
energycommerce.house.gov
__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

56-340 PDF                 WASHINGTON : 2024

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE

CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington
Chair
MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas            FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey
ROBERT E. LATTA, Ohio                  Ranking Member
BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky              ANNA G. ESHOO, California
H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia         DIANA DeGETTE, Colorado
GUS M. BILIRAKIS, Florida            JAN SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois
BILL JOHNSON, Ohio                   DORIS O. MATSUI, California
LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana               KATHY CASTOR, Florida
RICHARD HUDSON, North Carolina       JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland
TIM WALBERG, Michigan                PAUL TONKO, New York
EARL L. ``BUDDY'' CARTER, Georgia    YVETTE D. CLARKE, New York
JEFF DUNCAN, South Carolina          TONY CARDENAS, California
GARY J. PALMER, Alabama              RAUL RUIZ, California
NEAL P. DUNN, Florida                SCOTT H. PETERS, California
JOHN R. CURTIS, Utah                 DEBBIE DINGELL, Michigan
DEBBBIE LESKO, Arizona               MARC A. VEASEY, Texas
GREG PENCE, Indiana                  ANN M. KUSTER, New Hampshire
DAN CRENSHAW, Texas                  ROBIN L. KELLY, Illinois
JOHN JOYCE, Pennsylvania             NANETTE DIAZ BARRAGAN, California
KELLY ARMSTRONG, North Dakota, Vice  LISA BLUNT ROCHESTER, Delaware
Chair                            DARREN SOTO, Florida
RANDY K. WEBER, Sr., Texas           ANGIE CRAIG, Minnesota
RICK W. ALLEN, Georgia               KIM SCHRIER, Washington
TROY BALDERSON, Ohio                 LORI TRAHAN, Massachusetts
RUSS FULCHER, Idaho                  LIZZIE FLETCHER, Texas
AUGUST PFLUGER, Texas
DIANA HARSHBARGER, Tennessee
MARIANNETTE MILLER-MEEKS, Iowa
KAT CAMMACK, Florida
JAY OBERNOLTE, California
------

Professional Staff

NATE HODSON, Staff Director
SARAH BURKE, Deputy Staff Director
TIFFANY GUARASCIO, Minority Staff Director
Subcommittee on Environment, Manufacturing, and Critical Materials

BILL JOHNSON, Ohio
Chairman
EARL L. ``BUDDY'' CARTER, Georgia    PAUL TONKO, New York
GARY J. PALMER, Alabama                Ranking Member
DAN CRENSHAW, Texas                  DIANA DeGETTE, Colorado
JOHN JOYCE, Pennsylvania, Vice       JAN SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois
Chair                            JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland
RANDY K. WEBER, Sr., Texas           YVETTE D. CLARKE, New York
RICK W. ALLEN, Georgia               RAUL RUIZ, California
TROY BALDERSON, Ohio                 SCOTT H. PETERS, California
RUSS FULCHER, Idaho                  NANETTE DIAZ BARRAGAN, California
AUGUST PFLUGER, Texas                FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey (ex
MARIANNETTE MILLER-MEEKS, Iowa           officio)
JAY OBERNOLTE, California
CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington
(ex officio)
C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hon. Bill Johnson, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Ohio, opening statement........................................     2
Prepared statement...........................................     4
Hon. Paul Tonko, a Representative in Congress from the State of
New York, opening statement....................................     7
Prepared statement...........................................     9
Hon. Cathy McMorris Rodgers, a Representative in Congress from
the State of Washington, opening statement.....................    12
Prepared statement...........................................    14
Hon. Frank Pallone, Jr., a Representative in Congress from the
State of New Jersey, opening statement.........................    17
Prepared statement...........................................    19

Witnesses

Patrick O'Loughlin, President and Chief Executive Officer,
Buckeye Power, Inc., and Ohio Rural Electric Cooperatives......    21
Prepared statement...........................................    23
Answers to submitted questions...............................   156
Todd Snitchler, President and Chief Executive Officer, Electric
Power Supply Association.......................................    32
Prepared statement...........................................    34
Jay Duffy, Litigation Director, Clean Air Task Force.............    42
Prepared statement...........................................    44
Answers to submitted questions...............................   158
Michael J. Nasi, Partner, Jackson Walker, LLP....................    60
Prepared statement...........................................    62
Answers to submitted questions...............................   160

Submitted Material

Inclusion of the following was approved by unanimous consent.
List of documents submitted for the record.......................   117
Letter of May 23, 2023, from Daniel Czecholinski, Air Quality
Division Director, Arizona Department of Enviromnental Quality,
to the Environmental Protection Agency.........................   118
Letter of May 23, 2023, from Emily Sanford Fisher, Executive Vice
President, Clean Energy, and General Counsel and Corporate
Secretary, Edison Electric Institute, to Michael Regan,
Administrator, Environmental Protection Agency.................   120
Letter of May 23, 2023, from Allison D. Wood, Counsel to the
Power Generators Air Coalition, to Michael Regan,
Administrator, Environmental Protection Agency.................   122
Letter of May 24, 2023, from Dan Bosch, Regulatory Affairs
Director, National Rural Electric Cooperatives, and Carolyn
Slaughter, Senior Director, Environmental Policy, American
Public Power Association, to Michael Regan, Administrator,
Environmental Protection Agency................................   124
Letter of May 25, 2023, from Buddy Hasten, President and Chief
Executive Officer, Arkansas Electric Cooperative Corporation,
to Michael Regan, Administrator, Environmental Protection
Agency.........................................................   127
Letter of May 26, 2023, from Charlie Bayliss, Senior Vice
President and General Counsel, North Carolina Electric
Membership Corporation, to Michael Regan, Administrator,
Environmental Protection Agency................................   129
Letter of May 26, 2023, from Marty Durbin, President, Global
Energy Institute, and Senior Vice President, Policy, U.S
Chamber of Commerce, to Michael Regan, Administrator,
Environmental Protection Agency................................   131
Letter of May 30, 2023, from Jason Sloan, Executive Director,
Association of Air Pollution Control Agencies, and Miles Keogh,
Executive Director, National Association of Clean Air Agencies,
to Joseph Goffman, Principal Deputy Assistant Administrator,
Office of Air and Radiation, Environmental Protection Agency...   134
Report of the Environmental Protection Agency, ``Clean Air Act
Section 111 Regulation of Greenhouse Gas Emissions From Fossil
Fuel-Fired Electric Generating Units''\1\
Letter of June 5, 2023, from Michelle Bloodworth, President and
Chief Executive Officer, America's Power, to Mr. Johnson and
Mr. Tonko......................................................   136
Report of PJM, ``Energy Transition in PJM: Resource Retirements,
Replacements, & Risks,'' February 24, 2023\1\
Report of the North American Electric Reliability Corporation,
``2022 Long-Term Reliability Assessment,'' December 2022.......   139
Report of the North American Electric Reliability Corporation,
``2023 Summer Reliability Assessment,'' May 2023\1\
Letter of June 6, 2023, from Sean O'Neill, Senior Vice President,
Government Affairs, Portland Cement Association, to Mr. Johnson
and Mr. Tonko..................................................   148
Letter of May 22, 2023, from Dawn Buckingham, Commissioner, Texas
General Land Office, to Michael Regan, Administrator,
Environmental Protection Agency................................   152
Letter of June 5, 2023, from Glenn Youngkin, Governor,
Commonwealth of Virginia, to Michael Regan, Administrator,
Environmental Protection Agency................................   154
Report of Wilson Energy Economics, ``Maintaining the PJM Region's
Robust Reserve Margins: A Critique of the PJM Report `Energy
Transition in PJM: Resource Retirements, Replacements and
Risks,''' May 2023\1\

----------

\1\ The report has been retained in committee files and is included in
the Documents for the Record at https://docs.house.gov/meetings/IF/
IF18/20230606/116048/HHRG-118-IF18-20230606-SD094.pdf.

CLEAN POWER PLAN 2.0: EPA'S LATEST ATTACK ON AMERICA'S ELECTRIC
RELIABILITY

----------

TUESDAY, JUNE 6, 2023

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Environment, Manufacturing, and
Critical Materials,
Committee on Energy and Commerce,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 10:30 a.m. in
room 2322, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Bill Johnson
(chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Members present: Representatives Johnson, Carter, Palmer,
Crenshaw, Joyce, Weber, Allen, Balderson, Fulcher, Pfluger,
Miller-Meeks, Obernolte, Rodgers (ex officio), Tonko
(subcommittee ranking member), DeGette, Schakowsky, Sarbanes,
Clarke, Ruiz, Peters, Barragan, and Pallone (ex officio).
Also present: Representative Duncan.
Staff present: Sarah Alexander, Professional Staff Member,
Energy and Environment; Kate Arey, Digital Director; Sarah
Burke, Deputy Staff Director; Sydney Greene, Director of
Operations; Jack Heretik, Press Secretary; Nate Hodson, Staff
Director; Tara Hupman, Chief Counsel; Sean Kelly, Press
Secretary; Peter Kielty, General Counsel; Emily King, Member
Services Director; Mary Martin, Chief Counsel, Energy and
Environment; Jacob McCurdy, Professional Staff Member, Energy;
Kaitlyn Peterson, Clerk, Energy and Environment; Karli Plucker,
Director of Operations (shared staff); Carla Rafael, Senior
Staff Assistant; Emma Schultheis, Staff Assistant; Olivia
Shields, Communications Director; Peter Spencer, Senior
Professional Staff Member, Energy; Michael Taggart, Policy
Director; Dray Thorne, Director of Information Technology;
Timia Crisp, Minority Professional Staff Member; Waverly
Gordon, Minority Deputy Staff Director and General Counsel;
Anthony Gutierrez, Minority Professional Staff Member; Caitlin
Haberman, Minority Staff Director, Environment, Manufacturing,
and Critical Materials; Mackenzie Kuhl, Minority Digital
Manager; Kylea Rogers, Minority Policy Analyst; and Rebecca
Tomilchik, Minority Junior Professional Staff Member.
Mr. Johnson. The Subcommittee on Environment,
Manufacturing, and Critical Materials will now come to order.
The Chair now recognizes himself for 5 minutes for an
opening statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. BILL JOHNSON, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF OHIO

Well, again, good morning, and welcome to today's hearing
titled ``Clean Power Plan 2.0: EPA's Latest Attack on America's
Electric Reliability.''
Since day one, President Biden has jeopardized America's
energy security by pushing a whole-of-government climate agenda
that increases energy costs, degrades energy reliability, and
harms our economic and national security. At the forefront of
this regulatory onslaught is the EPA's recent announcement
proposing expensive and unproven greenhouse gas emissions
standards on electric generating units, particularly coal and
natural-gas-fired power generation, which alone make up 60
percent of America's electric generation capacity.
Under the Biden administration's Clean Power Plan, existing
coal-fired generation must either, one, limit its capacity
factor to 20 percent; cofire with 40 percent natural gas; or
capture 90 percent of its carbon dioxide with carbon capture
technology. Similarly, natural-gas-fired power generation must
either, by varying dates, cofire with 30 percent clean hydrogen
or install carbon capture and sequestration and cofire with
over 90 percent clean hydrogen.
Now, this sounds great, except the devil is in the details.
These requirements on this timeline--and let me emphasize ``on
this timeline''--experts tell us are infeasible and technically
unattainable if the grid is to remain operational. That is a
big problem, and I look forward to hearing more about this
today.
I do wonder, though: Is that by design?
We are starting down a path to severe grid reliability
challenges throughout the country. In fact, a case could be
made that we are already there. Just a few months ago, the
Nation's largest grid operator, the PJM Interconnection, whose
service territory covers the entire State of Ohio, released a
report noting it could face severe generation capacity
shortfalls by 2030. The report specifically noted that existing
EPA regulations, including the coal combustion residuals, the
good neighbor rule, and the effluent limitation guidelines are
all reasons for this potential capacity shortfall.
Add all this new regulatory attack on baseload generation
to that list. Even though the proposal is not finalized, it
sends signals to the market that investing in new gas-fired
power generation or keeping existing units operating through
their service life is not economically feasible.
In addition, the North American Electric Reliability
Corporation, in its annual summer reliability assessment,
warned that the vast majority of the country is at elevated
risk of insufficient operating reserves during above-normal
demand this summer--not 2030, this summer. Let me emphasize
that.
This isn't happening by accident. These electric
reliability challenges are a direct result of onerous climate
regulations favored by many congressional Democrats and the
Biden administration. The Biden administration has no plans to
ensure more reliable generation capacity is connected to the
grid.
Due to the intermittent nature of renewable energy, a
megawatt of wind or solar is fundamentally not the same as a
megawatt of coal, nuclear, or natural-gas-fired generation.
That is science, folks, it is not--it is a fact. Yet the Biden
EPA insists on regulating reliable sources of energy out of
existence.
The proposed regulation is another attempt by the
environmental left to fundamentally change our Nation's
electric generation portfolio. This is--this blatantly
contradicts a State's right to choose its own electric
generation mix, which is a core component of the Federal Power
Act.
We saw what happened last time they attempted to regulate
natural gas and coal out of existence. In a landmark decision
in West Virginia v. EPA, the Supreme Court found that such
sweeping regulations by the Federal Government failed the major
questions doctrine, which states that an action of major
national importance must have explicit direction from Congress.
EPA had no such authority then, and it has no such authority
now to transform our electric sector.
I am also concerned about the process by which this
proposed regulation was developed. According to numerous
reports, the EPA submitted an original proposal to the White
House for review that did not include regulations on existing
natural-gas-fired generation. But after the White House had a
chance to review, the EPA reportedly revised the rule to put
existing natural-gas-fired generation in their crosshairs.
They took this extreme action in spite of the fact that
natural gas makes up roughly 40 percent of our electric
generation portfolio and is the primary driver behind emissions
reductions in the electric power sector. This is further proof
that this administration is interested in nothing else but
decarbonization. Consumer costs and energy reliability and
resilience are afterthoughts in their pursuit of a zero-carbon
electric grid and a net-zero economy.
Thank you to our witnesses for being here today, especially
Mr. O'Loughlin and Mr. Snitchler, who hail from the Buckeye
State.
Thank you both for being here.
I look forward to hearing from each of our witnesses on the
harmful effects this proposed regulation will have on our
energy sector reliability, resiliency, and affordability.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Johnson follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Johnson. And with that, I yield back and I recognize
the ranking member from New York, Mr. Tonko, for his opening
statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. PAUL TONKO, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF NEW YORK

Mr. Tonko. Thank you, Chair Johnson, and thank you to our
witnesses for attending today.
Under the Clean Air Act, EPA has a responsibility and an
obligation to protect Americans' public health and the
environment from air pollution, and this does include carbon
pollution.
As we know, the power sector is the second-largest source
of greenhouse gas emissions in our United States. Many of the
coal-fired power plants that we will hear about today will have
been operating for over 60 years by the time EPA's proposed
rule would require them to take any compliance action. During
those decades they have been able to emit limitless carbon
pollution without consequences. Now, do my Republican
colleagues truly believe these plants should continue to be
able to pollute at these levels for as long as possible?
Section 111 of the Clean Air Act allows the agency to
establish standards of performance. Those standards are for new
and existing electric generating units. EPA has successfully
used this authority to reduce air pollution since the 1970s,
and each time regulated entities have found cost-effective
methods by which to comply with reasonable--and with reasonable
standards. This proposed rule will be no different, but today I
expect we will hear misrepresentations of what is included in
the proposal and fearmongering about how it will jeopardize
grid reliability.
So I would like to be clear about what is actually in the
proposed rule.
First, the rule is reasonable. It is a far cry from a
government takeover of our power sector. On the contrary, it is
based on existing market trends, which include significant coal
plant retirements for economic reasons and increased deployment
of renewables. This is ultimately a modest rule that builds
upon the Inflation Reduction Act, which will further support
cost-effective compliance with the proposed standards.
Second, this proposal provides ample flexibility to
entities. The rule has proposed to regulate generating units by
subcategories, taking into consideration a variety of factors
such as the size of units, when units plan to retire, and just
how often units intend to operate. It acknowledges that,
depending on the date of retirement, the cost effectiveness of
pollution controls will change.
Therefore, units planning to shut down within the next 15
years will need to take less stringent steps to comply, and
some units will not need to do much of anything at all. This
will avoid stranded assets from the installation of pollution
controls on power plants that will not operate for long enough
to make those investments recoverable.
The proposal also allows for several pathways for
compliance and does not dictate a specific type of pollution
control strategy. Some units may choose to pursue carbon
capture, others may adopt hydrogen cofiring, and it provides
ample timelines by which they can strive for compliance, which
will allow utilities and grid operators to make those long-term
plans.
Third, this proposal is targeted. The most stringent
emissions controls will only be required on a small number of
the largest and, indeed, most polluting power plants. These are
disproportionate polluters: 28 percent of power sector
emissions come from just 45 facilities that provide only 11
percent of our Nation's power. This rule intends that the most
polluting sources of carbon pollution take greater action to
reduce that pollution, and it ensures that smaller units, which
may have a role to play in grid balancing as we achieve a
cleaner electricity mix, are able to continue to operate. For
example, existing gas peaker plants, which do not run as often,
will likely not be covered at all.
Finally, I want to say a word on reliability. Despite this
rule being incredibly different from the Obama administration's
Clean Power Plan, many of the attacks against it remain
unchanged. Back then we also heard scare tactics that the rule
would threaten reliability. What happened instead? Before the
rule would have even gone into effect, market trends enabled
nearly every State to achieve the 2030 goals of the proposal.
Just like then, today Members are vastly underestimating just
how quickly our electricity system is becoming cleaner and how
quickly pollution control technologies will become cheaper.
Now, there certainly are steps Congress should take to
strengthen the reliability of our electric grid. Unfortunately,
our Republican colleagues missed a huge opportunity by failing
to agree to any serious transmission policies as part of last
week's debt ceiling agreement. We could have taken meaningful,
commonsense steps to strengthen transmission connections
between and amongst regions. This definitely would have
enhanced grid resilience in the short term, as we face
increasing numbers of extreme weather events, and the long
term, as our electricity mix continues to change.
Mr. Chair, I believe, despite what we will hear today, EPA
has taken a sensible, flexible, targeted, and certainly
achievable approach to reduce emission from some of the largest
carbon polluters in our country. I do look forward to today's
discussion. But more importantly, I look forward to EPA
finalizing this proposal.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Tonko follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Tonko. And with that, Mr. Chair, I yield back.
Mr. Johnson. The gentleman yields back. The Chair now
recognizes the Chair of the full Committee on Energy and
Commerce, Mrs. McMorris Rodgers, for 5 minutes for an opening
statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, A
REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF WASHINGTON

Mrs. Rodgers. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you to our
witnesses.
Energy is foundational to everything we do, and America's
ability to harness it through innovation and entrepreneurship
has completely transformed the human condition.
Energy powers our economy, and it is why America is leading
lifting people out of poverty and raising the standard of
living. And we have achieved this while being the leader in
emissions reduction and maintaining some of the highest
environmental and labor standards in the world.
In order to build on this remarkable legacy, we must
continue to innovate and take advantage of our abundant natural
resources for a diverse energy mix. Today, however, more and
more people in America are being forced to face the threats of
blackouts and brownouts. This is happening across the country.
In California, rush-to-green policies are driving out baseload
and dispatchable generation in exchange for less reliable
weather-dependent substitutes. This crisis is playing out in
Texas too, where overreliance on weather-dependent sources has
limited its capacity to endure severe regional weather.
Last year, the American--North American Reliability
Corporation, NERC, warned that more than half the Nation was at
an elevated risk of forced blackouts during the summer. This
year NERC is projecting that number will be roughly two-thirds
of the Nation.
The reliability of our electric grid is essential to
America's health and safety. Rushing to dismantle our Nation's
electricity generation is not how we improve people's lives and
well-being. Yet the EPA has sought to use the Clean Air Act to
restructure the American power sector by shutting down coal-
fired power plants and shifting electricity generation to
weather-dependent sources.
These efforts to transform the Nation's electricity system
would have damaging and lasting effects on reliability for
Americans across the country and would go well beyond the EPA's
congressionally mandated authority. The Supreme Court ruled
just that in West Virginia v. EPA when it found that the EPA's
efforts to circumvent Congress and restructure the U.S. power
sector through the Clean Air Act were unconstitutional. Given
the Court's ruling, the EPA must be completely transparent with
the public about how its sweeping new rules would jeopardize
the reliability of our electric grid and shut down our economy.
This morning, the committee sent a letter to the EPA
Administrator Regan demanding the agency extend its comment
period for the proposed greenhouse gas and power plant rules.
The EPA is setting a strict, costly, and untested standard on
both new and existing natural gas generators and remaining coal
generators, and the agency is doing it on an extremely fast
compliance timeline. This is unacceptable. This complex
proposal would affect the entire U.S. coal-generating fleet,
all future natural gas power plants, as well as existing plants
producing more than 300 megawatts of power. These changes will
have a chilling effect on American natural gas, which is
critical for generating electricity across the country. It will
make life more expensive across the board.
It is clear these profound changes sought by the EPA pose
risk to the structure of our entire electric generation and
energy mix. The comment period on the proposal should be
extended to enable stakeholders time to evaluate and respond
fully.
In order to ensure the American people have access to
affordable, reliable energy to keep them safe, fed, and warm,
it is vital that we, the committee of jurisdiction, understand
and take actions to address the EPA's proposals and what they
mean for the Nation's electricity systems, as well as
Americans--America's energy leadership. That is our goal today.
And I thank the witnesses for being here, and I look
forward to our discussion.
[The prepared statement of Mrs. Rodgers follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mrs. Rodgers. I yield back.
Mr. Johnson. The gentlelady yields back. The Chair now
recognizes the full committee ranking member, Mr. Pallone, for
5 minutes for an opening statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. FRANK PALLONE, Jr., A REPRESENTATIVE
IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF NEW JERSEY

Mr. Pallone. Thank you, Chairman Johnson.
Today we will be discussing the EPA's recently proposed new
carbon pollution standards for fossil fuel power plants. This
proposal is long overdue, and is critical to reducing dangerous
air pollution, fighting the worsening climate crisis, and
protecting communities across the Nation. It builds on the
climate and public health investments President Biden and
congressional Democrats made with the Inflation Reduction Act,
and it is necessary now because the power sector is the second-
largest source of climate pollution in the United States, yet
these power plants are still allowed to spew carbon pollution
without any oversight.
I think most Americans would be surprised to hear that
right now there are no limitations on how much carbon pollution
these power plants can emit. It simply defies logic when you
consider that, week in and week out, communities around the
Nation are devastated by extreme weather events made worse by
the climate crisis: Lives are lost; homes and livelihoods are
destroyed.
Power plants are the single largest industrial cause of
global warming in the United States. They make up 25 percent of
all carbon pollution nationwide. With fossil fuel power plants
being such a significant contributor to dangerous air pollution
that only exacerbates the worsening climate crisis, these
proposed standards are an important complementary action that
will benefit all Americans as well as our environment and our
economy.
Now, the EPA's proposal will finally set necessary emission
limits and guidelines for carbon pollution from new and
existing fossil fuel power plants. It will cut dangerous carbon
pollution and dramatically improve public health, particularly
for communities already overburdened by air pollution. And this
is critical to our ongoing efforts to safeguard clean and safe
air for all Americans.
The proposal is estimated to avoid up to 617 million metric
tons of total carbon dioxide through 2042. That is equivalent
to the annual emissions of roughly half of the cars in the
United States. And within the same timeframe, EPA projects that
the proposed standards will result in up to $85 billion in net
climate and health-related benefits. We are going to save
billions of dollars because Americans will be healthier, thanks
to this proposal's reductions in carbon pollution.
Now, these are significant benefits, but my Republican
colleagues would rather ignore them as they continue to push
their polluters-over-people agenda. They have no problem
letting dangerous air pollution go unchecked. In fact, they are
opposed to this proposal. So today we will undoubtedly hear
arguments from the Republican majority about how EPA's proposal
is illegal, will shut down power plants and turn off the
lights. We have heard these claims before, and none of them are
true. In fact, they get rolled out whenever this or any
administration acts on air pollution or the climate crisis.
Now, take the critical investments included in the
Bipartisan Infrastructure Law and the Inflation Reduction Act
to upgrade our Nation's power infrastructure, strengthen the
grid, and cut power sector pollution with clean energy tax
credits. Just because none of my Republican colleagues here
today voted for these laws doesn't mean they don't get--exist.
They did get enacted. The truth is the market, bolstered by
these few--by these key Federal investments, is already driving
changes in the power sector. And EPA's proposal merely builds
on this existing momentum.
Republicans are simply not interested in finding solutions
to our carbon pollution problems. They are not interested in
developing a plan to help us reduce emissions while still
maintaining a safe, reasonably priced electricity system.
The Clean Air Act is clear. EPA has both the authority and
obligation to protect Americans from dangerous carbon
pollution, and Republicans have not offered any practical
solution to address the serious threat of air pollution and the
climate crisis. Frankly, I think the Republican policy of
``just say no to any climate action'' is just getting old.
In my opinion, the EPA's proposal, combined with the
historic climate investments Democrats made last Congress, will
put us on track to cleaner air, better health, a safer climate,
and a stronger economy.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Pallone follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Pallone. And with that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back the
balance of my time.
Mr. Johnson. The gentleman yields back. We now conclude
with Member opening statements. The Chair would like to remind
Members that, pursuant to the committee rules, all Members'
opening statements will be made part of the record.
We want to thank all of our witnesses for being here today
and taking the time to testify before our subcommittee.
Each witness will have the opportunity to give a 5-minute
opening statement followed by a round of questions from
Members.
Our witnesses today are Mr. Patrick O'Loughlin. He is
president and CEO of Buckeye Power and Ohio Rural Cooperatives.
Welcome.
Mr. Todd Snitchler is president and CEO of the Electric
Power Supply Association, or EPSA.
Mr. Jay Duffy is litigation director with the Clean Air
Task Force.
And Mr. Michael Nasi is a partner with the Jackson Walker
law firm.
We appreciate you being here today. We will now recognize
Mr. O'Loughlin for 5 minutes to give an opening statement.

STATEMENTS OF PATRICK O'LOUGHLIN, PRESIDENT AND CHIEF EXECUTIVE
OFFICER, BUCKEYE POWER, INC., AND OHIO RURAL ELECTRIC
COOPERATIVES; TODD SNITCHLER, PRESIDENT AND CHIEF EXECUTIVE
OFFICER, ELECTRIC POWER SUPPLY ASSOCIATION; JAY DUFFY,
LITIGATION DIRECTOR, CLEAN AIR TASK FORCE; AND MICHAEL J. NASI,
PARTNER, JACKSON WALKER, LLP

STATEMENT OF PATRICK O'LOUGHLIN

Mr. O'Loughlin. Thank you, Chairman Johnson.
Buckeye Power operates as a not-for-profit electric
cooperative owned by and serving 25 electric distribution
cooperatives that provide electric service to approximately 1
million Ohioans. Ohio Electric Cooperative members are largely
residential and generally living in rural and lower-income
parts of the State.
Buckeye owns and operates a diverse set of generating
resources to meet the power demand requirements of our members
reliably and economically every hour of every day, during
normal weather, and during extreme weather events. Today we use
coal, natural gas, hydropower, biogas, and solar generation,
coordinated with an extensive demand response program to
achieve this mission.
Buckeye Power has invested more than $1 billion in
environmental control technologies over the last 20 years and
achieved not only full compliance with all current
environmental regulations but truly state-of-the-art emission
reductions.
Today, however, our electric power system is already
straining to provide reliable, continuous service. Throughout
the country, we are experiencing supply emergencies any time
there is an extreme weather event. The demand for electricity
is continuing to increase and is expected to increase at an
even faster pace as more and more end uses are electrified,
especially the growing demand for electricity to fuel our
transportation needs.
New-generation additions in recent years have been limited
almost exclusively to natural gas, wind, and solar, but they
have not kept pace with the rapid and disorderly retirement of
coal-fired generation over this period. Reliability challenges
have continued to grow as that always-available generation is
increasingly being replaced by intermittent renewable sources.
These retirements and many more expected in the coming years
have largely resulted from a never-ending flood of
environmental regulations.
EPA's existing 2020 wastewater discharge rule has caused
several more plants to plan to retire by 2028. EPA has since
proposed a new wastewater rule that creates even greater
hurdles to continued operation.
The proposed greenhouse gas rule for power plants forces
unproven emission control concepts on power plant operators in
unrealistic timeframes. If enacted, it will jeopardize nearly
every coal-fired power plant by 2039--and, in fact, most by
2030. Buckeye Power will likely be required to shut down all of
our coal units by 2030, which currently supply more than 80
percent of our annual energy requirements, and we have nearly
no hope of replacing this generation within that short
timeframe.
Carbon capture for coal-fired power plants has not been
proven on more than a portion of the flue gas at a few sites
and has not been able to operate on a continuous basis at the
required removal rates that EPA proposes. Large-scale carbon
capture projects cannot be permitted, designed, procured, and
installed on more than a few units--being those that are
already in advanced design stages today--by the 2030 deadline
EPA requires in order for continued operation.
The more-than-500-page rule follows 3 other major
environmental rules either proposed or finalized by EPA aimed
at fossil-fired power plants just this year, all with somewhat
questionable support from both an economic and technical
viewpoint.
We are a small company. Our entire office staff is about 80
people charged with running a generation transmission utility
to meet our members' needs. We are not a regulatory review
company, yet we are forced to review and comment on these very
significant regulations in only 60 days. Our company and our
member consumers can't afford to implement full-scale science
experiments at our production facilities.
We all need a reliable electric system for our safety,
security, and well-being. We can and have implemented large-
scale environmental improvements at our power plants when we
have commercially available technology that has been
demonstrated at a reasonable cost. This proposed rule ignores
these needs that a well-functioning electric system requires.
Thank you for having me here today, Chairman.
[The prepared statement of Mr. O'Loughlin follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Johnson. The gentleman yields back.
The Chair now recognizes Mr. Snitchler for your 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF TODD SNITCHLER

Mr. Snitchler. Good morning, Chairman Johnson and the
committee.
Try that again. Good morning, Chairman Johnson, and to the
committee. Thank you for the opportunity to appear before the
subcommittee this morning.
EPSA is the national trade association representing
America's independent power producers that compete every day in
regions operating competitive wholesale markets. I would like
to note that my testimony represents the position of EPSA and
not necessarily the review--the views of any particular member.
EPSA members own and operate generating assets which
account for roughly 20 percent of the Nation's installed
capacity. Those assets include nearly 115,000 megawatts of
natural-gas-fired generation. Members also own and operate
nuclear, wind, solar, battery storage, and coal resources.
EPSA's members have a deep commitment to the electric grid
and its reliability, and strongly support the clean energy
expansion. However, as--even as this energy expansion takes
place, we cannot lose sight of job number one, which is to
ensure reliability of the system.
To ensure reliability, the energy expansion must be done by
augmenting investment in clean resources with an appropriate
attention to dispatchable resources and not simply ignoring the
impacts of efforts to drive dispatchable resources from the
grid.
I would like to highlight a few key aspects from my
testimony.
First, natural gas generation is critical, and a critical
component to electric grid reliability, and will only increase
in importance as variable weather-dependent resources become a
greater part of our generation mix. In the coming years,
natural gas generation will be even more important to our
electric grid reliability in an era of evolving climate
priorities.
As the nameplate capacity for wind and solar resources on
the electric grid increases, the potential volatility of real-
time renewable energy production increases as well. Grid
operators will need sufficient dispatchable resources like
natural gas that can serve as a balancing resource as renewable
energy output rises and falls. The most prominent voices
highlighting reliability concerns are NERC, FERC, and the grid
operators themselves: neutral, independent parties with a great
understanding of the threats facing the electric grid.
Second, electrification policies are only going to increase
demands on the power grid at a time when State and Federal
policies and regulations are driving existing dispatchable
resources off the system. The electric grid expansion is not
about a static level of demand being met by dynamic generation
resources. Electrification policies are going to continue to
increase demand for additional electricity generation. That
means we will need more resources, not less, and those
resources will have to complement each other to deliver on the
goal of reliability.
Third, innovative technologies like carbon capture and
sequestration, long duration electric storage, and hydrogen
cofiring are promising but are not yet commercially ready for
widespread adoption. Some who would dismiss concerns about the
loss of both natural gas and coal generation cite advancements
in both long duration battery storage and CCS technologies to
calm fears about reliability. It is important to note that, as
of June 2023, not a single commercial power plant in the United
States uses CCS technology, and there are no megawatts of long
duration, multiday battery storage interconnected to the bulk
power system. Cofiring hydrogen with natural gas to reduce
carbon emissions is another developing technology that shows
promise yet does not have significant commercial adoption
today.
Under the proposed rule, these technologies will be the key
pieces needed to ensure reliability. However, despite not being
widely used, there is an intense rush to disconnect existing
resources vital to economic--to electric grid reliability on
the assumption that these not-yet-available technologies will
be available when they are needed.
The voices seeking to dismiss reliability concerns by
arguing the electric industry has always been able to meet
policy demands and ensure power is reliable ignore the
specifics of the current situation and directly contradict the
reliability concerns voiced by NERC, FERC, and the grid
operators.
Our concern is that the EPA's proposed rule once again puts
aspirational policy goals ahead of operational reality. If
finalized, these proposed rules will likely lead to power plant
retirements or reduced availability due to operational limits
at a time when reliability coordinators and regulators have
warned that our Nation is already facing a reliability crisis
due to the accelerated retirement of dispatchable resources.
EPSA's members maintain a strong commitment to reliability
and stand ready to help the Nation meet its reliability and
growing energy needs while enabling the coming energy
expansion.
Thank you for the opportunity to be here, and I look
forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Snitchler follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Johnson. The gentleman yields back.
The Chair now recognizes Mr. Duffy for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF JAY DUFFY

Mr. Duffy. Thank you, Chairman Johnson, Ranking Member
Tonko, and honorable members of the committee. My name is Jay
Duffy. I am the litigation director at Clean Air Task Force, a
nonprofit organization. I have been an attorney with CATF for
10 years, working on the rules that we will be talking about
today.
CATF's mission is to push the technology and policy changes
needed to achieve a zero-emissions, high-energy planet at an
affordable cost. In furtherance of that mission, CATF advocates
for and defends strong pollution control standards for power
plants.
A series of listings, findings, and rulemakings made
pursuant to congressional instructions in the Clean Air Act
require EPA to set standards and emission guidelines for
greenhouse gases from fossil-fuel-fired power plants.
The Clean Air Act is technology forcing and forward
looking, and its standards of pollution are based on pollution
controls that the Administrator determines are adequately
demonstrated and cost reasonable.
The Supreme Court recently spoke more favorably about
traditional, at-the-source pollution controls that are cost
reasonable and cause a power plant to operate more cleanly. But
a pollution control need not be on every street corner in order
to be the basis of standards. Standards have been upheld on the
basis of pilot control technology, test programs, operation of
one-plant vendor information, and the performance of controls
in other industries.
History shows that pollution control options can be
developed, available, and cost reasonable, yet sit on the
shelves gathering dust until some regulation or incentive
pushes or pulls an industry to reduce their pollution.
Accounting for the changing role and trajectory of the
regulated power plants and the recent limits imposed by the
Supreme Court, EPA has undertaken its job, as defined by
Congress in the Clean Air Act, and it has proposed emission
standards and guidelines for greenhouse gases from existing and
new power plants. The proposal can and it should be
strengthened, but the core elements of the proposal are strong.
It is key to reality: coal plants are retiring; overall,
fossil plants are running less, and they are supporting an
increasingly renewable grid; pollution control costs are coming
down, both due to learnings through the industry and
advancements and incentives passed by Congress.
Generally, EPA's proposal provides a pathway for older
plants that are approaching retirement and plants that do not
operate as much to control their pollution based on fuels and
efficiency. And let's be clear: As proposed, that is the
majority of the fleet.
Irrespective of this rule, EPA's model projects that coal-
fired generation capacity will fall from 100 gigawatts in 2028
to 33 gigawatts in 2035, and that 84 percent of new and
existing gas units will fall into the proposed low and
intermediate subcategories with less stringent standards. But
for those baseload power plants that are operating the most and
polluting the most, EPA proposes that they meet an emission
limit commensurate with carbon capture and sequestration or
hydrogen cofiring.
EPA first found CCS adequately demonstrated and cost
reasonable in 2015 for new coal-fired power plants. Post-
combustion capture has only become more cost reasonable,
widespread, and proven since that time. When EPA set standards
based on sulfur scrubbers in the 1970s, there were only three
units in operation, and one vendor for the technology. After
regulation, the technology was successfully deployed, cost
declined, and the control became the industry standard.
At least 13 vendors have done significant testing and offer
carbon capture and pollution standard--carbon capture pollution
controls specifically for coal and gas-fired power plants. And
carbon capture has been--or CCS--has been installed and proven
on two large-scale coal-fired power plants, and carbon capture
is currently operating on three coal-fired power plants in the
United States.
The Bellingham Natural Gas Combined Cycle Plant
demonstrated postcombustion capture from 1991 to 2005,
capturing 85 to 95 percent of its CO
2
emissions.
There are also several FEED studies that determine the
technical and economic feasibility of applying postcombustion
capture to coal- and gas-fired power plants. Due to learning by
doing and the 45Q tax credits, EPA found the cost of CCS even
more reasonable now than they did in 2015, and it is well below
the cost of sulfur scrubbers, a comparable pollution control.
EPA's record to support standards based on CCS is robust and
more than sufficient for the purposes of a forward-looking and
technology-forcing statute.
The impacts of this proposal are modest and manageable.
Several overlapping layers of security are in place to ensure
that we do not need to choose between public health and
reliable electricity.
Thank you for inviting me to this important hearing. I look
forward to the discussion.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Duffy follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Johnson. The gentleman yields back.
The Chair now recognizes Mr. Nasi for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF MICHAEL J. NASI

Mr. Nasi. Thank you, Chair Johnson, Ranking Member Tonko,
and members of the subcommittee. My name is Mike Nasi of the
Austin office of Jackson Walker, and thank you for the
opportunity to testify today regarding EPA's new section 111(b)
and (d) new carbon rule for new and existing power plants.
As an environmental lawyer who has celebrated the success
of the Clean Air Act in classes, businesses, and companies
alike, I regret that the rule reflects a recent trend by EPA to
act as an energy policymaker as opposed to an environmental
regulator.
As a practitioner with 28 years in the power sector and 20
years in CCS development, I am aware of the promises and the
challenges we face in CCS. I am also involved in hydrogen
projects, so I am no stranger to their promise or problems
either. It is with that background that I come before you today
to express concerns about EPA's new carbon rule and to point
out the immediate and lasting impacts it will have on our
Nation's grid, our economic security, and the rule of law.
In my written testimony, I spend some time giving a sense
of the risky state of the electric grid, because it is
essential that we have that in mind when we enter into a
discussion about the carbon rule.
I heavily--I am heavily involved in other EPA dockets, each
of which will have significant grid impacts, but none as
significant as the new carbon rule.
One of the graphics I include in my written testimony
depicts the compressed timeline that will force premature
retirements of coal plants on the front end, and ultimately
drive massive, wide-scale retirements of both coal and gas on
the back end. For the existing coal fleet, we stand to lose
about 155,000 megawatts of coal--and that is not the coal that
is already planning on retiring, that is the coal that is
planning on sticking around--because they will be faced with
the immediate doubt and--about the prudence of continuing to
spend dollars on facilities whose useful lives are now going to
be cut short because of the deadlines and the infeasible
control requirements that are starting in just January of 2030,
which will be, at best, 3 years, you know, to do--to come into
compliance by the time the State plans are completed.
Just to give you perspective, 155,000 megawatts is the
amount of power needed to power between 78 and 140 million
homes.
For the existing gas fleet, which is in--also in the same
range of potential impacts ranging up to about 204,000
megawatts, they are going to be faced with an impossible
choice. They are either going to have to down-dispatch to stay
out of the baseload category, which in many regions will be
uneconomic and means they will retire, or they will have to
take the unprecedented risk of hoping that CCS and/or these
hydrogen technologies will work.
For the hydrogen pathway, it involves displacing fully 30
percent of the natural gas they currently use with low GHG
hydrogen, a water-consumptive fuel that is not yet in existence
at scale. And in just 6 years after that they have to go to a
96 percent cofiring of low-GHG hydrogen--again, a nonexistent
fuel, but then will require a whole new transportation pipeline
system. If the low hydrogen pathway isn't chosen, they must
deploy the already mentioned carbon capture at a scale and in a
timeframe that is unprecedented, even if it is conceivable.
For those contemplating new gas generation, this rule has
already chilled investment in efficient, combined-cycle gas
plants and large-frame combustion turbines because, as of last
month, they will be held to the same standards with unproven
technologies in their future. And our inability, our slowing of
this new gas build is going to prevent us from filling the void
that is being left by the continued retirement of coal,
nuclear, and older gas units.
Turning to the legal defects of the new carbon rule, the
Clean Power Plan certainly triggers major questions and,
contrary to those who have suggested otherwise, is running
afoul of the Supreme Court's decision in
West Virginia v.
EPA.
No matter how much EPA and supporting advocates will try to
argue that this rule is simply technology forcing, the
technologies they chose to force don't just force technology at
the power plant, they force our entire Nation to consent to,
among other things, the construction of thousands of miles of
hydrogen and CO
2
pipelines and CO
2

storage sites. Even if such an unprecedented national energy
infrastructure overhaul was conceivable, it is simply not EPA's
job to mandate it.
This reliance on outside defense infrastructure is what
distinguishes CCS from scrubbers, which you have referred to,
for sulfur dioxide. When we put scrubbers in place, the entire
system is in our control at the plant. We have the systems to
manage it all on site. By contrast, CCS necessarily requires
outside-the-fence infrastructure to transport and inject that
CO
2
. In all but a handful of cases, that will be
outside the control of the power plant operator.
In conclusion, I urge the committee to request the EPA to
withdraw this proposal and rework the rule. EPA should
simultaneously reexamine the grid impacts of this rule. And at
the very least, EPA should extend the current 60-day time
period to make sure that we do this rule right, because if we
do it wrong it will be irreversible and ultimately tragic.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Nasi follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Johnson. The gentleman yields back, and I thank our
witnesses for their testimony, and we will now move into the
Q&A portion of the hearing. I will begin the questioning, and I
recognize myself for 5 minutes.
You know, the timing of this proposal rule--proposed
rulemaking could not be worse. Our Nation's largest grid
operator, PJM, which covers my district and the entire State of
Ohio, warned it could face significant capacity shortfalls by
the end of the decade. It cited specific EPA rules as the
primary driver behind this energy shortfall.
And it is not just Ohio. In fact, the Governor of Virginia
sent me a copy of a letter he sent to the EPA yesterday in
advance of this hearing. Virginia, part of the PJM grid, just
as Ohio is, Governor Youngkin warns that ``this proposal not
only ignores this looming potential energy crisis, but
exacerbates the problem.'' I have the letter right here, and I
am entering it into the record.
[The information appears at the conclusion of the hearing.]
Mr. Johnson. The North American Electric Reliability
Corporation, NERC, also has noted that significant portions of
the country face capacity shortfalls during normal and above-
normal demand scenarios. In fact, the CEO of NERC stated just
last week before a Senate hearing that ``the pace of change is
overtaking the reliability needs of the system.
``Unless reliability and resilience are appropriately
prioritized, current trends indicate the potential for more
frequent and more serious long-duration reliability
disruptions, including the possibility of national consequence
events.''
I mean, I have heard my colleagues talk about the EPA's
mission to manage public health. When is freezing to death and
suffering from heat exhaustion because you can't heat and cool
your home because your power is shut down--why is that not a
public health issue? And I don't understand why the EPA doesn't
see that.
I have a question for each of you on the panel, starting
with my fellow Ohioans.
Mr. O'Loughlin, for the record here, if this rule goes into
effect along with the litany of other EPA rules on power
generation, can my constituents in the PJM grid and families
across the country expect equal to or better grid reliability
in 2032 than they do right now?
Mr. O'Loughlin. Chairman Johnson----
Mr. Johnson. A quick answer, if you could.
Mr. O'Loughlin. I don't see any possible way that would be
true. We are at great risk today, and this will definitely make
it significantly worse.
Mr. Johnson. OK. Mr. Snitchler.
Mr. Snitchler. Mr. Chairman, we would have concerns about
what the ultimate outcome would be of the litany of policies
EPA----
Mr. Johnson. Is that a no under these rules? You don't
think it is going to be----
Mr. Snitchler. It has yet to be determined, but it sets us
up for a real reliability challenge.
Mr. Johnson. OK. What about Mr. Duffy?
Mr. Duffy. I think we can maintain reliability. There are
plenty of flexibilities in this rulemaking, and long
timelines----
Mr. Johnson. Yes or no, will it be the same or equal to or
better?
Mr. Duffy. I think we can maintain reliability.
Mr. Johnson. OK. Mr. Nasi.
Mr. Nasi. There is no way, if you look at the data of the
RTOs, that our reliability will not be in a much worse shape.
Mr. Johnson. OK. I am also concerned this rule sends
negative signals to the energy industry to invest in critical
natural gas infrastructure. My district sits atop the Utica and
Marcellus Shale, where we produce clean, abundant American
natural gas for a number of power generation facilities in our
region. However, due to many of the market subsidies like tax
credits for unreliable and nondispatchable wind and solar,
natural gas generation is becoming increasingly less
economically competitive.
On top of that, it is clear that EPA regulations are taking
this one step further, threatening the economic viability of
current and future gas-fired generation. For example, the
proposed rule sets unrealistic requirements like cofiring with
over 90 percent hydrogen by certain fast-approaching dates,
despite the fact this technology has never even been adequately
demonstrated.
So, Mr. Snitchler, can you explain to us how this rule will
further harm the economic viability of reliable gas generation
on our electric grid now and into the future?
Mr. Snitchler. As owners of natural gas resources or
developers of new natural gas resources, we are always looking
for some degree of certainty that would ensure the long-term
viability and low-cost operation, because unlike regulated
utilities, competitive power generators have to compete to be
the lowest-cost, most efficient unit to run.
And when you find yourself in a situation where you are not
sure that you will be able to earn a reasonable rate of return
and you are asked to make billions of dollars of investments,
that has a chilling effect on investment that suggests that we
will not see the needed amount of natural gas resources that,
if you want to increase your wind and solar resources, you need
to have additional natural gas resources to support them. They
work together. And if you turn off one, you are left with only
the other.
Mr. Johnson. I would submit that PJM's report actually says
that, of all the retirement and the energy coming off of the
grid, only 6 percent of it is--of the replacement is natural
gas. Only 6 percent.
With that, I yield back and I recognize the ranking member,
Mr. Tonko, for his questions.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you, Chairman Johnson.
Many utilities--excuse me--and power producers have already
made commitments to close their oldest and their most polluting
power plants. These announcements long predate this proposal,
and this is largely because all across the country renewable
energy is able to compete with existing fossil fuel resources.
So Mr. Duffy, your testimony mentioned that EPA's modeling
projects coal-fired power plant capacity will decline from 100
gigawatts in 2028, and I believe you said 33 gigawatts in 2035,
irrespective of this rule. Can you expand upon this trend in
the power sector toward cleaner alternatives?
And just how does EPA's proposed rule align with trends
already underway?
Mr. Duffy. Sure. So what EPA does here is it uses design
features that they have used for decades with the Clean Air
Act. So they took the fleet, they divided it into
subcategories, and then set standards for those subcategories.
They took into account the fact that these plants are already
planning on retiring. It doesn't make sense to do a big, huge
pollution control project on a plant that is intending to
retire. So there are pathways there.
And then, as we have mentioned before, the natural gas
fleet is operating at lower capacity factors to support an
increasingly renewable grid. And so for those plants there are
less stringent standards. It is the baseload plants that is--an
increasingly small percentage that have the more stringent
standards.
Mr. Tonko. And again, Mr. Duffy, last year Congress enacted
the Inflation Reduction Act. How do the incentives included in
that law complement the rule?
And will the IRA help reduce compliance costs?
Mr. Duffy. Yes, for sure. In 2015, when EPA decided that--
determined that CCS was--adequately demonstrated cost
reasonable, the 45Q credit was at $20. It is now at $85. So
that significantly changes things.
And then the baseline, of course, of what the generation
mix looks like right now has been changed, making, you know,
carbon pollution standards easier to meet.
Mr. Tonko. Right. Mr. Duffy, your testimony mentioned an
analysis that the proposed rule would only cover 7 percent of
existing natural gas plants, which must be greater than 300
megawatts and have a capacity factor greater than 50 percent to
be covered. And I am sure there are many environmental and
public health organizations that feel too few existing gas
plants are covered.
And for the record, I would like to see more sources
covered too. But for now, let's just examine what EPA has
actually proposed. Can you please help make this clear to
everyone?
Has EPA gone to great lengths to tailor this rule, as
proposed, toward the largest and the most polluting sources?
Mr. Duffy. Yes, the most stringent standards are certainly
on that small percentage that runs baseload.
Mr. Tonko. And when setting these thresholds, was EPA
considering the already-underway long-term expected shift in
our electricity mix, where some of these gas plants--smaller,
less polluting ones that don't run as frequently--may play a
role in balancing a grid that is much more reliant on renewable
resources?
Mr. Duffy. Certainly. I mean, EPA makes clear that power
trends were a driving factor in how they designed this rule,
and also that reliability was of paramount concern in the
design.
Mr. Tonko. Right. Well, we made great efforts to make
certain that we don't claw back some of the incentives of the
IRA, which are extremely beneficial to this entire picture.
To summarize, many existing coal plants are already
planning to retire, and certainly will not be required to take
meaningful actions under the rule. And many existing gas
plants, which can play a smaller but certainly perhaps needed a
role--needed role in grid balancing and reliability, are also
not covered by the rule.
This, therefore, I believe, is reasonable and achievable as
an approach that allows EPA to target the most polluting units
while following preexisting power sector market trends. We
should not suggest otherwise.
And with that, Mr. Chair, I yield back.
Mr. Palmer [presiding]. I thank the gentleman for his
questions. The Chair now recognizes the chairman of the full
committee, the gentlelady from Washington, Mrs. McMorris
Rodgers, for her questions.
Mrs. Rodgers. Thank you.
Delivering electric power reliability and affordability is
vital for public health and safety. Yet irresponsible climate
policies have relentlessly been pushing to eliminate the
baseload generation that is essential for assuring that people
have power, especially when they need it the most. Grid
authorities are finally speaking up about the risk to the
public, as witnesses today are highlighting.
The Biden administration, like the Obama administration,
has set policy goals to decarbonize the grid by 2035. And it is
a pace that is dangerous to the public. The Obama
administration used the Clean Air Act to circumvent Congress as
a weapon to force retirements and drive out baseload power,
even when proposed standards did not withstand legal challenge.
It looks like the Biden EPA is attempting the same thing.
Mr. Nasi, would you briefly walk through the estimates in
your testimony for the immediate and long-term impacts of EPA's
proposals, how much coal and gas generation could be retired?
Mr. Nasi. Thank you, Chairwoman, I will. Pages 11 and 12 of
my testimony set out the data. EPA's models about what is going
to happen, frankly, are not credible; they don't confer with
NERC, FERC, RTOs, or States to develop them, and they conflict
specifically with many of my clients' plans.
So you have to look at the data, and the data from EIA,
both Forms 860M and 923, show that about 55,000 megawatts of
coal is expected to retire by 2032, but 155,000 megawatts are
not. And so that is what is on the block, the chopping block
for retirement, for the reasons I explained.
On the gas fleet, because they have done this by capacity
factor, you look at that same data set, and you look at the
capacity factors. And those that are over a 45 percent capacity
factor--it depends on an economic test, but grossly speaking,
that would impact 194,000 megawatts of existing gas-fired
generation. At the best case, if it is actually only over a 55
percent capacity factor, it is 126,000 gigawatts of existing
gas. So EPA's predictions are, frankly, at odds with the data
and the announced plans of folks, and the compressed timelines
are going to force those retirements.
Mrs. Rodgers. Thank you. Do you know how many plants would
actually comply with this rule?
Mr. Nasi. I mean, we will have a handful of plants--I said
in my written testimony I am a big supporter of CCS technology.
I have been involved in projects for 20 years--a handful of
projects that are sitting on great geology that might be able
to take the risk. But that is in the hundreds and maybe a
couple thousand megawatts of that massive fleet. The other
facilities are just too dependent upon pipeline infrastructure
that doesn't exist and, on the gas side, hydrogen that doesn't
exist. Low GHG hydrogen is not a commercial product.
And so to bank a standard on something that doesn't exist
in reality now--and even because of metallurgical and other
reasons, frankly, can't realistically be moved around--is a big
problem.
Mrs. Rodgers. Thank you.
Mr. O'Loughlin and Mr. Snitchler, you are either directly
responsible for producing and providing power or represent the
companies that do so. Would retirements on this scale that Mr.
Nasi just described substantially change the generation mix on
the grid?
Mr. O'Loughlin. It will. And what is particularly being
targeted are baseload generation units, which may be few in
number, but they provide a large percentage of the energy and a
large percentage of the reliability services that we depend on.
You know, as I have said earlier, anybody that has
seriously looked at our current situation realizes that we have
elevated risk right now during extreme weather events, and any
decline in those baseload resources greater than what we are
already expecting is certainly going to have a negative impact
on that going forward.
Mr. Snitchler. I would echo the comments about the need for
us to ensure that we have sufficient resources. And if you look
at the EIA data from their most recent report--it just came out
about a month ago--it talks about the potential need for
additional resources to support the system, even under a high
renewables penetration scenario. It is at a minimum of 9
gigawatts of new natural gas or as high as 360 gigawatts of new
natural gas which would be required in order to ensure
reliability on the system. That suggests to me that we are
going to need more, not less. It is a both-and, not an either-
or, scenario.
Mrs. Rodgers. Thank you. Back to Mr. Nasi.
You were involved in the litigation over President Obama's
Clean Power Plan, which eventually resulted in West Virginia v.
EPA. Do you think section 111 of the Clean Air Act authorized
EPA to transform the electric system like this, or is it just
another example of the Federal agency circumventing Congress'
Article I authorities?
Mr. Nasi. Absolutely. You know, the Clean Air Act is based
in a principle that you can't infer massive powers from
Congress in vague language. And the Act requires--and the
Supreme Court's opinion requires--that the system of emission
reduction start and finish inside the fence of a facility.
When you are banking on an overhaul of an entire energy
system, you are technology forcing in a way that is explicitly
prohibited by both the Act and by the Supreme Court.
Mrs. Rodgers. Thank you. We are the elected representatives
of the people. We should be making these decisions around the
Clean Air Act.
I yield back.
Mr. Palmer. The gentlelady yields. The Chair now recognizes
the gentlewoman from Colorado, Ms. DeGette, for her questions.
Ms. DeGette. Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. So the Clean
Air Act was specifically designed to give the EPA the authority
to regulate air pollution, to improve public health and the
environment, and has held accordingly. And it was also designed
to be a driver of technologies that can address air pollution
in a forward-thinking way.
So, Mr. Duffy, I want to ask you, would you agree that the
Clean Air Act is technology driving?
Mr. Duffy. I would, and I think more importantly, so would
the courts.
Ms. DeGette. Right.
Mr. Duffy. They--history shows that you can have pollution
controls that are not--you know, being deployed, but they are
not being deployed because there is not a regulation to require
them. Why would you install a pollution control if there is no
regulation to do so?
Ms. DeGette. Exactly. And this rule that we are talking
about today, as proposed, fits in with the description of
technology driving under the Clean Air Act. Is that right?
Mr. Duffy. That is right. I mean, for, you know, the fuels
and efficiencies, which is the bulk of--the basis of the
standards, those have been done for decades. CCS, there is
adequate demonstration that it can be scaled up for this source
category.
Ms. DeGette. And also, this draft rule is aligned with
EPA's previous work under the Clean Air Act. And I am wondering
if you can expand your last answer to explain exactly how the
draft rule is similar to previous EPA rules.
Mr. Duffy. Sure. So, you know, I have used the example of
sulfur scrubbers. You know, in the 1970s we were hearing these
same sorts of arguments because there was only one vendor out
there for sulfur scrubbers. There were only three in operation.
And they set standards, and cost declined, the pollution
control was deployed, there were 16 vendors by the end of the
decade, and it became the industry standard.
Ms. DeGette. Right, that is right. So this rule, it seems
to me, seems like sort of the next step in combating air
pollution from coal- and gas-fired plants.
And so I want to move on and say EPA projects that coal-
fired electricity generation will fall to 33 gigawatts in 2035,
regardless of whether this rule was implemented or not.
So how does this rule complement the trends that are
already taking place in the markets?
Mr. Duffy. Right. I mean, it was actually pursuant to, you
know, large trade associations' request that EPA set these
glide paths, these pathways for plants that are nearing the end
of their useful lives, such that they didn't have to install
major pollution control technologies and make that investment
when they wouldn't be able to recoup it. So that seems to me a
meaningful--a reasonable path forward when these plants are,
you know, at the end of their useful lives.
Those that continue to run, CCS is cost effective and
available and, most importantly, reduces nearly all the
pollution, the climate pollution, from the power plant. And so
that is the basis of the standards for that sector.
Ms. DeGette. Yes, and frankly, we are seeing this in my
home State of Colorado already, where the coal-fired plants,
for business reasons, are coming offline and people are moving
to other alternatives.
And so Mr. Tonko asked you the question, and I think it is
worth expanding on it. The Inflation Reduction Act actually
lowered the cost for the new technologies, is that right?
Mr. Duffy. That is right. As I said, it is kind of a two-
part answer. It, number one, reduced the cost of CCS to be even
more reasonable and, in some places, you know, cost effective,
not just, you know, a cost of doing business. And so there is
that.
And then there is also the fact that the grid is being
supported in a way where, you know, replacement generation is
more and more affordable.
Ms. DeGette. Yes. So in your opinion, does this rule seem
overly burdensome, or does it seem like a commonsense next step
that EPA should take?
Mr. Duffy. This seems like a pretty traditional, inside-
the-fence rule that EPA has been doing for decades under
section 111.
Ms. DeGette. Great. Thank you very much.
I yield back.
Mr. Palmer. I thank the gentlelady. The Chair now
recognizes the gentleman from Georgia, Mr. Carter, for his
questions.
Mr. Carter. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank each of you
for being here. This is extremely important, and this is
something I am very concerned with, and that is EPA and other
agencies promulgating rules and essentially doing the work of
what is supposed to be Congress and the elected officials, and
then what we are going to find here is that this is going to
send negative signals to the entire power industry to invest in
baseload generation. And that is not what we need.
You know, I am still stinging from the State of the Union
address, when the President of the United States, in the same
breath, blamed the high price of gasoline on the fact that the
fossil fuel industry was not investing in the infrastructure,
and then in the next breath said, oh, we are not going to need
fossil fuels in the next 10 years, anyway. Duh.
I mean, this is serious stuff here, and I am very concerned
about this. We are putting every rule imaginable into the way
of the most reliable power-generating sources we have. Sixty
percent of this Nation's energy comes from natural gas and
coal, and we are--and here is the EPA putting these rules and
regulations in the way of this. And it is just--when you talk
about carbon capture technology, it is just not economical yet.
Do we want to get there? Yes, we want to get there. But it is--
we are not there yet, and that is a problem.
I had the opportunity to travel with the Conservative
Conference--the Conservative Climate Caucus, to Europe. And
what we recognized there and what we saw was that they have
allowed their policies to get ahead of their innovation in
Europe, and now they have got a mess. Now they are going back
to coal after they shut down their nuclear plants and
everything else. We should learn an important lesson there that
we not let our policies get ahead of our innovation.
Mr. O'Loughlin, I want to ask you. In light of this rule,
in light of the rule that we are discussing here today and many
others from EPA, where do you see investments in the power
sector going?
Mr. O'Loughlin. Yes, well, it is a difficult answer for
baseload generation. Obviously, the Government is incenting
more wind and solar, and I think we will see more of that, and
we--which is fine.
But the investment--you know, I would like to expand a
little bit on why I am so confident that we are going to see a
lot of closures of coal plants and probably some basic natural
gas, and it is the state of carbon capture systems, which are--
have been demonstrated to be able to capture carbon at some
larger scale, but they have never been demonstrated according
to the requirements in this EPA proposed rule. They have never
captured a full output of a unit of the size and scope of the
units that we operate. It has never been required to operate on
a continuous basis at a 90 percent capture rate, and they just
simply have not been demonstrated to even be able to do that,
let alone to do it at a reasonable cost.
So I am quite confident that many operators of coal plants
are not going to be able to just throw money away on this--what
I will call a science experiment--that this might work on a
full-scale----
Mr. Carter. Understood.
Mr. O'Loughlin [continuing]. Large, baseload-generating
unit.
Mr. Carter. Thank you.
Mr. Snitchler, let me ask you. How is it simply proposing
this rule, simply proposing it and subjecting the industry to
further regulatory uncertainty, affect planning and investment?
How does a company do that?
Mr. Snitchler. The degree of uncertainty that is raised
chills investment, quite simply.
If you look at the----
Mr. Carter. Sort of like if the President says we are not
going to need fossil fuel in the next 10 years?
Mr. Snitchler. Well, if you are looking at making a 20- or
30-year investment in infrastructure to a power plant, you are
not going to make a 20-year or 30-year investment on a 10-year
time horizon. So you elect not to make that investment.
The challenge becomes, as we look at this energy expansion,
as I noted before, with electrification, increased load, you
are going to need more resources, not less. And as the resource
mix changes, it is not a one-for-one replacement. If you add
10,000 megawatts of wind or solar, you still need to have 1,000
megawatts or more of natural-gas-fired resources in order to
back them up when they don't operate. And so they work
symbiotically, and they are required to work together.
Mr. Carter. Let's talk about pipelines for a second, and
that is important to me because we just got a letter, the
Georgia delegation just got a letter from the Georgia Public
Service Commission to the entire delegation telling us how a
lack of pipelines is threatening our ability to be competitive.
Do you think that is true?
Mr. Snitchler. I think the need for infrastructure is
clear. If we are going to need to see an expansion of the
natural gas system, even if it operates less frequently and at
a lower capacity factor, it is going to need to be able to have
access to the resources. And right now there is not sufficient
access to those resources. And that creates a problem, because
if you can't--if it is not there, it doesn't matter if you
build a plant or not.
Mr. Carter. Is it a financial problem or a liability
problem, or both?
Mr. Snitchler. It is an all-of-the-above problem.
Mr. Carter. OK. All right, Mr. Chairman, I appreciate it.
Thank you both. Thank all of you for being here. This is
extremely important.
And thank you, Mr. Chairman. I will yield back.
Mr. Johnson [presiding]. The gentleman yields back. The
Chair now recognizes the gentlelady Ms. Schakowsky for 5
minutes.
Ms. Schakowsky. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Under the proposed
rule, EPA estimates that the new standard would actually have
net climate, health, and--climate and health benefits to the
tune of about $85 billion.
Specifically, the new standards would prevent more than
1,000 premature deaths, 300,000 asthma attacks, 38,000 school
absences, 66,000 losses in jobs that we would be able to save.
So, Mr. Duffy, I wanted to ask you, can you go into more
detail about the--about how the rule would actually result in
some cost savings, especially when it comes to healthcare?
Mr. Duffy. Sure. You know, so as Ben Franklin said, an
ounce of prevention is worth a pound of cure, and that
certainly is the case with the Clean Air Act. These health
benefits, EPA estimates, will outweigh the compliance costs 7
to 1. So I think that is important here. And as you mentioned,
between 2024 and 2042, the range of health benefits associated
with this rule is 64 billion to 85 billion.
So I think, you know, we need to be conscious of what--the
purpose of this Act here, which is to protect public health.
Ms. Schakowsky. Thank you. And also, Mr. Duffy, I wanted to
ask you, did the clean energy provisions that are included in
the bills that we have passed--we have talked about the
Inflation Reduction Act, et cetera--and the EPA rule increase
costs to American consumers?
I think that is sort of a bottom line that people are
asking. And what is your view? I think we ought to, you know,
set the record straight.
Mr. Duffy. Yes, let's do that. So per the Princeton
University's REPEAT Project, enacting the Inflation Reduction
Act would lower annual U.S. energy expenditures by at least 4
percent in 2030. That is a savings of nearly $50 billion per
household per year for businesses, households, industry. That
translates into hundreds of dollars in annual energy savings
costs for U.S. households.
Ms. Schakowsky. Thank you. So in your testimony you state
that fossil fuel power plants are operating at lower capacity,
and that what we are seeing now is that renewable generation is
actually accounting for greater energy production.
Mr. Duffy. Yes, that is right. I mean, that's the trends
and, you know, the power sector trends that EPA is keying these
rulemakings to. They want to make sure that they are supporting
an ongoing transition that is happening already.
So, as you mentioned, you know, fossil plants are running
less to support an increasingly renewable grid, baseload power
plants are retiring, pollution control costs are coming down.
These are things that are happening in reality. And it is EPA's
job to look at what is happening in the world and determine the
best systems of emission reduction for carbon pollution.
Ms. Schakowsky. So we are hearing a lot about--a lot of
pessimism, I think, about the possibility of the kind of
innovation that we need to have in order to achieve both our
goals of power generation and also healthcare. Can you comment
on that?
Mr. Duffy. Absolutely. I am similarly struck. I think, you
know, the Clean Air Act has driven, you know, American
innovation for decades.
Once a regulation is set, industry generally overcomplies,
has costs come down lower than even anticipated, and then we
don't have the air pollution and the public health detriments
that are associated with their pollution.
Ms. Schakowsky. So you think that we can achieve the goal
to--we don't have to make a choice between clean air and
energy?
Mr. Duffy. No, I don't think so. And that is how the Clean
Air Act is designed: It provides those factors, it gives EPA
the job of looking at what are the pollution controls that are
out there, which ones are adequately demonstrated, which ones
are cost reasonable, consider energy. So all of those things
are the job of EPA, and they have set about doing that here,
and I think it is--they did it fairly successfully.
Ms. Schakowsky. Thank you.
And I yield back.
Mr. Johnson. The gentlelady yields back. The Chair now
recognizes Mr. Palmer for 5 minutes.
Mr. Palmer. Just a couple of points here. I would like to
quote the former chairman of this committee, John Dingell, who
said that he was present when we--meaning Congress--wrote the
Clean Air Act, and he thought it was clear enough that not even
the Supreme Court was stupid enough to determine that the EPA
had the authority to regulate greenhouse gases. I think I agree
with Congressman Dingell, Chairman Dingell.
I just want to point out a couple of things. One, I keep
hearing people talk about this existential threat that climate
change is to the country. And I don't know where they get that
information, because even the Intergovernmental Panel on
Climate Change findings indicate that there has been no
connection to human activity to increase the frequency or the
intensity of hurricanes, or droughts, or any of that. So I just
want to--I just wish people would stick to the science.
But there has been a lot of discussion about the health
impacts. And there was an article a couple of weeks ago in The
Economist where they had done a study, and they determined that
68,000 people died as a result of higher energy costs in
Europe. Sixty-eight thousand. Is that a problem, Mr. Duffy?
Mr. Duffy. Absolutely.
Mr. Palmer. Well, why would you inflict that on American
people?
Mr. Duffy. I think that is a false choice.
Mr. Palmer. No, it isn't a false choice, because it is the
conversion of European hydrocarbon energy to renewables that
precipitated this. It is the problem in the UK, an enormous
problem in the UK. Residential household energy use in the UK
has gone down 10 percent, not because they have become more
efficient but because they can't afford it. That 68,000 is more
than the estimated number of people who died from COVID at
59,700.
And I think it is a huge problem, Mr. Nasi, that we
continue to make these moves that have--could have and are
having enormously devastating consequences for people,
particularly people who are living in energy poverty already.
Mr. Nasi. Yes, sir. I mean, I think on page 18 of my
testimony I conclude with a statement of you really don't even
have to debate climate change to know that the Clean Air Act
directs this agency, this EPA, to do a materiality analysis.
I mean, we can zero out our entire fossil fleet and we make
a 0.7 percent difference in global CO
2

concentrations. That is not a debate about climate science.
That is assuming all linkages that IPCC would assume. That is
just math. And so, when you balance that against the actual
exposure of--to life and treasure that are associated with
outages, it is a big problem.
In Texas I was without power a week. We killed between 250
and 700 people. It is an embarrassment. It is a cautionary tale
for the entire world to follow. We accelerated too fast, too
far. And this rule would do more of the same.
Mr. Palmer. Well, not only would it do that, not only would
it endanger the lives of American people, it makes--it becomes
a national security issue as well, because we cannot have a
power grid that is 100 percent renewable without being almost
100 percent reliant on China to provide the resources that we
need, many of--much of which was built with slave labor, but
that is a whole different point. I guess that is just
considered collateral damage by some folks who are supporting
renewables.
But wouldn't that not only be a problem for our economy but
also for our national security?
Mr. Nasi. Yes, I mean, it is a big geopolitical issue. I
mean, I think the sad truth is, for those that would actually
want to see CCS deployed--which I actually have historically
been a supporter of--the picture is global. And the fact that
the United States is defunding fossil projects even if they are
CCS-equipped is a problem.
We need to turn--everybody can agree that we need to help
bring people out of energy poverty. That will have material
health benefits to human flourishing. And nothing we do
domestically is going to change that reality, and so it is just
a misallocation of capital. We should be focusing on the bigger
picture.
Mr. Palmer. What is interesting is that, as India and China
have gone to fossil fuel coal predominantly to build out their
energy infrastructure, the life expectancies in those countries
have gone up dramatically----
Mr. Nasi. Right.
Mr. Palmer [continuing]. Over the last 25 years, yet there
are still 2.4 billion people who don't have access to reliable
energy. They are cooking their food indoors using wood and
biomass, cow dung, other stuff. I think the WHO estimates about
500,000 have died as a result of that. What would the impact be
if we could provide them with, say, natural gas as a means of
providing energy, and particularly as a means of cooking their
food?
Mr. Nasi. I mean, I spoke to the United Nations a few
months ago, and I simply stated climate deprivation is not a
moral climate--I am sorry, energy deprivation is not a moral
climate policy. We should be empowering them to build gas and
bring themselves out of energy poverty.
Mr. Palmer. Mr. Chairman, I think what he just said should
be taken note of, that the policies that are being pushed are
immoral, and the dangers that they inflict on people.
One quick question. Mr. Duffy, you mentioned that flue gas
scrubbers--the first one was built in the 1970s. What company
was that? You mentioned the only vendor in 1970. Do you know
what company that was?
Mr. Duffy. I apologize, I don't know what the company's
name was off the top of my head.
Mr. Palmer. Well, I worked for the company that built them.
Mr. Johnson. Thank you, Mr. Duffy. The gentleman's time has
expired. The Chair now recognizes Mr. Sarbanes for 5 minutes.
Mr. Sarbanes. Thanks very much, Mr. Chairman. Thank you to
the panel.
I can't think of a greater moral imperative than to
successfully make this transition to renewable sources of
energy as quickly as we can, but also practically, if we are
going to address climate change and address the health effects
that we see from reliance on fossil fuels for sourcing
electricity and other power.
The EPA's proposed power plant rule, which, obviously, we
are talking about today, is part of a very sensible, ongoing
effort by the Biden-Harris administration to ensure that
reliable energy does not come at the expense of public health.
That is the idea here. And the rule would set very reasonable
pollution limits on power plants protecting the health and
well-being of Americans across the country. In particular, I
will just mention the low-income often--and communities of
color that have often borne the brunt of such pollution, again,
if we want to tie it back to a moral imperative underlying
this.
The rule is not an overreach. It is a sound, commonsense,
practical step to take. It is exactly what the EPA should be
doing.
I want to touch on reliability, which is a topic,
obviously, that we have been talking about quite a bit here
today. I represent central Maryland, which is firmly within the
PJM grid. Earlier this year, PJM forecasted that its grid would
see roughly 40 gigawatts of retirements--retirements, I will
note, that it explicitly did not tie to the rule that we are
discussing today. It has also had, as of the time of that
report, 290 gigawatts of capacity trying to connect to PJM's
grid.
Mr. Duffy, we have heard some fearmongering clearly about
resource retirements today, but could you talk a little bit
about how the grid operators actually have quite a big lever to
get more power onto their grid quickly by reforming their
interconnection policies?
Mr. Duffy. So fortunately or unfortunately, I am not a FERC
attorney, but I can--you know, I--as I am not prepared to speak
on kind of reforming the interconnection policies. But what I
can share is that the proposal is going to allow grid
operators, plant owners, and States significant lead time in
order to, you know, deal with these sorts of issues so that
they can--the flexibilities can accommodate the dynamics in
their grid.
EPA has also committed to near-constant communication with
DOE and FERC throughout this process. I am also happy to talk
about kind of the reliability features that are in this rule--
--
Mr. Sarbanes. Right.
Mr. Duffy [continuing]. To help support the rule.
Mr. Sarbanes. I appreciate that.
Mr. Chairman, without objection, I would like to enter into
the record a report prepared by Wilson Energy Economics
critiquing the PJM report.
Mr. Johnson. Without objection, so ordered.
[The information appears at the conclusion of the
hearing.\1\]
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ The information has been retained in committee files and is
included in the Documents for the Record at https://docs.house.gov/
meetings/IF/IF18/20230606/116048/HHRG-118-IF18-20230606-SD094.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Mr. Sarbanes. Thanks very much.
My Republican colleagues are concerned, clearly, about
energy reliability in these discussions about EPA potentially
regulating pollution from power plants. But I think they may be
actively--or maybe it is unwittingly--ignoring the significant
reliability shortcomings of fossil fuels.
So Mr. Duffy, maybe take a shot at that. Can you describe
the reliability concerns associated with fossil fuels--because
we keep hearing about it on the other side of the ledger--and
why we should remember that fossil fuels are not 100 percent
reliable?
Mr. Duffy. Sure. I mean, especially with aging coal plants,
they--you know, as they reach their remaining useful life,
there is more time that they have to--they break down and need
to be fixed. You know, we have had coal piles being frozen
before. So it is not a--there is not a silver bullet here. And
the best way to keep fossil on the grid at baseload is with
this virtually free carbon pollution technology.
Mr. Sarbanes. I appreciate that. I mean, the goal here,
obviously, is to strike a balance as we move as quickly and
intentionally as we can towards a new portfolio when it comes
to how we power our society and, frankly, how we lead globally
here. And we have got more to do in that respect.
So I want to thank you for explaining how we don't have to
choose between reasonable pollution regulation, which will lead
to healthier communities on the one hand, and reliable
electricity, which, from what I can discern, EPA's rule will
actually enhance over time.
With that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back. Thank you.
Mr. Johnson. The gentleman yields back. The Chair now
recognizes the gentleman from Texas, Mr. Crenshaw, for 5
minutes.
Mr. Crenshaw. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
We are here today to discuss yet another horribly
unrealistic rule proposed by the EPA. This rule would require
that we reduce CO
2
emissions from power plants to
such an extent that most coal and many natural gas plants will
likely be forced offline by the end of the decade. So we are in
a country where our energy demand will increase by at least 30
percent over the next couple of decades. This EPA wants to
reduce our energy generation, which is just genius.
And I heard earlier that power plants are the biggest
emitter of carbon dioxide in America, and so we have to, you
know, save Americans from them. Yet they are also the biggest
emitter of electricity. Yes, electricity. And I don't know how
that doesn't matter to this administration or the entire
Democrat Party. Why does no one seem to have an answer for how
we might replace that power generation, replace that
electricity? Why won't anyone from this administration or the
other side of the aisle acknowledge how physically impossible
it is to replace baseload energy with renewables?
I would love answers--answers, for instance, how we are
going to come up with a land mass the size of South Dakota to
put the amount of solar and wind farms necessary to replace
such generation, or the thousands of miles of additional power
lines, or the additional steel required, the copper, the
cobalt, all of the critical minerals. Where is that going to
come from? There is just some whimsical assumptions that it
will all work out because Greta Thunberg says it will.
Now, if the goal is to protect Americans, maybe protecting
their ability to heat their homes or cool their homes in the
summer might be important. You know, not a single American is
actually harmed by CO
2
as a pollutant, and yet that
has been the claim by my colleagues in this hearing as we all
breathe out copious amounts of CO
2
. It is not the
pollutant giving anyone asthma. Can we at least stick to the
science if we are going to have this discussion?
And if the claim is that additional CO
2
warms
the planet over time, then we might consider the fact that
all--if the U.S. completely abolished all CO
2

emissions, then it would have a negligible effect on
temperature and climate. And that is not according to me, that
is according to all relevant climate modeling. A carbon-free
America by 2050 would reduce CO
2
concentration by a
mere 2.2 percent, and a negligible effect on the climate.
So once again, we find ourselves in a really simple policy
discussion about costs versus benefits. This EPA seems content
to impose massive costs on Americans without any clear benefits
to speak of. I don't think the mission, the original one, of
the EPA was supposed to be to reverse human flourishing, but it
certainly seems that that is the goal now. They want to remove
power generation from an already stressed electrical grid.
And for what benefit? None. Just some hand-waving and
sloganeering about, you know, saving the Earth and protecting
people and our children. But catchy slogans and angry teenagers
from Sweden are not a good excuse to upend the American way of
life and threaten the reliability of the power grid.
Mr. Nasi, you mentioned that over 55,000 megawatts of
existing coal is already scheduled for retirement by 2032. And
because of this proposed rule, we have got another potential
155,000 megawatts at risk of retirement. I just have a
question. Is there any real chance that this loss of generation
gets replaced by reliable energy, or even intermittent
renewable energy?
Mr. Nasi. Well, I mean, even if theoretically we could fill
that gap with natural gas generation, as you have heard
multiple witnesses testify, this rule just put a chilling
effect.
I mean, I have clients that are trying to build new gas.
This rule freezes everybody in place, not just because of the
general uncertainty, but as of May 23rd, you know, last month,
any plant built after that date is subject to things that don't
exist today. And who is going to invest and finance that
project, right? And so it is a problem that we are not going to
solve.
And to the point of EPA modeling what coal plants are--it
is not EPA's job to say whether a coal plant is going to
retire. It is actually, under the Clean Air Act, the State's
job. And EPA is running right through that stop sign and
modeling a rule predicting something that is contrary to the
data. And actually, the Clean Air Act contemplated that and
told them, no, you are going to actually have to ask the
State's opinion, and they have not.
Mr. Crenshaw. Mr. O'Loughlin, could you build upon that
notion of potential investment in reliable baseload energy
because of this rule?
Mr. O'Loughlin. Yes. The rule--I mean, there has been this
choice between reasonable environmental regulation and reliable
electricity. I agree we don't have to make that choice. But I
would say this is not a reasonable environmental regulation. It
is going to force unproven technologies onto plants, and
operators like ourselves that have to answer to consumers are
not going to invest in things that they can't reliably depend
on to meet their needs and create further stranded costs above
what has already been created by the--by this rule.
So it is going to cause us to not invest in our current
facilities, and it has sort of shut off natural gas as an
option, because it has got the same problem: unproven
technologies to try to replace our coal fleet.
Mr. Crenshaw. Thank you, and I yield back.
Mr. Johnson. The gentleman yields back. The Chair now
recognizes the gentlelady from New York, Ms. Clarke, for 5
minutes.
Ms. Clarke. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I thank our
Ranking Member Tonko. I thank our panelists for being here to
testify for us today.
And while I am glad that this subcommittee is considering
the importance of power plant emissions to ensure our
constituents have clean air to breathe, I reject the premise of
the hearing that we cannot set our Nation on a path to
decarbonize the power sector without having reliable and low-
cost energy--electricity.
The State of New York is a clear counterexample to the
false Republican narrative. Our State passed the Climate
Leadership and Community Protection Act of 2019 and is now well
on its way to achieving 70 percent renewable energy by 2030
without significant reliability concerns. If Republicans were
serious about their concerns with reliability, they would
commit to working with Democrats to modernize our Nation's
transmission infrastructure, which would immediately improve
reliability and resiliency against extreme weather events and
lower energy costs.
My first question is to Mr. Duffy.
In your testimony, you called the EPA's current proposal a
reasonable approach in line with the power sector's trends but
note that it should be strengthened. I agree with the
assessment. I was disappointed to see the proposal lack action
toward peaker power plants, which in New York represent more
than 50 fossil fuel power plants. Many of these have been
operating since the 1970s or earlier and have little or no
pollution control equipment to reduce emissions and are located
almost exclusively in environmentally overburdened communities
of color.
In what ways can this rule be strengthened, especially with
regard to the Nation's dirtiest power plants and in ways to
protect the most vulnerable communities from overlapping
sources of pollution?
Mr. Duffy. Sure. Thank you for that question. So there are
two things that--you know, it is early days in reviewing this
big proposal, but there are two things that come to mind as far
as strengthening it.
One is, as you mentioned, the coverage of the existing gas
plants. So EPA has proposed to cover those that are bigger than
300 megawatts and that are operating more than 50 percent of
the time. That covers just 7 percent of the existing natural
gas fleet, less than 30 percent of their CO
2

emissions. EPA has asked for comment on down to 150 megawatts
and 40 percent capacity factors. That would move us up to 44
percent of all units covering almost 80 percent of emissions.
So there is a really big swing that can happen there, and we
have been looking at that.
The second is on timelines. It makes a lot of sense to have
longer timelines for big pollution control technology,
construction like CCS, but for things like fuels and
efficiencies we are looking at whether that can be done on a
shorter timeframe.
Ms. Clarke. Thank you. It is important that when policy
prioritizes polluters over public health, it is our most
vulnerable community members--seniors, pregnant women,
children--who are hurt the most. Further handcuffing our
economy to fossil fuels does nothing but trap our frontline
communities in unhealthy environments, as communities of color
are often the ones bearing a disproportionate share of the
impacts from pollution and climate change.
I mentioned earlier that New York has led the country in
setting emissions reductions goals and making actionable plans
to meet those goals. For example, New York's Peaker Rule is
expected to retire over 1,600 megawatts of fossil fuel peaker
power plants by 2025, setting the State on a path towards 70
percent renewable energy by 2030 and saving countless lives
caused by environmental pollution.
However, I know not every one of my colleagues is blessed
to represent a State that has taken significant steps toward
climate pollution reductions. Mr. Duffy, EPA's proposed rule
included necessary flexibility to account for the different
resources and meet States where they are. What flexibilities
are available to States to comply with these standards, and
does that flexibility account for the need for grid reliability
and resiliency?
Mr. Duffy. Yes. So the way the Clean Air Act works, EPA
sets emission guidelines for existing sources. The States then
write their own plans. Generally, they have to have those--the
standards be equivalent to what EPA has proposed. They can go
stronger. They can also consider the remaining useful life and
other factors of these plants and have less stringent
standards.
EPA is also taking a lot of comments on how--whether or not
trading and averaging and different types of compliance
programs could be equivalent with EPA's emission guidelines. So
there is a lot of flexibility for the States to engage with
local communities, with the power plant owners, and design a
plan that works for them.
Ms. Clarke. Very well. Thank you.
I remain committed to ensuring my constituents have clean
air to breathe and that we act with the urgency the climate
crisis demands.
With that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Johnson. The gentlelady yields back. The Chair now
recognizes the gentleman from Pennsylvania, our Vice Chair of
the Environment, Manufacturing, and Critical Materials
Subcommittee, Dr. John Joyce.
Mr. Joyce. First of all, I want to thank you, Chairman
Johnson, for holding today's important hearing.
Over the past few years, we have heard the Biden
administration proudly discuss the so-called wonders of
renewable energy. And unfortunately, the rush to adopt green
technology will have dramatic consequences on the reliability
of the electric grid. This year, the regional transmission
organization PJM released a report on the state of the grid and
its load capacity. There were significant decreases in energy
resources for the third year in a row, especially in coal. This
continued decline of energy has led PJM to project that its
reserve margin will decrease from 23 percent currently to a
maximum of 15 percent, or perhaps even as low as 5 percent by
2030.
Through my conversations with Pennsylvania utility
companies, I know how close we came last Christmas Eve to
rolling blackouts as the temperatures dropped to below zero
degrees Fahrenheit. I am deeply concerned that escalating EPA
regulations will further push baseload power generation off the
grid and close the critical power plants that are desperately
needed for the energy that my constituents rely on summer,
winter, fall, and spring.
One example in my home State is the closure of Homer City
generation facility as the largest coal power plant in the
State. Losing its generating capacity will move my constituents
one step closer to the rolling brownouts that Texas and
California have experienced. It could not be clearer that the
regulatory uncertainty created by the EPA is a large factor
driving investment away from plants like these.
Our Nation has led the world in emissions reduction, and we
can continue to do that through American innovation and
American ingenuity. But we cannot afford to let--government
policies written with a misunderstanding of real world will put
Americans at risk.
My first question is for you, Mr. O'Loughlin. I am
concerned about how deployable some of the new power generation
technology is in the short term. Has a power plant with carbon
capture and storage or a power plant that is hydrogen cofired
to date been adequately demonstrated for 24/7 power generation
and connected to the grid? Does that exist right now?
Mr. O'Loughlin. It does not. We don't have any examples of
those in the United States today. And as I said, the CCS
projects that have been demonstrated to date have been at a
much lesser reliability and at a lower quantity of flue gas
that they have been able to treat.
And I think there has been some disagreement about how
reasonable this is and what the effect on reliability is. EPA
has worked on this rule for 18 months. We now have 60 days to
digest it and respond to it. And I guess I would suggest that
EPA provide an adequate time for an independent review of the
reliability impacts of this rule, because I think there is a
lot to it and I think that it is likely to have a very
significant negative impact on reliability at coal plants and
at natural gas plants.
Mr. Joyce. I share your concerns about that negative
potential impact.
Mr. Nasi, utilities have to make decisions in the next few
years about the future of their generation fleets, and there is
simply not enough time to prove and deploy the technology that
EPA expects. For example, if a coal plant does not plan to
retire, it must be running with carbon capture and storage at
90 percent by 2030. Similar decisions will be required for
existing natural gas generations, as they are mandated to add
carbon capture or hydrogen in similar timeframes.
Including the time needed for State regulations to be
implemented, how much time will utilities have to decide the
fate of their existing fleets? Is it 10 years? Is it 5 years?
Is it 2 years? What can we expect?
Mr. Nasi. Well, thank you, Doctor. And on page 11 of my
testimony I put together a graphic, because that is really the
heart and soul of the reliability problem, is that by the time
the States get their 2 years--and they will use every bit of
that, because they will need it--we will basically have 3 years
to build this stuff.
And every day at power plants--and I am at their boards all
the time--they are making capital decisions about can I afford
to keep on putting money into a plant, and they always evaluate
how much life do I have. And if I have got a 30-year remaining
useful life that just got cut down to 10, I am not going to
make a capital investment. That is what accelerates the
retirements, is when you force people to amortize it over a
shorter period of time.
Mr. Joyce. Mr. Snitchler, without a clear path for
replacement of natural gas generation, what are the options for
operators? Will baseload nuclear be available to replace the
140 gigawatts of coal or the 40 to 60 percent of the coal fleet
within 3 years?
Mr. Snitchler. Well, given the experience of the nuclear
fleet now, there is only one nuclear unit currently under
construction in the United States, and that is in Georgia. So I
don't think we are going to see a rapid expansion of nuclear
resources that are capable of filling that gap. And unless
there is a technology breakthrough that we are hoping for--but
you can't plan your grid around hope--then we are not going to
find ourselves in a spot where we have sufficient resources
should those retirements occur.
And so the technologies that are evolving and may work--
small modular reactors and carbon capture and hydrogen
cofiring--all are great on the drawing board, but they are not
commercially available today. And if we want to meet those
aggressive timelines, you have to have technology that can be
deployable now.
Mr. Joyce. I think that you concluded with a great take-
home message: We cannot build that just on hope.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I yield.
Mr. Johnson. The gentleman yields back. The Chair now
recognizes the gentleman from California, Mr. Ruiz, for 5
minutes.
Mr. Ruiz. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
My home State of California has made serious efforts to
move away from an addiction or dependance on fossil fuels as we
look towards the future. The Inflation Reduction Act and the
CHIPS and Science Act have made much-needed investments in
domestic battery manufacturing and lithium recovery. This
funding is essential to advancing renewable energy here at
home.
A smooth transition--smooth transition--is needed to remove
our grids from the dirty climate-changing energy of the past
and catapult us into the future of a new, reliable and clean
energy grid. This includes powering our homes and businesses
with solar, wind, and battery storage and all of the above.
However, we cannot move forward at the expense of
vulnerable or frontline communities. We cannot invest in
production without enforcement of the Clean Air Act standard
for healthy air quality. I believe we can advance our grid
while keeping our air quality safe to breathe.
The American Lung Association has given all three of the
counties in my district a failing grade for air particle
pollution, which has serious impacts on the health of my
constituents. And as you know, I am an emergency medicine
physician and public health expert, and that is very important
to me. That is why I am particularly passionate about
supporting the EPA's congressionally granted authority to
protect the public's health and the environment, including
through pollution standards like the one we are discussing
today.
And as a physician, I have seen firsthand the connection
between a person's health and the environment where they live,
and the very real effect of environmental injustices.
Communities that face the biggest burdens are oftentimes
marginalized, impoverished communities of color, and they have
10 years less life expectancy who live in high-polluted, poor
air quality communities than in other places that don't have
the same pollution in their air. So it has real-life health
impacts in the communities.
Mr. Duffy, how would the EPA's proposed rule reduce
pollution from power plants?
Mr. Duffy. Sure. So this rule will significantly reduce
pollution associated with especially the baseload plants but
will also control those that are running less often.
You know, this is--also, this is part of a whole suite of
power sector rules. Some are more focused on hazardous air
pollutants and local criteria pollutants. This, of course, is
focused on CO
2
. It will have cobenefits associated
with that. And as you mentioned, the impacts of climate change
are falling most heavily on those overburdened communities
already.
The other thing EPA is doing in this rulemaking is to
ensure active community engagement when these State plans are
written such that, you know, the concerns of local communities
can be brought to bear when power plants are--and States are
considering how to move forward.
Mr. Ruiz. Well, according to the American Lung
Association's 2023 report card, my congressional district ranks
as one of the worst for air pollution in the country. From a
large volume of transportation, warehouse development, and air
particulate matter from saline mineral dust in the Salton Sea
region, the communities in my district suffer from a high rate
of asthma and other respiratory health complications.
Can you elaborate more on the engagement with local
community partners?
Mr. Duffy. Yes, yes. So EPA has in its proposal as well as
a complementary rule, which is--it is called implementing--how
to implement these sort of 111(d) rulemakings--has really
elevated and made it clear that, you know, shallow community
engagement is no longer sufficient for meeting the meaningful
engagement requirements of the Clean Air Act. And so they will
need to demonstrate in their plans that they have reached out
to the communities that are most impacted, and that they have
gotten sufficient input about concerns associated with the
technologies, concerns associated with health, et cetera, such
that the plans are reflective of those concerns.
Mr. Ruiz. One of the biggest concerns are the cumulative
impact of polluting projects, industries that come in, and
taking an individual and assessing the increment of pollution
that they add over time. Although the individual emission can
meet certain criteria to allow them to pursue, over time you
are just adding to a conglomerate of dirty air, which has
significant impact.
So where are we with assessing the cumulative impacts?
Mr. Duffy. Right. I mean, I think that is why it is so
important that Administrator Regan came in and said, you know,
not only for communities but also for companies, we are going
to set the rules of the road early with a lot of lead time and
we are going to, you know, make sure that our fossil fleet is
operating cleanly. We are going to do that by focusing on
hazardous air pollutants, on the criteria of PM, ozone
pollutants, and we are going to focus on climate pollution such
that these can be comprehensive solutions that communities can
engage with, power companies can plan, the grids can plan, the
States can plan.
Mr. Ruiz. As part of meaningful consultation, they bring
community--and I have worked on this, especially during--with
some of the Tribes that often experience check-the-box: We sent
out a message and now we--you know, now, because they haven't
responded, we have done our job.
Mr. Duffy. Right.
Mr. Ruiz. And it is a problem that we are dealing in in
Energy, in this committee, with wanting to allow cable
companies to do the same for Tribes to enter their land, to
build, you know, on their land without their permission if they
don't respond within 45 days.
Mr. Duffy. Right.
Mr. Ruiz. But part of the meaningful consultation means to
have conversations about mitigation efforts in case something
goes bad.
Mr. Duffy. Right.
Mr. Ruiz. Is that part of the necessity? So in case
something goes bad, that the--those that pollute the area, the
water--the air, in this case, can--there is some kind of
accountability, some kind of recompense to the local
communities?
Mr. Duffy. Right. So in here EPA has enforcement authority,
obviously, if they do not meet their standards. And if a plant
has committed to retirement or to doing a CCS project, there
are increments of progress to make sure that they are on a path
to achieving those pollution reductions.
Mr. Johnson. OK.
Mr. Ruiz. Thank you.
Mr. Johnson. Thank you. The gentleman yields back. The
Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Georgia, Mr. Allen, for
5 minutes.
Mr. Allen. Thank you, Chairman Johnson, and--for holding
this important hearing today. And I know we are all learning a
lot, and as we discussed the Biden administration's proposed
rule that would severely impact the reliability of our power
grid and would shut down American energy.
You know, this was going on under the Obama administration
when I first was elected to Congress. My--all of my EMCs had
spent millions of dollars putting in these scrubbers to meet
that administration's rule. And, of course, now here we are.
And so, you know, it is no doubt since President Biden's first
days in office, he has launched a war on fossil fuel.
And it occurred to me sitting in this hearing, you know,
most of my district is rural. My air quality is excellent. In
fact, I need carbon to grow my trees and my crops. And it seems
like, to me, that the big problem is in these big, congested
cities. They are the air quality problem. Why do people live
there? I don't understand that. They can come to my rural
America and have excellent quality of living--you know, the
costs are much lower--and grow their own food.
But anyway, the recent proposed rule by the Environmental
Protection Agency, the Clean Power Plan 2.0, is one of this
administration's latest attempts to end the use of natural gas
in our Nation. We have heard today how detrimental this would
be to the reliability of our grid.
Mr. O'Loughlin, in your testimony you referenced the
retire-or-else strategy of EPA compliance, where you can avoid
excessive compliance costs--if compliance costs is even
possible--by simply retiring units earlier than their planned
service dates. That is a serious issue of reliability.
Last month, I asked the EPA Administrator Regan about
whether manufacturers, utilities, or others pay attention to
potential future regulatory costs and compliance costs when
making long-term decisions to maintain or expand operations.
The more EPA signals and outlines what it plans for
regulations, owners of facilities take that into account. And
he agreed they did.
We know from experience that some of EPA's rules will never
be implemented, but that is not the problem. The problem is EPA
appears to be sending as many signals as possible that future
costs are going to increase. And with that, owners and
investors will decide to shut down some power generation
permanently. That is why I am so glad that we have Unit 3 in
Georgia in my district running at 100 percent, the first
nuclear power facility built. In fact, I tell my friends from
California they are going to have to come to Georgia to charge
their electric cars.
You know, that is the entire--that is the retire-or-else
strategy. Administrator Regan refused to say that that was the
case, but from the evidence of all the compliance requirements
across all the rules that the EPA has presented, utilities and
power producers, do you think that is what is going on, Mr.
Nasi, Mr. Snitchler? Would you both like to share your thoughts
on this?
Mr. Nasi. Yes, I mean, I will start with I do a lot of work
in rural America. Rural electric cooperatives are trying to
serve their populations, and they are having to make these
difficult decisions. And as Mr. O'Loughlin has done a great job
of articulating, you can't sit around that board table and make
multimillion, multihundred-million-dollar decisions to keep a
facility going if you have no idea whether you are going to
live out its useful life. Otherwise, you have to accelerate
that expenditure onto the ratepayers.
So I think it is a very intentional effort, frankly, by the
administration----
Mr. Allen. Yes.
Mr. Nasi [continuing]. To create that kind of uncertainty.
Mr. Allen. To punish rural America, yes.
Mr. Snitchler?
Mr. Snitchler. I think one of the challenges that you bump
into is also that not every resource is the same in that
utilities have a different business model than independent
power producers do. And we don't have captive customers on
which we can rely to recover those costs over any period of
time.
And so when a rule has additional costs or expenses that
are going to be incurred on the part of the shareholders or the
investors, then business decisions have to be made about
whether you are going to continue to operate that, whether you
are going to continue to make investments to prolong its life,
or you make the business decision to say it is more cost
effective to retire it.
Mr. Allen. I mean, is this a responsible use of EPA's Clean
Air Act authorities, Mr. Snitchler?
Mr. Snitchler. I won't opine as to whether it is an
appropriate or reasonable use. We find ourselves in the
position of having to comply with whatever the rules are. And
the challenge I think we find with this rule is that, unlike
the last Clean Power Plan proposal under the Obama
administration, there isn't a coal fleet that can retire and a
natural gas fleet that will be able to support the system. If
this rule is implemented and it has a negative effect on
natural gas resources, we don't have sufficient wind, solar,
and nuclear to power the country.
Mr. Allen. Thank you. Thank you so much for your time and
your expertise.
I yield back.
Mr. Balderson [presiding]. Thank you, Mr. Allen. Next up is
Mr. Peters from California.
Mr. Peters. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I guess I have been
around here a while now. When I first came in, the argument the
industry was making was for clean coal, and the
environmentalists were very skeptical of carbon capture. Today
the administration is asking for clean coal and the
environmentalists like carbon capture. And in fact, carbon
capture and sequestration is a clean energy technology that is
supported by Republicans and Democrats and now a diverse group
of industries.
In 2020 I was proud to coauthor the USE IT Act with my
Republican colleague from West Virginia--California and West
Virginia working together--Dave McKinley. That passed in the
spending bill. In 2021 the bipartisan Infrastructure Investment
and Jobs Act provided $12 billion in new investments for CCS,
and the Inflation Reduction Act made the strongest investment
in CCS to date by increasing the existing CCS tax credit to $85
per ton.
As I said, environmentalists had been very skeptical of
this, and now we are trying to offer it, and it is--now it is
getting resistance.
So despite major technological advancements and broad
support for CCS, my colleagues apparently are choosing to
undermine the technology today. But to be very clear, CCS will
be a cost-effective approach to complying with the proposed EPA
power plant standards, and the proposed rule is a reasonable,
flexible approach to reducing climate pollution while
maintaining an affordable and reliable electric grid.
Beyond the specifics of the rule, I would share my concern
about ensuring that our power system is reliable. I do believe
we have major challenges ahead of us, particularly with
increasingly severe weather events.
I would just offer that one of the best ways to improve
grid reliability is interregional electric transmission, which
can improve reliability by making more power resources
available to grid operators across more geographic locations so
if extreme weather hits one State, a robust system of
interregional transmission helps ensure that the power stays on
and the costs stay low. And that transmission doesn't
discriminate among energy sources. The imported power could
come from coal, gas, nuclear, hydro, solar, wind, whatever.
The research is clear that interregional transmission is
essential to maintaining an affordable, reliable power system,
and we are terrible at building it today. We are bad at it.
According to the Americans for a Clean Energy Grid, North
America has built just 7 gigawatts of interregional
transmission, and less than half of that in the United States.
Since 2014, 7. South America has built 22; Europe, 44; and
China, 260.
And that is largely a permitting and siting issue. For
example, the Department of the Interior recently approved the
TransWest transmission line, which will carry power from
Wyoming to California, to begin construction. The permitting
took 15 years. So I invite my colleagues on the other side to
work with us to advance bipartisan transmission policies for
liability and for better cost for consumers and for a stable
grid.
So back to this rule. The Intergovernmental Panel on
Climate Change found that carbon capture and sequestration, or
CCS, will be an essential technology to reach our climate goals
by mid-century. Mr. Duffy, can you elaborate on the role that
CCS will play in a decarbonized energy system?
Mr. Duffy. Sure. So this is more broadly. The, you know,
leading climate experts, economists, energy systems experts say
that carbon capture and sequestration is an essential tool
needed to cut carbon pollution and address climate change. The
International Energy Agency has reached the exact same
conclusion, calling it impossible to meet our goals without
CCS.
Mr. Peters. Do you agree with EPA's determination that CCS
should be considered a best system of emission reductions under
their proposed rule?
Mr. Duffy. I do. As I have said, you know, it is a
technology-forcing, forward-looking statute, and there is
sufficient evidence that the technology is available to be
deployed.
Mr. Peters. I don't begrudge or--in any way--the industry's
skepticism or their statement of a difficulty of complying. But
I just want you to touch on the research defending CCS as a
cost-effective emissions control technology. Can you comment on
that for me?
Mr. Duffy. Sure, sure. So DOE and NETL have recently done--
released studies on the costs of CCS. Those are the costs that
EPA uses in this rulemaking. Their cost estimate for 90 percent
CCS, including transport and storage and considering 45Q, is
$11 a ton for existing gas plants. You are up $22 a ton for
existing coal plants and up $15 a ton for new gas plants.
Now, that is the low end and assumes a high capacity
factor, but EPA undertook a conservative approach, still found
it well within the line of comparable pollution controls like
scrubbers.
Mr. Peters. And I would just conclude by saying again to my
colleagues, I am happy to talk about reliability, and I do
think we face real challenges. I just want that conversation to
include transmission as a focus.
And with that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Balderson. Thank you, Mr. Peters. Next is me, next in
line.
Welcome, the two Ohio boys. This is like old times, isn't
it?
Thank you all for being here, not only the Ohio ones. But
my first question is for Mr. O'Loughlin, and I would like to
follow up on a point that Mr. Carter raised earlier.
Regardless of future actions or issues that may arise with
litigation down the road, how does the EPA's latest carbon
proposal impact the planning and investments for your members
in Ohio today and the near future?
Mr. O'Loughlin. Thank you, Congressman. It clearly creates
a stranded cost risk for us today and also going into the
future. It also creates a reliability risk, as the timeframe
that has been laid out is not something that we can meet. And I
think we have looked at other studies. We have been watching
carbon capture technology for some time. It is at least 7 to 10
years to put a system into place in a commercial basis if it
would work, which is unclear to us at this time. And the rule
requires it by 2030, and there is just no way we can make that.
So we are not able to invest in something that can't be on
time, and we don't know what the cost will be because,
ultimately, we are accountable to our consumers for recovery of
that cost, and that is just not a wise use of their funds. And
it is going to have a reliability impact, because it is going
to force--if it is enacted as proposed, it is going to force
the retirement of several units like ours that right now
provide the backbone of a reliable electric system.
Mr. Balderson. OK. Thank you. Continuing, Mr. O'Loughlin,
as you know, the PJM report that came out a few months ago
shows that 40 gigawatts of existing generation in the region
are at risk of retirement by 2030, which you somewhat just
explained there. Do you think renewables can make up for more
retirements that will be forced because of this policy?
Mr. O'Loughlin. Well, I don't and, more importantly, I
think PJM does not. And I also think NERC and pretty much
anybody else that has looked at it has realized that we are not
going to be able to site and build that much--interconnect that
much in that timeframe and also that it doesn't provide the
same reliability services that the existing baseload fleet
provides and--because of its intermittent nature.
And so I think, again, I would say it would be a great idea
for EPA to allow some independent analysis of the reliability
impacts so that you can hear differing views on it, but why not
take a little bit of time and let the independent authorities
like PJM, like NERC go ahead and study it and tell us what they
think? Because that prediction they made was even prior to this
rule being issued. So--and I think it is hard to see that it
wouldn't have a further negative impact on reliability.
Mr. Balderson. Speaking for Ohio, in terms of potential
rate increases, blackouts, or general reliability concerns, is
that all part of it too?
Mr. O'Loughlin. It sure is. You know, so I was here a
couple of months ago. Last Christmas Eve we were very close to
having rolling blackouts. We had mandatory conservation
requests. And we have retired 5,000 megawatts within PJM just
since December. And so we are at a tipping point on reliability
today in Ohio, and we have retired--we used to have 21 coal-
fired power plants in 2009 operating in Ohio. Today we have
four. We have lost about 15,000 megawatts of capacity. About
half of that has been replaced with other sources. And we
continue to see this having a further negative effect.
Mr. Balderson. Thank you.
Mr. Snitchler, as you know, I recently introduced the Grid
Reliability and Resiliency Improvement Act, which would require
NERC, in consultation with FERC, the Department of Energy, and
RTOs and ISOs, to issue a report every 2 years addressing long-
term reliability concerns with the electric grid.
The PJM report that we have discussed came out months
before the EPA's tailpipe emissions proposal and this Clean
Power Plan 2.0. So the EPA is actively increasing demand while
forcing retirements and taking resources offline.
Do you think it would be a good policy for the agencies
responsible for ensuring grid reliability and the operators of
the bulk power system report back to us on potential issues and
threatened grid reliability?
Mr. Snitchler. It would seem to me that having the people
who are most closely aligned and responsible for reliability
ought to be the ones who are advising Members of Congress about
what the situation is on the ground. And so we would strongly
support that type of information being provided by
dispassionate third parties that allow you to make wise policy
choices instead of having aspirational goals get ahead of
operational realities.
Mr. Balderson. I will follow up with that. And in the same
vein, we know the EPA is issuing these proposals without
providing detailed information on how they will impact
reliability. That is the concern I raised with Administrator
Regan a few weeks ago before the--before this subcommittee. Do
you think it would make sense for NERC to provide an
independent assessment before EPA rules affecting the power
sector are finalized and go into effect?
Mr. Snitchler. I think it would be helpful to have all of
the information. NERC has been providing updates for years and
warnings for at least the last 4 or 5 years about reliability
concerns that it sees, so their involvement and engagement in
rulemaking to at least have an eyes-wide-open approach seems
like that would be an informed way for rulemakings to proceed.
Mr. Balderson. OK. Thank you all very much. I yield back my
time and I yield now to the gentlelady from California, Ms.
Barragan.
Ms. Barragan. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The EPA's new carbon pollution standards for power plants
is important for the U.S. efforts to fight the climate crisis
and to reduce air pollution in communities of color. Ninety
percent of the top 50 polluters are power plants that burn coal
or gas. Many are in low-income communities and communities of
color.
Mr. Duffy, how will the EPA proposed carbon pollution
standards benefit environmental justice communities?
Mr. Duffy. Sure. So this is part of a whole suite of EPA
actions focusing on local pollutants, hazardous pollutants. And
this, of course, is focused on CO
2
, which has broad
implications, but of course environmental justice communities
are--have a--are shouldering a heavier burden of the impacts.
This rule also, you know, has cobenefits that--particulate
matter and other pollutants that will impact public health,
also requires meaningful engagement during the State planning
process.
Ms. Barragan. Well, thank you. I can tell you that in my
congressional district doctors' offices and the clinics have
asthma inhalers, like, stocked up in boxes because they are
expecting more children there to come in who have developed
asthma because of the air pollution and the impact there.
Mr. Duffy, why is it important that existing gas plants
were included in the proposed rule?
Mr. Duffy. Yes, thank you for this question. It is really
important.
First is because the Clean Air Act requires it. EPA set
standards for new gas plants in 2015. That sets a--that
triggers a responsibility to set standards for the existing gas
fleet.
Second, in 2022 the gas fleet emitted 661 million metric
tons of CO
2
. That is 43 percent of total sector
CO
2
emissions. The emissions from the gas fleet have
increased by 65 percent since 2010.
And third, not covering the existing gas fleet is kind of
robbing Peter to pay Paul. You end up just leaking all of the
emissions from, you know, from coal and the other sources
that--sectors that are regulated, and the existing gas fleet
will just run more. And that is unacceptable when there is a
pollution control that is cost reasonable and available.
Ms. Barragan. Thank you. One of the concerns that I have is
that only the largest gas plants that run the most frequently
are covered.
Mr. Duffy. Yes.
Ms. Barragan. However, smaller gas plants that mainly run
during the hottest summer months can cause unhealthy air in
frontline communities. How important is it for our climate and
environmental justice efforts for the EPA to strengthen the
rule to cover more gas power plants?
Mr. Duffy. Very important. And we are looking at that and
will likely be advocating for expanded coverage. Right now, EPA
is proposing to cover 7 percent of the natural gas units. They
are requesting comment on taking a--on covering a larger
portion, and that would end up covering 80 percent of emissions
if it was down to what--the lowest thing that they are taking
comment on, which is, I think, 100 megawatts and 40 percent
capacity factor.
Ms. Barragan. Great, thank you. Mr. Duffy, there has also
been support from the White House for a more ambitious timeline
of 2035 for coal plants to curb emissions by 90 percent or
retire, rather than year 2040. It is a faster timeline
feasible, and should this rule be strengthened to include it?
Mr. Duffy. Yes, I--well, I am trying to get the timelines
right. I think if you--for coal, if you retire by 2040 you need
to start--you need to install--if you retire after 2040, the
compliance period is 2030. For gas it is out to 2035. So with
gas, with the gas fleet, yes.
I think there are places where these big kind of carbon
capture, hydrogen pollution control technologies will need time
to build out, to construct, to get permitted, et cetera. But
the other pollution standards that are associated with
efficiencies and fuels, those can be done on a shorter
timeline.
Ms. Barragan. And Mr. Duffy, is there anything else that
you haven't been asked today, or information that you think
should be shared with the public?
Mr. Duffy. No, I think, you know, the agency is doing
exactly what the Supreme Court told it to do. It is basing
reasonable standards for the biggest polluters on traditional
inside-the-fence approaches that are going to cause these power
plants to operate more cleanly and protect public health.
Ms. Barragan. Well, thank you. Thank you for your work. You
know, I am a big advocate for environmental justice communities
to make sure that we all have access to clean air and to be
able to breathe clean air. We have seen the health impacts. I
have heard from constituents and people across the country who
just want to breathe clean air and who are seeing the impacts
to climate and these emissions. So thank you.
With that, I yield back.
Mr. Balderson. Thank you. I now turn it over to the
gentleman from Texas, Mr. Pfluger.
Mr. Pfluger. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I thank the
witnesses for being here.
This is a national security issue. We are literally facing
decisions and a pacing of the decisions that will lead us to a
grid that not only is unreliable, but it will make the winter
storms and the other events that we have seen recently,
honestly, look like a junior-varsity exercise when you have a
lack of dispatchable and readily available energy.
I will start by saying that in the last 10 years a billion
people have been lifted out of poverty worldwide, and that has
happened because we have affordable, reliable energy that is
able to get to places like sub-Saharan Africa, the Indian
subcontinent, and other places in the world that have never had
energy before. So the fact that we are literally facing rule
after rule after rule from unelected bureaucrats who are not
cooperating, communicating, or consulting with industry, with
communities, with Congress is unbelievable.
Our current baseload, annual baseload, demands about 4
trillion kilowatt hours per year. And so my question--I will
start with Mr. Nasi.
I really enjoyed your testimony, and all of you. Does the
EPA or the Department of Energy have a plan for providing
baseload power when you look at what they are trying to do with
this latest rule?
Mr. Nasi. Well, I mean, first and foremost, it is EPA's
statutory obligation to evaluate those impacts but not to do so
in a silo. And that is one of the fundamental things that I
think you have heard many of us say, is that this thing needs
to be rebooted with real consultation, not just with NERC,
FERC, but also with the regional transmission organizations
and, ultimately, those who have the sovereign power over the
grids: the States. It is the exclusion of the States that is
the biggest problem to me, as a practitioner, because we are
the ones who actually are on the ground keeping the grid alive,
as you know. We both experienced Winter Storm Uri.
So it is a problem, and so they need to start over. And
frankly, before they do a rule they should evaluate what is
possible, not try to rationalize how we might get out of it
after they have already cooked the rule.
Mr. Pfluger. Do you think that they have a plan?
Mr. Nasi. They----
Mr. Pfluger. And have they done the math?
Mr. Nasi. They have models. And I have already said their
models explicitly contradict the data and the actual real-world
expectations of power plant operators. And it is not the first
time.
We try to work with the EPA to improve their models. I
think there is a lot of well-intentioned people at EPA, but the
fact is that this rule has a model that doesn't measure up to
reality.
Mr. Pfluger. Mr. O'Loughlin--thank you for that. Mr.
O'Loughlin, do you think that the EPA has done the math on what
is going to be required, supplywise, to meet demand?
Mr. O'Loughlin. Well, they have done some modeling, and I
would just suggest that they take the time and go ahead and let
the independent reliability experts, the ISOs like PJM, NERC go
ahead and do an independent reliability assessment, and let's
just see what an independent view of that looks like.
Mr. Pfluger. A couple of weeks ago, we had the Secretary of
Energy before this committee, the full committee, and I asked
her what the demand would grow to if the 2032 EV mandate took
place. And I quote: ``It would double.''
Do we have the ability to service a doubling of electricity
demand with this EPA rule, Mr. O'Loughlin?
Mr. O'Loughlin. Yes, we are strained today. We don't--this
is not going to enable the baseload capacity that we are going
to need to meet greater demand.
And oh, by the way, you know, carbon capture requires about
25 percent of the output of a power plant to operate, hydrogen
is electrolysis, green--is a very electric-intensive activity,
so those would be further demands on the electric system that
we would see placed through this rule.
Mr. Pfluger. Why are companies shutting down their carbon
capture plants, carbon capture, you know, features of
production plants right now?
Mr. O'Loughlin. Yes, well, I am not intimately familiar,
but I do understand that the two that have been operating in
North America are--largely have been providing for enhanced oil
recovery as part of their economic stream, which is unclear
that this rule would even allow for that, which we haven't
really talked much about, but it also requires storage of
carbon dioxide, which is something that is definitely unproven
at the scale that is being requested here.
Mr. Pfluger. And I think that is the reason.
And Mr. Chairman, I would like to submit for the record a
letter from the Texas General Land Office to the EPA
highlighting Dr. Buckingham's extreme concern with the EPA's
implementation of this Clean Power Plan 2.0.
Mr. Johnson [presiding]. Without objection, so ordered.
[The information appears at the conclusion of the hearing.]
Mr. Pfluger. You know, the--I just spoke with the CEO, one
of your colleagues, Mr. O'Loughlin, just a few minutes ago
outside. And I think the answer to this question of why carbon
capture is not working is because it is not financially
sustainable. It doesn't work. Without the funds and the
subsidies, it doesn't work. In fact, the only carbon pollution
that I think is dangerous at this point in time is that which
fills the halls of Congress with the hot air that comes out and
doesn't actually look at the financial and economic impacts to
our country.
So I appreciate everyone's testimony today. We have to do
the math. And if Secretary Granholm is right and energy demand
is going to double, then this is a terrible plan that we would
be--we would not suit our constituents well by not pushing back
on it.
With that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Johnson. The gentleman yields back. The Chair now
recognizes the gentleman from Idaho, Mr. Fulcher, for 5
minutes.
Mr. Fulcher. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And to the panel,
thank you for your flexibility. We, as you probably know, we
have got dueling committees today. And so what I ask may be a
rerun, and so for that I will ask for forgiveness in advance.
But, Mr. O'Loughlin, I just caught the tail end of your
comments on this last go-around here. And given this Clean
Power Plan, can electric generating units realistically and
economically achieve these--this Biden administration goal and
the timeline, given this new set of rules?
Mr. O'Loughlin. Yes, well, my understanding of the timeline
is the answer is no to that on the timeline. I think it is
unclear and undemonstrated whether carbon capture will be able
to provide the level that is being requested. But what we have
today has not been demonstrated.
And so it is very difficult for small companies like ours
and others to invest in projects that are unclear whether they
will work and that are unclear whether they can meet the
timelines that are required and it is unclear whether they can
meet the standards that are required, even if they do work. So
it makes it something that we can't in good faith spend our
member consumers' money on.
Mr. Fulcher. Just to follow up that, do you know if--how
many coal-fired plants, how many natural-gas-fired plants will
be forced to retire as a function----
Mr. O'Loughlin. Yes----
Mr. Fulcher [continuing]. Of this?
Mr. O'Loughlin. I don't know the answer to that. I know EPA
has modeled some things, but I would expect it would be nearly
all the coal-fired power plants would have to retire in this
country if this rule is implemented. There are a few that have
already begun working on carbon capture projects that might
have a chance of at least trying to put those in service. But
most of the industry can't possibly meet this timeline for coal
plants.
Natural gas has a little bit longer, so it is a little less
clear to me what they--whether they will be able to do it. But
I think the bigger question is whether they will be willing to
invest the money in this unproven technology.
Mr. Fulcher. Thank you for that.
Mr. Nasi, I am going to direct this to you. I know you have
got some legal background, but if there is someone else on the
panel that wants to take a crack at it, I am perfectly fine
with that too. Permitting seems to be such a significant issue.
I can tell you in my State, whether it be power plants or any
kind of a project, you name it, the permitting always is an
issue.
Do you think, given the--what you understand about this
rule, this new set of rules, will electric companies be able to
build and obtain the permits for CCS hydrogen infrastructure
that is required, moving forward?
Mr. Nasi. Yes, I mean, as a practitioner in the space,
there is no possibility that we will be able to permit the
scale of pipeline infrastructure necessary to actually
transport CO
2
to storage facilities across the
entire fleet, or even a significant component of it.
And, you know, the congressman from California raised the
point about permitting and how it takes 15 years to do a
transmission line. Welcome to pipeline construction. We know
they are not exactly noncontroversial. Rural America has--I
think, correctly--got rights to actually stand up against
condemnation when it doesn't make sense.
And so it--projects are hard, and they take a long time. We
don't mandate technology requirements based on the hope that
all that is going to work out and we are going to do it three
times faster than we ever have. That is just not the way the
Clean Air Act works.
Mr. Fulcher. Yes, thank you for that. I have got a minute
left.
Mr. Duffy, Mr. Snitchler, if either of you would like to
comment on that, you are certainly welcome in the minute I have
got left.
Mr. Duffy. I would just say, I mean, you will get no
argument from me that permitting, you know, needs to be
expedited, but it needs to be done in an environmentally
conscious way.
But as far as, you know, Class 6 permits and things like
that, we certainly need to ensure that the infrastructure that
will support this transition is able to be built out.
Mr. Fulcher. OK.
Mr. Snitchler. I think it is clear that there are a lot of
knock-on effects to this proposed rule that would require
significant amounts of investment: permitting, siting,
construction, labor, all of the materials that will be required
that I don't think are properly accounted for in the timeline
that has been established.
Mr. Fulcher. Thank you for that. Thank you to the panel.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Johnson. Would the gentleman yield?
Mr. Fulcher. Yes, I will yield.
Mr. Johnson. I thank the gentleman for yielding. I want to
follow up on a question that I asked and I, if I could, just
get a quick yes-or-no answer from you folks.
Do you see the inability to heat our homes in freezing
winter temperatures, the inability to cool our homes in the
heat of the summer in rural Appalachia, and the inability to
cook our food because we don't have electricity because of
brownouts or blackouts--do you see that as a public health
problem, Mr. O'Loughlin?
Mr. O'Loughlin. I do, and I would say that the lower-income
portion of the people that we serve are the most negatively
affected by that.
Mr. Johnson. OK. Mr. Snitchler?
Mr. Snitchler. I would agree that that is a public health
problem.
Mr. Johnson. Mr. Duffy?
Mr. Duffy. Yes.
Mr. Johnson. OK, thank you.
Mr. Nasi. Yes.
Mr. Johnson. Mr. Nasi? OK, thank you.
I yield back, and with that----
Mr. Fulcher. I----
Mr. Johnson [presiding]. I now recognize the gentlelady
from Iowa, Dr. Miller-Meeks.
Mrs. Miller-Meeks. Thank you, Mr. Chair, and I thank all of
our witnesses for being here.
First, let me state--because I do this at every hearing we
have on Energy and Commerce--that Iowa is a State where over 50
percent of its energy is from renewables. We are now almost up
to 60 percent of our electricity is from wind, and we are an
exporter of energy. Despite that, last year there was concern
that we were going to have brownouts and rolling blackouts in
Iowa from a lack of energy.
And so as I think about this entire process and I watched
what unveiled in Europe this past winter and their energy
crisis in Europe, which was already imposed upon very high
electricity prices, and then when I think about the EPA's
recently proposed greenhouse gas emissions standards for coal
and natural-gas-fired power plants, I have immediate concerns
about our ability to ensure electric reliability and meet
increased energy demand in the United States, which--we know
demand is going up. At both COP26 and COP27 they readily
admitted demand is going up.
And I also think about the consequences of power shortages.
Of course, it varies by region, but there are several days if
not months of the year that heating and cooling American's
homes is not a luxury but a necessity. In fact, a 2012 study
showed that the installation of air conditioning in American
homes is the reason why the chances of dying on an extremely
hot day fell 80 percent over the past half-century.
In a previous hearing at the Energy Subcommittee, I spoke
about the lives lost globally each year from heat and cold.
Lancet and Wall Street Journal articles in 2021 indicated
exposure to hot or cold temperatures is associated with over 5
million premature deaths globally each year. Heat death is
responsible for about 1 percent of global fatalities, 600,000,
but cold kills 8 times as many people, 4.5 million annually.
A 2019 study from the National Bureau of Economic Research
estimates that, by driving down gas prices, the fracking
revolution saved more than 11,000 American lives annually since
2010. Natural gas, targeted by the EPA's proposed rule,
provided 40 percent of the electricity nationally in 2022. And
as we have already heard, Secretary Granholm estimated that the
demand for electricity would double with the emission standards
yielding to electric vehicles.
If the U.S. does not have the energy to make up what the
EPA proposes to take offline with this rule, it will cost
lives, not just harm the economy. It is not pie in the sky.
It is always puzzling to me as a doctor that--Mr. Duffy, do
you think our air is cleaner than it was 15 years ago?
Mr. Duffy. Yes.
Mrs. Miller-Meeks. So our air is vastly cleaner than it was
15 years ago, but yet my colleagues on the other side of the
aisle want to continually allude to increasing asthma rates,
and it has puzzled me. We are saving lives because of air
conditioning and heating because we have affordable, reliable
electricity, but yet we have cleaner air and asthma is going
up. Maybe we did the wrong thing in the EPA.
Mr. O'Loughlin, the North American Electric Reliability
Corporation, NERC, and RTOs like PJM have warned that energy
availability and electric reliability in the United States are
already at risk as of today. EPA's proposed ruling would place
further restrictions on power plants that would force early
closures of key baseload energy facilities. Looking to the
future, McKinsey's estimated that electricity demand is
expected to triple by 2050.
How will the United States be able to meet the significant
increase in demand if EPA's regulations are finalized?
Mr. O'Loughlin. Well, that is a great question. I wish I
had a great answer for you, because I am not really sure how we
will be able to meet increased demand with diminished electric
supply.
Mrs. Miller-Meeks. Does anyone know what the carbon
emissions are from the mining of lithium, cobalt, rare earth
elements that go into a solar panel, or the steel for
manufacturing for wind turbines, or the petroleum that goes
into wind turbines for their--or the disposal of those said
units when their life expectancy is expired? Do we know the
carbon emissions? Mr. Duffy, do you know the carbon emissions?
Mr. Duffy. I know that there is there is no silver bullet,
and that all of these----
Mrs. Miller-Meeks. So you have taken that into account at
the EPA?
Mr. Duffy. EPA's job is to look at these power plants and
determine the best system of pollution control for those power
plants.
Mrs. Miller-Meeks. So you don't care about the pollution
control of other sources of energy?
Mr. Duffy. We certainly do. But what we are talking about
today is the rule at issue here.
Mrs. Miller-Meeks. Thank you. And Mr. Snitchler, how will
the closure of natural gas production affect our carbon
emissions?
Mr. Snitchler. Natural gas has led to the largest reduction
in emissions in U.S. history. Since 2005, restructured regions
around the country have had emissions dropped by north of 35
percent. So we are actually going in the wrong direction if we
try to eliminate natural gas, which has been the largest driver
of reduced emissions.
Mrs. Miller-Meeks. Thank you very much.
Mr. Chair, I yield back my time.
Mr. Johnson. The gentlelady yields back. The Chair now
recognizes the gentleman from California, Mr. Obernolte, for 5
minutes.
Mr. Obernolte. Well, thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you to our witnesses. This is a very important hearing on
a very important topic.
Mr. O'Loughlin, thanks for your testimony. I would like to
kind of narrow down exactly what we mean when we talk about the
fact that electricity prices would increase should this rule be
implemented. Can you tell us what the--your average current
customer pays for a kilowatt hour of electricity and how much
that would go up should this rule become law?
Mr. O'Loughlin. Yes. Our average price today in Ohio for
electricity in a rural cooperative is between 13 and 14 cents a
kilowatt hour, which is pretty close to the national average.
And most of that, about two-thirds of that cost, is made up of
the cost of production of generating that electricity.
I wish I could tell you how much our costs would increase
if we had to implement this rule, but unfortunately, I am
unable to estimate that because I am not really sure what we
are going to do to replace our electricity and what the market
conditions for electricity will likely be if we have a
shortage, other than I know it will be considerably higher than
it is today.
We would replace some with some renewables at a somewhat
higher cost, and we would be forced to close our plants and
have stranded assets which we would need to continue to recover
for the next 10 or 12 years from our member consumers. And then
we would be purchasing electricity to make up the difference in
a constrained market, which I expect would be significantly
higher than today's market prices.
Mr. Obernolte. So, I mean, it stands to reason by a
substantial increase we are not talking about a cent or two per
kilowatt hour.
Mr. O'Loughlin. Yes.
Mr. Obernolte. We are talking about something more
substantial.
Mr. O'Loughlin. I would expect it to be much more
substantial than----
Mr. Obernolte. Like doubling?
Mr. O'Loughlin. Like--yes, I would be speculating at that
point, but it would be easy to see it going up 50 percent or
more, yes.
Mr. Obernolte. Thank you very much.
Mr. Duffy, it--I was very interested in your testimony. And
by the way, thank you for being here. It is not easy to be the
opposite--the opposition witness, I know.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Duffy. I appreciate that.
Mr. Obernolte. You used a couple of terms multiple times.
You used the words ``affordable'' and ``cost reasonable.''
Mr. Duffy. Mm-hmm.
Mr. Obernolte. So is a 50 percent increase in the cost of
energy, is that affordable and cost reasonable?
Mr. Duffy. I don't know about that. But I do know what EPA
did estimate as the electricity price increases. The Inflation
Reduction Act reduces electricity prices 4 percent. There is a
2 percent increase in retail price in 2030, which goes down to
a quarter of a percentage increase by 2035, and .08 percent
increase in 2040 associated with EPA's modeling for this rule.
Mr. Obernolte. I am sorry, you lost me there. The EPA
believes that their rule would decrease the cost of
electricity?
Mr. Duffy. No, this is a 2 percent increase. I was saying
the Inflation Reduction Act, in and of itself----
Mr. Obernolte. Sure, sure. We are talking about this
proposed rule, you know, in isolation.
Mr. Duffy. Yes. So in isolation, a 2 percent increase in
retail price, 2030; a less than a quarter percent increase in
2035; and .08 percent in 2040. The benefits of this rule
outweigh the costs 7 to 1.
Mr. Obernolte. OK. Mr. O'Loughlin, who is the expert
because he runs a co-op that does energy generation, just
testified that it is going to increase costs 50 percent for his
customers. Do you--is that wrong?
Mr. Duffy. I don't have the background information to know
if that is wrong or right. All I can go by is what EPA has
modeled here.
Mr. Obernolte. OK. Well, I mean----
Mr. Duffy. I am sure he is being forthright, but I don't
know the----
Mr. Obernolte. There is----
Mr. Duffy [continuing]. Background.
Mr. Obernolte. I am just saying that there is a huge
disparity between the EPA saying, you know, a 2 percent cost
increase and system operators saying a 50 percent cost
increase.
OK, well, you know, let me just, in the time I have got,
illustrate something that is very poignant for the people that
I represent. I represent a lot of folks that are on a fixed
income, they are retired. They struggle to pay their bills. My
hometown--I wish, Mr. O'Loughlin, that I lived in your service
area, because my local electric provider just submitted a rate
case to the California Public Utility Commission asking for
base electric rates to be increased over 40 cents a kilowatt
hour.
Every time those rates go up, more and more of the folks
that I represent get driven into poverty. There was a study
that just occurred a couple of months ago that said that over a
third of Americans have had to choose between paying an energy
bill and paying for other household goods in the last year. You
know, that should be meaningful to everybody.
So we are all protectors of our environment. We want to be
good stewards of our planet. You know, we have to balance the
requirement to do that with also the requirement to provide
basic necessities to the people that live here. And it is going
to be a balance. It can't be all of one or the other.
And my problem with this proposed rule, an increase of 50
percent does not seem affordable or cost reasonable to me. And
so I really think it needs to be rethought and reexamined. But
I want to thank you very much for your testimony.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Johnson. The gentleman yields back. And seeing there
are no further Members asking--wishing to ask questions, I
would like to thank, once again, all of our witnesses from--for
being here today.
I ask unanimous consent to insert in the record the
documents included on the staff hearing documents list.
Without objection, that will be the order.
[The information appears at the conclusion of the hearing.]
Mr. Johnson. Pursuant to committee rules, I will remind
Members that they have 10 business days to submit additional
questions for the record, and I ask that witnesses submit their
response within 10 business days upon receipt of the questions.
Without objection, the subcommittee is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 12:59 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]
[Material submitted for inclusion in the record follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
