- DRIVING AFFORDABILITY: PRESERVING PEOPLE'S FREEDOM TO BUY AFFORDABLE VEHICLES AND FUEL

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

DRIVING AFFORDABILITY: PRESERVING PEOPLE'S
FREEDOM TO BUY AFFORDABLE VEHICLES AND
FUEL

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON ENVIRONMENT,
MANUFACTURING, AND CRITICAL MATERIALS

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

JUNE 22, 2023

__________

Serial No. 118-53

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Published for the use of the Committee on Energy and Commerce

govinfo.gov/committee/house-energy
energycommerce.house.gov

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
57-716 PDF                  WASHINGTON : 2025

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE

CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington
Chair
MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas            FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey
ROBERT E. LATTA, Ohio                  Ranking Member
BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky              ANNA G. ESHOO, California
H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia         DIANA DeGETTE, Colorado
GUS M. BILIRAKIS, Florida            JAN SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois
BILL JOHNSON, Ohio                   DORIS O. MATSUI, California
LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana               KATHY CASTOR, Florida
RICHARD HUDSON, North Carolina       JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland
TIM WALBERG, Michigan                PAUL TONKO, New York
EARL L. ``BUDDY'' CARTER, Georgia    YVETTE D. CLARKE, New York
JEFF DUNCAN, South Carolina          TONY CARDENAS, California
GARY J. PALMER, Alabama              RAUL RUIZ, California
NEAL P. DUNN, Florida                SCOTT H. PETERS, California
JOHN R. CURTIS, Utah                 DEBBIE DINGELL, Michigan
DEBBBIE LESKO, Arizona               MARC A. VEASEY, Texas
GREG PENCE, Indiana                  ANN M. KUSTER, New Hampshire
DAN CRENSHAW, Texas                  ROBIN L. KELLY, Illinois
JOHN JOYCE, Pennsylvania             NANETTE DIAZ BARRAGAN, California
KELLY ARMSTRONG, North Dakota, Vice  LISA BLUNT ROCHESTER, Delaware
Chair                            DARREN SOTO, Florida
RANDY K. WEBER, Sr., Texas           ANGIE CRAIG, Minnesota
RICK W. ALLEN, Georgia               KIM SCHRIER, Washington
TROY BALDERSON, Ohio                 LORI TRAHAN, Massachusetts
RUSS FULCHER, Idaho                  LIZZIE FLETCHER, Texas
AUGUST PFLUGER, Texas
DIANA HARSHBARGER, Tennessee
MARIANNETTE MILLER-MEEKS, Iowa
KAT CAMMACK, Florida
JAY OBERNOLTE, California
------

Professional Staff

NATE HODSON, Staff Director
SARAH BURKE, Deputy Staff Director
TIFFANY GUARASCIO, Minority Staff Director
Subcommittee on Environment, Manufacturing, and Critical Materials

BILL JOHNSON, Ohio
Chairman
EARL L. ``BUDDY'' CARTER, Georgia    PAUL TONKO, New York
GARY J. PALMER, Alabama                Ranking Member
DAN CRENSHAW, Texas                  DIANA DeGETTE, Colorado
JOHN JOYCE, Pennsylvania, Vice       JAN SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois
Chair                            JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland
RANDY K. WEBER, Sr., Texas           YVETTE D. CLARKE, New York
RICK W. ALLEN, Georgia               RAUL RUIZ, California
TROY BALDERSON, Ohio                 SCOTT H. PETERS, California
RUSS FULCHER, Idaho                  NANETTE DIAZ BARRAGAN, California
AUGUST PFLUGER, Texas                FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey (ex
MARIANNETTE MILLER-MEEKS, Iowa           officio)
JAY OBERNOLTE, California
CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington
(ex officio)

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hon. Bill Johnson, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Ohio, opening statement........................................     2
Prepared statement...........................................     4
Hon. Paul Tonko, a Representative in Congress from the State of
New York, opening statement....................................     6
Prepared statement...........................................     8
Hon. Cathy McMorris Rodgers, a Representative in Congress from
the State of Washington, opening statement.....................    11
Prepared statement...........................................    13
Hon. Frank Pallone, Jr., a Representative in Congress from the
State of New Jersey, opening statement.........................    16
Prepared statement...........................................    18

Witnesses

Joseph Goffman, Principal Deputy Assistant Administrator, Office
of Air and Radiation, Environmental Protection Agency..........    20
Prepared statement...........................................    22
Answers to submitted questions...............................   264
Chet Thompson, President and Chief Executive Officer, American
Fuel & Petrochemical Manufacturers.............................    66
Prepared statement...........................................    68
Answers to submitted questions...............................   269
Neil Caskey, Chief Executive Officer, National Corn Growers
Association....................................................    80
Prepared statement...........................................    82
Genevieve Cullen, President, Electric Drive Transportation
Association....................................................    98
Prepared statement...........................................   100
Answers to submitted questions...............................   272
Scott Lambert, President, Minnesota Automobile Dealers
Association....................................................   104
Prepared statement...........................................   106
Answers to submitted questions...............................   274

Legislation

H.R. 1435, the Preserving Choice in Vehicle Purchases Act........   132
H.R. 3337, the Fuels Parity Act..................................   135
Discussion Draft, H.R. ___, the No Fuel Credits for Batteries Act
of 2023........................................................   138
Discussion Draft, H.R. ___, the Choice in Automobile Retail Sales
Act of 2023....................................................   140

Submitted Material

Inclusion of the following was approved by unanimous consent.
List of documents submitted for the record.......................   143
Press release of June 12, 2023, from the Clean Fuels Development
Coalition......................................................   145
Letter of June 21, 2023, from Doug Kantor, General Counsel,
National Association of Convenience Stores, to Mr. Johnson and
Mr. Tonko......................................................   149
Letter of June 22, 2023, from Garrick C. Francis, Vice President,
Federal Affairs, Alliance for Automotive Innovation, to Mr.
Johnson and Mr. Tonko..........................................   155
Memo of April 6, 2023, from the Alliance for Automotive
Innovation.....................................................   169
Letter of June 22, 2023, from Emily Skor, Chief Executive
Officer, Growth Energy, to Mrs. Rodgers, et al.................   174
Blog post of June 12, 2023, ``EPA's EV Rules: What it Means for
China and the U.S. Auto Market,'' by John Bozzella, President
and Chief Executive Officer, Alliance for Automotive Innovation   177
Blog post of April 12, 2023, ``How to Think About EPA's New
Greenhouse Gas Rules...,'' by John Bozzella, President and
Chief Executive Officer, Alliance for Automotive Innovation....   181
Report of the American Lung Association, ``Zeroing in on Healthy
Air: A National Assessment of Health and Climate Benefits of
Zero-Emission Transportation and Electricity''.................   184
Report of the Union of Concerned Scientists and the Greenlining
Institute, ``Cleaner Cars, Cleaner Air: Replacing California's
Oldest and Dirtiest Cars Will Save Money and Lives,'' by
Matthew Beyer, et al., June 2023...............................   203
Report of the Environmental Protection Agency, ``Climate Change
and Children's Health and Well-Being in the United States,''
April 2023 \1\
Report of the International Council on Clean Transportation,
``Assessment of Light-Duty Electric Vehicle Costs and Consumer
Benefits in the United States in the 2022-2035 Time Frame,'' by
Peter Slowik, et al., October 2022 \1\
Fact sheet of the International Council on Clean Transportation,
``Benefits of Adopting California Advanced Clean Cars II
Regulations Under Clean Air Act Section 177,'' May 2023........   223
Report of the International Council on Clean Transportation and
the Energy Innovation Policy & Technology LLC, ``Analyzing the
Impact of the Inflation Reduction Act on Electric Vehicle
Uptake in the United States,'' by Peter Slowik, et al., January
2023 \1\
Article of April 7, 2023, ``EV Popularity Driven by Range and
Cost Improvements--Study,'' by Lamar Johnson, Politico Pro.....   226
Letter of June 21, 2023, from Alyssa Tsuchiya, Senior Washington
Representative, Clean Transportation Program, Union of
Concerned Scientists, to Mrs. Rodgers, et al...................   228
Letter of June 22, 2023, from Senior Counsel, Sustainability
Policy, and Dr. Quinta Warren, Associate Director,
Sustainability Policy, Consumer Reports, to Mrs. Rodgers, et
al.............................................................   231
Report of the Association of Air Pollution Control Agencies,
``State Air Trends & Successes: The StATS Report, 2023
Edition,'' \1\
Letter from Affiliated Construction Trades Ohio Foundation to
Ohio House Transportation Committee Chairman Riordan McClain,
et al..........................................................   234
Statement of the Consumer Energy Alliance to Ohio House
Transportation Committee Chairman McClain, et al., June 20,
2023...........................................................   235
Statement of Scott Hayes, Midwest GR Director for PBF Energy.....   238
Letter of June 20, 2023, from Zach Doran, President, and Joe
Cannon, Vice President, Government Relations, Ohio Automobile
Dealers Association, to Ohio House Transportation Committee
Chairman McClain, et al........................................   240
Letter of June 20, 2023, from Don Thoren, Vice President, State
Government Affairs, American Fuel & Petrochemical
Manufacturers, to the Ohio House Transportation Committee......   241
Statement of Stephanie Kromer, Ohio Oil and Gas Association, to
the Ohio House Transportation Committee, June 20, 2022.........   243
Report of the Consumer Energy Alliance, ``Freedom to Fuel:
Consumer Choice in the Automotive Marketplace,'' 2023..........   245

----------

\1\ The information has been retained in committee files and is
included in the Documents for the Record at https://docs.house.gov/
meetings/IF/IF18/20230622/116147/HHRG-118-IF18-20230622-SD040.pdf.

DRIVING AFFORDABILITY: PRESERVING PEOPLE'S FREEDOM TO BUY AFFORDABLE
VEHICLES AND FUEL

----------

THURSDAY, JUNE 22, 2023

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Environment, Manufacturing, and
Critical Minerals,
Committee on Energy and Commerce,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 10:00 a.m., in
the John D. Dingell Room 2123, Rayburn House Office Building,
Hon. Bill Johnson (chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Members present: Representatives Johnson, Carter, Palmer,
Crenshaw, Joyce, Weber, Allen, Balderson, Fulcher, Pfluger,
Miller-Meeks, Obernolte, Rodgers (ex-officio), Tonko
(subcommittee ranking member), DeGette, Sarbanes, Clarke, Ruiz,
Peters, Barragan, and Pallone (ex-officio).
Also present: Representatives Latta, Bilirakis, Walberg,
Lesko, Pence, and Dingell.
Staff present: Sarah Alexander, Professional Staff Member,
Energy and Environment; Katie Arey, Digital Director; Sarah
Burke, Deputy Staff Director; Jerry Couri, Deputy Chief Counsel
for Environment; Sydney Greene, Director of Operations; Jack
Heretik, Press Secretary; Nate Hodson, Staff Director; Tara
Hupman, Chief Counsel; Sean Kelly, Press Secretary; Peter
Kielty, General Counsel; Emily King, Member Services Director;
Mary Martin, Chief Counsel, Energy and Environment; Kaitlyn
Peterson, Clerk, Energy and Environment; Karli Plucker,
Director of Operations (shared staff); Carla Rafael, Senior
Staff Assistant; Emma Schultheis, Staff Assistant; Olivia
Shields, Communications Director; Peter Spencer, Senior
Professional Staff Member, Energy; Michael Taggart, Policy
Director; Dray Thorne, Director of Information Technology;
Waverly Gordon, Minority Deputy Staff Director and General
Counsel; Anthony Gutierrez, Minority Professional Staff Member;
Caitlin Haberman, Minority Staff Director, Environment,
Manufacturing, and Critical Materials; Mackenzie Kuhl, Minority
Digital Manager; Kylea Rogers, Minority Policy Analyst; Medha
Surampudy, Minority Professional Staff Member; and Rebecca
Tomilchik, Minority Junior Professional Staff Member.
Mr. Johnson. The subcommittee will come to order.
The Chair recognizes himself now for an opening statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. BILL JOHNSON, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF OHIO

Welcome to the Environment, Manufacturing, and Critical
Materials Subcommittee's hearing on four pieces of legislation
intended to safeguard economic freedom and mobility for the
American people.
Our constituents across the country rely on their cars to
commute to work, travel to and from school, check in on
grandparents and loved ones, go to the grocery store, go to
medical appointments, a host of things. According to the
Department of Transportation, approximately 280 million
vehicles were registered in the United States in 2021. In
total, 92 percent of U.S. households have at least 1 vehicle,
and more than half of U.S. households have 2 or more vehicles.
The Biden administration continues to release regulation
after regulation to dramatically change transportation and
mobility for Americans on a timetable that defies reality. For
many Americans, this is pushing them toward vehicles that they
cannot afford and into vehicles that don't make sense,
especially for rural Americans like those in my district.
And who will pay for this so-called transition? It is the
American taxpayer.
Luckily, Republicans on our committee have some solutions.
The four bills we are considering today stop the Biden
administration's excessive overreach and enable Americans to
continue to choose the cars they want and can afford.
First, the Preserving Choice in Vehicle Purchases Act was
introduced by our subcommittee members Dr. Joyce, Mr. Latta,
Mr. Bilirakis, and Mr. Obernolte. This legislation limits the
EPA's ability to unilaterally issue a waiver of national
vehicle emission standards to California if the State's
policies directly or indirectly limit the sale or use of new
internal combustion vehicles. The intent of the Clean Air Act
is clear: Congress never directed California to dictate
America's vehicle emissions and also did not authorize the EPA
to force vehicles that the agency does not like off the road.
Next, we have the Fuels Parity Act introduced by Dr.
Miller-Meeks, which allows ethanol derived from cornstarch to
qualify as a renewable fuel and an advanced biofuel under the
Renewable Fuel Standard. The bill also supports the use of the
Department of Energy's Argonne National Laboratory GREET model
to assess life cycle greenhouse gas emissions. We should
prioritize nationally recognized standards rather than
international standards that specifically disadvantage American
fuels.
We also have two discussion drafts we are considering
today. The first addresses one of the most egregious examples
of the Biden administration's regulatory overreach: the
proposed creation of a program to introduce electricity into
the Renewable Fuel Standard with eRINs. I am encouraged that
the EPA decided to pull back on the eRINs program from the
final set proposal, but any administration currently has the
ability to reengage on eRINs at a later date. So we need to
address this. Fortunately, the No Fuel Credits for Batteries
Act would clarify that the EPA is not authorized to create an
eRINs program.
The second draft tackles another similarly disastrous
proposal by the Biden and the EPA: the ``multi-pollutant
emission standards for model years 2027 and later for light and
medium-duty vehicles.''
The Biden administration's intent with the proposed rule
was to pave the way for two-thirds of new car sales and nearly
half of new truck sales to be totally electric in the next 10
years. To reach its goal, the EPA set emission standards that
only electric vehicles could achieve. The Choice in Automobile
Retail Sales Act, or the CARS Act, prohibits the EPA from
moving forward with this proposed rule. The bill also prevents
the EPA from issuing any regulations in the future that would
mandate a specific technology or engine type.
All Americans deserve the freedom to choose what car they
drive, and to my Democratic colleagues I want to emphasize that
none of the bills being considered today prevent electric cars
or trucks from being driven on our roads if people want them.
But forcing these vehicles on long-distance-driving rural
Americans--and, for that matter, many urban-dwelling Americans
who don't have garages and driveways to charge these cars--is
simply wrong.
Ultimately, this forced EV transition will
disproportionately burden working-class Americans. The four
pieces of legislation simply prevent the Biden administration
from using the Federal Government to dictate how Americans
travel and reach their desired destinations.
I appreciate the witnesses for testifying today, and I look
forward to our discussion on ensuring affordable and reliable
transportation for the American people.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Johnson follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Johnson. And with that, I yield back and I recognize
the ranking member, Mr. Tonko from New York, for his opening
statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. PAUL TONKO, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF NEW YORK

Mr. Tonko. Thank you, Mr. Chair. I begin by recognizing and
thanking our witness, Mr. Goffman, as well as the EPA's staff,
for continuing their work on a regulatory agenda that boldly
addresses pollution from the transportation sector and upholds
the agency's mission of protecting human health and our
environment.
Transportation remains the largest source of greenhouse gas
pollution in our United States and is a major emitter of other
harmful air pollution. Luckily, the Clean Air Act provides EPA
with a wide range of authorities and tools to address their
emissions, and I believe EPA is working to fulfill its
obligation to protect public health in a manner consistent with
both the latest science and the law.
Unfortunately, the four bills under consideration today
would undermine EPA's efforts, and I must oppose them.
H.R. 1435, the Preserving Choice in Vehicle Purchases Act,
would limit the Clean Air Act's so-called California waiver and
requires previously issued waivers to be revoked. Given its
history and extraordinary air quality challenges, California
has the ability to request a preemption waiver for its vehicle
emission standards, provided that they are at least as
stringent as Federal standards and necessary to meet compelling
and extraordinary conditions. This leadership by California has
benefited so many Americans. My home State of New York is among
the section 177 States that adopt these standards.
The Choice in Automobile Retail Sales Act prohibits EPA
from finalizing its recently proposed medium-duty and light-
duty vehicle standards, blocking the ongoing effort to
strengthen tailpipe emission standards for future model years.
I would not have been surprised to see the majority use the
Congressional Review Act on this rule, but they could not even
wait for it to be finalized. This bill prevents EPA from
carrying out its duties to protect the public from harmful air
pollution, and it will deny Americans the significant economic
and health benefits of the proposed rule.
Ultimately, this bill will undermine private-sector
investments, investments in cleaner vehicle technologies, by
injecting even greater uncertainty into the standards and
incentives that are resulting in this rapid adoption of zero-
emission vehicles. It will also stifle innovation, removing the
push on automakers and suppliers to continue making cleaner,
more efficient, and more affordable vehicles at every price
point.
The No Fuel Credits for Batteries Act would prevent EPA
from allowing eligible biofuels used to make electricity that
power EVs from earning eRINs under the RFS. There are currently
several fuel pathways involving electricity approved under RFS,
but these pathways have never been operationalized. EPA has
recently considered adding eRINs to the RFS, and I hope the
agency moves forward with this proposal in the near future.
Failing to do so will keep otherwise eligible feedstocks from
participating and receiving the benefits of the RFS.
Finally, H.R. 3337, the Fuels Parity Act, changes the
definition of advanced biofuel in the Clean Air Act to remove
the bar on cornstarch. It also requires EPA to use the GREET
model to assess carbon intensity for corn ethanol.
I want to be clear that I do not necessarily have a problem
with the GREET model, but this bill would give preferential
treatment to only two types of biofuels while requiring other
fuels to use other, less advantageous models.
Ultimately, I believe these bills will continue the
Republican trend of creating uncertainty for private sector,
seeking to upend investments in the next generation of clean
vehicle technologies.
There is no denying the rapid adoption of EVs, which is
only expected to increase in the years ahead. The consumers are
realizing that these vehicles are not only good for the
environment but also result in major cost savings over the life
of the vehicle. And these vehicles and their components will
increasingly be built in America, in large part due to the
incentives included in the Bipartisan Infrastructure Law and
the Inflation Reduction Act.
Now, while I am very excited about the possibilities for
widespread EV adoption, I also know liquid fuels will continue
to play an important role in our fuel mix for many decades to
come, and I want those fuels to continue to reduce their carbon
intensity.
Last year, under Democratic leadership, the House passed
bipartisan legislation with the support of several Republicans
on this committee that would have done just that by allowing
E15 to be sold year-round. These higher biofuel blends not only
reduce emissions but also give consumers another option to save
at the pump. While that proposal is certainly not my preferred
long-term solution to evolve Federal fuels policy toward a
fuel-neutral, performance-based, carbon intensity program, I do
believe it is a more legitimate attempt at bipartisan
legislating than the bills before us today.
So while I look forward to our witnesses' testimony, I
remain unconvinced that we can work together to build broad
bipartisan support for any of these bills.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Tonko follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Tonko. And with that, Mr. Chair, I thank you and yield
back.
Mr. Johnson. The gentleman yields back. I now recognize the
Chair of the full committee, Chair Rodgers, for 5 minutes for
the purposes of an opening statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, A
REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF WASHINGTON

Mrs. Rodgers. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Since the invention of the Ford Model T, America has led
the world in car manufacturing and technology. The combustion
engine has allowed people from around the world to increase
their mobility, raise their standard of living. For more than
half a century, affordable transportation has helped drive
America's economic success.
The question we should be asking today is what do we want
America to be--whether we want America to be leading the auto
sector for the next 100 years.
Nearly 20 years ago, China made the decision to fully
electrify. Today, by some estimates, they are building an
average of two coal-fired plants per day in order to meet their
needs to fully electrify. I continue to hear from some of my
colleagues, well, we just need to put more money into this
system. That is money that is going to China. China dominates
the supply chains. It is China's technology that is being used
in electric vehicles and the batteries. Those supply chains
include nickel from Russia, cobalt from Congo, lithium from
China.
Ladies and gentlemen, it has been the United States of
America that has been leading in bringing down carbon
emissions. We have led the world. It has been American
technology and innovation that has resulted in us leading the
world and bringing down carbon emissions. It is not China.
China continues to increase their carbon emissions. China's
carbon emissions are going to continue to increase until at
least 2030, 2032.
So today we are discussing a rule, a proposed rule by EPA,
that would have us follow China's lead. It is just 1 of 151
proposed rules by EPA, 151 rules right now at OMB, Office of
Management and Budget, the White House by EPA. And this is a
rule that would basically, in the next--by 2032 take away the
choice from Americans. Ninety-five percent of the cars that
Americans drive today would no longer be made available.
Today's hearing is really, fundamentally about whether--you
know, and if we are going to make this decision, if the United
States is going to make this decision to fully electrify its
transportation fleet, it should be the elected representatives
of the people that are making that decision. That is a decision
that belongs in this committee, the Energy and Commerce
Committee.
When it comes to protecting consumers' affordable
transportation choices and preferences, that should be a debate
in Congress. The cars we drive, how we fuel them, we need to
make sure that it is practical, affordable. Top-down government
mandates and subsidies will not reduce emissions or lower cost.
Americans deserve to have the choice to decide what mode of
transportation suits them best.
So the proposed rule. The proposed rule suggests that--it
proposed that two-thirds of the cars, nearly 70 percent of the
cars, by 2032 must be 100 percent battery electric. Not
hybrids, not plug-in hybrids, not hydrogen, not any other
technology--100 percent battery electric. That is China's goal.
That is China's agenda. Since when is the United States of
America following China's lead?
I have heard from many of my colleagues and I have heard
from the Secretary of Energy that we need to be following
China's lead. I don't agree. I don't agree for a moment, and
this proposed rule is an affront to representative government.
It is an affront to the elected representatives of the people,
and it is affront, actually, to every American.
So instead of forcing Americans to spend more money on
vehicles that they don't want to buy, on vehicles that only
advance a political agenda, let's get back to the work of
making sure that people have access to affordable, reliable,
functional means of transportation. Let's get focused on
improving mobility, mobility choices. Let's get focused on
American technology and innovation. Protecting people's way of
life and the ability to provide, you know, for their families
should be a bipartisan priority.
You know, America has long celebrated that we trust people
to make the best decisions for themselves, not a government
that decides for them. And today we have the EPA wanting to
decide for us, not even the elected representatives of the
people.
[The prepared statement of Mrs. Rodgers follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mrs. Rodgers. I yield back.
Mr. Johnson. The gentlelady yields back. I now recognize
the gentleman from New Jersey, the ranking member of the full
committee, Mr. Pallone, for 5 minutes for an opening statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. FRANK PALLONE, Jr., A REPRESENTATIVE
IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF NEW JERSEY

Mr. Pallone. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Today we are once again witnessing Republicans picking
winners and losers in our Nation's transportation sector to put
polluters over people. With the bills before the subcommittee,
Republicans are actively fighting against innovation, lower
energy bills for Americans, and the oil industry's ability to
make manufacturing decisions based on what consumers want.
Committee Republicans' efforts to continue propping up Big
Oil corporations threatens a clean and prosperous future for
all Americans. I reject this approach and am instead committed
to clean-vehicle affordability and consumer choice, and that is
exactly what Democrats delivered last Congress: real solutions
for our transportation sector.
The Bipartisan Infrastructure Law invested $7.5 billion in
EV charging, 10 billion in clean transportation, and over 7
billion in EV battery components, including critical minerals
which have increasingly been manufactured overseas. These
investments will help build the EV infrastructure needed across
the Nation.
The Inflation Reduction Act included rebates and tax
credits to lower the cost of EVs for American families,
including a tax credit up to $4,000 for a qualifying preowned
or used EV.
Electric vehicles are becoming more and more popular every
day, and these tax credits are making them even more affordable
for American families. And yet every Republican here today
voted against both of these laws and all of these critical
investments. Instead, they are deliberately misleading
Americans about EVs and EPA proposals in order to do the
bidding of Big Oil corporations.
The truth is, EPA is not imposing any sort of EV mandate.
It is also true that EVs provide significant public health and
environmental benefits and deliver significant savings to
Americans by decreasing fuel costs by 50 percent. They are
also, overall, 25 percent less expensive to own than regular
cars. As a result of these benefits, demand for EVs is already
exceedingly outpacing supply.
Unfortunately, the four Republican bills included in this
hearing will move us backwards in cleaning up and modernizing
the transportation sector. My Republican colleagues oppose EVs
so much that they are trying to legislate away decades of
innovation and cleaner transportation, are working against
market trends, and will strip EPA of its authority to protect
Americans from vehicle pollution. And they are doing all of
this to protect large corporations while refusing to invest in
American families.
Now, H.R. 1435 flies in the face of 50 years of Congress
and EPA recognizing California's authority to set more
protective vehicle standards. It infringes on States' ability
to voluntarily adopt these standards to protect their citizens
from dangerous pollution and climate change. This bill is not
just a direct attack on California but also on dozens of other
States, including New Jersey, that frequently follow
California's lead.
Then there is a discussion draft that would block EPA from
finalizing its proposed light and medium-duty vehicle emission
standards. As drafted, it could also prevent EPA from ever
finalizing new vehicle standards, hamstringing the agency's
ability to fulfill its obligation to protect Americans from
dangerous motor vehicle pollution.
Another discussion draft, the No Fuel Credits for Batteries
Act, would bar EPA from allowing credits to be generated under
the Renewable Fuel Standard for renewable electricity for
transportation fuel, also known as eRIN--like iPhones. EPA has
been working in this area since 2010, as directed by Congress.
The renewable electricity for eRINs would be produced by a
variety of renewable biogas feedstocks such as landfills,
farmers, municipal wastewater treatment facilities, and others.
And this legislation would stifle biofuel production
opportunities across the country.
And finally, I have concerns with H.R. 3337, which would
allow cornstarch ethanol to qualify as an advanced biofuel
under the Renewable Fuel Standard. It would force EPA to rely
solely on the Department of Energy's GREET model for
determining life cycle emissions for biomass-based diesel and
cornstarch ethanol. Picking winners and losers within the
biofuels market under the RFS makes no sense. As drafted, the
bill also weakens EPA's ability to administer the RFS
responsibly and would replace science-based decision making
with political preference.
Now, if House Republicans are really interested in driving
affordability, they should join us in supporting policies that
will continue to promote innovation in our clean transportation
sector, not undermine it. I invite them to join us in our
efforts to lower energy costs for Americans, protect public
health, address the worsening climate crisis, and grow our
economy for the future.
Unfortunately, the bills before us today are a step in the
wrong direction. And for that reason, I oppose.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Pallone follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Pallone. And I yield back the remainder of my time, Mr.
Chairman.
Mr. Johnson. The gentleman yields back.
And our first witness today, our only witness for the first
panel, is Mr. Joseph Goffman, Principal Deputy Administrator
for the Office of Air and Radiation at the EPA.
Mr. Goffman, thanks for being with us today. You are
recognized for 5 minutes for your opening statement.

STATEMENT OF JOSEPH GOFFMAN, PRINCIPAL DEPUTY ADMINISTRATOR,
OFFICE OF AIR AND RADIATION, ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY

Mr. Goffman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Chair McMorris
Rodgers, Ranking Member Pallone, Chair Johnson, Ranking Member
Tonko, and members of the subcommittee, thank you for inviting
EPA to testify today.
At this point, the administration does not have an official
position on the bills or drafts before the subcommittee, but I
would like to make a few points that I hope will assist the
committee in the consideration of the bills before it.
On April 12, 2023, EPA proposed vehicle standards that
would significantly reduce CO
2
, hydrocarbons, NOx,
and particulate matter and deliver widespread reductions in air
pollution across the country. The Choice in Automobile Retail
Sales Act of 2023, if enacted, would not allow EPA to finalize
those standards.
That legislation, if enacted, would prevent EPA from
finalizing the proposed standards, and that would mean that
harmful pollutants would continue to blight Americans' quality
of life and health by subjecting them to more hospital visits,
more respiratory and cardiovascular illnesses, and more health
impairments from nonfatal heart attacks, aggravated asthma, and
decreased lung function. It means that drivers would be denied
the chance to save fuel costs and that American society would
not see the 850 billion to $1.6 trillion in net benefits these
standards would achieve.
The proposed standards align with commitments already made
by automakers and U.S. States as they plan to accelerate clean
vehicle technologies in the light- and medium-duty fleets, and
they are aligned with the significant investments Congress
itself made in clean vehicle technologies through the Inflation
Reduction Act and the Bipartisan Infrastructure Law.
Moving on to the second bill, let me just observe a couple
of things. The Clean Air Act explicitly requires the control of
air pollution be primarily the responsibility of States and
local governments. The regulation of new motor vehicle
emissions is an exception to this design. The Clean Air Act
gives that job to the EPA and preempts States from doing it.
But even here, Congress made a move back toward the State
role by expressly giving California authority to set separate
standards. In fact, the Clean Air Act explicitly stipulates
that the EPA Administrator shall waive the Federal preemption
of State car and truck standards for California, unless one of
three specified criteria are met. Thus, the Preserving Choice
in Vehicle Purchases Act, if enacted, would preclude EPA from
issuing State waivers that directly or indirectly limit the
sale or use of new motor vehicles with internal combustion
engines.
For perspective on this, I just want to note that the
authority that Congress granted to California and the
obligation to grant a waiver in--unless certain criteria are
met--when Congress set this system up, it did so 50 years ago
and continually reenacted that structure through a series of
reauthorizations of the Clean Air Act.
The third bill before this committee, the No Fuel Credits
for Batteries Act of 2023, would prohibit the EPA from
requiring or otherwise promoting the generation, use, or
transfer of RINs for the creation of electricity for use as a
transportation fuel.
I just want to note, as the Chair and others did, that
while we proposed an eRIN program, we got such an overwhelming
level of interest and such an extensive comment record that we
thought that what we really needed to do was to continue to
engage with stakeholders to explore the issues that they
raised.
Finally, the Fuels Parity Act would revise the statute to
no longer preclude cornstarch ethanol as an advanced biofuel
and would specify the life cycle analysis modeling that we
should use. As a general matter, the EPA relies on multiple
models and relies on the expertise of our technical staff and
our scientists to continually oversee the models that are used
because our experience is that, from the perspective of
scientific integrity, they are in the best position to continue
to collect information, observe the advancements in science,
and update our modeling repertoire, if you will, as they see
fit.
Thank you very much, and I look forward to answering
questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Goffman follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Johnson. Thank you, Mr. Goffman.
The gentleman has yielded back, and we will now begin our
questioning, and I recognize myself. I will begin.
Mr. Goffman, in late April our subcommittee held a hearing
titled ``Exposing the Environmental, Human Rights, and National
Security Risks of the Biden Administration's Rush-to-Green
Policies.'' During the hearing, witnesses emphasized that EV
adoption faces significant cost barriers, which would
disproportionately impact low-income Americans. The average
price of an EV is $17,000 more than the average price of an
internal combustion engine vehicle.
So, Mr. Goffman, are you concerned that pursuing such a
policy that clearly makes vehicles unaffordable would eliminate
reliable transportation options for low-income Americans?
Mr. Goffman. Thank you for that question, Mr. Chairman,
because that is actually of--it is an essential objective of
the rulemaking process we----
Mr. Johnson. So are you concerned?
Mr. Goffman. Yes, and we are----
Mr. Johnson. OK, great.
Mr. Goffman [continuing]. Focusing on affordability because
of that concern.
Mr. Johnson. All right. All witnesses--also, witnesses at
that hearing highlighted the negative global environmental
impact of mining, processing, and refining the critical
minerals necessary for EV batteries and motors, as it has been
pointed out. We are tremendously dependent upon China for those
materials today.
Would you agree we need to significantly increase the
production and refining of critical minerals necessary to meet
the Biden administration's EV and green energy goals?
Mr. Goffman. My understanding is that the Inflation
Reduction Act and the Bipartisan Infrastructure Law put that in
motion, which is to bring----
Mr. Johnson. So you agree that we need to significantly
increase?
Mr. Goffman. And I believe the authors of those two bills--
--
Mr. Johnson. No, I am asking you. Do you agree?
Mr. Goffman. Yes, yes.
Mr. Johnson. Yes, OK. Are you concerned that the EPA is
ignoring the environmental, human rights, and national security
risks associated with the skyrocketing demand for these
critical minerals, though?
I mean, we are more dependent upon critical minerals from
China than we have ever been on oil from OPEC, for example,
right now. And they hold the corner market in the world. Are
you concerned about the skyrocketing demand for these minerals?
Mr. Goffman. And I believe the IRA was----
Mr. Johnson. No, I am asking you. Are you concerned about
that skyrocketing demand?
Mr. Goffman. I am--we are----
Mr. Johnson. The EPA. I am not asking you what the law did.
I am asking you, is the EPA concerned?
Mr. Goffman. Yes, we are----
Mr. Johnson. OK, thank you.
Mr. Goffman [continuing]. Focused on that issue.
Mr. Johnson. Mr. Goffman, as I mentioned in my opening
statement, I appreciate that the EPA decided not to finalize
the eRINs proposal. What do you mean when you say that EPA is
not moving forward with eRINs ``at this time''? Is that leaving
the door open for EPA to issue an eRINs rulemaking in the
future?
Mr. Goffman. Yes, it is.
Mr. Johnson. OK. Will you commit to briefing this committee
on any work that the agency does on an eRINs program?
Mr. Goffman. Of course. When we have something to brief you
on, we----
Mr. Johnson. OK, all right. And quickly, given the
information that we have seen coming from PJM, the RTO, the
grid operator, and others, I do have questions on how--if we
shut down reliable, dispatchable power at an accelerating rate
in the next decade, there are concerns there will even be
enough electricity, whether or not there will be enough
electricity for this so-called EV transition.
So, Mr. Goffman, will you commit to returning to this
committee to brief us on your new Source Performance Standards
Rule for Coal and Natural Gas-Fired Power, better known as the
Clean Power Plan 2.0? Will you return to discuss this with us?
Mr. Goffman. Yes.
Mr. Johnson. OK, great. Mr. Goffman, if EPA grants
California's waiver of vehicle standards, 17 States are poised
to adopt the low-emission vehicle criteria. Along with
California, these States represent 40 percent of the market for
new vehicles.
Ohio, however, is leading the charge in litigation with 17
States against EPA's reinstatement of the California waiver. It
is now pending before the U.S. Court of Appeals for the DC
Circuit.
Your testimony mentions three conditions under which the
EPA Administrator cannot grant a waiver. If EPA's proposed
tailpipe emission standards go into effect, the national
standard would not be significantly different than California's
standards, nullifying one of the statutory criteria for
granting the waiver.
So has the EPA considered how the two policies would
interact, and whether they conflict?
[Pause.]
Mr. Johnson. My time is expired. If you could, just respond
to that quickly.
Mr. Goffman. Sorry, sorry.
Mr. Johnson. Have you considered how they interact?
Mr. Goffman. We haven't reached the stage in reviewing
the--with the current pending waiver requests to get to that
question.
Mr. Johnson. Well, I mean, would California need a waiver
if the national standard accomplished the same goal
effectively?
Mr. Goffman. I don't know.
Mr. Johnson. OK.
Mr. Goffman. We just haven't gotten there yet.
Mr. Johnson. I will come back with some future questions,
perhaps, if I get yielded some additional time.
With that, I yield back and I recognize the ranking member,
Mr. Tonko, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Goffman, thank you for your testimony. Let's start by
focusing on the eRINs legislation.
Section 211(o) of the Clean Air Act uses the terms
``renewable fuel'' and ``transportation fuel.'' Transportation
fuel is defined as, and I quote, ``a fuel for use in motor
vehicles, motor vehicle engines, nonroad vehicles, or nonroad
engines, except for oceangoing vessels.''
So with that, Mr. Goffman, is there anywhere in the Clean
Air Act that indicates that a transportation fuel must be a
liquid fuel?
Mr. Goffman. That is not how we interpreted it.
Mr. Tonko. So do you believe EPA has the authority to allow
fuels produced from eligible biofeedstocks used to make
electricity to power electric vehicles to participate in the
RFS?
Mr. Goffman. Yes, we do.
Mr. Tonko. And that would be consistent with EPA's
longstanding view. Mr. Goffman, is it correct that there have
been approved fuel pathways involving electricity since 2010?
Mr. Goffman. Yes, there have been.
Mr. Tonko. And since then, there has also been
appropriations language directing EPA to operationalize these
pathways. So I am not sure what additional clarity is needed
now that hasn't been afforded over the past 13 years.
Mr. Goffman, I want to make certain everyone understands
that, to receive an hypothetical eRIN, electricity must be
produced from a feedstock eligible under the RFS such as biogas
from digesters at landfills, wastewater treatment facilities,
and other waste digesters. Is that correct?
Mr. Goffman. Yes.
Mr. Tonko. So am I correct that today a digester that
captures biogas, processes it into renewable natural gas, and
puts it into a pipeline to power a natural gas bus qualifies
for RINs, but that same digester that captures that same
biogas, turns it into electricity to power an electric bus does
not?
Mr. Goffman. You know, I am sorry, I am a little bit
confused by the question.
Mr. Tonko. Sure. So if a digester that captures biogas----
Mr. Goffman. Right.
Mr. Tonko [continuing]. Processes it into a renewable
natural gas and puts it into a pipeline to power a natural gas
bus qualifies for RINs, but----
Mr. Goffman. Ah, OK.
Mr. Tonko [continuing]. That same digester that captures
that same biogas turns it into electricity to power an electric
bus, it does not.
Mr. Goffman. At the moment, it does not. But I believe our
proposal would be consistent with authorizing or--the creation
of RINs in the second example.
Mr. Tonko. And I thank you, because I think it is clear
that we should be allowing every eligible feedstock into the
program, regardless of what type of vehicle it fuels.
Now, I know EPA's recent eRIN proposal has been put on
hold, and I appreciate it is more complicated than other fuels.
But I encourage EPA to move forward to operationalize these
pathways and to distribute credits in a manner that promotes
the most equitable buildout of EV charging infrastructure.
Now, finally, on H.R. 3337, the GREET bill, I want to be
clear that I am not opposed to GREET as a method for
calculating life cycle assessments, but I do think all fuels
need to be assessed on a level playing field. So, Mr. Goffman,
do you have concerns with EPA being required to use GREET for
only two fuel categories under the RFS?
Mr. Goffman. Well, our concern is--in the vein of
maintaining scientific integrity, is being limited to just
certain of our analytic tools when we know that not just the
GREET model but other models provide valuable information. And
so that is why we have long since come to rely on multiple
models and the flexibility to update them, change them, and at
times put differential weight on different models.
This is an area of work in the scientific and technical
community that is fairly dynamic, and we want to--we always
prefer to be able to have the flexibility to respond to that
dynamism, as the science and understanding of the world and of
our modeling tools changes.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you. I certainly agree that we need to
constantly revisit rules, regs, and laws that would give us
more opportunity and more flexibility. So with that, I thank
you for your participation today.
And with that, Mr. Chair, I yield back.
Mr. Johnson. The gentleman yields back. The Chair now
recognizes Mr. Palmer from Alabama for 5 minutes.
Mr. Palmer. Mr. Chairman, we find ourselves in another
hearing again in which our colleagues in the Biden
administration are pushing dangerous socialist propaganda
policies over people.
And I was struck by your comments about the air quality
issues and how it impacts people with respiratory illnesses,
cardiovascular illnesses. Are you aware that, because of the
move to renewables in Europe, that the increase in utility cost
has resulted in 68,000 people dying just last winter because
people who had respiratory issues, cardiovascular issues--
because they couldn't afford to adequately heat their homes?
Mr. Goffman. I am not familiar with those specific----
Mr. Palmer. I am not surprised, because you are on your own
agenda that will deprive people of their rights in this
country. And that is where this is heading with this
administration. You are going to--you guys are pushing policies
that are literally going to derive--deprive people of their
rights to choose whether they want to cook their food on a gas
range top or drive a vehicle of their choice.
Are you also aware that the head of the National
Transportation Safety Board warned of the risk posed by heavy
electric vehicles colliding with lighter cars? Are you aware
that the weight differentials impact injury rates and fatality
rates? Are you aware of that?
Mr. Goffman. We looked at that issue explicitly----
Mr. Palmer. And you didn't care?
Mr. Goffman [continuing]. The analysis----
Mr. Palmer. You apparently didn't care.
Mr. Goffman [continuing]. Our proposal.
Mr. Palmer. You apparently don't care.
Mr. Goffman. Oh, not--we do care, and we addressed----
Mr. Palmer. Yes, it is like----
Mr. Goffman. We addressed that issue in our proposal.
Mr. Palmer. Let me point out to you that--you take the Ford
Mustang Mach 4 or 5, I believe it is. It is the Mach-E. It is
approximately 33 percent heavier than its gasoline counterpart.
Are you--do you have any understanding of physics, mass and
velocity and things like that, and the impact of a heavier
vehicle colliding with another vehicle at the same speed, what
the damage can be from the heavier vehicle?
Mr. Goffman. We looked explicitly at----
Mr. Palmer. And you didn't care.
Mr. Goffman [continuing]. That issue in our proposal, and--
--
Mr. Palmer. Yes, but you really didn't care.
Mr. Goffman. Well, on the contrary----
Mr. Palmer. You--no, you are----
Mr. Goffman. We care----
Mr. Palmer. Listen, I am so tired of listening to the
propaganda coming in these hearings. I am so tired of putting
our national security at risk because there is no way that we
are going to catch up with China in battery production, because
we can't even get the permits to do the mining for the
materials you need to make batteries.
And what this administration is doing is putting the
country at risk by making us more dependent on China. And
people need to wake up to this. This is past politics. I am not
interested in the politics of it. I am focused on the policy. I
am focused on the risk that it imposes on people. And we are
going to see that here if we go headlong into EVs, into full-
bore renewables. We are going to see people die because of the
propaganda coming out of this administration.
So don't come in here and tell us that you are concerned
about the air quality and how it is going to impact people. We
have done a remarkable job of improving our air quality, which
I have yet to hear a single witness from this administration
admit to. We reduced the 6 criteria pollutants over the last 50
years by 86 percent, even though our--the vehicle miles have
doubled almost in terms of vehicle miles driven, and the number
of vehicles on the road have gone up.
So what you are proposing, I just want the American people
to wake up to this. This is an assault on freedom, and it is
dangerous. It is not only a threat to people's personal safety,
it is a threat to our national security. It is a threat to our
economy. And people need to understand this.
And you can call us climate deniers, whatever crap you want
to come up with. That is not the case. We understand climate,
we understand science, but we also understand safety, we also
understand freedom. And that is what is at stake here.
And I will reiterate: You people are so beholden to an
agenda that you would literally tell families around the
country they can't even use a gas range top.
And I am--you know, I am going to continue to focus on the
science. I am going to continue to focus on the physics, the
economics, but also on our national security.
Mr. Chairman, thank you for holding this hearing. It is not
my usual line of questions, but I yield back.
Mr. Joyce [presiding]. The gentleman yields. The Chair now
recognizes the gentlelady from New York, Ms. Clarke, for her 5
minutes.
Ms. Clarke. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, and I thank
our Ranking Member Tonko for holding today's hearing. I would
also like to thank our witness for being here to testify on
these bills.
Through my line of questioning this morning, I want to use
my limited time to remind this committee, in contrast to my
colleagues on the other side of the aisle, of the consequences
of inaction and what it would mean for our constituents if the
EPA does not finalize the strongest feasible standard proposed
under its light day vehicle emission standards.
In your testimony, Mr. Goffman, you note the health impacts
associated with vehicle pollution and how communities of color
and economically disadvantaged neighborhoods are
disproportionately exposed to air pollution from vehicles. If
this rule does not go into place, what does this mean for the
health of our communities?
Mr. Goffman. Well, thank you for that question.
When we analyzed our proposal, we looked at one of the
projected years of implementation. We saw that the premature
deaths avoided in that analytic year would range between 730
and 1,700 in that year. We projected that hundreds if not
thousands of respiratory ailments and illnesses, including
aggravated asthma attacks requiring hospital visits, could be
prevented if we--if this proposal was fully implemented. And of
course, those illnesses affect the entire cardiovascular
system. And so often people who suffer from those illnesses
have adjacent or related health problems, which means that
their--they experience health suffering.
And I think, as one of your colleagues said recently,
getting sick isn't free. And that is why, when we take those
benefits and we look at what the avoided oil costs would be
under this rule and we sort of add them together, you know, we
are confident that there would be about a $1 trillion net
benefit to American society if these proposals were adopted and
implemented.
Ms. Clarke. Well, let me just thank you for that. For
environmental justice communities where pollution from peaker
power plants, chemical facilities, and dirty diesel trucks are
compounded, pollution is a matter of life and death. There is
no doubt about that.
A recent report by the American Lung Association found that
if we transition to 100 percent sales of zero-emission
passenger vehicles by 2035, over 100,000 deaths would be
prevented, 2.2 million asthma attacks would be avoided, and
over 10.7 million days of work would not be lost. So I would
like to ask for unanimous consent to submit this report from
the American Lung Association entitled, ``Zeroing in on Healthy
Air'' into the record.
Mr. Johnson [presiding]. Without objection, so ordered.
[The information appears at the conclusion of the hearing.]
Ms. Clarke. Thank you.
I also want to note that communities of color, low-income
communities, seniors, and disabled populations are especially
vulnerable to the harmful impacts associated with climate
change. Cutting greenhouse gas emissions in the transportation
sector is one of the most critical steps we must take to meet
our climate goals and limit the harm of climate change on our
most vulnerable populations.
Mr. Goffman, can you provide an estimate of the magnitude
of greenhouse gas emissions that would be avoided by finalizing
the proposed standards?
Mr. Goffman. Yes. And again, thank you for that question.
We estimate more than 7 billion tons of CO
2

would be reduced by the light-duty vehicle standards and
other--1.8 would be reduced, about 9 billion tons of
CO
2
reduced by the heavy-duty and the light-duty
standards. That is double our emissions in 2020.
Ms. Clarke. Very well.
My Republican colleagues have continued to bring up costs
during this hearing. Mr. Goffman, can you tell us how much
money would be saved by reducing this climate--these climate
emissions by finalizing the proposed standards?
Mr. Goffman. Well, we project for an individual driver or
customer, that driver would save $12,000 over the lifetime of a
vehicle that met these standards, mostly in fuel savings as
well as in lower maintenance costs.
Ms. Clarke. Very well. With that, I yield back, Mr.
Chairman.
Mr. Johnson. The gentlelady yields back. The Chair now
recognizes Dr. Joyce from Pennsylvania for 5 minutes.
Mr. Joyce. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. First I want to thank
Chairman Johnson and Ranking Member Tonko for holding today's
important legislative hearing.
Over the past year, we have seen draconian actions by the
Biden administration and Democrats to force Americans to buy
electric vehicles. One of the clearest and most radical actions
are California's new Advanced Clean Car II Regulations. These
regulations would require 35 percent of new cars to be electric
vehicles in 2026, and fully 100 percent to be EVs by 2035.
Thankfully, these regulations have yet to go into effect
and require a waiver from the EPA under the Clean Air Act to be
implemented. That is why I have introduced H.R. 1435, the
Preserving Choice in Vehicle Purchases Act, to prevent the EPA
Administrator from granting a waiver allowing California's ban
on internal combustion engine sales by 2035.
Although starting in California, section 177 of the Clean
Air Act will ensure that, once adopted, this regulation will
spread across the Nation, disrupting the entire American auto
market and ultimately limit what my constituents are able to
buy. Seventeen States, including my home State of Pennsylvania,
have already adopted California's clean air regulations. These
States represent over 40 percent of the American auto market--
over 40 percent--and any electric vehicle mandate at that large
of scale is a de facto mandate on the entire market and
represents a decisive shift in national policy.
Let's be clear. This legislation is not anti-EVs. Those who
can afford and those who want an electric vehicle should be
able to buy one. But to put it bluntly, in my district EVs
simply cannot fulfill the needs of my constituents. They can't
drive the distances needed, they can't maintain the charge at
extreme temperatures, they can't recharge fast enough to keep
hard-working Pennsylvanians on the move.
An EV mandate is an abandonment of the free market
principles that have enabled Americans to have the most
mobility of any nation in the world. This policy will harm
working- and middle-class families by making cars more
expensive and less capable. Only by taking government's thumb
off of the scale and letting free market decide will Americans
get the efficient and the affordable transportation that they
need and that they want.
Mr. Goffman, do you agree that a ban on internal combustion
engines affecting 17 States and over 40 percent of our domestic
market would be a de facto national policy?
Mr. Goffman. I am not sure. And that--and I----
Mr. Joyce. I am sure. I think it would guide market forces
with that 40 percent domestic market. The automakers have let
us know that that is part of their decision of how they will
roll out new vehicles.
Mr. Goffman, do you think it is appropriate for a policy
tool that was meant to address local pollution concerns in
California in the 1960s and 1970s be used to create a national
ban on internal combustion engines?
Mr. Goffman. If you will indulge me, I want to be a little
bit circumspect, since we do have that issue in front of us,
thanks to California petitioning for a waiver. That is like an
adjudication process, so I hesitate to answer your question
because it is a decision that we may have to make, or will have
to make to respond to the petition.
Mr. Joyce. Mr. Goffman, on May 10, Administrator Regan
testified in front of this subcommittee. When I posed the
question to him if he supported banning internal combustion
engines, he responded--and I am quoting--``No, not at all.''
When asked if he supported consumer choice in vehicles, his
response was--again, quoting--``I don't see a near-term future
where we don't have a fuel supply that complements electric
vehicles and provides customer choice.''
So I am going to ask you the same question: Do you support
a ban on internal combustion engines or consumer choice in
vehicles?
Mr. Goffman. No.
Mr. Joyce. Thank you. Wouldn't granting a waiver for the
California regulations be a ban on internal combustion engines?
Mr. Goffman. I don't know yet, and----
Mr. Joyce. I think the ramifications are clear to all of us
that that and the 40 percent market share would be a national
ban.
Do you think that automakers will produce one set of
vehicles for California, another set for New York, maybe a set
for West Virginia? Do you think there is a capability in
production to have different vehicles for different parts of
the United States?
Mr. Goffman. My understanding is that, historically, auto
manufacturers have striven to avoid making more than just one
national fleet.
Mr. Joyce. But yet 40 percent of the market would be
affected--again, a de facto mandate of making EVs the only
vehicle that Americans could choose to drive. Do you really
think that the refining capacity----
Mr. Johnson. The gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. Joyce. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield.
Mr. Johnson. The Chair now recognizes the ranking member of
the full committee, Mr. Pallone, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Pallone. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I have significant concerns with the intent, execution, and
desired outcomes of the bills before us today. And as I said in
my opening statement, Republicans' opposition to EVs is an
attack, in my opinion, on innovation, public health, and lower
energy bills for American drivers.
But I am particularly concerned about H.R. 1435. In my
opinion, this bill runs counter to the intent of the Clean Air
Act, which is a model of cooperative federalism, with decades
of successful partnership between EPA and States, to protect
Americans from dangerous air pollution. And this is especially
true when it comes to controlling vehicle emissions.
Congress directed EPA to take the lead but also included
language to recognize the authority of California to set
separate and more protective standards. But the bill would
ignore this well-established structure. So, Mr. Goffman, how
would blocking more protective State vehicle standards
undermine the Clean Air Act's partnership between States and
the Federal Government to control air pollution?
Mr. Goffman. It could limit California's--or more
precisely, EPA's--authority to grant a waiver to California.
And I think, as you know, States like New Jersey have
voluntarily--have voluntarily chosen over the history of the
Clean Air Act to exercise the option that the Clean Air Act
gives them to adopt California's standards after EPA has
granted California a waiver to implement its standards.
Mr. Pallone. Well, thanks. And I am committed to defending
States' authority to protect the health of their citizens and
the environment from dangerous air pollution in the
transportation sector. And that is why Senator Carper and I
filed an amicus brief earlier this year defending EPA's
decision to grant a Clean Air Act waiver for California's
Advanced Clean Cars program.
Now, H.R. 1435 would reverse EPA's decision and revoke this
waiver. And this would be especially problematic, as you said,
for New Jersey, since we often follow California's lead on
vehicle standards. So, again, Mr. Goffman, how would revoking
existing waivers impact the ability of States like New Jersey
to control pollution from their transportation sectors?
Mr. Goffman. States like New Jersey who have exercised
their option of adopting California's standards have depended
on section 177 of the Clean Air Act. Section 177 is contingent
on California's being granted a waiver by the EPA for its
standards.
There have been waiver grants we have done in the last year
or so where we determined that the--California's implied
entitlement under the Clean Air Act was not negated by any of
the facts that were presented to us in the record, and so that
would take away not only California's ability to implement its
vehicle regulations, but it would completely erase the option
of States like New Jersey that have exercised that option in
the past to adopt their--California standards.
Mr. Pallone. Well, thank you again. Let me just say that
the transportation sector is currently the largest source of
climate pollution in the United States. So it is critical, in
my opinion, that States and EPA have every tool available to
help cut these emissions. And with these bills, it is clear
that my Republican colleagues are not interested in addressing
this dangerous air pollution and are just continuing to promote
handouts for their polluting friends over the American people.
But I do want to thank Mr. Goffman for being here today. I
do think this hearing is important.
And I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Johnson. The gentleman yields back. The Chair now
recognizes Chair Rodgers----
Mrs. Rodgers. All right.
Mr. Johnson [continuing]. For the purpose of 5 minutes for
her questions.
Mrs. Rodgers. OK. Well, when the EPA Administrator was here
for our committee's EPA budget hearing--Mr. Regan--like you he
rejected the idea that EPA was trying to ban internal
combustion engine cars. He stated that EPA's proposed
regulations are ``technology standards that guide the future.''
In contrast, your testimony claims that the proposed rule for
light- and medium-duty vehicle emissions is a ``performance-
based emission standard.''
So is it a technology standard or is it a performance-based
standard?
Mr. Goffman. It is a performance-based standard, but we
calculate the emission standard based on what we assess to be
the available technologies on which to base the standard.
Mrs. Rodgers. OK, OK, thank you. Your testimony states that
the car companies can choose the mix of technologies used in
the vehicle to comply with your proposed standards. EPA's
analysis, though, assumes virtually no hybrids or plug-in
hybrids will be in the market when the rule is fully
implemented. Hybrids use far less critical minerals than
battery electric vehicles, they don't require new
infrastructure to be built, they are more affordable,
convenient for most consumers.
My question: Why does EPA's rule basically force
manufacturers away from providing hybrid and plug-in hybrid
options?
Mr. Goffman. What we projected is that up to a certain
percentage, depending on which of the alternatives we looked
at, of EV technology would be available, and based our
standards on that calculus, or that assessment. But we
expressed the obligation to--that manufacturers must meet in
terms of grams per mile, in order to give them the option,
individual companies the option of using whatever mix of
technologies that they choose.
One of the issues that we expect to get feedback on--and,
in fact, we are working actively to collect information from
the manufacturers while this proposal is pending--is whether we
do succeed in giving them options like adopting hybrids----
Mrs. Rodgers. Excuse me. By 2032, what percentage of
vehicles do you project will be battery electric?
[Pause.]
Mrs. Rodgers. What is the percentage?
Mr. Johnson. Microphone.
Mr. Goffman. Sorry, thanks. It is somewhere between 62
percent and 67 or 68 percent, depending on the alternative.
Mr. Johnson. Excuse me, Mr. Goffman, can you pull your
microphone just a little closer to you?
Mrs. Rodgers. Did you say 2 percent to 68 percent----
Mr. Goffman. Sure, I am sorry.
Mrs. Rodgers [continuing]. By 2032?
Mr. Goffman. Yes, I apologize. I don't have the figures----
Mrs. Rodgers. Two percent to 68 percent?
Mr. Goffman. No, no, no, 62.
Mrs. Rodgers. Sixty-two to 68, I am sorry. OK, so 68
percent, 68 percent will be battery electric. That is the
projection, battery electric----
Mr. Goffman. That is a projection----
Mrs. Rodgers. Not hybrid, not plug-in hybrid.
So how can the Administrator say it is technology neutral
if hybrids don't qualify?
And I want to highlight for everyone that you can build--
for one--for the raw materials for one battery-electric
vehicle, you can build 90 plug-in hybrids. Ninety for the same
raw materials. And over the lifetime, 70--37 times, it will
have 37 times the carbon reduction as a single battery electric
vehicle. Yet EPA is taking us down this path.
So on April 12 of this year, 2023, EPA released a press
release about the proposed regulations, and it proclaimed that
the proposed standards are projected to accelerate the
transition to electric vehicles in the next 10 years. In
addition, using your numbers, it states that the sales of
internal combustion engines will drop in 2032 to a level that
is 12.5 percent of what they were allowed in 2032.
I am going to be running out of time here shortly. I just
want to highlight that 1 percent of Americans today drive
battery electric vehicles. One percent. And one of my concerns
is that EPA is driving us down a road where we are going to be
dependent upon Chinese cars--not just the minerals, not just
the raw materials, not just the processing, but also the cars
themselves. China is building manufacturing--car manufacturing
plants in Mexico today. And by 2032 our future could very well
be one where it is only the Chinese cars that fulfill the
requirements that are being handed--mandated to us by EPA.
I yield back.
Mr. Johnson. The gentlelady yields back. The Chair now
recognizes Mr. Sarbanes from Maryland for 5 minutes.
Mr. Sarbanes. Thanks very much, Mr. Chair, and thank you,
Mr. Goffman, for being here. And I want to get back to first
principles, the authority that EPA has in this critical role of
protecting our air quality.
Congress gave EPA this role more than 50 years ago under
the Clean Air Act and reaffirmed that responsibility in 2005
under the Energy Policy Act. And I don't want us to lose sight
of that today as we discuss the bills that are being put forth
by my Republican colleagues, each of which--each of which--
would hamper EPA's ability to regulate air pollution and,
unfortunately, continues this Republican agenda of putting Big
Oil interests over the interests of the public.
For example, one of the draft bills we are discussing today
would preemptively bar EPA from finalizing, implementing, or
enforcing its light and medium-duty vehicle proposed rule, as
we have been talking about here, and it would preclude EPA from
issuing any emission standards that mandate the use of any
specific technology or result in limited availability of
internal combustion engine vehicles.
It is important to be clear that EPA's proposed standards
are reasonable, performance-based emissions standards and
constitute neither a national electric vehicle mandate nor an
internal combustion ban.
Mr. Goffman, Republicans like to accuse the agency, your
agency, of ``legislating.'' Can you explain what statutory
authority EPA is using to promulgate vehicle emission
standards, making it clear that we are the ones that legislate?
We give you authority, and then you act responsibly within
that authority. So could you talk about the statutory authority
that you have with respect to these standards?
Mr. Goffman. Thank you for that question, Congressman
Sarbanes.
We have longstanding authority under section 202 of the
Clean Air Act to set vehicle emission standards based on
available technology, taking account of a variety of factors.
We have used that authority, I guess I would say, for decades
now to set pollution standards for a variety of pollutants,
including greenhouse gases as well as air quality pollutants.
And we are using exactly the same authority in this proposal
and applying the same basic analysis in terms of technological
availability, feasibility, manufacture, lead time, cost, market
uptake, et cetera.
Mr. Sarbanes. Right.
Mr. Goffman. So it is a traditional authority that we are
applying in our----
Mr. Sarbanes. Yes, I mean, you are playing it straight,
based on the authority that you have. They are operating inside
the lines of the authority that Congress has given you, and you
are doing it in order to protect the health of the American
people.
And would you say that the model year 2027 emission
standards proposal is outside the scope of EPA's authority or
inside the scope?
Mr. Goffman. I would say it is well within the scope. And
if you will allow me, I will want to observe that what is
different this time is not the use of our authority, it is
everything that is going on from the automobile companies' own
commitment to advance EVs in their new car fleets.
I think, as you know, 2 years ago a number of companies
stood up with President Biden and committed to a 50 percent EV
goal for 2030, and at least one of those companies then adopted
a set of principles to reach 100 percent EVs by 2035. And while
they are doing that, Congress itself has made a significant
investment, or a significant menu of investments, in supporting
electric vehicle technology, supporting the supply chain from,
if you will, mine mouth to battery production to vehicles in a
way that both creates more jobs here, brings these operations
onshore here, and ultimately makes these vehicles affordable to
produce and affordable to buy.
Mr. Sarbanes. That is an excellent point, I appreciate you
making it. We are making--we are trying to make investments
here that align with the deployment of the regulatory authority
you have, which aligns in turn with where industry is headed,
all for the benefit of the health of the American people and
energy efficiency. Thank you very much for your testimony.
I yield back, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Johnson. The gentleman yields back. The Chair now
recognizes the gentleman from Texas, Mr. Weber, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Weber. I thank the Chair.
Mr. Goffman, roughly 70 percent of cobalt, a raw material
needed in lithium ion cells that power most EVs, comes from
DRC. Are you aware of that?
Mr. Goffman. I believe, yes.
Mr. Weber. OK. And unfortunately, the DRC has a high volume
of artisanal--I believe it is how you say that--mines where
kids, children are working in inhumane conditions to extract
this resource. Are you aware of that?
Mr. Goffman. Yes.
Mr. Weber. In a separate vein, Chile is home to the driest
nonpolar desert on Earth. The lithium mining industry there is
consuming large amounts of groundwater, destroying the local
ecosystem, and literally drying up the resources needed for
their very own local farmers and herders. Are you aware of
that?
Mr. Goffman. I wasn't aware of that specific set of facts.
Mr. Weber. But you know it is dry, and they are using a lot
of water, so it makes sense--bad sense, but it does make sense.
On an average, the water required for producing EV
batteries is 50 percent more water-intensive than a traditional
internal combustion engine. Were you aware of that?
Mr. Goffman. I wasn't aware specifically of that fact.
Mr. Weber. But you knew it was a lot.
Mr. Goffman. Yes.
Mr. Weber. How can the human and environmental impacts of
the growing EV market be measured against the impacts of the
production of combustion engine vehicles?
And the answer is they can't. But when you look at those
facts, and you--then you merge them with what our great
chairwoman was saying, that Americans deserve a choice--what
Dr. John Joyce was saying, Americans deserve a choice, doesn't
it seem a little out of kilter that we would try to force the
lack of choices on them?
Mr. Goffman. I agree. And I think our proposal is
consistent with that, that Americans will still have a choice.
In fact, they will have more choices.
If the auto companies continue with their plans to market
EVs on a massive scale, and our proposals are adopted, also----
Mr. Weber. That sounds like pie in the sky. Forgive me for
interrupting, but I remember when Henry Ford created the Model
T, you know, he said you could have any color you want as long
as it is black.
We are going to reduce their choices. And with the facts
that we just laid out about the mines and the deserts and the
waters and all of this stuff--we didn't even really talk about
the child labor all that much--but how can one really say that
EVs are truly a clean vehicle? It just doesn't make sense to
me.
In the time remaining, I want to jump over to--in your
written testimony you state, ``The proposal is not a national
electric vehicle mandate or an internal combustion engine
ban.'' But, in essence, that is the slope that we are going
down.
And I saw--tongue in cheek, saw a survey the other day
about electric vehicles. It said 90 percent of electric
vehicles were still on the road today; the other 10 percent
made it home safely. We just don't have the charging capacity
in our current grid. I am from Texas. We have our own grid. I
owned an air-conditioning company for 35 years. We dealt with
power requirements all the time. I know how much electric power
is needed, and we don't have it. And we have got to race down a
slope, a slippery slope, to make all these laws and rules--that
Americans don't get the choice, the vehicle is really not all
that green, it comes from sources that are anti our own values,
harming people in the process--and we want to go down this
slope.
So you also go on to say, ``We know that Americans need and
want flexibility in the type of vehicles they drive, and our
proposed light and medium vehicles rule will help consumers
have more choices, not fewer.'' That dog don't hunt in Texas.
That statement is just not true. I agree with you that
Americans want more choices when they look to purchase a
vehicle, but you and I both know--and our colleagues across the
aisle should know--that that won't be the case if and when this
rule were to go into effect.
This proposal--they like to say that Republicans like to
pick winners and losers. ``Polluters over people'' is the name-
calling they resorted to. You know, kindergarten kids did that.
I remember that from kindergarten, calling names. This proposed
rule picks winners and losers in the market and inherently goes
against consumer choice, which you claim is important to the
EPA.
True or false--I am out of time--is it true or false, a
good thing for Americans to have more choices?
Mr. Goffman. Yes, it is.
Mr. Weber. I yield back.
Mr. Goffman. And this proposal will give them more choice.
Mr. Johnson. The gentleman yields back. The Chair now
recognizes the gentleman from Georgia, Mr. Allen, for 5
minutes.
Mr. Allen. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you, Deputy
Principal Administrator, for being with us this morning.
Just for the record, I have a dear friend who is a--who was
a Cadillac dealer in my district, and he is no longer a
Cadillac dealer. Cadillac decided to go total electric. And he,
along with 400 other Cadillac dealerships, are nonexistent in
this Nation today.
So what is the problem here? The problem here is the EPA
drove them out of business, the Government. A huge economic
engine is no longer in my district.
Sir, this country is about market-driven, not government-
driven.
I grew up a while back. In fact, I graduated from college
and my mother and dad finally put air-conditioning in our home.
I went to a school that wasn't air-conditioned. And what I
would like you all to do is a study on how much carbon we could
save if everybody did away with air-conditioning like I grew
up. And then let's see who gets elected to office after you do
away with all air-conditioning in this country. And I use that
as an example because what you are doing is you are
incrementally moving this ball along and convincing people that
you are on the right path, yet the market and the people say
otherwise.
You know, there is an aggressive approach. I have got EMCs
who put in all the scrubbers and met all the requirements under
the Clean Air Act. And then, under the Obama administration,
they were told, ``You got to do away with coal.'' There was a
war on coal.
As far as manufacturers are concerned, do you have
commitments from the manufacturers?
You had said that--before a subcommittee hearing yesterday,
a House Oversight and Accountability Committee, you testified
that provisions from the Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act
and the Inflation Reduction Act were intended to make
manufacturing of these electric vehicles less expensive,
therefore give the car companies the opportunity to sell
vehicles they are planning to market at affordable prices.
However, Kelley Blue Book reported that the average price of
electric vehicles increased by $313 in just 1 month, from
February to March of 2023.
Do you have commitments from the manufacturers that they
are going to lower their price on electric vehicles they sell?
Mr. Goffman. Our expectation is, given their plans--and we
are in conversations as part of the rulemaking process,
gathering information from manufacturers--that they do intend
to sell a significant--more than 50 percent--EV fleet.
What we are doing, Congressman, is making sure that what--
that our final rules support or are consistent with their
business strategies to market----
Mr. Allen. Well----
Mr. Goffman [continuing]. A substantial amount of EVs.
Mr. Allen. Right. Not to interrupt, but it seems to me that
when you eliminate 400 dealerships across this country--you
know, cost can only be reduced by competition. That is what has
made--that is the American way, is competition. We love to
compete. You get rid of 400 dealerships and then, of course,
God knows how many more that aren't going to be able to sell
these things.
I mean, I asked my friend, ``What in the world were you
thinking?'' He said, ``Do you know how much demand I have for
electric vehicles? Zero. And yet they want me to spend $20
million to build this new electric dealership? You got to be
kidding.''
And I will tell you this. This Government is not going to
bail out General Motors when they come asking for us--asking to
us for help because of what this Government has done to General
Motors.
Let me ask you this. If you are relying on manufacturers to
lower prices, are you envisioning a direct-to-consumer
marketplace for vehicles? Americans like Scott Lambert in our
second panel today is out of business. So how are you going to
do this?
Mr. Goffman. I am sorry, sir. I didn't quite follow the
question.
Mr. Allen. How are you going to lower prices?
Mr. Goffman. Well, our job is to collect information from
the auto industry----
Mr. Allen. OK.
Mr. Goffman [continuing]. To make sure that our final
standards are consistent with their business strategy.
Mr. Allen. Yes, sir. Well, the market controls prices, sir.
I am out of time. I yield back.
Mr. Johnson. The gentleman yields back. The Chair now
recognizes the gentleman from California, Mr. Ruiz, for 5
minutes.
Mr. Ruiz. Thank you, Chairman.
Since the mid-1980s, the Coachella Valley in California has
welcomed all of its visitors with the iconic view of the San
Gorgonio Pass wind farm, right off of the 10 Freeway heading in
from the west. It is that wind farm that you see in movies when
people are driving their Harleys into Palm Springs in the
desert. Usually, it is filmed in that area.
My home State of California has been on the forefront of
renewable energy by investing in solar, wind, and battery
energy storage decades before the Inflation Reduction Act and
the Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act were passed into
law. In fact, my district produces the most renewable energy
than any district on Federal land, than any district in the
country. And Democrats are making unprecedented investments
that make this possible. It is my district's competitive
advantage.
However, air pollution has serious negative impacts on
human health. And as a physician, I have seen the effects of
air pollution firsthand. Children, the elderly, communities of
color are disproportionately impacted by poor air quality. In
fact, in April the EPA released a report entitled ``Climate
Change and Children's Health and Well-Being in the United
States.''
And I ask unanimous consent to enter the report into the
record, Mr. Chairman. Thank you.
Mr. Johnson. Without objection, so ordered.
[The information appears at the conclusion of the hearing.]
Mr. Ruiz. Thank you. And this report found that climate
change is expected to increase the incidence of asthma in
children. Specifically, climate-driven changes in air quality
are estimated to increase annual cases of asthma between 4 and
11 percent, respectively. Children's health is a very serious
issue, and it is unfortunate that we are discussing rolling
back regulations to help clean up our air.
Mr. Goffman, how does the EPA's vehicle emission standards
protect public health, especially the health of our most
vulnerable populations?
Mr. Goffman. Well, thank you for that question,
Congressman.
Our standards would reduce a broad range of pollutants, not
just greenhouse gases but a number of air quality pollutants
like fine particles, NOx, and hydrocarbons. Those are the
pollutants that contribute to smog and soot. And those--that
bad air quality contributes massively to a range of health
effects, including----
Mr. Ruiz. You know, those health effects are documented.
There is a recent study that came out that, on average, people
who live near high or at high air-polluted areas live, on
average, 10 years less than people who don't. So there is an
association, of course, with length of life due to poor air
quality.
California has air quality challenges--which is my home
State, of course--and they have taken a lead role in pollution
controls for vehicles, which is one of the highest source. This
bill that we are considering, the Preserving Choice in Vehicle
Purchase Act, would prevent the EPA Administrator from granting
a waiver to California from setting their own vehicle emission
standards. This bill would have detrimental impacts on the
EPA's longstanding statutory authority to grant California
waivers on the Clean Air Act.
California leads the way in ensuring a clean air for its
population. The California waiver is vital for my home State,
for my district to tackle air quality and greenhouse gas
emissions, which is one of the worst in the Nation due to the
10 corridor from Long Beach to Phoenix that runs right through
my district, and all those semis.
So can you explain why EPA's authority to grant the
California waiver to protect vehicle emission standards at the
Federal level is an important tool for tackling air pollution?
Mr. Goffman. Again, thank you for that question. It is a
tool that Congress has long recognized and re-ratified, if you
will, over 50 years, and that is because California has
historically had a range of very particular air quality and, in
recent years, climate challenges.
And California has used its authority to ensure that on-
road transportation really is--the air quality problems can be
addressed through new technology----
Mr. Ruiz. Thank you. The Preserving Choice in Vehicle
Purchase Act is punishing a State that has proactively looked
to clean up the air for its residents. This bill shouldn't even
be discussed, let alone seriously considered.
I yield back.
Mr. Johnson. The gentleman yields back. The Chair now
recognizes the gentleman from Texas, Mr. Crenshaw, for 5
minutes.
Mr. Crenshaw. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you for
holding this important hearing.
Mr. Goffman, this EPA just cannot help themselves. It is
one thing after another, attacking Americans' way of life in
pursuit of some pointless agenda that actually benefits no one,
and I mean no one--and we are going to go through the numbers,
and I will explain why--because we always got to tackle policy
this way.
What are the costs? What are the benefits? Policy is about
trade-offs. By EPA's admission, this tailpipe emissions rule is
designed to increase EV sales. Is that correct?
Mr. Goffman. It is designed to improve air quality.
Mr. Crenshaw. OK. So the EPA website states, ``The proposed
standards are also projected to accelerate the transition to
electric vehicles.'' This is just from the website. I don't
know, maybe you guys are on a different page. ``Depending on
the compliance pathways manufacturers select to meet the
standards, EPA projects that EVs could account for 67 percent
of new light-duty vehicles,'' et cetera, et cetera, et cetera.
OK, so right now, EVs account for 1 percent of cars
registered to U.S. drivers, and about 4.5 percent of new
vehicle sales. So that is quite a leap.
Here is another thing: EVs are expensive--on average,
$20,000 more than a similarly sized internal combustion engine
vehicle.
Here is another thing: The price of a new EV has risen by
over 50 percent in the last 10 years, despite a concurrent
increase in sales and obvious scalability. So what evidence
does the EPA have that EVs will become more affordable for
American consumers, or is that even part of your consideration?
Mr. Goffman. Affordability is a major part of our
consideration, and we are fortunate, as we do this, as we put
this proposal out and consider finalizing it, to have a number
of factors----
Mr. Crenshaw. OK. So they have increased by 50 percent. How
are they going to start decreasing? How is that going to
happen? Does the EPA even care? How do you analyze that?
Mr. Goffman. Well, one of the things we are doing is--and
one of the things we observed even before we put the proposal
out--is that a number of American manufacturers committed to
the goal by 2030 of marketing 50 percent of their new car fleet
as EVs, and at least 1 American company has followed that up
by----
Mr. Crenshaw. None of that speaks to costs. You guys have
no idea, do you? And you don't take it into account. EVs are
more expensive. This is just a fact. It is the way they are
built, it is the way they are processed.
So the question is--they are going to be more costly,
continuously more costly, as they always will be. So the
question is, what benefit do we get from that? Are we saving
people's lives by making them spend more on cars? No.
You know, does the EPA--when you assess, you know, the
benefits from emissions from EV vehicles, do you assess the
life cycle emissions? Do you take those into account from
production of everything that goes into it through the sale?
Mr. Goffman. We do look at that.
Mr. Crenshaw. OK.
Mr. Goffman. Under the Clean Air Act authority, we look
primarily and base our standards on----
Mr. Crenshaw. I mean, I know you guys don't, you don't have
any reports that do that. But luckily, others do. The
International Energy Agency did a critical minerals report.
They found that, when you count all emissions of production, on
average, a single battery for an EV, you have to dig up 500,000
pounds of Earth. That involves heavy machinery, oil, gas. And
let's not forget, 85 percent of critical mineral processing is
in China. I am pretty sure their environmental standards are
not very high.
According to other studies by the manufacturers
themselves--like Volvo, like Volkswagen--manufacturing an EV
generates 70 percent more emissions than manufacturing an
internal combustion engine. You need to drive 70,000 miles to
even break even with an internal combustion engine. Even at
100,000 miles, you are only getting a 20 to 30 percent
reduction in carbon emissions. So it will do nothing for
climate change. It will do nothing to reduce overall global
emissions.
And by the way, the EV owner already drives less, so it is
unlikely that most of them have even reached the break-even
point. So just by the math, in the short term EVs increase
emissions globally. That is just the math.
Now, if you are concerned about air pollution, which--you
have stated that--on the EPA website it says this: ``The graph
below shows that between 1980 and 2022 gross domestic product
increased almost 200 percent, vehicle miles traveled increased
over 100 percent, energy consumption increased 29 percent, and
the U.S. population grew by 47 percent. But during that same
time period, total emissions of the 6 principal air pollutants
dropped by 73 percent.'' It is like we are making all this
progress.
So I just want to know where is the evidence that we are
all of a sudden in an air quality crisis in America and that we
need to impose these enormous costs on the American people?
Where is the evidence for that?
Mr. Goffman. I believe there is extensive evidence and, as
it happens, it is reflected in a proposal we issued
addressing----
Mr. Crenshaw. There is----
Mr. Goffman [continuing]. Ambient air quality----
Mr. Crenshaw [continuing]. Extensive evidence that we have
decreased our problems with air quality, that we have increased
air quality in America. There is extensive evidence on your own
website--it took me 5 seconds to Google it--that those
pollutants have decreased by 73 percent. That is what your
evidence says, and you want to impose these massive costs on
the American people. That is why these bills are up for
consideration today.
And I yield back.
Mr. Johnson. The gentleman yields back. The Chair now
recognizes the gentleman from Ohio, my colleague, my neighbor,
Mr. Balderson, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Balderson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, Mr. Goffman, for being here today. There are
three regulations that are currently under development by your
office that will have a significant impact on the electric
grid, which I am sure you are hearing a lot about today. Two of
these proposals, the light-duty and the heavy-duty vehicle
proposals, will greatly increase demand for electricity. The
third ruling related to power plants will force the premature
retirement of flexible, dispatchable resources.
Additionally, California and several other States are
seeking waivers to essentially ban the sale of new internal
combustion engine cars and light trucks by 2035. Even the EPA
admits in their regulatory impact analysis for light-duty
vehicles that an enormous amount of electricity will be needed
in 2035 just to support this EV rule.
Due to the increased demand of these rules and the impact
of EPA's Clean Power Plan 2.0, I would expect FERC to have a
significant interest in all of these rules. When you were
working on the original Clean Power Plan in President Obama's
administration, FERC had a series of technical conferences
between the proposed and final rules to ensure grid reliability
if the Clean Power Plan went into effect. In fact, I believe
you spoke at one of those conferences.
FERC has not stated that they will have any technical
conferences or any of the rules I previously mentioned. Do you
believe that FERC should hold technical conferences to ensure
that the grid can be maintained if these rules get finalized?
Mr. Goffman. I am really not in a position to speak for
FERC, but I can speak for the EPA to tell you that we have
spent, ourselves, time talking to FERC Commissioners and FERC
expert staff precisely about the issues related to reliability
that we want to make sure that we are addressing as we finalize
these power sector rules.
Mr. Balderson. So you would agree to--I mean, want FERC to
be part of this discussion.
Mr. Goffman. For our purposes, we have already----
Mr. Balderson. For your purposes. I understand you can't
answer for FERC, but for your purposes.
Mr. Goffman. We have had discussions with them even before
we, if you will, put pen to paper on some of these proposals.
Mr. Balderson. OK, thank you. Have you tried to coordinate
with FERC to facilitate these conferences occurring? Obviously,
you have not done that.
My last question is, did you consult in any way with the
Department of Transportation or the Federal Highway
Administration on the tailpipe emissions proposal?
Mr. Goffman. We--as part of the interagency process, we
benefited from the contributions and engagement with NHTSA and
DOT on the vehicle--on our vehicle rules, and we--on our power
sector rules we have been in discussions with DOE as part of
the interagency process, and we even entered into an MOU with
DoE to continue to address--or at least monitor--reliability
issues in the process of finalizing our rules and their
ultimate implementation.
Mr. Balderson. Did the Department of Transportation provide
you any feedback on this, whether it was good, bad,
indifferent, anything?
Mr. Goffman. In the interagency process NHTSA provided us
with significant technical advice.
Mr. Balderson. OK. Well, it is concerning to me. And I know
car manufacturers, auto dealers have been brought up. I am a
former auto dealer, so I am just ad-libbing here a little bit.
And I heard some of Mr. Allen's testimony and some of his
questions.
I sat with a friend yesterday that is going to lose his
dealership because the manufacturer that he sells--he is a
single point store, like we were, and our family business was
shut down back in 2008 during the bailout with the auto
manufacturers. And I shouldn't say it was caused by that, but
it led up to that taking place. But I have two friends as of
yesterday that are going to lose their agencies because the
manufacturer has committed not to do any more fossil fuel
vehicles, combustion engines, however you want to look at it.
I mean, do you have any insight into that? I know that you
don't deal with the manufacturers, but these rules being
implemented the way that they are, I mean, they--are you
looking at the bigger picture of who it is impacting, and what
it does?
Mr. Goffman. Well, we are in the process of taking in
comment and feedback and engagement with--we hope to be--all
stakeholders who have equities in these rules.
Mr. Balderson. What would you advise my friend that is
losing his agency potentially here in 2030 because his
manufacturers--what would be his comment to the EPA?
Mr. Goffman. Well, the--we would certainly be eager to get
some analysis, some background on what his experience--what
your constituent's experience was.
Mr. Balderson. OK, I am out of time.
Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Johnson. The gentleman yields back. The Chair now
recognizes the gentleman from Texas, Mr. Pfluger----
Mr. Pfluger. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Johnson [continuing]. For 5 minutes.
Mr. Pfluger. I want to push back, Mr. Goffman, on some
things that have been said in this hearing.
The number-one cause of death in this world is lack of
energy. And there are many studies that suggest that the higher
the CO
2
emissions in a country, the higher the GDP
and the higher the life expectancy. And for us to be having an
all-out assault from the EPA with rule after rule and
weaponization after weaponization on liquid fuels and on
primary sources of energy and on all the things that have made
this country the richest, most powerful country in the world
are just unbelievable.
What is the range on your electric vehicle? What is the
range on your electric vehicle?
[Pause.]
Mr. Pfluger. Two hundred and fifty?
Mr. Johnson. Microphone.
Mr. Pfluger. Two hundred and fifty miles?
Mr. Goffman. Anecdotally, in my personal experience----
Mr. Pfluger. OK, which is the exact same range on one of
the manufacturer's pickup trucks, except for when you add load
to it and when temperature starts to drop.
So a pickup truck, an electric vehicle pickup truck, is now
40 percent less, which at 240 miles is about 100 miles less.
That is 140 miles. It is not reasonable. It doesn't work.
I assume you support the President and his initiatives.
Mr. Goffman. Of course, yes.
Mr. Pfluger. OK. Do you support his desire to kill fossil
fuels?
Mr. Goffman. I am not aware that he has a desire to kill
fossil fuels.
Mr. Pfluger. Mr. Goffman, that was a clear message that he
said when he was being elected to President of the United
States.
Do you support killing fossil fuels?
Mr. Goffman. In my role as implementing the Clean Air Act,
no.
Mr. Pfluger. Is it your goal to kill liquid fuels?
Mr. Goffman. My goal is to improve air quality and address
climate----
Mr. Pfluger. Which we have----
Mr. Goffman [continuing]. And implement the Clean Air Act,
which----
Mr. Pfluger. Which we have done.
Mr. Goffman [continuing]. The last time I looked, does not
authorize EPA to, if you--as you put it, to kill fossil fuels.
Mr. Pfluger. That is right. It doesn't. But your policies
are doing that, and they are actually going to decrease our
quality of life here, and they are going to put the most
vulnerable in our world in jeopardy. And they are going to kill
the dealerships that my colleagues just mentioned.
I want to follow up on your response to my colleague that
the EPA is still looking at California's waiver request for the
Advanced Clean Cars II regulation. You claim that you have not
looked at this yet, and you have not looked at light-duty
vehicles at the same time. But in the recent LDV proposal that
your office wrote, ACC II and section 177 are used as a
justification as to why EPA should introduce and move forward
with such stringent standards. This sounds like the EPA is
using ACC II and a waiver that has not yet been granted or
reviewed as justification for their light-duty vehicles rules.
Is the agency making decisions before a waiver has been
granted?
Mr. Goffman. Congressman, let me check on that, because----
Mr. Pfluger. This is a response in this hearing that you
said to one of my colleagues.
Mr. Goffman. Well, my understanding--let me check to make
sure that we--my experience is that we do not rely on
regulations from California where we haven't granted the
waiver----
Mr. Pfluger. So the waiver has not yet been granted?
Mr. Goffman. It has not been----
Mr. Pfluger. So would it be used as justification?
Mr. Goffman. Let me check to--let me check on that. My
experience is----
Mr. Pfluger. Is it standard practice for the EPA to use a
waiver that has not been granted as justification?
Mr. Goffman. In my experience, we have not. But your
question makes me a little nervous. I would like to get back to
you----
Mr. Pfluger. It makes me nervous, as well, Mr. Goffman.
Mr. Goffman. I would like to get back to you with a----
Mr. Pfluger. It makes our country nervous.
Mr. Goffman [continuing]. A well-founded answer.
Mr. Pfluger. How much electricity does the United States
demand each year?
Mr. Goffman. I don't know that number off the top of my
head.
Mr. Pfluger. OK. It is 4 terawatts, annually. So the
Secretary of Energy didn't know it, the EPA doesn't know it,
FERC probably doesn't know it. Who else doesn't know it in this
country, and we are mandating electric vehicles?
What is the percentage increase in electricity demand if we
get to the 2030 and 2035 mandates that your agency is pushing
for and the administration is pushing for? What is the
percentage increase that we will need?
Mr. Goffman. Four-tenths of a percent in 2030, and 4
percent in 2050.
Mr. Pfluger. OK. So the Secretary of Energy sat right there
2 weeks ago, and she said it is going to double our electricity
demand, and you are giving me a much more accurate--or at least
specific--answer. You guys have no idea how much demand is
going to be there. Where is that electricity going to come
from?
Mr. Goffman. Well, first of all, we did analyze the demand
that the implementation of these proposals----
Mr. Pfluger. EPA analyzed it, or the Department----
Mr. Goffman. Yes, we did.
Mr. Pfluger. OK.
Mr. Goffman. We analyzed it as part of our----
Mr. Pfluger. Where is the electricity----
Mr. Goffman [continuing]. Analysis.
Mr. Pfluger [continuing]. Going to come from?
Mr. Goffman. It will come from a diverse grid.
Mr. Pfluger. It is 110 degrees in my hometown today. The
wind is not blowing, the sun is shining. And after 4 hours of
darkness, there will be no batteries on this planet that can
produce a reliable source of baseload dispatchable power. We
have no plan for this.
So please get back to me on the question that I asked you.
And if waivers are being used that have not been granted for
justification, this is complete--this is overreach to a point
that we couldn't even imagine.
Mr. Chairman, I know my time is up. I yield back.
Mr. Johnson. The gentleman yields back. The Chair now
recognizes the gentlelady from Iowa, Dr. Miller-Meeks, for 5
minutes.
Mrs. Miller-Meeks. Thank you, Mr. Chair. I am glad Energy
and Commerce is focusing today's hearing on several bills
related to preserving choice in America for vehicles and fuel,
including my bill, the Fuels Parity Act.
The Fuels Parity Act, which I introduced with
Representatives Hunt, Bice, Budzinski, and Sorensen, is a
bipartisan bill with geographically diverse cosponsorship
ranging from Texas oil and gas members to Midwestern biofuels
members.
As the Biden administration continues its war on liquid
fuels, biofuels and gasoline included, this bill makes it
abundantly clear that establishing a partnership between
biofuels and oil is more important than ever.
The Fuels Parity Act would allow ethanol from cornstarch to
qualify as an advanced biofuel, and require EPA to use DOE's
Argonne GREET model to determine the carbon content of biofuels
under the Renewable Fuel Standard, rather than an outdated
predictive model. Allowing corn to qualify as an advanced
biofuel allows internal combustion engine vehicles to compete
with EVs by incentivizing lower emissions from ethanol
production, making the fuel that powers on-road vehicles
cleaner.
Here is a list of biomass types that are allowed to be
advanced fiber fuels: Brazilian sugarcane ethanol, the fibrous
outer shell of a kernel of corn known as corn kernel fiber
sorghum, soybeans, wheat, and barley. All of these crops can be
advanced biofuels so long as they meet 50 percent requirement
for carbon reductions. Literally, the only feedstock that
cannot qualify is cornstarch. Even other parts of the corn
kernel can qualify. As long as cornstarch ethanol can achieve a
50 percent greenhouse gas emission reduction, it should be
afforded the same opportunity to be an advanced biofuel like
every other feedstock.
And Ranking Member Tonko, I would be open to a discussion
prior to subcommittee markup with you and others about making
DOE's Argonne GREET model applicable to all fuels.
Mr. Chairman, I ask unanimous consent to insert a letter
into the record which expresses support for the Fuel Parity
Act. The letter also includes support for year-round E15 and
outlines concerns about the EPA's final RVOs from 2023 to 2025,
which limit the growth of low-carbon fuels.
Mr. Goffman, the Refuelable Fuel Standard, RFS, program is
integral to reducing carbon emissions and adding value to
agricultural commodities. While opportunities may exist to
improve the program, any statutory reforms should be careful
and thoughtful. The Fuels Parity Act would remove the
prohibition on cornstarch ethanol as an advanced biofuel. I
realize this is not a perfect piece of legislation, and I am
committed to working with all stakeholders moving forward.
Can you speak to the EPA's ability to consider new Clean
Air Act proposals, including pilot programs, when setting post-
2022 volumes?
Does the EPA have authority to consider criteria not
explicitly stated and contained in section 211(o)?
Mr. Goffman. Well, thank you for that question,
Congresswoman.
I don't believe we have the authority to consider criteria
that aren't in the statute, especially now that we are in--we
are past 2022, and the statute doesn't include presumptive
volumes.
Mrs. Miller-Meeks. Mr. Goffman, under the Clean Air Act EPA
is required to set annual increasing volume requirements for
the amount of renewable fuel to be blended into our
transportation fuel supply. EPA fulfilled this obligation and
increased volume requirements for 2023 to 2025. In contrast,
however, EPA has also proposed several rulemaking, including
the latest tailpipe emission standards that would drastically
reduce all supply of all liquid fuels in favor of an all-EV
approach.
How can EPA simultaneously implement the RFS, where the
goals are to increase biofuels and liquid fuels usage, and at
the same time propose a tailpipe rule which would dramatically
curb liquid fuels? Your agency's tailpipe proposal appears
completely contradictory to RFS goals.
Mr. Goffman. Well, in both cases, Congresswoman, we were
responding to what we understand to be the imperatives of the
Clean Air Act, which requires us to set or--authorizes us to
set tailpipe emission standards, as well as to set volume
obligations under the RFS.
Our approach has been to maintain, ultimately, a diversity
of energy sources for transportation, consistent with both 202,
which is our tailpipe emission standard authority, and 211,
which is our RFS authority.
Mrs. Miller-Meeks. Which is why it seems contradictory that
cornstarch would not be classified as an advanced biofuel, and
we wouldn't have--we don't have year-round E15, and also that
the volumes are not set at the level where we can certainly
produce.
A Des Moines Register article just today indicates some
studies show that ethanol can reduce greenhouse gas emissions
by 46 percent and biodiesel by 69 percent. So if, in fact, we
are trying to reduce greenhouse gas emissions, increasing the
volume production of all biofuels would be complementary to
that goal.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I yield back.
Mr. Johnson. The gentlelady yields back, and without
objection the letters requested by the gentlelady will be
included in the record.
[The information appears at the conclusion of the hearing.]
Mr. Johnson. The gentlelady yields back. The Chair now
recognizes the gentleman from California, Mr. Obernolte, for 5
minutes.
Mr. Obernolte. Well, thank you very much, Mr. Chair, and
thank you, Mr. Goffman.
In your testimony you talked about the California Air
Resources Board a little bit. They have issued a request that
the EPA approve a waiver under the Clean Air Act to implement
new rules in California that would set yearly rising zero-
emission vehicles starting in 2026 and would end completely the
sale of vehicles that are powered by gasoline by the year 2035.
So one of the bills that we are hearing today is my bill,
H.R. 1435, that would restrict the EPA from issuing a waiver
for any new regulations that would completely ban the sale of
internal combustion motor vehicles, and I will talk about the
reasons for that in a moment.
My question for you is, has the EPA reviewed that request
by CARB? And if so, has any consideration been made on whether
or not it will be approved?
Mr. Goffman. We have only just begun the review process,
which has at least three steps.
Step one is to publish a notice to the public that the
petition is under review, and ask the public and stakeholders
for input on specific issues.
Once that step is completed, by creating a record based on
all the public comment we received, we review the record and
then make what we think of as an adjudication as to whether or
not, based on the record, California's--the mandate to the
Administrator to grant the waiver can be met, or whether one of
three criteria has actually been triggered that would negate
California's entitlement to the waiver.
And I am sorry, it is a very--very much an adjudicatory
process that involves creating a public record. We have only
just begun that.
Mr. Obernolte. And what would you say the timeframe for
issuing that decision is?
Mr. Goffman. I measure it in months. But since we haven't
actually published, formally published the notice inviting
comment, set a comment deadline, or even, obviously, seen what
kind of record we are going to have to work with, we haven't
established a precise timeline yet.
Mr. Obernolte. Yes, I would appreciate it if you would keep
my office informed as you work through that process.
Mr. Goffman. Of course.
Mr. Obernolte. My motivation for introducing my bill to
prevent the EPA from granting that request and requests like it
is twofold.
First of all, I am deeply skeptical that California's
electric grid can be in a position to support a 100 percent new
electric vehicle fleet by the deadline that CARB has set.
I also represent a very economically disadvantaged portion
of California, and my constituents can't afford to buy new EVs,
even if they were available. And I have deep skepticism that by
that time we will have the mineral resources necessary to even
convert the current year's production vehicle fleet to
electric.
So those are some of my concerns. And although we are all--
we all want to be good stewards of the environment, we have to
live here too. And we have to keep the needs of the
economically disadvantaged in mind when we make these
decisions. Do any of those factors--are any of those factors
considered when the EPA makes decisions about whether or not to
grant that waiver request?
Mr. Goffman. Just to observe that when we set standards, we
take those into consideration. What the statute, what the Clean
Air Act tells us to do when California submits its waiver is--
the statute basically says the EPA Administrator shall grant
the waiver unless one of three conditions is met. So Congress
itself narrowly circumscribed what we can consider when a
waiver petition comes in.
Mr. Obernolte. Right. So you are saying that this--these
factor into the EPA's standards but not necessarily the
decision about whether or not to approve California's waiver
request?
Mr. Goffman. The Clean Air Act does not clearly authorize
us to take that breadth of considerations in mind. Congress,
when it drafted those provisions and reauthorized them,
contemplated California as sort of something that resembles an
entitlement.
Mr. Obernolte. Right. Well, that is why I think there is a
need for the bill that I have authored. But I thank you for
your testimony today.
I will yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Johnson. The gentleman yields back. The Chair now
recognizes the gentleman from Georgia, Mr. Carter, for 5
minutes.
Mr. Carter. Thank you for being here, Mr. Goffman. Mr.
Goffman, in looking at EPA's proposed tailpipe rule with its
timeline and its scale, it is hard to say that it intends to do
anything more than just ban internal combustion engines. I
mean, I have to be quite honest with you. This is one of the
most egregious rules that I have ever seen the Federal
Government come out with. And it is totally inappropriate.
And I am not saying that because I am not a fan of EVs. I
am a fan of EVs. But this is ridiculous. In fact, I am so much
a fan that the largest economic development project in the
history of the State of Georgia is going to be in my district.
It is under construction right now, an EV manufacturer bringing
in a $5.5 billion investment to bring 8,100 jobs and probably
that many more in ancillary businesses. We are excited about
it. Georgia has embraced this. We have embraced the battery
plants, EV manufacturers, all of that.
But we are not going to enact a tailpipe rule, not in the
State of Georgia. That would be ridiculous. Just like
California and other policies that have more or less mandated
EVs, there is no better example of the Federal Government
picking winners and losers than what we are witnessing right
here. No better example. And that is the last thing the Federal
Government should be doing. I just don't--I don't agree with it
at all. Again, I feel like it is totally inappropriate.
Why is this rule necessary? Explain to me why it is
necessary, especially in the scale and the timeline that you
have set out.
Mr. Goffman. Well, thank you for that question and thank
you for articulating the concerns you raised.
If I can just start with one point that we observed as part
of our analysis, is that we project that even--that under this
proposal, if it were finalized, we project north of 40 million
internal combustion engine vehicles continuing to be sold in
the new car fleet over the course of the 6 model years covered
by this rule. So we obviously don't see this as either--
certainly not explicitly, and not even effectively--a ban on
internal combustion engines.
What this rule does is, in many ways, complement what the
private sector and Congress have already begun to make
substantial investments in, which is diversifying the on-road
fleet so that it is not just internal combustion engines that
relies on, in part, imported oil, but also domestic
electricity.
And in fact, as you know, Congress less than a year ago
made substantial investments in the components and the raw
materials to manufacture electric vehicles here in the United
States----
Mr. Carter. Mr. Goffman, with all due respect, I understand
the point you are trying to make, but I beg to differ.
And you used the word ``diversify.'' To me, this does more
than diversify. To me, this mandates. And there is a big
difference between diversification and mandating.
Mr. Goffman. Well, our intent with this rule is not to
create a mandate. We don't see the Clean Air Act as doing
anything different from what we did in this proposal, which is
to set grams per mile emissions performance standards, which
we, based on what we see, is available, affordable technology,
and then----
Mr. Carter. Do you feel like the internal combustible
engines would be able to meet those, though?
Mr. Goffman. We think of--we project that fleets that
include both EVs and internal combustion engines will be able--
--
Mr. Carter. So the hybrids.
Mr. Goffman [continuing]. Wide level to meet these
standards.
Mr. Carter. Well, now I want to follow up on what my
colleague from California just asked you about. Did you take
into consideration any of the low-income families that rely on
internal combustion engines to get to work, to get to school,
to get to groceries, any--all of those things?
Mr. Goffman. Well, we did take--we took into consideration
the affordability of meeting these standards.
Mr. Carter. Well, look. I represent south Georgia. It is a
vast area, and a lot of traveling. And it--I mean, we need
internal combustion engines in south Georgia. And we have got a
lot of low-income families. And this is going to have a major,
major impact.
And again, I just--I want to reiterate that I feel like
this is one of the most inappropriate and blatant examples of
picking--of the Government picking winners and losers that I
have ever witnessed. And--but I do appreciate you being here,
and I appreciate your work.
With that, I will yield back.
Mr. Johnson. The gentleman yields back. The Chair now
recognizes Mrs. Dingell from Michigan for 5 minutes.
Mrs. Dingell. Thank you, Mr. Chair. I think today's
legislative hearing is very important, and it is very important
to the industry that I represent. I do want to say that we are
considering four bills that I believe could have potential
harmful effects on the future of the automotive industry and
would fail to help consumers truly afford the clean vehicles,
the future that Detroit is building.
Collectively, these bills could undo the good progress we
have made on reducing harmful vehicle emissions and would
stymie future automotive innovation. And these bills are
clearly disconnected right now from the market reality. Right
now every major automotive company in the United States and
around the globe is in a race to manufacture and ship greater
and greater numbers of clean vehicles, including hybrids,
battery electric vehicles, and hydrogen fuel cell vehicles.
So with due respect to my colleagues on the other side, I
oppose each of your bills at this time, but I do share many of
the concerns my Republican colleagues have raised here today.
If we are to successfully make the needed transition to
electrification, we have to do so in a comprehensive way and
build on all the meaningful bills from last Congress, and we
need to do it together.
So, Mr. Goffman--and I am going to ask you to be concise,
because I have a lot of questions--thank you for being here. I
would like to start with the real concerns I am hearing and
that I share as it relates to the EPA's recently proposed rule
on multipollutant emission standards for light- and medium-duty
vehicles beginning in model year 2027.
First off, in your testimony you say the proposed standards
align with commitments already made by automakers in the U.S.
States as they plan to accelerate clean vehicle technologies in
the light- and medium-duty fleets in the next 10 to 15 years. I
will be honest, I don't think this is consistent with what the
industry or labor has committed to. So, Mr. Goffman, can you
expand on what you mean, and how this proposal aligns with
commitments made by the automakers?
Mr. Goffman. Well, thanks for that question. I am glad to
be able to address it. What I was referring to was a couple of
things.
One, in August of 2021, 3 companies----
Mrs. Dingell. Three companies joined with the
environmentalists and labor to a 50 percent goal.
Mr. Goffman. That is right. And then, in the fall of last
year, at least one American company announced principles to--
what they called principles to set as a goal of 100 percent EVs
by 2035----
Mrs. Dingell. Goals, if the underlying foundation is there.
Mr. Goffman. And that is exactly why part of the process we
are engaged in now is collecting information from the companies
about how these rules ultimately will interact with their
business plans.
We are at a technical level, Congresswoman, spending time
really talking to the companies, collecting information, and
making sure that what our rules do work together----
Mrs. Dingell. I have a lot more questions, and you know the
companies have expressed their reservations to you.
Mr. Goffman. Yes.
Mrs. Dingell. While Administrator Regan has stipulated the
emissions proposal does not require a particular propulsion
technology, it is clear that battery electric vehicles would
need to account for 67 percent of new vehicle sales by 2032, up
from under 6 percent as of last year.
Mr. Goffman, can you explain how EPA measures success in
terms of a nearly 10 times increase in light-duty
electrification compared to new vehicle sales in 2022? Quickly,
please.
Mr. Goffman. Again, the way we ultimately define the
success of this program is if it supports the goals that
companies like, say, GM have announced to----
Mrs. Dingell. But what if they can't get there because what
needs to be in place isn't there?
What if people can't afford to buy the vehicles?
What if the charging stations aren't there?
What happens if the assumptions and forecasting that EPA
relies upon aren't viable?
Mr. Goffman. Well, our first line--we have three lines of
defense to answer that.
One is we have run a number of different analytic cases to
see how and at what rate these emissions standards could be
achieved. We have asked for public comment on that. We are also
getting input and information from the companies.
And then, as you know, there is at least the precedent of--
from a previous rulemaking--of mid-term review. Now, the
companies have not raised that with us, but what they are doing
is working with us----
Mrs. Dingell. I believe they have raised it----
Mr. Goffman [continuing]. On the four----
Mrs. Dingell [continuing]. And you are going to be getting
comments.
Mr. Goffman. OK.
Mrs. Dingell. I have 34 seconds----
Mr. Goffman. OK.
Mrs. Dingell [continuing]. And a lot more questions. I am
going to ask you for the record to talk about whether the new
proposed EPA GHG rules are factoring into other fuel economy
regulations. Based on my conversations I have had with
industry, labor, and my own constituents, it is clear we still
need additional EV charging solutions and investments if we are
going to be able to assure every family in America who wants an
electric vehicle can reliably access charging.
I also am going to ask you to give us what analysis you did
to evaluate the charging infrastructure necessary.
But I have a UAW question. I would like to know more about
the work EPA has done to study the impact this proposal will
have on autoworkers. Mr. Goffman, what are the proposed
standards projected to do--impact on employment?
Has the EPA evaluated the impact on the union workforce
that produces light- and medium-duty ICE vehicles?
Mr. Johnson. Mr. Goffman, I am going to ask you to take
that question for the record.
Mr. Goffman. OK.
Mr. Johnson. And if you would get back, I would appreciate
it.
The gentlelady's time has expired. The Chair now recognizes
Mr. Latta for 5 minutes.
Mr. Latta. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman, for holding
today's legislative hearing, and also for allowing me to waive
on to the subcommittee today. I appreciate it.
Along with the gentlemen from Pennsylvania, California, and
Florida, I am proud to colead the Preserving Consumer Choice
and Vehicle Purchases Act, and I thank the subcommittee chair
and the full committee chair for working with us to get to this
point today.
This legislation builds on the previous work that we did
last fall, which included a letter with over 150 House Members
to President Biden advocating for the rights of our
constituents to purchase whatever vehicles they so choose.
Unfortunately, we never received a response from the
administration. To me, this signals that the administration is
not prioritizing the rights of consumers in their
deliberations.
Without repeating the same points as my coleaders on this
legislation, I cannot emphasize enough that California's
efforts to ban the sale of internal combustion engine vehicles
will have national implications. It will, as stated by others,
will increase costs for Americans and add to greater
instability for an already strained electric grid.
Mr. Deputy Administrator, since the President did not
respond to our concerns that we outlined in our letter last
year and your written testimony doesn't indicate any specific
stance on the bill, do you know, is the administration opposed
to this legislation?
Mr. Goffman. I don't know, because we have--the
administration has not taken a position yet on the legislation.
Mr. Latta. Did the administration forward the letter on to
the EPA?
Mr. Goffman. I don't know. I just--I am not calling up to
mind that particular letter, so I just don't know about----
Mr. Latta. If you could, if you would get back to me on
that, I would like to know if the EPA, you know, received that
letter from the President then to work on.
When Congress first wrote title 2 of the Clean Air Act, do
you believe it was the Congress' intent to allow one State to
have the ability to implement a de facto national mandate on
what specific vehicle consumers could purchase?
Mr. Goffman. I believe what Congress intended to do was to
give States the option of adopting California's standards if
EPA granted a waiver for those standards. And, of course----
Mr. Latta. I am sorry, could you speak into the microphone?
It is--there we go.
Mr. Goffman. I am sorry.
Mr. Latta. But you said that you believe it was what?
Mr. Goffman. I believe that the intent--I don't--I believe
the intention of Congress was to give States the option after
EPA granted waivers--a waiver to California--to adopt
California's standards as appropriate to address the air
quality problems within their States.
Mr. Latta. But--and again, though, in this situation, could
it be a de facto national mandate when you look at the size of
California, especially the States around it, what it could do
to other States having to then adhere to what California is
doing?
Mr. Goffman. Well, sir, the mechanism under the Clean Air
Act is for States to exercise their option to choose to adopt
California standards.
Mr. Latta. Well, and--because our time is short here--but
again, if California would do it, it could be in a situation
that would be almost a de facto mandate on the other States.
Let me move on, because I am running out of time here. You
know, and again, as you have already heard, in order to move on
to an all-EV fleet, which is what California wants to impose on
the entire country, the U.S. Energy Information Administration
has stated that the United States will need to generate at
least 50 percent more electricity.
Now, again, when EPA starts reviewing things, do you look
at what EIA says, that we are going to have to have 50 percent
more energy generation by that point in time? Because I know,
when I have talked to the electric co-op associations, they are
saying that the amount is over 50 percent.
So--and also, as has also been pointed out by other
Members, how much does EPA look at, then, that--on generation
alone? Do you look at the statistics out there that, you know,
we could be having brownouts, blackouts across the country?
And even last September, when the Governor of California
just recently said they wanted to go to this EV mandate that--
that almost following weekend they had a heat wave, where
everyone was supposed to turn up their air-conditioners, and
then not plug in their cars.
So how much does EPA look at on the energy production in
this country that we would have to have just to meet the
requirements of having an EV fleet?
Mr. Goffman. Well, when we issued this proposal for these--
this set of standards, we did do an analysis of the net
increase in demand. And what we project for 2030 is that these
standards would increase demand by 4/10 of a percent, and then
go up to 4 percent in 2050.
Mr. Latta. I am sorry, when you say the--pardon me, Mr.
Chairman.
When you say 4 percent, are you talking about we need 4
percent more energy?
Mr. Goffman. Four percent more energy to----
Mr. Latta. Well, how--I am kind of confused, then. How does
EIA come up with 50 percent?
Mr. Goffman. I am not--I know we considered--we work with
the EIA. I don't know. I would need to go back and look at the
particulars----
Mr. Latta. What I would like you to do----
Mr. Goffman [continuing]. Of the EIA's analysis.
Mr. Latta. I will make sure that we get the EIA information
to you all.
Mr. Goffman. OK.
Mr. Latta. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, and I yield
back.
Mr. Johnson. The gentleman yields back. The Chair now
recognizes the gentleman from Florida, Mr. Bilirakis, for 5
minutes.
Mr. Bilirakis. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you for
allowing me to waive on. This is a very important hearing.
Briefly, I just wanted to identify with the comments of
Representatives Joyce, Obernolte, of course, my good friend,
Mr. Latta, my colleagues on the Preserving People's Freedom to
Buy Affordable Vehicles and Fuel Act.
I just wanted to emphasize the national effect this new
California regulation would have. California has 17 other
States bound to follow its air quality standards. Therefore,
this standard would have an effect on 40 percent of the market,
making it a de facto national impacting policy, as my good
friend Mr. Latta said. This means that the residents in my
State will most likely see an increase in vehicle costs and a
decrease in choice.
That also means that automakers, convenience store owners,
farmers, and car dealerships nationwide will also be negatively
affected by this California policy.
We can't let California and the Biden administration ban
combustion engines, and Preserving People's Freedom to Buy
Affordable Vehicles and Fuel Act is the way to stop it. This is
a priority for us, and we really appreciate you giving me the
time, Mr. Chairman.
And I yield back the balance of my time.
Mr. Johnson. The gentleman yields back. The Chair now
recognizes the gentleman from Michigan, Mr. Walberg, for 5
minutes.
Mr. Walberg. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thanks for letting me
waive on, as well.
Michiganders care about cars, as you might expect, and care
about trucks, pickup trucks especially.
I want to better understand the Biden administration's
thinking on vehicles. So, Mr. Goffman, just to kind of lay the
foundational consideration here, I would like a yes or no on
whether or not you believe that all Americans should have
access to reliable, available, functional, and affordable cars
and trucks.
Mr. Goffman. Yes.
Mr. Walberg. Thank you. Do you believe any rules you are
issuing should make cars less available, less affordable, and
less functional for consumers and their needs?
Mr. Goffman. No.
Mr. Walberg. Then let me move on. Your testimony discusses
new vehicle sales numbers. Could you tell me roughly what new
car sales were 5 years ago and 10 years ago?
Mr. Goffman. Off the top of my head, I can't.
Mr. Walberg. Well, let me add to it, because being a car
guy from Michigan, I have to know these type of things.
Ten years ago, it was 15 million in sales. Five years ago,
it was 17.1 million in sales vehicles themselves. Total sales
peaked at 18.665 million in April of 2021.
Your testimony claims that, under your proposed rule, the
number of new ICE vehicles will be slashed by close to half
between 2027 and 2032. How many new EVs does EPA expect to be
available and affordable for consumers to replace that cut?
Mr. Goffman. Well, the--we expect there to be enough EVs to
meet demand and meet the performance standard. But the----
Mr. Walberg. Well, and I appreciate you saying ``we expect
that,'' because it is certainly a guess and, by golly, what in
the world it is going to be, based upon what we are seeing so
far and based upon, you know, the Michiganians, Michiganders,
whatever we call ourselves in any given time, expect and what
we need.
Under your proposed rule, will there be more cars on the
road in 15 years or less when your rule is entirely
implemented?
Mr. Goffman. I don't know the total, offhand. I----
Mr. Walberg. But more or less, what would we expect?
Mr. Goffman. More or less--we don't expect these rules--we
didn't assume or premise these rules on any kind of reduction
in demand for vehicles.
Mr. Walberg. Well, between State and EPA requirements on
the auto sector over the last 10 years, it is hard to say there
has been no impact on the price of compliance. And that has got
to have an impact on the number of cars that will be on the
road.
Can you tell me what the average price of a vehicle over
the last couple of years--or how it has changed?
Mr. Goffman. Over the last couple of years, no, I don't
know that.
Mr. Walberg. I set you up so I could answer that again, and
let me tell you, the answer is that back in 2021 the reported
estimated average transaction price for a light-duty vehicle in
the United States was $37,876. According to Kelley Blue Book
and the Bureau of Labor Statistics, the average new car price
at the beginning of 2023 is $49,388.
Will you commit--and that of the EPA--will you commit that
this proposed rule is not going to directly or indirectly raise
the price of new vehicles for consumers?
Mr. Goffman. Well, what I can commit to is that between now
and the time we finalize this rule, this--these proposals, we
will be focusing on that issue and addressing it.
Mr. Walberg. Oh, I hope you are, because my constituents
need to know that. They need to understand that they are not
going to experience what California has experienced. They don't
want to have to leave--well, if we do it all, there is no place
to go to, there is no place to flee like Californians.
Let me get to this question: Will your proposed rule reduce
the number of affordable SUVs and small trucks?
Mr. Goffman. I don't believe so. And certainly, we will
again address that issue, because one of the objectives of this
rule is to ensure that vehicles that--or fleets that meet these
standards are affordable.
Mr. Walberg. Well, I hope that is the case. But just to be
sure this proposal doesn't cause problems for consumers, will
you commit to inserting a regulatory off-ramp into the rule,
light- and medium-duty rule, if new vehicles either become more
expensive or unreliable, auto choice or functionality is
limited, or those cars are unavailable to American consumers?
Mr. Goffman. Well, we anticipate ideas like that being
raised in the comment record and we will, of course, will
consider them.
Mr. Walberg. I appreciate that, and I hope it comes to
fruition. Because if it doesn't, my constituents' way of life
is altered irretrievably.
Thank you, I yield back.
Mr. Johnson. The gentleman yields back. The Chair now
recognizes the gentlelady, Ms. Barragan, for 5 minutes.
Ms. Barragan. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Goffman, thank you for your tireless work at EPA to
advance critical clean air regulations that are critical for
our--for the health of our planet and our communities.
Mr. Goffman, since Democrats passed the Inflation Reduction
Act the private sector has committed over $120 billion in
domestic electric vehicle manufacturing and battery
investments. Do these investments give the EPA confidence that
its proposed light- and medium-duty vehicle emission standards
can be reached?
Mr. Goffman. Yes. Yes, they do. In fact, we are finalizing
these proposals in the coming months in a context in which
Congress has made substantial investments and the auto industry
itself has made substantial investments in producing exactly
the results that these proposals are intended to produce.
Ms. Barragan. Great, thank you. EPA estimates the benefits
of its proposed light- and medium-duty vehicle emission
standards will exceed costs by at least $850 billion. Can you
tell us about some of the benefits for our communities?
Mr. Goffman. Well, these rules will have substantial impact
on improving air quality in communities, and that means they
will have substantial impact on public health. We project that
in one of the years we--one of the single years we analyzed,
these proposals would reduce up to 1,700 premature deaths
related to air pollution. And that is just in one year.
We determined that there would be a substantial reduction
in hospital visits, aggravated asthma attacks, nonfatal heart
attacks, and all of the health costs in human terms and in
financial terms that are associated with those impacts.
Ms. Barragan. Well, thank you for bringing those up. Often
when I go across the country, and certainly in my district, it
is parents talking about their children, their health, the
health impacts. So often overlooked is the amount of money we
save in healthcare costs, and you can't put a dollar figure
on--when somebody is sick and in the hospital, you as a parent,
as a loved one, you say to yourself, ``I don't care what it
would cost to make my loved one better.'' So thank you.
As you noted in your testimony, EPA's notice of proposed
rulemaking offered different options that EPA could take for a
final rule. I want to just urge the EPA to choose the most
ambitious option that will result in the greatest number of
zero-emissions vehicles sales over the life of the rule that
will maximize the benefits that you just outlined.
Mr. Goffman, EPA has proposed a rule to strengthen our
national air quality standards for particulate matter, a
pollutant--a toxic pollutant estimated to cost tens of
thousands of excess deaths each year. Public health groups
argue the proposed standard should be stronger and follow the
recommendations of EPA's own Clean Air Scientific Advisory
Committee, and many Democrats agree.
This spring, 85 Members of Congress, led by myself and
Representative Blunt Rochester, wrote the EPA requesting a
final rule that follows a recommendation of your advisory
committee. Will EPA finalize a rule that follows the
recommendations of its Clean Air Scientific Advisory Committee?
Mr. Goffman. Thank you for that question. We are right now
in the process of deliberating on the record that we got back
from the proposal that we issued at the end of last year. And
we are certainly taking--we are putting a lot of weight on what
the Clean Air Act Science Advisory Committee, as well as other
experts who submitted comments, as--we are putting great weight
on all of that as we finalize our decision.
Ms. Barragan. Well, thank you. I urge, again, EPA to set
stronger particulate matter standards that protect our
communities. It would make sense, given the positive steps EPA
is taking to reduce particulate matter from cars, trucks, and
power plants.
Mr. Goffman, my last question is, has the Renewable Fuel
Standard reduced greenhouse gas emissions?
Mr. Goffman. As part of the rulemaking we announced
yesterday, we analyzed that question, and we determined that
there would be about a 50-billion-ton-per-year--did I say 50
billion? I meant 50-million-ton-per-year net reduction in
greenhouse gas emissions under the standards we--or the
renewable volume obligations we finalized yesterday.
Ms. Barragan. OK. Thank you so much.
With that, my time has run. I will yield back.
Mr. Johnson. The gentlelady yields back. The Chair now
recognizes the gentlelady from--I am sorry, the gentleman from
Indiana, Mr. Pence.
Mr. Pence. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for letting me waive on
here.
And thank you, Mr. Goffman, for being here. Let's talk
eRINs for a minute, OK?
I am an individual that actually created and traded them in
my former life. I understand that if EPA creates a new eRINs
program in the future that is substantially similar to the
eRINs program that the agency proposed at the end of 2022, the
program could go straight to a final rule and eliminate the
opportunity for public comment. True?
Mr. Goffman. One of the reasons that we didn't finalize the
proposal is that we wanted to have more engagement with the
many----
Mr. Pence. Sure, and I kind of want to get to that. But do
you have to get more public comment?
Mr. Goffman. You know----
Mr. Pence. Or can you go right to issuing?
Mr. Goffman. We may be able to go right to issuing, I just
don't----
Mr. Pence. OK, thank you.
Mr. Goffman. I just don't know.
Mr. Pence. So I would encourage you not to do that, right?
I noted in the executive summary some stakeholders are strongly
supportive, some sought significant modifications, and others
opposed. So let's kind of talk about the impact that eRINs
would have.
First and foremost, what would the impact of eRINs be on
RINs?
Mr. Goffman. Well, when we proposed it, we proposed that in
2025, if we had--if we were going to finalize eRINs now, that
it would increase the volume obligation for 2025 for cellulosic
fuel or for cellulosic volume obligations.
Mr. Pence. So not being technically up to speed on that
language, does that mean RINs would reduce and eRIN use would
increase, or eRIN requirement would increase?
Mr. Goffman. We would--we projected at the time we proposed
this that the total volume of the program would go up to match
the availability of eRINs.
Mr. Pence. So what I said is incorrect. It wouldn't be--
eRIN increase wouldn't be at the expense of RINs. Is that
correct?
Mr. Goffman. That is correct.
Mr. Pence. OK.
Mr. Goffman. But of course, that is one of the issues that
some stakeholders----
Mr. Pence. Sure.
Mr. Goffman [continuing]. That we want to go back and----
Mr. Pence. Well, sure. I mean, liquid fuel fuels, the
ethanol industry, the ag industry all are very--would be very
concerned about something like that, right?
Mr. Goffman. Yes, that is----
Mr. Pence. Who is going to need eRINs, going forward? Who
would be the buyers of eRINs, in your opinion?
Mr. Goffman. I think, to the extent that eRINs were sort of
fungible with other RINs, it would be other parties with volume
obligations.
Mr. Pence. So would that go beyond the transportation
industry or the production industry?
So let's say the car manufacturer would generate a need----
Mr. Goffman. That is----
Mr. Pence. Whomever generates an eRIN, who would need those
eRINs to comply?
Mr. Goffman. Refiners with volume obligations.
Mr. Pence. Refiners with----
Mr. Goffman. Yes.
Mr. Pence. Would any other manufacturing type industries
have to look at eRINs?
Mr. Goffman. I don't think so.
Mr. Pence. OK. So----
Mr. Goffman. It would stay within the sort of four corners
of the obligated party.
Mr. Pence. So certain refiners buy RINs.
Mr. Goffman. Right.
Mr. Pence. And now those same refiners, I would assume,
because of their production capabilities and emissions, they
would have to buy more RINs by buying more eRINs. Correct?
Mr. Goffman. Yes.
Mr. Pence. So that would increase their cost of production,
which would have a negative impact on their profitability, or
their ability to generate profits and be competitive.
Mr. Goffman. Well, we----
Mr. Pence. Is that correct?
Mr. Goffman. We certainly got comments to the effect that
that would be the effect, and there were certainly stakeholders
that objected to that.
Mr. Pence. Yes. So--and my concern about that is, while you
are looking for expanding choice, as you were saying, and you
are pushing against winners and losers, but over here on the
liquid fuel side you would be in a sense penalizing liquid
fuels by creating additional expenses for them which would make
them more or--that would make them less competitive----
Mr. Goffman. We----
Mr. Pence. And I have run out of time, and that is
something we will keep an eye on.
Thank you, Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Johnson. The gentleman yields back. The Chair now
recognizes the gentlelady from Arizona, Mrs. Lesko, for 5
minutes.
Mrs. Lesko. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and good news. I think
I am the last person. So only 5 minutes to go.
I want to clarify something I think I heard you say
earlier. Did you say that the EPA has estimated that the extra
amount of electricity you will need on the grid for the switch
to electric vehicles is only 4 percent by 2050? Is that what
you said?
Mr. Goffman. Yes, 4/10 of a percent in 2030, and then going
up to 4 percent in 2050.
Mrs. Lesko. And do you have math on this that you could
give to the committee? Because I would be really curious how
you came up with 4 percent.
Mr. Goffman. Sure.
Mrs. Lesko. OK.
Mr. Goffman. It is in the regulatory impact analysis, which
I can----
Mrs. Lesko. Yes, if you could----
Mr. Goffman. It is a page-turner, but I will get you the--
--
[Laughter.]
Mr. Goffman. I will get you the specific----
Mrs. Lesko. Yes, if you could get me a link with the page
number, that would be great.
Mr. Goffman. Yes.
Mrs. Lesko. I would like to see it.
I am going to switch. I am from Phoenix, Arizona. I
represent Phoenix, Arizona, and some suburbs. I have the Taiwan
Semiconductor Plant in my district that is newly being built.
Mr. Goffman, Maricopa County, Arizona, which is the Phoenix
area, has developed 2 proposed emission reduction credit rules,
rule 204 and 205. These rules have languished before region 9
for approval for years. In fact, rule 204 was submitted 3 years
ago and is still awaiting a response. Do you have a timeline on
the approval of rule 204 and/or 205?
Mr. Goffman. Well, thank you for that question. This has
recently been brought to my attention by others in the
delegation, as well. And our--EPA's region 9 understands the
importance of getting to a resolution on those rules. And I
know from conversations I had with my colleagues in region 9 in
the last few weeks that they are working with the State and
with the county to resolve some issues and try to get a
decision across the finish line.
I think we have a very acute and vivid understanding of how
important these rules are to economic development and air
quality in Maricopa County.
Mrs. Lesko. Well, thank you very much for that answer.
Hopefully, it will get done pretty soon.
The administration and this Congress has made it a priority
to bring semiconductor manufacturing back to the United States
through the CHIPS Act. Unfortunately, without a strong
industrial history, Arizona is limited in its option to
generate credits to meet the Clean Air Act offset requirements.
Without a long-term solution, The Federal requirements will cap
the growth of these very manufacturing facilities which are key
to the future technology to reduce ozone.
So my question is, is the EPA dedicated to finding long-
term alternatives for new ways to create emission reduction
credits to enable States like Arizona to continue to attract
investment and grow into the clean, innovative technology
manufacturing hub?
Mr. Goffman. Well, I am glad you asked that question. I
know that recently Maricopa County, working with the State
Department, the Arizona DEP, and with region 9, came up with an
innovative approach to using offsets from the transportation
sector, from a fleet, to help a facility meet its offset
requirements.
And so what we are learning is that there is a very
important supportive role that we can play in working with
States and air quality districts as they come up with
innovative strategies for addressing the offset needs of new or
reinvested facilities, which is one of the reasons that we know
that Arizona is looking at 204 and 205, and really needs us to
be responsive on that.
So what I am saying is that, at the State and air quality
district level, we are seeing increasing leadership in
innovation, and we are committed to supporting that.
Mrs. Lesko. Thank you. That would be very helpful. You
know, we are just doing a lot of great things in Arizona. And
so sometimes regulations--quite frankly, the EPA--kind of hold
us back from doing what we need to do. And so any help in that
aspect would be greatly appreciated.
And I yield back.
Mr. Johnson. The gentlelady yields back.
I think, if it is--Mr. Goffman, first of all, thank you for
taking the time out of your busy schedule to be with us today.
These are very serious questions. And, you know, your rules
coming out of the EPA are very serious, and I understand that.
So thanks for joining us today to have this discussion over
these pieces of legislation.
With that, I will excuse you, and we will ask our other
panelists to please take your seats. And while we get arranged,
we will take a quick 5-minute break and then come back and get
started.
The subcommittee stands in recess for 5 minutes.
[Recess.]
Mr. Johnson. The subcommittee will again come to order. I
thank our guests for the second panel for taking your seats.
Our witnesses for the second panel are Mr. Chet Thompson,
president and CEO of the American Fuel & Petrochemical
Manufacturers; Mr. Neil Caskey--have I got that right, Caskey--
CEO of the National Corn Growers Association; Ms. Genevieve
Cullen, president of the Electric Drive Transportation
Association; and Mr. Scott Lambert, president of the Minnesota
Auto Dealers Association.
Mr. Thompson, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENTS OF CHET THOMPSON, PRESIDENT AND CHIEF EXECUTIVE
OFFICER, AMERICAN FUEL & PETROCHEMICAL MANUFACTURERS; NEIL
CASKEY, CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER, NATIONAL CORN GROWERS
ASSOCIATION; GENEVIEVE CULLEN, PRESIDENT, ELECTRIC DRIVE
TRANSPORTATION ASSOCIATION; AND SCOTT LAMBERT, PRESIDENT,
MINNESOTA AUTO DEALERS ASSOCIATION

STATEMENT OF CHET THOMPSON

Mr. Thompson. Well, thank you and good afternoon, Chairman
Johnson, Ranking Member Tonko, members of the subcommittee. It
is a real honor to be here this afternoon. I have the great
privilege of representing the American Fuel & Petrochemical
Manufacturers. Our members lead the world in the manufacturing
of gasoline, diesel, jet, and renewable fuel.
Our refineries and the products we produce every day are
critical assets to the United States. This was made abundantly
clear most recently when Russia invaded Ukraine last year. In
fact, it was around that time when President Biden called our
industry to reopen refineries and make more, not less, fuel.
That is because we supply reliable and affordable fuel not only
to the United States but to our allies all around the world,
and we do so cleaner, safer, and more efficiently than any
other country in the world.
Our energy security is a national strength. That is why
AFPM supports the legislation under consideration today. Here
are just a few key points from my written testimony.
First, and importantly, AFPM is fully committed to
improving vehicle efficiency and reducing the carbon intensity
of transportation. Today's fleet, as you know, is bigger,
heavier, and more powerful than ever before. Yet it is also the
highest in fuel economy and the lowest CO
2
emission
rate on record. We also are committed to lowering the carbon
intensity of fuels. In fact, as you know, Mr. Chairman, I have
testified multiple times before this very committee in support
of a national octane standard that would lower carbon emissions
from cars and trucks.
Second, and very importantly for the subject matter today,
California's ban of the new internal combustion engine and
EPA's proposal to effectively do the same are clearly unlawful.
Eliminating consumer choice is not the American way. Ingenuity
is. Congress, this is the only body in this country, in this
town that has the authority to develop our Nation's energy and
transportation policies, not EPA, and surely not one State that
fancies itself a super State.
Now, to be clear, AFPm is not anti-electric vehicle. My
members produce a lot of plastics that go into electric
vehicles. But we are anti-bans.
Third, our transportation policies should be realistic, and
they should reflect the full life cycle of fuels and batteries.
Right now EPA and California want to measure emissions
exclusively at the tailpipe. This means that emissions
generated upstream, places like battery production, mining,
during EV charging, they are not even accounted for at all.
This gives consumers the false impression that there is such a
thing called a zero-emitting vehicle. There is no such thing.
A tailpipe-only approach ignores the investments refiners
and biofuel producers are making in reducing emissions
throughout--through carbon capture, lower carbon hydrogen, and
alternate feedstocks, just to name a few of the technologies we
are invested in. Liquid fuels like renewable diesel and
sustainable aviation fuel can reduce emissions by 80 percent.
And guess what? We can do that today without overhauling our
fuel and our vehicle infrastructure. Yet they are not even
considered under a tailpipe-only approach. This makes
absolutely no sense.
In addition to being unlawful, mandating EVs and banning
gasoline and diesel cars and trucks is bad for consumers. It is
bad for our national security. It would trade our hard-won
energy security for mineral dependance on countries that simply
don't have our best interests at heart, countries like China.
Last year, 85 percent--85 percent--of all the crude that ran
through U.S. refineries were sourced from right here in North
America. Let's contrast that to China, which owns 80 percent of
global battery manufacturing capacity. Forced electrification
would make us less secure as a country, not more.
The world is growing, and we need more energy, not less. We
need all options to remain on the table to meet this demand, to
maintain our energy security, and to continue to reduce
emissions from the transportation sector.
Finally, AFPM supports both of the RFS bills under
consideration today. EPA did the right thing yesterday by
abandoning--it is a theme here--its unlawful attempt to turn
the RFS into yet another subsidy for electric vehicles.
We also support allowing cornstarch ethanol to qualify as
an advanced biofuel. This might surprise some, but the RFS no
doubt has been a challenging--has a challenging history. But we
hope that the diverse support for this bill is a model for ways
for us to work together going forward. A modernized RFS would
promote competition, reduce costs, and achieve better emission
reductions.
In closing, we support these bills for a very important
reason: because they foster innovation and competition, which
is how we as a country have tackled every single challenge we
have ever faced.
I appreciate the opportunity to be here, and I look forward
to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Thompson follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Johnson. The gentleman yields back. The Chair now
recognizes Mr. Caskey for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF NEIL CASKEY

Mr. Caskey. Chairman Johnson, Ranking Member Tonko, thank
you for the opportunity to testify. I am Neil Caskey, the CEO
of the National Corn Growers Association, and we appreciate the
subcommittee asking for our input on increasing consumer
choices for affordable fuels and vehicles.
As producers of the sustainable primary feedstock for low-
carbon ethanol, America's corn farmers stand behind
agriculture's contributions to low-cost, cleaner domestic
energy. Farmers' higher yields using fewer resources enable
them to meet food, feed, and fuel needs, and their production
improvements will help achieve biofuels with net-zero emissions
and higher ethanol blends cost less. Cleaner liquid fuels are
imperative. Consumers will benefit from greater choices and
affordability without sacrificing climate progress and energy
security.
NCGA shares concerns regarding California's advanced Clean
Cars II Standard reflected in H.R. 1435, the Preserving Choice
in Vehicle Purchase Act. We support uniform vehicle standards
for both fuel economy and GHG emissions, relying on a full life
cycle analysis to ensure a level playing field.
California should not limit its vision of a zero-emissions
future based on one technology but should instead focus on
setting achievable targets and allowing innovation to maximize
emissions reductions and improve equity.
We also support the Fuels Parity Act, introduced by
Congresswoman Miller-Meeks. This legislation ensures EPA uses
the most accurate life cycle emissions assessment for biofuels:
the Department of Energy Argonne National Labs GREET model.
According to Argonne, today's corn ethanol is up to 52 percent
lower in carbon intensity than gasoline, due to increased crop
yields, reduced fertilizer intensity, and improved ethanol
production efficiency.
The Fuels Parity Act recognizes progress made under the
RFS, allowing all fuels that meet the 50 percent lower
greenhouse gas standard to qualify as an advanced biofuel. NCGA
has a long--has long followed the principle of do no harm for
the RFS. Therefore, we caution that any efforts to update the
RFS must unite supporters of this successful policy and protect
it.
Regarding the Choice in Automobile Retail Sales Act, NCGA
supports policies to further reduce emissions from vehicles.
However, we have serious concerns with the EPA's proposed rule.
EPA's proposed rule envisions only one solution to meet new
standards, electric vehicles, without accounting for their full
life cycle emissions. Rather than endorse a single technology,
we are urging EPA to focus on outcomes and open pathways for
all low-carbon fuels and technologies, as well as advance a
needed rulemaking to improve fuels.
NCGA also strongly urges EPA to separate its proposal for
renewable biomass electricity, or eRINs, from the RFS volumes
during the RFS rulemaking process because the eRIN proposal was
inconsistent with the way the RFS functions for other renewable
fuels. We appreciate that EPA did not finalize the eRIN
proposal with the RFS volume rule from yesterday.
We also agree with the Chairs that we need to increase
choices and access to reliable, affordable fuels and vehicles.
Two additional bipartisan bills referred to this subcommittee
would help deliver on the Chairs' commitment, and we urge
consideration of these measures, as well.
Last June, the House passed legislation that included the
Consumer and Fuel Retailer Choice Act. We ask the House to pass
H.R. 1608 again this Congress. H.R. 1608 would permanently
remove outdated barriers to full market access for E15, a
lower-cost and lower-emissions choice. More than 95 percent of
vehicles on the road can use E15, often marketed as unleaded
88.
The Biden administration used emergency authority to
prevent a disruption in E15 availability last year and again
this year. Biofuel, retail, agriculture, and even oil
stakeholders now support Congress permanently removing this red
tape.
Consumers need more choices and affordability in addition
to EVs. Led by bipartisan committee members Representative
Miller-Meeks and Representative Craig and 21 cosponsors, the
Next Generation Fuels Act provides another choice. NCGA
supports H.R. 2434 and urges the subcommittee to advance this
bill, as well. The Next Generation Fuels Act considers fuels
and vehicles as a system, improving our Nation's liquid fuel
supply and transitioning new combustion vehicles to use
advanced engines that take advantage of better fuels. This
transition to updated fuels and vehicles would cut fuel costs,
reduce greenhouse gases and other transportation emissions,
while also increasing fuel efficiency.
For consumers, these advanced vehicles and fuels mean
additional clean choices that are affordable. For automakers, a
better fuel allows deployment of advanced combustion engine
technologies.
With that, I thank you for considering our input, and I
look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Caskey follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Johnson. The gentleman yields back. Ms. Cullen, you are
now recognized for 5 minutes for your statement.

STATEMENT OF GENEVIEVE CULLEN

Ms. Cullen. Thank you, Chair McMorris Rodgers, Chair
Johnson, Ranking Member Pallone, Ranking Member Tonko, and
members of the subcommittee.
The Electric Drive Transportation Association is the cross-
industry trade association promoting the advancement of
electric drive transportation. EDTA's members represent the
entire value chain of electric drive, including vehicle
manufacturers, materials and component manufacturers, electric
utilities, and infrastructure developers. Collectively, these
companies are building the electric transportation ecosystem,
which is enabling U.S. competitiveness and creating jobs while
reducing greenhouse gas emissions and creating transportation
options that families, businesses, and communities want.
I appreciate the opportunity to appear before the committee
to talk about the electric transportation opportunity in the
United States.
First, a quick picture of the market. EVs are projected to
rise to 30 percent of global new car sales by 2026, and in the
United States that number will be 28 percent of new car sales.
This market is accompanied by investment in building out the
entire ecosystem, from supply chains to chargers. And what it
all points to is that the future of transportation is
electrified. Our choice now is simply whether we are going to
lead in this market or follow.
For consumers, an electric future means more transportation
options, fuel and maintenance savings, and healthier
communities. Consumers have 87 models to choose from today at
all price points and sizes, and that number will increase to at
least 150 models by 2027. The used EV market is poised to
follow this rapid growth in the new EV market. Both the new and
used vehicle sales are reinforced by Federal and State purchase
incentives that accelerate price parity, putting some vehicles
at or below the cost of their conventional counterparts today.
Domestically produced electricity, on average, costs the
equivalent of $1.20 a gallon of gasoline. This price is stable
and insulated from the volatility of global oil markets.
Drivers of battery electric cars save roughly 60 percent in
energy costs. Owning an EV is also cheaper. Plug-in cars incur
only half the repair and maintenance costs of conventional
cars.
Electrifying the transportation sector is also an essential
tool in combating climate change and reducing air pollution,
which accounts for one in five premature deaths in the United
States. According to the Union of Concerned Scientists, no
matter where you plug in in the U.S., an EV has fewer emissions
than the average internal combustion engine vehicle.
For the United States, an electric future means growing
U.S. leadership in the global EV race. It has already created
hundreds of thousands of jobs and more than $210 billion in
private EV manufacturing and battery investments since 2021.
As many analysts have noted, the EV industry is at an
inflection point. What policymakers do next can help cement
U.S. leadership, get us to full scale in the next decade, and
secure the economic and environmental benefits of e-mobility
for consumers and for the country. And from that perspective,
we offer the following thoughts on the legislation before the
committee.
H.R. 1435's proposed changes to the EPA's Clean Air Act
waiver program could create substantial disruption in the U.S.
vehicle market, extending beyond California to the section 177
States, which combined represent more than 40 percent of new
vehicle sales.
In addition, the legislation would hinder the States'
ability to address their unique environmental conditions, as
waivers are designed to do.
The CARS Act would prohibit the EPA from finalizing its
proposed rule for 2027 to 2032 and potentially invalidate
previous emissions regulations. At this inflection point for
the market, the disruption and uncertainty created by the
changes proposed in these bills will work against U.S. market
leadership and consumers' access to choices. Vehicle
manufacturers and the complex supply chains that support them
and the EV ecosystem have made substantial investments in
reliance on the current regulatory regimes.
EDTA supports a coherent national regulatory regime that
promotes investment in greenhouse gas-reducing technology, and
provides manufacturers with the support they need to achieve
aggressive goals. We believe that informed regulators and
engaged stakeholders working together to finalize standards is
the way to ensure effective regulation and reward innovation in
the vehicle market.
Regarding the No Fuel Credits for Batteries Act, EDTA
supports establishing an RFS pathway for renewable electricity
used in transportation. We believe that renewable electricity
is logically within the ambit of the program and want to work
with the administration and stakeholders to take this important
next step in the expansion of EV infrastructure.
And finally, EDTA has no position on the Fuels Parity Act.
I thank you for the opportunity to be here, and I look
forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Cullen follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Johnson. Thank you, Ms. Cullen. The gentlelady yields
back.
Mr. Lambert, you are now recognized for 5 minutes for your
statement.

STATEMENT OF SCOTT LAMBERT

Mr. Lambert. Good afternoon, Mr. Chairman and Ranking
Member Tonko. My name is Scott Lambert, and I am president of
the Minnesota Automobile Dealers Association.
We represent 365 franchised new car and truck dealers in
the great State of Minnesota. Combined, my members employ over
20,000 people and have a sales of over $14 billion. And we are
a truck State. Our customers purchase pickups and SUVs at an
impressive rate of 89 percent.
To be clear at the outset, we are not opposed to electric
vehicles. In fact, our dealerships are making millions of
dollars in investments for chargers, new hoists, forklifts, and
other equipment necessary to sell and service electric
vehicles. When consumers are ready to purchase these vehicles,
we are very anxious to sell them. Currently, however, new EVs
compose only 5 percent of the retail market in Minnesota. What
we are opposed to are mandates that will force dealers to stock
vehicles that may not appeal to consumers.
For over 100 years, manufacturers have built and dealers
have sold vehicles based on consumer demand. In the last few
years that basic economic model has been replaced by one that
now has vehicles being produced and offered for sale based
instead on public policy. And it is a public policy that is
impatient.
Minnesota recently adopted the California car rules.
Unfortunately, these rules are one-size-fits-all and, equally
unfortunately, Minnesota does not have a southern California
climate. The average low temperature in February in Minnesota
is 10 degrees, while the average low temperature in Los Angeles
for the same time period is 48 degrees. This is important,
because the colder temperatures and need to defrost and heat a
vehicle can reduce the battery range by as much as 40 percent,
causing an already limited vehicle range to become even lower.
The other significant drawback to EVs currently is their
limited towing capability. Towing anything with any weight to
it dramatically reduces the potential vehicle range, even in
ideal weather conditions. This is a significant problem for
contractors, farmers, loggers, miners who rely on their
vehicles, just to name a few, for their livelihood. In
Minnesota the ability to tow a boat to one of our 10,000 lakes
is just as important.
Another barrier to EV adoption at the moment is the lack of
dependable EV charging. Urban consumers who don't have a garage
to charge their vehicle overnight will find charging difficult,
especially when there is 2 feet of snow on the ground. Rural
consumers who drive longer distances for basic goods want to
know that they can easily find a fast charger at their
destination. But there are large areas of Minnesota where we
can drive for 3 hours with no access to a fast charger.
In Minnesota, 80 percent of the State's almost 35,000
registered EVs reside in the Twin Cities area, where only 55
percent of the population lives. It is simply not convenient to
own an EV in vast stretches of farmland or northern lakes
areas.
The California mandate forces dealers to stock EVs at an
increasing rate until it bans the sale of internal combustion
vehicles by 2035. The EPA's proposed rules on mileage standards
basically accomplishes the same goal by simply strangling the
manufacturers with ever-increasing mileage standards. Both
regulations distort the marketplace and fail to acknowledge the
basic economic principles of supply and demand.
Currently, the average electric vehicle costs approximately
$14,000 more than the average equal gas-powered vehicle. The
upfront price differential is a deterrent to consumers' uptake
of EVs. For dealers being forced to stock vehicles that do not
enjoy widespread consumer demand is a recipe for economic
chaos.
Over the past 100 years, the Federal Government has been
very good at nudging the industry forward to build and sell
more efficient and safer vehicles. I fear these new mandates
are not nudges forward but instead are a shove off the cliff.
When manufacturers can build an affordable truck that can go
over 400 miles on a single charge and can tow heavier cargo,
that will be, in my opinion, a game changer and will speed up
the new era of mass sale of EVs, and we won't need a mandate.
But that vehicle does not presently exist.
We all understand the concerns about climate change, but I
believe we should slow down and let technology get caught up in
this sector. Violating the principles of consumer choice and
mandating the supply of vehicles that do not work in every
situation is folly.
Our organization supports H.R. 1435, and hopes that
Congress will do the right thing for consumers.
Thank you for allowing me to testify today.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Lambert follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Johnson. Thank you, Mr. Lambert, for yielding back, and
we will now begin questioning, and I will start once again. And
I will go directly to you, Mr. Lambert.
My constituents in Appalachian Ohio, I think, are much like
rural Minnesotans. They actually need to use their trucks,
their vehicles for work. Now, Ohio doesn't get quite as cold as
Minnesota does, but I am concerned--and you mentioned this in
your testimony--that in real-life scenarios, while EVs have
their place, they may be good for a quick run out to run an
errand or to jaunt around town, that kind of thing, but the
challenges for other uses start to compound depending on where
you live, and in climates and geography like we live in. And
that makes the elimination of a choice very problematic for the
American people.
What happens if, say, you need to tow or haul heavy
equipment or building materials 60 to 80 miles or more, and it
happens to be below freezing outside, and you could be hours
from an EV charging station--that is, if there is even one in
the direction or close by the job that you are going to?
I mean, these are practical questions that you have to ask.
It is like, you don't cut your grass if you don't have gas in
your lawnmower, for crying out loud. If you can't charge your
vehicle, you got a problem if all you have got is an electric
vehicle.
Mr. Thompson, in your testimony you mentioned--oh, I am
sorry.
So back to you, Mr. Lambert. Is that a problem, in your
view, that you can't get to a charging station and you got
these long distances to drive?
Mr. Lambert. Mr. Chairman, yes, it is definitely a problem.
Remember, it gets cold in Minnesota. And currently the
truck on the market has a towing capability range of 80 miles.
That is the current pickup truck. If it gets cold, that reduces
by 40 percent. If you are planning to take your ice fishing
house onto the lake in cold weather, you better plan your day
pretty carefully. That is just the reality of the market right
now.
Mr. Johnson. OK. Mr. Thompson, in your testimony you
mentioned multiple times the dangers of this multipronged
effort by the administration to force us into EVs, which would
eventually lead to significant shutdowns of America's refining
capacity. America's refining capacity is one of our strengths
and ways we can project geopolitical power.
I mean, I was just--I was thinking during our first panel,
some of them--some of the questioning, you know, the
skyrocketing costs that will result in refined fuels as they
become in less demand, making it more costly to produce them
and make them available.
But our adversaries are watching, you know. We can use our
refining capacity to project geopolitical power. China is
rapidly building its own refining capacity. Can you speak to us
about the national security implications of China taking over
America's global market share in refining if we shut ours down
and, on the West Coast, the possible effects on our military
readiness?
Mr. Thompson. Chairman, Mr. Chairman, thank you for that
question. Let me start off and say proudly we have the best
refining kit in all the world right now. We are the cleanest,
the most efficient. But we should not take it for granted.
One thing that has happened over the last 3 years, we
actually lost the world's leading capacity, refining capacity.
We have now been overtaken by China. During COVID we lost over
a million barrels per day of refining capacity in this country,
in part due to bad policies that could indeed get worse with
these policies if they were to proceed because this would, you
know, create a significant dent in demand, and some refineries
might not be able to survive in that--under that economic
model, and we could lose more refining capacity. It is a real,
real concern, as we felt, all of us, last year when we were
coming out of COVID.
But China right now is, in essence, going to become the
world's swing refiner capacity. They have exceeded us. They
have plans to get up to 20 million barrels a day. And so that
takes away further leverage from us right now, as the world's
leading producer of oil and gas and refined products.
Mr. Johnson. OK.
Mr. Thompson. Now, you mentioned the West Coast. I will say
we provide 750 million gallons a year of fuel to--on the West
Coast for the military. It is a real national security--if we
lose more West Coast refining, it would be a real, you know, a
real impediment to our national security, something we should
avoid.
Mr. Johnson. OK. Mr. Caskey, a key component of the Fuels
Parity Act is requiring the use of Department of Energy's
Argonne GREET model to measure life cycle greenhouse gas
emission. Is the GREET model considered to be scientifically
sound?
And secondarily, how does the GREET model benefit domestic
biofuels as opposed to international standards?
And I am already out of time, so if you could answer
quickly.
Mr. Caskey. I would just answer that it is absolutely the
gold standard, and it does--it is the most robust and
transparent model that exists in measuring the carbon intensity
of biofuels, and that is why we stand behind it.
Mr. Johnson. OK. All right. Well, thank you very much.
I yield back, and now I recognize the gentleman from New
York, the ranking member, Mr. Tonko, for his 5 minutes.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Thompson's testimony
included a phrase that I like, ``Competing for emissions
reductions.'' I think that is part of the ethos that our
Republican colleagues claim to support--all-of-the-above,
market-based approaches--while supporting the emissions
reductions that Democratic Members are expecting in our
transportation system.
That is why, instead of these messaging bills, we should be
working together on legislation to transition our Federal fuels
policy towards a technology-neutral, performance-based policy
that incentivizes emissions reductions. A clean fuel standard
would directly reward a refiner that makes those investments to
be able to produce those lower-emission fuels. It could also
support a biofuels producer that continues to drive down the
carbon intensity of their product. And if an electric vehicle
doesn't use clean electricity, such a program would penalize it
accordingly.
This can all happen if we transition to a performance-based
standard that cares first and foremost about emission
reductions. So I encourage the witnesses and other Members to
work with us on finding consensus on such a policy. I know
reaching agreement won't be easy, but it does seem like it
could address much of the dissatisfaction with the current RFS.
Ms. Cullen, I want to ask you about how EDTA's members are
responding to the incentives of the Inflation Reduction Act and
the Bipartisan Infrastructure Law. Are you seeing a great deal
of private-sector investments across the supply chain to
support zero-emission vehicles?
Ms. Cullen. Thank you. We are, indeed. In fact, we, along
with Atlas Organization, has documented $210 billion in EV
supply chain investments since 2021, but there is $190 billion
of investment that started in 2016.
So the Federal policies in the Bipartisan Infrastructure
Law and the Infrastructure Reduction Act are reinforcing where
the market is going, and they are helping to drive down costs.
In fact, as you know, as been--we have talked a lot about costs
here today. And the fact is, even in the tumult and the
inflation and then the global supply chain disruptions of the
last couple of years, battery costs have gone down 6 percent in
year-over-year--between 2021 and 2022. So these investments are
already paying off through the supply chain.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you. And if Congress continues to inject
uncertainty into the market, whether that is by repealing
incentives or blocking EPA's regulatory agenda, how would that
affect your members?
Ms. Cullen. Well, they, in fact, have--if you read any of
the papers, you have seen they have made substantial promises
to their shareholders, to their customers, and to their
workforces about building the fleet of the future that
customers want. They are investing heavily. They are making
decisions today for the fleets that will be on the road 5 years
from now and 10 years from now.
So all uncertainty undermines investment, and it certainly
doesn't accelerate our movement towards a cleaner fleet.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you. And do you believe the bills before
us today could undermine the private sector's efforts to
develop resilient domestic supply chains, build charging and
hydrogen refueling infrastructure, and plan for a modernized
electric grid that can integrate these new loads?
Ms. Cullen. I absolutely do. A confused market signal does
not provide the certainty that businesses and even consumers
need to make the substantial investments in technology and
supply chains. And I would have to say I think a red-light/
green-light policy is just not the way forward for plotting our
transportation and our economic future.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you. Again, Ms. Cullen, I asked Mr.
Goffman earlier about one of the bills to prevent eligible
feedstocks from participating in the RFS just because they are
used to power an EV. Do you believe that it would be fair to
close off the program to eligible renewable fuels based on the
type of vehicle they would be powering?
Ms. Cullen. It doesn't make sense to me. We believe that
renewable fuel used in transportation, you know, that
electricity, if it is renewable, falls within the ambit of that
program.
And that--we certainly would like to work with the
administration and participate--they said they had a lot of
interesting comments, pro and con--and be part of that process.
Mr. Tonko. And I would just ask a question, and you can
perhaps respond on record. And can you discuss how eRINs might
contribute to a more resilient grid with more distributed
energy resources?
Ms. Cullen. Creating more stakeholders and more
participants in a renewable electricity market in fact creates
more opportunities for expanding EV charging, and even in
particular--in places--say, remote farm areas where folks have
assets that might be generating renewable natural gas, that we
are--we create more opportunities to create charging that is--
that reinforces the grid or, in fact, is distributed from the
grid.
So more resources is better for the electricity supply,
overall.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you.
And with that, Mr. Chair, I yield back.
Mr. Johnson. The gentleman yields back. The Chair now
recognizes the Chair of the whole committee, Mrs. Rodgers, for
5 minutes.
Mrs. Rodgers. Thank you.
In prior committee hearings, we have heard testimony about
how the United States is not ready to practically make the
transition at the pace and the scale that is called for in many
of these rules, 147 proposed rules from EPA, and that we will
be more reliant on Chinese and the Russians to make these
changes in the short term.
So, Mr. Thompson, would you speak to the concerns? What
concerns should we have about Chinese and Russian influence in
the marketplace, and especially at a time when we see these
countries and their leaders being more and more adversarial
towards American security and prosperity?
Mr. Thompson. Well, it seems--thank you for the question,
Chairman. It seems we should be quite concerned.
Let me tell you what happens this year. This year 85
percent of all the crude that we run through domestic
refineries comes from North America. So here in the United
States or Canada, under an EV transition, a forced EV
transition, we are going to be at the hands of China, who
presently controls the--all the mining of the minerals required
for EVs, the processing of these same minerals, and more than
80 percent of the battery capacity. So it seems that we would
be trading what we have today, which is energy security, in
order for dependance upon China. I would think we would be very
concerned, and it doesn't seem like this is in the best
interests of consumers.
Mrs. Rodgers. Thank you.
You know, we heard the EPA witness this morning say that
they estimated a 4 percent increase in electricity demand. Mr.
Lambert, do you have any thoughts on what the proposed increase
in electricity demand may be, given the goal of two-thirds of
the new vehicles being sold in the United States in 2032 being
100 percent battery electric?
Mr. Lambert. Madam Chair, I am the car guy and not the
power grid guy, necessarily. But I can tell you that my 365
dealers that I represent are served by 63 different power
providers, everything from IOUs to municipals and co-ops. They
are all in different states of readiness. And I--a week doesn't
go by I don't get a call from one of my dealers where they say,
``I have got to do all this upgrade for my store, my
manufacturer is requiring me to get all this done, but my power
provider has no idea how to do this. I have got no specs, they
can't tell me cost. We have got to get the power increased to
my store. What do I do?''
And we have actually hired an EV program director to try
and help liaison between these different power providers and
the stores to give them a leg up, because the mandates are
coming.
Mrs. Rodgers. Thank you.
I am a big believer in free markets. I am a big believer in
the power of innovation as what has set America apart. It is
why we have led the world. It is why we have led the world in
reducing carbon emissions. It is why we have dominated the car
sector and new technology in cars over the last 100 years. And
I am very concerned about an agenda right now being driven by
the Biden administration and the EPA that is benefiting China.
It is an agenda that benefits China. I am concerned about
government intervention in markets that remove consumer choice
for Americans, limit affordable options, and ultimately give
China control of the cars and the trucks that we are going to
have on the roads.
So, Mr. Lambert and Mr. Thompson, would you speak to the
impact of these--this approach, the proposed rule that EPA has
on tailpipe emissions for consumers making their best
decisions, and just how government is tipping the scale of the
market to control vehicle and fuel outcomes, and how that is
going to impact people and potentially create hardships in
America?
Mr. Lambert. Madam Chair, I can say simply we are for
consumer choice, and we believe this limits consumer choice and
gives consumers less to take home.
If we want to try and get EVs into people's driveways, we
should let the market happen organically and let this
technology develop. The mandates speeding this up only allow
people to hang on to their cars longer.
Mrs. Rodgers. Thank you.
Mr. Thompson. I will just echo we certainly agree in
consumer choice. Only a family can decide what meets their
budget and what meets their family needs.
The other point that should be stressed is this rule is
unlawful. This rule is unlawful. EPA does not have the
authority to have this transformative of a rule. The Supreme
Court recently spoke to this, when an agency is going to make a
rule that has massive consequences, and this--there is nothing
more transformative. I have worked at EPA for 3 years. There is
no bigger rule they have ever done than this one. They do not
have the authority buried in this statute to move the society
and our economy this way. They know it. And I appreciate what
this legislation does to call them out on it.
Mrs. Rodgers. Thank you. I will just highlight Americans
have chosen today--1 percent of Americans today have chosen to
have a battery electric vehicle. One percent. And this rule is
completely a mandate by the Federal Government to tell
Americans what they think is best--by the EPA, not the elected
representatives of the people.
I yield back.
Mr. Johnson. The gentlelady yields back. The Chair now
recognizes the gentlelady from California, Ms. Barragan, for 5
minutes.
Ms. Barragan. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
There has been lots of talk about the people and consumers.
We have had dangerous levels of wildfire smoke from Canada
causing air alerts in Washington, DC, and along the East Coast.
We have had--State Farm and Allstate have stopped offering home
insurance in California because of extreme weather driven by
the climate crisis. And brutal heat waves that have hit Texas
this week. Last week in--more than 40 million people in the
South were under excessive heat warnings and heat advisories.
These extreme weather events threaten public health and
property costs on all Americans. These aren't just happening to
random folks. I mean, these are Americans. These are the same
people that we are talking about need choice. When the heat is
extreme or they don't have the ability to keep the lights on,
they are not given a choice.
We really need to continue to do all we can to address the
climate impacts. Despite these extreme weather events,
Republicans in Energy and Commerce have another hearing to try
to block efforts by EPA to address climate change and reduce
air pollution.
Ms. Cullen, for over 50 years the EPA has granted
California waivers under the Clean Air Act to set vehicle
emission standards stronger than the Federal Government. How
has California's waiver authority led to a vehicle emission
standard that improves public health and drives innovation?
Ms. Cullen. Well, I don't think there is any disputing the
fact that California has been a leading adopter of EV policy
and of electric transportation. It is the largest EV sales
market in the country. In fact, it is the largest car market in
the country, so--but there are over a million EVs on the road
in California today, and they are laying down a template of
how, in fact, to answer these questions about transition, about
how do you make these vehicles a grid asset, how do you plan
for that increased demand, how do you build out infrastructure
that serves inner-city and rural and highway needs?
Ms. Barragan. Well, thank you. I mean, one of the things
that we have definitely seen is a reduction in emissions. We
have seen health outcomes become a little bit better, but there
is a lot of work to do. And in many communities, you are seeing
increased asthma rates. In my very community you see asthma
inhalers there.
And the talk about the 1 percent who has gotten EVs, there
is a shortage of them. People can't get their hands on electric
vehicles, at least in California. There is a huge shortage of
them. And so it is that--1 percent number, I think, also could
attribute to the fact that the supply is not keeping up with
the demand.
Ms. Cullen, a bill on the hearing today--on the hearing
agenda today would limit these EPA Clean Air Act waivers and
even revoke recent ones for any California standard that would
limit the sales of cars. Let me start again.
A bill on the hearing agenda today would limit these EPA
Clean Air Act waivers and even revoke recent ones for any
California standard that would limit the sales of cars, would
an internal--with an internal combustion engine. What would be
the impact of these restrictions on innovation and clean
vehicle options for consumers?
Ms. Cullen. As we testified, we do not support upending the
current rulemaking process. Our members are participating in
it, and we--you know, we are going to be working with the
regulators to come to a workable and effective rule, but to
freeze the ability of EPA to move forward and to work with
stakeholders to take the next steps in setting emissions--
performance-based emission standards undermines U.S.
competitiveness.
We are in a global race for--to win the EV race. There is
just simply no option. If we do nothing, we give the market to
China.
Ms. Barragan. Well, thank you for that.
Other witnesses have made claims today that electric
vehicles are not cleaner than internal combustion engines when
you factor in the carbon footprint of the grid. Are those
claims accurate?
Ms. Cullen. No, they are not. It has been well documented
by multiple sources. No matter where you plug in an EV in the
United States, on a well-to-wheels basis it is cleaner than the
average combustion engine. That is even in places where the
grid is entirely grid-fired.
Ms. Barragan. And also between the clean energy investments
in the Inflation Reduction Act, the proposed EPA power plant
rule, and the recent growth of clean energy resources, we know
the grid will continue to get cleaner, right?
Ms. Cullen. That is absolutely true. An electrified car is
the one car that gets cleaner as it gets older, because the
grid will get cleaner.
Ms. Barragan. Great, thank you.
I yield back.
Mr. Johnson. The gentlelady yields back. The Chair now
recognizes the gentleman from Texas, Mr. Crenshaw, for 5
minutes.
Mr. Crenshaw. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I will start with a
correction here.
It is absolutely not true, what you just said. It is not
true. Every study has shown about 70,000 miles are required to
break even. That is from the manufacturers themselves who want
to sell their EVs. These are accurate studies. Now, if you
don't take into account the entire production line and what it
takes to actually extract the critical minerals to make the
batteries, which are extremely complex machines, then yes, you
might come up with different numbers. But if you do the
calculations the right way, you come up with those numbers,
which is really--it is interesting, because what it actually
shows is in the short term you will actually get an increase in
global emissions from doing EVs, because it takes so long to
actually even break even.
It is 70 percent more emissions required to build an
electric vehicle versus an internal combustion engine. That is
what the math and the studies show from the people who want to
sell EVs. It is just not correct.
Again, we have to ask ourselves cost/benefit, cost/benefit.
So there is not very much benefit, it seems, but we seem, like,
obsessed with this idea that we have to just--we have to get to
electrification, we have to get to EVs because it will save us.
From what? What does that even mean? I mean, what would be
the decrease in emissions, even? And then what would the effect
be on the climate? Those are the questions you have to ask when
you are willing to impose massive costs on people and their way
of life. These are very objective questions.
So--and then I also want to talk about who are we relying
on to build these things. So maybe, Mr. Thompson, you could
make some remarks on this. You know, our refining capacity is
damaged, as you said, because of COVID and because of certain
policies and lack of investment in additional refining capacity
because of those policies. But at least, you know, we are not
importing it necessarily from China.
But, you know, when 85 percent of critical mineral
processing occurs in China, aren't EVs already--aren't the
batteries, the battery manufacturing, isn't that already a
Chinese product? Are we going to be more reliant on China if we
transition drastically to electric vehicles?
Mr. Thompson. Well, it certainly would seem that way, based
on the data now.
And again, to be clear, we are certainly not anti electric
vehicles. We are anti these rules, which simply go about
banning the internal combustion engine. That is the point.
But yes, Congressman, you are correct that China owns--
dominates the supply chains. I saw a stat the other day that
says, even if the United States increases its investment in
minerals and mining by tenfold over the next 5 years, we will
still be dwarfed. We will only have 10 percent of the supply
chain. So think about that. Ten times.
Mr. Crenshaw. Yes.
Mr. Thompson. We will still have only 10 percent of the
supply chain. And having worked at EPA, I know that we are not
going to be able to permit mines in this timeframe.
Mr. Crenshaw. Yes. I mean, what is interesting is, you
know, the EPA suggests that these new emission standards will
help us get to 70 percent EV usage by, whatever, 2032. You
know, that--I don't think that is taking into account the
actual material required to build that many EVs, right? So you
are going to have a supply constriction there, very obviously,
just because of the supply chain issue. So what does that do to
cost?
And this is what I was getting at, you know, in the last
panel. So Mr. Lambert, you might be a good person to ask about
this. Are costs of electric vehicles going down in the short,
medium, or long term? Because I have data that says they have
been going up, actually, despite them, you know, increasing in
sales.
Mr. Lambert. Congressman, there is no indication from our
viewpoint that costs are going down.
Mr. Crenshaw. And how could--well, how could they go down?
Is there anything--I mean, obviously, they are subsidized, so
that--you know, it is a way to make them go down. Of course,
that subsidy generally goes to wealthier folks.
And is what I just said even accurate? Because my theory
here is that the supply chains will constrict the supply of--
even an ability to even produce these vehicles, which means
there is not enough of them. But the tailpipe emission
standards are going to make it way too expensive to buy
anything else. So when there is less supply and higher demand,
what happens to prices?
Mr. Thompson. Congressman, when there is less supply and
more demand, obviously, prices go up. But understand, supply
chain has been disrupted in a big way from the pandemic years.
And we are still--that is still rippling through at least the
new car economy.
Mr. Crenshaw. Right.
Mr. Thompson. So supplies are hard right now.
Mr. Crenshaw. So there is no way to see the cost going
down, right, without massive government subsidies. I mean, the
costs are what they are just because of the market. And then
there is the cost to the taxpayer. So you have to add in those
costs, as well.
So this is a massive cost to our society. And if we are
going to impose a massive cost to our society, I want to see
clear benefits. This is the point I always make on this
committee, whether we are--whatever issue we are talking about.
Whenever we are imposing a cost on Americans, you have to
directly link it to a benefit, and that benefit is very clearly
not there in this case.
And I yield back.
Mr. Johnson. The gentleman yields back. The Chair now
recognizes my colleague from Pennsylvania, Dr. Joyce, vice
chair of this committee.
Mr. Joyce. First I want to thank you, Chairman Johnson and
Ranking Member Tonko, for holding the second panel on today's
important hearing.
This is important to all of Pennsylvania. This is important
to all of America. It is great to hear from people in the real
world, our witnesses here today who can speak to how hard-
working Americans are going to be affected by these radical
actions taken by the Biden administration and Democrats to
force Americans to buy electric vehicles.
I was disappointed by the lack of foresight and wishful
thinking by the EPA on the effects of granting the California
waiver and implementing the tailpipe emissions regulations. It
seems that the EPA is looking to mandate electric vehicles and
remove the American freedom to choose the car, the truck, the
SUV that the individual American wants to purchase.
The facts is my constituents want to choose on their own.
They don't want the EPA, they don't want government making
those decisions for them. That is why I, along with
Representatives Latta, Bilirakis, and Obernolte introduced H.R.
1435, the Preserving Choice in Vehicle Purchases Act, to
prevent the EPA Administrator from granting a waiver allowing
California's ban on internal combustion engines.
As I have said before, this legislation is not anti-EVs.
Those who can afford and who want an electric vehicle should be
able to buy one. There is a laundry list of reasons why an
electric vehicle mandate is bad policy.
First, and for the most, EVs simply cannot fulfill the
needs of my constituents. They can't drive the distances
needed. I am in a rural district. I am in a mountainous
terrain. In places like Pennsylvania with winters, or
Minnesota, electric vehicles can lose a third of their range.
Our grid is also simply not ready for the added demand, and
we cannot build transmission or chargers fast enough.
Lastly, this policy will harm working- and middle-class
families by making vehicles cost thousands of dollars more for
people who can afford it the least.
Again, only by taking government's thumb off of the scale
and letting the free market decide will Americans get the
efficient and affordable transportation that they need and that
they want.
Mr. Thompson, our Nation is already losing refining
capacity at a rapid rate. How would granting California a
waiver for a ban on internal combustion engines affect 17
States and over 40 percent of our domestic market?
How would that hurt American energy independence and
American energy dominance?
Mr. Thompson. Well, Congressman, thank you for the
question.
And let me just say again we support--and listen, this is
what we want, we want EPA to follow the law, we want EPA to
recognize consumer choice, and to take into account life cycle.
Now, this--you are right. If the California waiver is
granted, that is 40 percent of the new car market. That is a
substantial share of liquid fuel demand, and certainly that
could undermine the viability of some U.S. refining capacity in
this country. We lost over a million barrels a day of capacity
already. And if, you know, we certainly continue to go down
this road, it is a real threat that we would lose more, and
that will hurt consumers, lack of supply--you know what it does
for, you know, demand and prices. So that would not be a good
thing.
We don't have to do it this way.
Mr. Joyce. Mr. Lambert, the Federal Government has been
putting significant pressure on automakers to produce more
electric cars. You talked to us about that. How is this
pressure felt at the dealer level? And what are the real-world
implications on your members?
Mr. Lambert. Congressman, it is a mandate to produce. It is
not a mandate for consumers to buy. So we are stuck, the
dealers are stuck in the middle. We will have to take on these
vehicles.
And remember, we purchase the vehicles from the
manufacturers. We go to a bank, get a loan, and service that
loan. So the dealers will be stuck with a supply of vehicles
that they may not be able to sell, servicing the loan, losing
money. The resulting economic chaos could be significant.
Mr. Joyce. Mr. Lambert, in my district I have spoken with
dealers who talk about just what you said: being stuck, having
the loans, carrying the notes on these vehicles. And they are
happy to sell EVs to those who want them, but they are seeing
the demand wane.
In places, as I mentioned earlier, with winters, severe
winters like Pennsylvania and Minnesota, can EVs meet the
demand of every customer, rural or urban?
Mr. Lambert. Congressman, no, they cannot. There is a place
for EVs in the marketplace, but at--currently, at the current
technology, they cannot meet everybody's need.
Mr. Joyce. I think, as I said earlier, we need to remove
our thumb from the scale. That place exists, but the consumer,
the purchaser should make that decision.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I yield.
Mr. Johnson. The gentleman yields back. And seeing that
votes have been called, and we are getting kind of low on the
number, we are going to recess, and then we will reconvene
after votes.
So with that, the subcommittee stands in recess until after
votes.
[Recess.]
Mr. Johnson. The subcommittee will come to order. We are
going to continue with our 5-minute questionings. Now the Chair
recognizes the gentleman from Alabama, Mr. Palmer, for 5
minutes.
Mr. Palmer. I appreciate the opportunity to have our
witnesses here, and thank you for coming.
One of the things that I think I expressed rather
passionately in the--with our previous witness is my concerns
about this effort to transition so rapidly from gasoline-
powered vehicles to electric-powered vehicles, and how that
impacts consumer choice. I personally drive a light-duty
pickup. It is not a status symbol, it is my everyday vehicle.
It is also a work vehicle. And I don't have a whole lot of hope
that I would be able to use an electric vehicle for the things
that I need my pickup for.
The other thing, though, that concerns me is how this rapid
transition to electric vehicles are going to impact safety,
automobile safety. And what we have seen over the years as we
have pushed these corporate auto fuel economy standards is the
technology for increasing fuel efficiency has been good, but it
hasn't been good enough. And so what we have had to do is
lighten vehicles, and particularly where you are dealing with
smaller cars and light-duty trucks or other SUVs. In those
situations where accidents occur, the heavier vehicles--the
consequences of getting hit by a heavier vehicle are pretty
severe.
And I brought this up in the previous panel. The head of
the National Transportation Safety Board warns of these risks.
And I would just like to get some feedback from some of you. I
know that you are very interested in different types of fuel,
but is this a concern to you, Mr. Thompson?
Mr. Thompson. Well, certainly, safety is a concern, and we
want all drivers to be as safe as possible. I am not in a
position to speak to the physics of light versus heavy, but
what I can say is one concern would be, you know, the average
EV is going to be between 14 and 16 thousand dollars more
expensive than its ICE counterpart, which, for some consumers,
means they are going to have to delay buying new vehicles, and
they are going to have to rely on their current vehicles for
longer. And that would mean that some of the new modern safety
benefits of a newer car is going to have to be foregone. And
that certainly is something that folks should be concerned
about.
Mr. Palmer. Well, I understand the economic consequences,
but I am talking about the safety. And I think we all
understand the physics well enough to know if you are in a
boxing match with a guy that is 6-foot-4 and weighs 240 pounds,
a heavyweight, and you are 5-11 and weigh 175 pounds, the
impact of the blow to the 175-pounder is going to be a good bit
more severe than the other way around. That is basic physics,
mass versus--mass and velocity. The consequences pile up for
the heavier object.
Mr. Caskey, I know you are here to talk about the benefits
of ethanol. But again, does the safety concern impact your
decision making if you were to buy a vehicle?
Mr. Caskey. Sure. Safety is, obviously, a concern in all
things farming. And I can't really speak to the physical
physics of that, either. But I can say from a clean air
standpoint that ethanol has an incredible track record of
cleaning the air, and it is--and helping in climate change. So
if we talk about safety in that respect, ethanol is a wonderful
product that can help solve some of those problems.
Mr. Palmer. Well, thank you for working that into the
answer. And apparently--I hope you know enough about physics to
know the problems with heavier vehicles.
And Ms. Cullen, I know you are all for the electric
vehicles, so I can anticipate that you are not concerned, but
maybe you should be.
Ms. Cullen. Well, I think everyone is concerned with
safety, and no one wants to be creating more hazard. And I
believe it is the function and the mission of NHTSA to regulate
the safety of vehicles on the road. And the mismatch between
smaller and bigger, heavier and lighter cars has been happening
since cars were invented and, in fact, was exacerbated when the
fleet transitioned to SUVs. And it was the weight of SUVs and
how they were constructed that was such a menace to smaller
cars. So there----
Mr. Palmer. Well, I will just point out----
Ms. Cullen. So we, in fact, created safety regulations to
mitigate those risks, and I would assume NHTSA would do the
same----
Mr. Palmer. Mr. Chairman, if I may continue this just for a
minute longer, because I think the thing that you need to know
is, if you take the electric Mustang, which is a Mach 2, I
believe, it is a third heavier than its gas-powered
counterpart. We are talking a disproportionate increase in
weight, as opposed to--I mean, if you choose to drive a Prius
and you get hit by a light-duty truck, that is an issue,
obviously.
But--and then, Mr. Lambert, I will just let you close this
out.
And I will yield back after his answer. Thank you.
Mr. Johnson. The gentleman yields back. The Chair now
recognizes the gentleman from Georgia, Mr. Allen, for 5
minutes.
Mr. Allen. Thank you, Chairman Johnson and--for holding
this important hearing.
Mr. Lambert, I will let you answer that question because I
got another question for you. You can answer both of them for
my friend Mr. Palmer.
Early in the first panel I highlighted the impact that
regulations proposed by the Biden administration would have on
rural communities--and of course, we have just talked about
light-duty trucks--and middle-income families, which--these are
my constituents.
This push to electrify our vehicle sector will have severe
impacts on the reliability of the grid--many States are already
having brownouts--and the affordability of vehicles that our
constituents need to perform everyday tasks. It is critical
that consumers are provided with choice.
And Mr. Thompson, you noted in your testimony how the State
of California is utilizing a waiver from the Environmental
Protection Agency to adopt a standard which will essentially
ban traditional gasoline and diesel vehicles in California.
Should this waiver be approved by EPA, it could have negative
impacts for vehicles across the Nation. Can you elaborate on
the impacts that approval of this Clean Air Act waiver could
have on other States like my home State of Georgia, and for
citizens across this country?
Mr. Thompson. Yes, thank you for that question. Again, let
me start off by saying we think that California's--or EPA's
approval of the California waiver would be unlawful. We don't
believe that California is meeting the intent of the Clean Air
Act that gave California that ability to get a waiver. And what
is happening now is that, as you say, if it is granted, it will
be 40 percent of the new car market, which means every consumer
in this country is going to be subsidizing the price of these
EVs.
You can see it, and it is in the news every day. I think
Ford had some commentary on this recently. They are losing lots
of money on every car they sell. So what ends up happening is
all cars, including gas- and diesel-powered trucks, have to be
more expensive to make up for that.
Mr. Allen. Exactly.
Mr. Lambert. So that is going to impact--and then, of
course, if we lose any more refining capability, that is going
to jeopardize fuel supplies for everyone in the country.
Mr. Allen. Exactly. And I--of course, my colleague
Congressman Joyce earlier mentioned his bill, H.R. 1435, which
I am a cosponsor of, the Preserving Choice Vehicles Act, so
that the Federal Government could deal with this issue between
States.
As mentioned in this hearing, this bill would prevent a
State from getting an EPA waiver, and if--their directive would
directly or indirectly limit the sale or use of a new motor
vehicle with an internal combustion engine.
I told this in the early hearing. A dear friend of mine was
a long-time--three-generation Cadillac dealer in my district.
Cadillac made the determination to go all electric, came to the
dealers and said, ``We are going all electric, and we want you
to build this new modernized dealership.'' And he sold his
dealership to Cadillac, as did 400 dealers throughout the
country, 400 dealers, a huge economic impact across this
country.
And he said--I had asked him, I said, ``Why did you do
that?''
He said--and, of course he was also a GMC dealer. But he
said, ``I have zero demand for electric vehicles.''
And, you know, and it is what--Mr. Lambert, it cost 20, 25
million dollars to build a dealership at this day and time, a
new dealership?
Mr. Lambert. Congressman, yes. To build a new dealership,
it would probably be $20 million.
Mr. Allen. Yes. So EPA is forcing this. It has got to be
free market. So--and of course, I have said, you know, General
Motors better not come back to us, Congress, and ask for help,
financial help, when they are--when they go upside down
because, again--and they are going to blame it on the
Government. ``Well, the Government said we had to do this.''
So, Mr. Lambert, can you speak to this rush to electric
vehicles perpetrated by the Federal Government and an agency of
this Federal Government, and what it is going to do to
dealerships across this country?
Mr. Lambert. Congressman, we used to--15 years ago we had
41 Cadillac dealers in Minnesota, and now we have 11. They are
selling a third of the amount of Cadillacs. I have dealers who
are investing a million, a million and a half dollars to
upgrade their facilities. And they have told me it might be the
worst money they ever spent. They do not see the ROI right now,
because they don't have demand for these vehicles. There is a
place for electric vehicles.
Mr. Allen. And let me tell you what this Federal Government
does, and it is doing the same thing to automobile
manufacturers and dealers. The Obama administration, when they
took office, the State of West Virginia was the tenth-best
economy in this country. At the end of that administration,
they were third from last. We have got to stop this Federal
Government from perpetrating the disaster of our economy.
And I yield back. Thank you.
Mr. Johnson. The gentleman yields back. The Chair now
recognizes the gentleman from Ohio, Mr. Balderson, for 5
minutes.
Mr. Balderson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Just earlier this
week, the Transportation Committee in the Ohio House of
Representatives held a hearing on legislation that would
prohibit the State of Ohio or a State agency from adopting
California's ban on the sale of new internal combustion engine
vehicles.
Given that we are discussing the Preserving Choice in
Vehicle Purchases Act, I would like to submit several documents
from that hearing into the record, including statements and
testimony supporting the Ohio State's efforts from the Ohio
Auto Dealers Association--Zach said to tell you, hi, Mr.
Lambert; the Ohio Oil and Gas Association--my father was a 25-
year board member; Act Ohio; PBF Energy; Consumer Energy
Alliance; and the American Fuel and Petrochemical
Manufacturers.
I would like to add that to the record, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Johnson. Without objection, so ordered.
[The information appears at the conclusion of the hearing.]
Mr. Balderson. Thank you, Mr. Lambert. Thank you for being
here today. And you have noted about the dealerships. And
having been one myself, but--Mr. Allen has been advocating for
automobile dealerships also--are not opposed to electric
vehicles. And I have friends that have dealerships to this day
that aren't opposed to it. But you are opposed--they are
opposed to the mandates that force dealers to stock vehicles
that may not appeal to their community.
Would you consider the EPA's proposed regulations on
tailpipe emissions for medium- and light-duty vehicles as a
mandate?
Mr. Lambert. Yes, sir, I would.
Mr. Balderson. Thank you. While the waiver has not been
accepted yet, we know that Minnesota plans to adopt these
standards. I think we have touched on this a little bit, but if
you want to add anything extra, obviously, you have talked
about the dealers, but how else--is there any other thing? We
have talked to some big truck dealers also, but how would it
impact the dealers in Minnesota?
Mr. Lambert. Well, Mr. Chairman--excuse me.
Mr. Balderson. I would take that title any day, thank you.
Mr. Lambert. Sorry, my apologies.
Mr. Balderson. With all due respect, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Lambert. I apologize.
The impacts are investments. We have got to be certain
about what the future is for us. The dealers right now are
making investments that they do not feel good about because the
product is not there that consumers want.
And again, consumers need to have a choice. I can't say it
enough. They need to have a choice in every category, including
electric. And there are vehicles for them. But right now
there's starter vehicles and low-volume vehicles, and then
there's vehicles that allow people to show off their good
fortune. And there's nothing really in the middle 90 percent
that applies to people's livelihoods and lifestyles.
Mr. Balderson. I agree. You make an excellent point in your
testimony that these rules are one-size-fits-all and that,
unfortunately, Minnesota does not have a southern California
climate. Can you expand on the issues that rural populations
and States like Ohio or Minnesota would experience if we
transitioned as quickly as this administration is proposing?
Mr. Lambert. Well, sir, the--it gets cold in Minnesota in
the winter. For about 3 or 4 months out of the year, it is very
cold. And we lose battery capacity when that happens because we
have to defrost and heat the car, and we can lose up to 40
percent. If you are trying to tow anything in winter weather,
you are going to have well under 100, possibly under 50 miles
of range on your vehicle. That affects consumers.
Consumers are not dumb. The consumers will make the
decisions that work for them, and they are not interested in
those types of vehicles. We have had a lot of vehicles, a lot
of trucks recently, electric trucks that were sold but that
were also returned when people understood their limited
capabilities. So the impacts are real, especially in our
climate.
Mr. Balderson. Thank you very much, and I appreciate
everyone being here today.
I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Johnson. The gentleman yields back. The Chair now
recognizes the gentleman from Texas, Mr. Pfluger, for 5
minutes.
Mr. Pfluger. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you
all for being on the panel today, for your testimony and
discussion on this.
And Mr. Lambert, let's just pick right up there where we--
where I heard you leaving off. You know, I am concerned about
the capability of these vehicles being, you know, much less
than it was previously. And, you know, one example is a
manufacturer that has a truck with an advertised range of 240
miles before you hit the load of either a trailer--and,
actually, this is coming from a car dealer who wanted to
purchase this but had a kind of a golf-cart-style trailer. And
you put that load on there, either with a trailer or with
temperature being reduced, and you are talking 25 to 40 percent
reduction in range.
And so this is something that I am, you know, worried
about. Do you believe that any agency or the administration has
thought through the actual impact on transportation--this is a
personal use trailer--but on the transportation sector, on our
economy? You know----
Mr. Lambert. Congressman, they are looking at numbers and
trends, but I fear they are not looking at how people really
use these vehicles and what it means for their livelihoods and
their lifestyles. It just doesn't seem to work for a lot of
people.
If they can fix those problems, they won't need a mandate.
People will buy these vehicles.
Mr. Pfluger. How long have we been talking about electric
vehicles in this country? I mean, 20 years, 50 years, 80 years,
100 years?
Mr. Lambert. The history of the electric vehicle is
tortured through the manufacturing process. But I think in
current status we have been talking about it for maybe a decade
to 15 years.
Mr. Pfluger. But, I mean, this is not a new subject.
Mr. Lambert. No.
Mr. Pfluger. And if the ranges were such that it made
economic sense, then we would be doing it already, and the
manufacturers would be doing it. They are for-profit businesses
that want to maximize that.
So, Mr. Thompson, you referenced that the United States
would need to--and I will quote--``more than double its
electricity supply by 2050 and build more than 75,000 miles of
high-voltage power lines by 2035 to achieve the administration
goals.'' Is that feasible, given, you know, what we are--given
the scale, the timeline of the Biden's EPA mandates and
policies?
Mr. Thompson. It certainly doesn't seem feasible within the
time, you know, horizon we are talking about.
And you know, on that same point, there was a question
earlier about, you know, the cost of charging. And I took the
opportunity to look at, you know, an article that says that
California, their own California Utility Commission, is
projecting, by 2026, that the price to charge a car could be
the equivalent of $8 a gallon and that the State of California
would need to triple their current capacity right now to meet
EVs in the State--triple, OK?
And so I don't even know how you begin to get something
like that permitted in that time horizon.
Mr. Pfluger. OK. So we have got this mandate. We go
electric. We get to 2030 or the 2035, or whatever the other
markers are, and we get this done. Then what is the EPA going
to do on production, on the generation of electricity, and
where is it going to come from?
I have asked the witness prior on the panel, I know many of
you were here. I have asked the Secretary of Energy. There are
no answers for where it is going to come from, other than a
mixture of sources, which, to me, we need specifics. And I will
open it up to any of you.
Mr. Thompson. Well, Congressman, I don't know where it is
going to come from, but what I will tell you--and I tell
others--is that if we move forward and we lose refining
capacity in this country, it is never coming back.
Mr. Pfluger. That is right.
Mr. Thompson. The administration came to us last year and
said--they knew we lost over a million barrels a day, and they
said, ``Well, turn it back on.'' It doesn't work that way. When
they are gone, they are gone forever. And this is a national
treasure that we have. It gives us security. We should be
really, really reluctant to trade that away for dependance on
China.
Mr. Pfluger. We are trading it away. You see the way
Western Europe has gone. Some of the countries have completely
turned away from reliable and affordable energy. The Texas grid
is right now enduring 110-degree, 115-degree days. It is not--
you know, we can't take it for granted. This is a fragile
entity that we have, and we have to make sure it has got
baseload, dispatchable power that is ready to go. And we are
trading it away with policies that don't make sense, and they
are not realistic.
The Secretary of Energy told me that by 2030, if we had the
50 percent mandate or the different markers, that we would need
to double the demand, which is actually quicker than your
assessment. I don't necessarily agree with that, although I
will take it, because they don't have a plan when it comes to
servicing the grid and the baseload demand.
So my time is expired. Thank you for your time today. This
is a very important discussion. At the end of the day, this is
a national security discussion. And if we trade it away and we
go the way of some of the countries in Western Europe, we will
absolutely be in a more vulnerable place than Ukraine and other
countries have been in.
Mr. Chairman, thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Johnson. The gentleman yields back. The Chair now
recognizes Dr. Miller-Meeks for 5 minutes.
Mrs. Miller-Meeks. Thank you, Mr. Chair, and I thank the
witnesses for being here.
The Fuels Parity Act is legislation that would allow
ethanol from cornstarch to qualify as an advanced biofuel and
require EPA to use DOE's Argonne GREET model to determine the
carbon content of biofuels under the Renewable Fuel Standard.
Allowing corn to qualify as an advanced biofuel allows
internal combustion engine vehicles to compete with EVs by
incentivizing lower emissions from ethanol production. And even
today there is an article in the Des Moines Register saying
some studies show that ethanol decreases emissions by as much
as 46 percent and biodiesel by 69 percent. So if our goal is to
decrease emissions, biofuels is a great way to go.
And as I stated in the earlier panel to Representative--
Ranking Member Tonko, I would be open to a discussion prior to
the subcommittee markup of--you know, about making DOE's
Argonne GREET model applicable to all fuels.
Mr. Caskey, as you know, I am the author of the Fuels
Parity Act. Why isn't cornstarch an advanced biofuel?
Mr. Caskey. Well, thank you, Congresswoman, for that
question. Thank you for your leadership on all things ethanol.
We are grateful for that. Obviously, under current law there is
only one biofuel that is not allowed, as--is not permitted as
an advanced biofuel, and that is cornstarch ethanol. And so,
obviously, your bill would change that.
I think, you know, when the law was established, you know,
we may not have been able to--ethanol may not have been able to
meet that 50 percent greenhouse gas reduction standard. It can
now. And that is largely because of the hard work, the way that
America's corn farmers grow their crops. They are better now.
They have better practices, they have better tools, and they
are just--they are better at their craft. And so the things
that they are doing from a sustainability standpoint are
amazing, and that is why we are able to hit that standard,
along with the work at the plants. They are a lot more
efficient.
And now cornstarch ethanol is able to hit that standard,
and so it makes sense that this--that law be amended, as your
legislation would do. And we are grateful for that change. It
is overdue.
Mrs. Miller-Meeks. Moving to the Argonne GREET requirement
and the Fuels Parity Act, your testimony characterizes the
Department of Energy's Argonne GREET model as the Federal
Government's most robust and transparent tool for measuring
carbon intensity.
Earlier today Mr. Goffman testified that the EPA should use
multiple models. Do you know why the EPA would oppose the use
of a model that the DOE relies on?
Mr. Caskey. It is a great question. I know EPA has even
suggested that the model that they are currently using is
outdated. And when you look at GREET, it is developed by the
Department of Energy. It is the gold standard in terms of
measuring carbon intensity of biofuels and transportation, and
it just makes a lot of sense to use it across the board. And
certainly we would favor that, as well.
Mrs. Miller-Meeks. Thank you.
Mr. Thompson, would you say that the EPA and the Biden
administration's forced push to EVs by looking solely at
tailpipe emissions is completely oblivious or intentionally
ignoring the tremendous carbon and climate impacts on the
production of said vehicles?
And to Ms. Cullen's point, I am not talking about just the
grid. I am talking about production, from production to
disposal.
Mr. Thompson. Well, we certainly believe that the way EPA
should be looking at this is through a full life cycle
analysis.
The American people, the consumers need to just put all the
cards on the table. We are not even necessarily--I don't know
how that would all play out, but I do know that, when you look
at--there is no such thing as a zero-emitting vehicle just
because you don't have a tailpipe. So we ought to be looking at
the whole life cycle, from mining to where they are charged,
right down. And we would expect the same for ICE engines, as
well. Let consumers decide.
Mrs. Miller-Meeks. Thank you.
The Government classifies passenger vehicles as passenger
sedans, light trucks, and motorcycles. So, Mr. Lambert or any
of our panelists, do you know how many passenger vehicles are
on the road in the U.S. today?
Ms. Cullen. Two hundred and seventy-eight million.
Mrs. Miller-Meeks. Around 286 as of 2020, probably more on
the road now.
Do any of you know how much energy it takes to get a single
100-mile charge on an electric vehicle?
[No response.]
Mrs. Miller-Meeks. That would be 30 kilowatt hours. So can
you please do the math for me? Let's say there's 300 million
passenger vehicles--that is not the rest of the vehicles--300
million vehicles on the road today, 30 kilowatt hours to get a
single 100-mile charge. How many kilowatt hours is that to get
a single 100-mile charge for all vehicles on the road today?
Three hundred million times thirty kilowatt hours? Something
like 9.5 trillion kilowatt hours. I think that is the
substantial problem that we have in asking for choice.
Electric vehicles are fine, they are not--just because the
tailpipe emission may not be--may be zero doesn't mean that
their carbon--they have no climate or carbon impact. And the
monumental task of electrifying all vehicles, while there is
increasing demand for everything else that we do in our
lifestyle, would certainly increase the cost of energy, make
less energy available, and might stall some vehicles on the
road when there is a natural disaster and they don't need to be
on the highway with no charge.
With that, I yield back my time.
Mr. Johnson. The gentlelady yields back. The Chair now
recognizes gentleman from Georgia, Mr. Carter, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Carter. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank all of you
for being here. Obviously, we are very concerned about this, as
I am sure you have gathered from the questions that have been
asked here today.
Earlier in our first panel I made it clear, I think, the
tailpipe ruling proposal is one of the most egregious,
irresponsible proposals that I have seen the Federal Government
do. I mean, it is just ridiculous that we are mandating and
picking winners and losers like this and trying to do with
internal--doing away with internal combustible engines.
But nevertheless, I wanted to ask you, Mr. Thompson--I read
your testimony. And in your testimony you characterized the
tailpipe emission standard for light- and medium-duty vehicles
and the California waiver as mandating a single technology,
EVs, and banning the sale of new internal combustion engine
vehicles. And I couldn't agree with you more.
My question is this: Can you explain how the EPA
regulations can be considered a mandate?
Mr. Thompson. Well, look, you know, I couldn't help but
think the emperor has no clothes when you hear EPA say this is
not a mandate. Look at the President's Executive order, where
he wanted to go with this. Look at the press releases around
this. Look at the executive statements around the rule, and it
is all about being about EVs and EV mandates. And they say that
the only way the dealers can--excuse me, the manufacturers--can
comply is selling 70 percent electric vehicles. That is a
mandate under any reasonable definition.
Mr. Carter. You know, also in your testimony you mentioned
that refiners make long-term investment decisions. And, you
know, I was--look, I was in business for 32 years, and I know
that I did that, as well. My business decisions were based on a
lot of what was going on in the economy, what was going on in
my profession. And certainly, that is what is happening here.
And I go back to the State of the Union address, where this
President had the audacity to stand up before a joint session
of Congress and say that the reason gasoline prices were so
high is because the petroleum companies weren't investing in
infrastructure and in refineries, and then in the next breath
said, oh, by the way, we are not going to need fossil fuels in
the next 10 years. Unbelievable.
But I ask you this because, even if these are simple
proposals, these tailpipe emissions proposals, even if they are
simple, what is the impact of the EPA issuing such excessive
regulation? What would it have on business?
Mr. Thompson. Well, it is a massive impact.
And as to any commentary that we haven't invested, I will
tell you that our industry has invested over $100 billion in
the last couple of decades to reduce our emissions and to keep
our plants up and running so we could supply the fuel that gets
people to work and to church and everywhere else we need to go.
We make tremendous investments.
But we are capital intensive, Congressman, as you just
said. And so if you are at a refinery right now trying to
decide whether you are going to invest a couple of billion
dollars to keep your plants up and running, these rules mean a
lot. These rules mean a lot.
Mr. Carter. So do you think that they--that these rule
proposals and California's waiver, that they have a chilling
effect on the investments in the energy sector?
Mr. Thompson. Absolutely. There is no doubt about it.
Mr. Carter. It makes perfect business sense to me. One last
question, Mr. Thompson. The Fuels Institute report indicated
that battery EVs have a higher life cycle greenhouse gas
emissions footprint than internal combustion engines and hybrid
vehicles, and that is one thing that bothers me.
Hybrid vehicles seem to be working well, and yet it is all
or none. It has got to be all EV or nothing at all, whereas the
hybrids seem to accomplish even more. And you would think that,
if we were being reasonable, that we would try to ease into
this, maybe, you know, encourage more hybrids and then get to
EVs, if that is the ultimate decision. But it doesn't--this
rush to green that we are experiencing with this administration
just is appalling to me.
But if the Biden administration truly wanted to decrease
transportation-related emissions, should the tailpipe emission
standard for light- and medium-duty vehicles include hybrids?
Mr. Thompson. Absolutely. It should include all options,
and it should do a life cycle analysis, and that way--and they
should follow the law, importantly, and then, you know, let the
standards fall where they may.
Listen, nothing we have said today is any way suggesting
there should be a rollback or we should not be pressing for
fuel efficiency improvements. But we ought to do it the way
this body, Congress, told EPA to do it, and we ought to leave
all options--it is crazy to take hybrids off the table, crazy.
Mr. Carter. Good. Well, again, I thank all of you for being
here. And this is extremely important to this.
And thank you, Mr. Chairman, for this very educational and
important hearing, and I yield back.
Mr. Johnson. The gentleman yields back.
Seeing that there are no other Members seeking to ask
questions, I ask unanimous consent to insert in the record the
documents included on the staff hearing documents list.
Without objection, that will be the order.
[The information appears at the conclusion of the hearing.]
Mr. Johnson. I remind Members that they have 10 business
days to submit questions for the record, and I ask the
witnesses to respond to the questions promptly if you receive
them. Members should submit their questions by the close of
business on July 6.
Without objection, the subcommittee is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 2:57 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]
[Material submitted for inclusion in the record follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
