- OVERSIGHT OF FERC: ADHERING TO A MISSION OF AFFORDABLE AND RELIABLE ENERGY FOR AMERICA

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

OVERSIGHT OF FERC: ADHERING TO A MISSION OF AFFORDABLE AND RELIABLE
ENERGY FOR AMERICA

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON ENERGY, CLIMATE, AND GRID SECURITY

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION
__________

JUNE 13, 2023
__________

Serial No. 118-45

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Published for the use of the Committee on Energy and Commerce

govinfo.gov/committee/house-energy
energycommerce.house.gov
__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

56-592 PDF                WASHINGTON : 2024

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE

CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington
Chair
MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas            FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey
ROBERT E. LATTA, Ohio                  Ranking Member
BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky              ANNA G. ESHOO, California
H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia         DIANA DeGETTE, Colorado
GUS M. BILIRAKIS, Florida            JAN SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois
BILL JOHNSON, Ohio                   DORIS O. MATSUI, California
LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana               KATHY CASTOR, Florida
RICHARD HUDSON, North Carolina       JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland
TIM WALBERG, Michigan                PAUL TONKO, New York
EARL L. ``BUDDY'' CARTER, Georgia    YVETTE D. CLARKE, New York
JEFF DUNCAN, South Carolina          TONY CARDENAS, California
GARY J. PALMER, Alabama              RAUL RUIZ, California
NEAL P. DUNN, Florida                SCOTT H. PETERS, California
JOHN R. CURTIS, Utah                 DEBBIE DINGELL, Michigan
DEBBBIE LESKO, Arizona               MARC A. VEASEY, Texas
GREG PENCE, Indiana                  ANN M. KUSTER, New Hampshire
DAN CRENSHAW, Texas                  ROBIN L. KELLY, Illinois
JOHN JOYCE, Pennsylvania             NANETTE DIAZ BARRAGAN, California
KELLY ARMSTRONG, North Dakota, Vice  LISA BLUNT ROCHESTER, Delaware
Chair                            DARREN SOTO, Florida
RANDY K. WEBER, Sr., Texas           ANGIE CRAIG, Minnesota
RICK W. ALLEN, Georgia               KIM SCHRIER, Washington
TROY BALDERSON, Ohio                 LORI TRAHAN, Massachusetts
RUSS FULCHER, Idaho                  LIZZIE FLETCHER, Texas
AUGUST PFLUGER, Texas
DIANA HARSHBARGER, Tennessee
MARIANNETTE MILLER-MEEKS, Iowa
KAT CAMMACK, Florida
JAY OBERNOLTE, California
------

Professional Staff

NATE HODSON, Staff Director
SARAH BURKE, Deputy Staff Director
TIFFANY GUARASCIO, Minority Staff Director
Subcommittee on Energy, Climate, and Grid Security

JEFF DUNCAN, South Carolina
Chairman
MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas            DIANA DeGETTE, Colorado
ROBERT E. LATTA, Ohio                  Ranking Member
BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky              SCOTT H. PETERS, California
H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia         LIZZIE FLETCHER, Texas
BILL JOHNSON, Ohio                   DORIS O. MATSUI, California
LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana               PAUL TONKO, New York
TIM WALBERG, Michigan                MARC A. VEASEY, Texas
GARY J. PALMER, Alabama              ANN M. KUSTER, New Hampshire
JOHN R. CURTIS, Utah, Vice Chair     KIM SCHRIER, Washington
DEBBIE LESKO, Arizona                KATHY CASTOR, Florida
GREG PENCE, Indiana                  JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland
KELLY ARMSTRONG, North Dakota        TONY CARDENAS, California
RANDY K. WEBER, Sr., Texas           LISA BLUNT ROCHESTER, Delaware
TROY BALDERSON, Ohio                 FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey (ex
AUGUST PFLUGER, Texas                    officio)
CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington
(ex officio)
C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hon. Jeff Duncan, a Representative in Congress from the State of
South Carolina, opening statement..............................     2
Prepared statement...........................................     4
Hon. Diana DeGette, a Representative in Congress from the State
of Colorado, opening statement.................................     7
Prepared statement...........................................     9
Hon. Cathy McMorris Rodgers, a Representative in Congress from
the State of Washington, opening statement.....................    11
Prepared statement...........................................    13
Hon. Frank Pallone, Jr., a Representative in Congress from the
State of New Jersey, opening statement.........................    16
Prepared statement...........................................    18

Witnesses

Willie Phillips, Chairman, Federal Energy Regulatory Commission..    20
Prepared statement...........................................    22
Answers to submitted questions...............................   147
James P. Danly, Commissioner, Federal Energy Regulatory
Commission.....................................................    27
Prepared statement...........................................    29
Answers to submitted questions\1\
Allison Clements, Commissioner, Federal Energy Regulatory
Commission.....................................................    35
Prepared statement...........................................    37
Answers to submitted questions...............................   156
Mark C. Christie, Commissioner, Federal Energy Regulatory
Commission.....................................................    43
Prepared statement...........................................    45
Answers to submitted questions...............................   157

Submitted Material

Inclusion of the following was approved by unanimous consent.
List of documents submitted for the record.......................   100
Letter of June 12, 2023, from Paul N. Cicio, Chair, Electricity
Transmission Competition Coalition, to Mr. Duncan and Ms.
DeGette........................................................   101
Report by the North American Electric Reliability Corporation,
``2023 Summer Reliability Assessment,'' May 2023 \2\
Report by PJM, ``Energy Transition in PJM: Resource Retirements,
Replacements & Risks,'' February 24, 2023 \2\
Report by the North American Electric Reliability Corporation,
``2022 Long-Term Reliability Assessment,'' December 2022.......   105
Report by GE Energy Consulting, ``Economic, Reliability, and
Resiliency Benefits of Interregional Transmission Capacity:
Case Study Focusing on the Eastern United States in 2035,''
2023 \2\

----------

\1\ Mr. Danly's answers to submitted questions have been retained in
committee files and are available at https://docs.house.gov/meetings/
IF/IF03/20230613/116094/HHRG-118-IF03-Wstate-DanlyJ-20230613-SD001.pdf.
\2\ The report has been retained in committee files and is included in
the Documents for the Record at https://docs.house.gov/meetings/IF/
IF03/20230613/116094/HHRG-118-IF03-20230613-SD055.pdf.
Fact sheet, ``The Latest Market Data Show that the Potential
Savings of New Electric Transmission was Higher Last Year than
at Any Point in the Last Decade,'' by Dev Millstein, et al.,
Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, February 2023...........   114
Draft, ``National Transmission Needs Study,'' Department of
Energy, February 2023 \2\
Study, ``Transmission Makes the Power System Resilient to Extreme
Weather,'' by Michael Goggin, Grid Strategies LLC, July 2021
\2\
Study, ``The Value of Transmission During Winter Storm Elliott,''
by Michael Goggin and Zachary Zimmerman, Grid Strategies LLC,
February 2023..................................................   121
Study, ``The Value of Increased HVDC Capacity Between Eastern and
Western U.S. Grids: The Interconnections Seam Study,'' by Aaron
Bloom, et al., IEEE, May 2022..................................   132
Article of May 10, 2023, ``Expensive energy may have killed more
Europeans than covid-19 last winter,'' The Economist...........   142
Letter of October 21, 2022, from Senator James E. Risch, et al.,
to Richard Glick, Chairman, Federal Energy Regulatory
Commission, et al..............................................   145

----------

\2\ The information has been retained in committee files and is
included in the Documents for the Record at https://docs.house.gov/
meetings/IF/IF03/20230613/116094/HHRG-118-IF03-20230613-SD055.pdf.

OVERSIGHT OF FERC: ADHERING TO A MISSION OF AFFORDABLE AND RELIABLE
ENERGY FOR AMERICA

----------

TUESDAY, JUNE 13, 2023

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Energy, Climate, and Grid Security,
Committee on Energy and Commerce,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 10:00 a.m., in
the John D. Dingell Room 2123, Rayburn House Office Building,
Hon. Jeff Duncan (chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Members present: Representatives Duncan, Burgess, Latta,
Guthrie, Griffith, Johnson, Bucshon, Walberg, Palmer, Curtis,
Lesko, Pence, Armstrong, Weber, Balderson, Pfluger, Rodgers (ex
officio), DeGette (subcommittee ranking member), Peters,
Fletcher, Matsui, Tonko, Veasey, Kuster, Schrier, Castor,
Sarbanes, Cardenas, and Pallone (ex officio).
Also present: Representatives Carter, Allen, and Fulcher.
Staff present: Kate Arey, Digital Director; Sarah Burke,
Deputy Staff Director; Sydney Greene, Director of Operations;
Jack Heretik, Press Secretary; Nate Hodson, Staff Director;
Tara Hupman, Chief Counsel; Patrick Kelly, Staff Assistant;
Sean Kelly, Press Secretary; Peter Kielty, General Counsel;
Emily King, Member Services Director; Elise Krekorian,
Professional Staff Member; Mary Martin, Chief Counsel; Jacob
McCurdy, Professional Staff Member; Brandon Mooney, Deputy
Chief Counsel; Kaitlyn Peterson, Clerk; Karli Plucker, Director
of Operations (shared staff); Carla Rafael, Senior Staff
Assistant; Emma Schultheis, Staff Assistant; Michael Taggart,
Policy Director; Dray Thorne, Director of Information
Technology; Waverly Gordon, Minority Deputy Staff Director and
General Counsel; Tiffany Guarascio, Minority Staff Director;
Kris Pittard, Minority Professional Staff Member; Kylea Rogers,
Minority Policy Analyst; Medha Surampudy, Minority Professional
Staff Member; and Tuley Wright, Minority Staff Director,
Energy, Climate, and Grid Security.
Mr. Duncan. The Subcommittee on Energy, Climate, and Grid
Security will now come to order.
The Chair will now recognize himself for 5 minutes for an
opening statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. JEFF DUNCAN, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF SOUTH CAROLINA

And I want to thank you all for being here today for this
oversight hearing with the Federal Energy Regulatory
Commission. I appreciate all four Commissioners being here, and
welcome to the committee.
FERC is a critical agency that plays a significant role in
ensuring Americans have access to affordable, reliable supplies
of energy. First, I'd like to commend Chairman Phillips for
resetting the priorities of the Commission to focus on
affordability and reliability. You have moved forward some
critical natural gas projects and are vocal about the negative
effects of high energy prices on consumers and our
constituents. The committee appreciates your work in this
regard.
The Commission, however, needs to do more to ensure the
affordability and reliability of our energy system. It can do
this by adhering to its core statutes governing its authorities
under the Natural Gas Act and the Federal Power Act. We are far
from achieving the goals set forth in these core statutes. The
past 2 years under the Biden administration has severely
weakened our energy security. Prices have skyrocketed and
reliability has degraded. American consumers are paying more
for less energy.
I urge the Commission to return to its core mission to
provide for the orderly development of supplies of electricity
and natural gas at just and reasonable rates. This must be the
Commission's primary focus. Too many on the left want the
Commission to become an environmental regulator. The
Commission's primary authority is as an economic regulator. The
energy industry and the American people rely on timely issuance
of orders from FERC to help develop our energy infrastructure
to the benefit of secure and affordable American energy.
Just last week, the Subcommittee on Environment,
Manufacturing, and Critical Minerals held a hearing on the
negative effects of the EPA's rule regulating the electric
generation sector will have an affordability and reliability.
The Commission must do more to resist such regulations that run
contrary to its core mission.
Electrical reliability has significantly degraded over the
past few years. Blackouts and energy rationing are now
commonplace in the wholesale electricity markets like
California and Texas. The Nation's largest grid operator, the
PJM Interconnection, issued a dire warning earlier this year
that it may face significant capacity shortfalls because of, in
large part, rules like the EPA has proposed. The Northern
American Electric Reliability Corporation, NERC, also issued a
stark warning last month that the vast majority of the country
faces potential for insufficient operating reserves and above-
normal demand conditions.
This is not happening by accident. It is not happening
solely because of extreme weather or a lack of sufficient
interregional transmission capacity. It is largely happening
because too much dispatchable firm generation has retired from
the bulk power system. These retirements are caused by
unrealistic environmental policies like the EPA regulations and
private-sector environmental, social, and governance goals as
well as market frameworks that do not properly value firm
generation. Addressing this is a top priority for this
subcommittee, and it should be for the Commission as well.
In February of last year under different leadership, the
Commission issued two natural gas policy statements that had a
chilling effect on private investment and natural gas
infrastructure. It should come as no surprise that, according
to the Energy Information Administration, in 2022 we added the
least amount of interstate natural gas pipeline capacity on
record since the EIA began tracking that metric. The Commission
must withdraw these policy statements to grant certainty of the
natural gas infrastructure developers.
I would like to commend the Commission for undertaking a
proceeding to modernize wholesale electric market design. FERC
has encouraged the development of such markets for over two
decades. The bulk power system has changed drastically since,
and FERC must do more to ensure that these markets work for the
American consumer. I encourage the Commission to take a serious
look at how these markets have affected the development of
natural gas-fired generation and nuclear generation. These two
resources are critical to ensuring the reliability and
affordability of our energy system.
We have seen too much of this firm baseload generation
prematurely retire from the grid over the past decade. FERC has
the authority to act and ensure resources like these are
appropriately compensated for the service they provide to the
grid. So I urge the Commission to do just that, and I want to
thank Chair Rodgers for allowing us to have this FERC oversight
hearing. I look forward to the conversation today from each
Commissioner and the Members here.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Duncan follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Duncan. And with that, I will yield to the ranking
member for her opening statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. DIANA DeGETTE, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF COLORADO

Ms. DeGette. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
First, I would like to take a moment of personal privilege
and congratulate the world champion Denver Nuggets. As a--I see
some of my constituents in the audience cheering. But as a
fourth-generation Denverite, we have been waiting a long, long
time for this victory.
I also--now turning to serious business, I want to thank
you, Chairman Duncan, and you--and to the other Commissioners
for being here today. The work that FERC does each and every
day is really important to our overall energy system.
It is the body responsible for overseeing the flow and
transmission of oil, gas, and electricity across State lines.
It is the body charged with greenlighting new pipelines,
hydropower projects, and LNG terminals throughout the country.
It is the agency that can bring our Nation's energy system into
the 21st century, help lead our clean energy transition, and
take on the climate crisis head on, all the while ensuring that
Americans maintain access to the affordable, reliable
electricity that they need. And that is why FERC is so
important. And, Mr. Chairman, I am glad that we are having this
hearing today.
As our Nation's demand for energy increases in the coming
decades, as is expected to do, so must our ability to transmit
that energy efficiently and effectively across the country.
Since the transmission of energy is one of the most important
facets of our Nation's overall energy system, one of the most
important things that FERC can do right now is to help us
modernize the grid to facilitate the deployment of transmission
lines as needed throughout the United States. And everybody
here knows that.
FERC has done the work, the research, the studies, and
analysis. You know the regional and interregional issues that
have to be addressed to increase our transmission capabilities
as we make the clean energy transmission--transition. And that
is why FERC is already taking the steps to address several
much-needed transmission reforms that are necessary to ensure
that all Americans continue to have access to the reliable
electricity they need.
It is working to create a long-term regional transportation
planning process. It is implementing new backstop transmission
siting reforms included in the Bipartisan Infrastructure Law.
And it is working to reform the interconnection process to help
get electricity generation projects online faster and to ensure
that financed and shovel-ready projects are no longer allowed
to languish. And I applaud FERC for these efforts. I urge the
speedy completion of all of the rulemaking efforts.
But let me be clear about one other thing: The
interregional transfer capacity--capability study that was
required by the debt limit deal 2 weeks ago in no way prohibits
FERC from completing any of these rules. It is not a stop to
any of these rules or from working on interregional
transmission or minimum transfer capabilities.
And so delaying any potential actions by FERC or NERC was
not the congressional intent of that study and is not the
congressional intent of that study and should not be construed
as such. The timelines as laid out in the debt limit deal are
maximums, not minimums, and I hope that we get some information
from that study, but it should not be a block to the efforts
that we need to do to expanded transmissibility.
I am going to encourage both FERC and NERC to comply with
the requirements under the law in an expeditious manner,
because if we as a nation are going to be successful in making
the transition to clean energy, the work that FERC is doing to
utilize grid-enhancing technologies like dynamic line ratings
is more important than ever. We must build out our transmission
capability in this country, and we need to take steps now to
modernize our grid to get more electricity out of our existing
infrastructure.
I would encourage the Commission to continue advancing
these important technologies. And I want to encourage it to do
so in a way that addresses environmental justice. It is no
secret that our energy system and the pollution it creates
disproportionately impact low-income and disadvantaged
communities. As we continue to develop energy infrastructure,
we must do so in a way that fully incorporates the voice of
those directly impacted by energy infrastructure and its
pollution.
Just last week, Ranking Member Pallone and I sent a letter
to Chair Phillips urging FERC to incorporate environmental
justice into its decision-making process. Let's bring our
energy grid into the 21st century, and let's make sure we are
doing so in a way that doesn't ignore the most vulnerable among
us.
So, again, I want to thank everybody, and particularly all
the Commissioners, for being here, and I yield back.
[The prepared statement of Ms. DeGette follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Duncan. I thank the gentlelady, and I will now--it is
my honor to recognize the Chair of the full Committee on Energy
and Commerce, Mrs. McMorris Rodgers, for 5 minutes for an
opening statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, A
REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF WASHINGTON

Mrs. Rodgers. Thank you, Chairman Duncan, and thank you,
Chairman Phillips and the Commissioners from FERC, for being
here today. This is a very important hearing, and FERC has a
very important role to play to ensure affordable and reliable
energy for America's economic and national security. I look
forward to hearing from each of you today as we examine FERC's
mission, its authorities under the Federal Power Act, the
Natural Gas Act, and other statutes passed by Congress, and its
performances over the past year.
As Chairman Duncan said, energy reliability and
affordability are two of the top pillars of your
congressionally mandated mission. I believe that you have done
a good job on steps to reset the priorities of FERC, but more
is needed. Through its authorities to regulate energy, natural
gas, and electricity, FERC touches 7 percent of our economy.
Without affordable and reliable energy, our economic and
national security are at risk.
We have witnessed this over the past 2 years through
President Biden's damaging energy policies. Recent energy
blackouts and rationing as well as increased prices have harmed
American families and our industrial base, and we cannot allow
this to continue. FERC plays an important role in ensuring
energy costs are affordable for people. And that is why the
Commission must return to its core mission of facilitating the
delivery of abundant, affordable energy resources like natural
gas and electricity to Americans.
FERC must resist calls by the radical left to circumvent
the Commission's mandated priorities. These calls have upended
the Nation's energy sector. E&C Republicans have sent several
letters highlighting our concerns with FERC's current
environmental overreach in the recent proposed rulemaking
implementing its electric transmission siting authorities. We
have inquired as to how FERC plans to implement the latest
guidance from the Council on Environmental Quality, CEQ, which,
if implemented, would significantly shift FERC's mission as an
economic relater--regulator to an environmental regulator.
FERC should be working to ensure that reliable,
dispatchable supplies of energy are properly valued in
wholesale electricity markets, issue timely decisions on
interstate and natural gas facilities and liquefied natural gas
terminals, and grant certainty to hydroelectric power and
electric transmission developers. If FERC sticks to these core
functions, energy prices will decrease and reliability will
improve.
Last week we heard from expert witnesses regarding how the
Biden administration's new EPA regulations will weaken and harm
our electric power sector, especially coal- and natural-gas-
fired generators. This new suite of environmental red tape
comes despite significant energy cap--capacity shortfalls
across the country. Nearly every grid operator across the
country has warned it is facing an energy adequacy crisis which
will continue into the near future. We can reverse this trend
if we commit to energy expansion.
Chairman Phillips, at a recent conference you noted that
``building things like new energy infrastructure is something
we can--we are all in agreement on.'' I could not agree more.
And we are committed to building more nuclear, more natural gas
pipelines, more wind, more electric--hydroelectric power.
America's electrical grid keeps our hospitals, military
bases, homes, and businesses powered. Its security and
reliability are critical to keeping people safe and our economy
moving. An American energy expansion will lead to a more
reliable grid and reverse the reliability crisis that currently
looms over our energy sector.
In addition, FERC also has significant authority to license
and permit hydropower infrastructure. Waterpower is vital for a
secure, affordable energy future. It has been critical for grid
reliability and economic development in my home State of
Washington.
Just yesterday, I introduced a hydropower licensing reform
bill which includes significant reforms to the burdensome
hydropower licensing process, which currently takes a
considerable amount of time and investment. A recent DOE report
found that it takes on average 5 years to obtain the original
license, 7.6 years for relicensing, and some complex projects
can take more than a decade. These timelines are unacceptable.
America has been blessed with an abundance of natural
resources, and we are the best stewards of them. It is critical
that we foster these resources so Americans have access to
reliable, affordable clean energy. It powers our way of life.
It is foundational for human prosperity and flourishing.
So welcome again to FERC, the Chairman, the Commissioners.
I thank you for being here, and I look forward to your
testimony.
[The prepared statement of Mrs. Rodgers follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mrs. Rodgers. I yield back.
Mr. Duncan. I thank The Chair, and I will now recognize the
ranking member of the full committee, Mr. Pallone, for 5
minutes.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. FRANK PALLONE, Jr., A REPRESENTATIVE
IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF NEW JERSEY

Mr. Pallone. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I thank each of
the Commissioners for being here today and for their important
work at the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission.
It is unfortunate that the Commission only has four
Commissioners right now. I believe FERC is at its best when it
has a full complement of five Commissioners, and I was
disappointed that the Senate was unable to confirm former Chair
Richard Glick to another term on the Commission last year. I
urge the White House to nominate a fifth Commissioner and for
the Senate to confirm that nominee as soon as possible.
FERC's work is vital in ensuring that every American has
access to reliable and affordable energy. The Commission's
activities also have an outsized impact in the communities that
play host to natural gas pipelines it authorizes and hydropower
dams that it licenses. In particular, natural gas pipeline
projects impact both the local environments that they run
through and the national environment with the greenhouse gas
emissions that they emit.
And that is why Ranking Member DeGette and I wrote to
Chairman Phillips last week, as she mentioned, urging that FERC
incorporate environmental justice principles into its decision
making. Under the leadership of Chairman Phillips and former
Chairman Glick, the Commission has already taken a number of
vital steps on environmental justice, and the Commission has
issued its first-ever equity action plan and finally
established its Office of Public Participation, something I
have long advocated. And these are important first steps, but
additional action is necessary.
Last year, FERC issued two important policy statements that
would guide its authorizations of natural gas projects. The
first statement would have created a new framework to help
guide the Commission in determining whether or not a project is
in the public convenience as required by the Natural Gas Act,
and the second would have clarified how FERC access--or
assesses the impacts of greenhouse gasses emitted as a result
of a potential natural gas pipeline. And I was pleased by both
of these policy statements but was disappointed when they were
downgraded to draft status a year ago and that the Commission
has yet to return to them.
Now, I want to be clear: FERC must consider environmental
justice factors when making its public convenience
determinations under the Natural Gas Act. Furthermore,
greenhouse gas emissions and, critically, the consequences from
these emissions are absolutely reasonably foreseeable
environmental effects under the National Environmental Policy
Act. The DC Circuit made this clear 2 years ago in its decision
in Vecinos v. FERC.
Now, downgrading the policy statements to draft status does
nothing to relieve FERC of its obligations under the Natural
Gas Act or NEPA. However, the policy statements did offer much-
needed clarity on how the Commission would consider those
issues, clarity that has now been stripped away, leaving
communities and industry in the dark. So I urge all of you to
act on finalizing the two policy statements as soon as
possible.
Now, turning to electricity markets, it has been roughly 25
years since FERC issued Order 888 to bring competition to
electricity markets across the country. And I was skeptical at
first, but the developments of the last 25 years have made
clear that power markets have promoted competition that has
lowered prices and made the grid cleaner, all while ensuring a
reliable bulk power sector. So to be sure, there are issues,
especially at PJM, the electricity market that covers my State
and several other mid-Atlantic States, but in looking at
reforms to keep these markets viable and reliable, we should
not throw out the progress we have made in lowering costs for
consumers. A competitive electricity market has typically been
a bipartisan issue in Congress and at FERC, and I hope that
that continues.
And, finally, I want to briefly address the three key
proposed rulemakings on transmission that are outstanding at
FERC. These rulemakings will be vital to electricity
reliability over the next decade as we work to move clean
energy generation from sunny and windy areas to population
centers, and I urge FERC to finalize strong versions of all
three rules promptly.
Today we are going to hear about the reliability challenges
our Nation is facing, largely caused by extreme weather events
fueled by the worsening climate crisis. But if we want to be
serious about addressing reliability issues, then we should be
serious about having a more interconnected grid. This will
ensure that different parts of the country not in a crisis at a
given time can help by sending power to regions that are
struggling. An interconnected grid will result in better
reliability, increased affordability, and access to cleaner
electricity.
So that is an across-the-board win for Americans, and I
expect that FERC will do its part to ensure that our Nation's
grids are sufficiently connected.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Pallone follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Pallone. And with that, I look forward to this hearing
and yield back, Mr. Chairman, the balance of my time. Thank
you.
Mr. Duncan. The gentleman yields back. We now conclude with
the Member opening statements. The Chair would like to remind
Members that, pursuant to the committee rules, all Members'
opening statements will be made part of the record.
And so now we will go to the FERC Commissioners, and we
want to thank all of them for being here today and taking time
to testify before the subcommittee. Each witness will have the
opportunity to give a 5-minute opening statement followed by a
round of questions from the Members. There's lights in front of
you. If it goes to yellow, that means about time to wrap up.
Red means conclude.
And our witnesses today are Chairman Willie Phillips,
Commissioner--he is the Chairman of the FERC--Commissioner
James Danly, Commissioner Allison Clements, and Commissioner
Mark Christie.
Mr. Chairman, we appreciate you being here today. We will
now recognize Chairman Phillips for 5 minutes for an opening
statement.

STATEMENTS OF WILLIE PHILLIPS, CHAIRMAN, AND JAMES P. DANLY,
ALLISON CLEMENTS, AND MARK C. CHRISTIE, COMMISSIONERS, FEDERAL
REGULATORY COMMISSION

STATEMENT OF WILLIE PHILLIPS

Mr. Phillips. Chairman Duncan, Ranking Member DeGette,
Chair Rodgers, and Ranking Member Pallone, and members of the
subcommittee, thank you for inviting us to testify here today
about the important work that we do on behalf of the American
people.
The Commission's jurisdiction is broad. Pursuant to the
FPA, the NGA, and the ICA, and other statutes, it is our
responsibility to ensure that rates for the wholesale sale and
transmission of electricity as well as the transportation of
oil and natural gas by pipeline are just and reasonable. In
addition, we are responsible for ensuring that the Nation's
bulk power system remains reliable. And last, but by no means
least, we are also responsible for siting vital energy
infrastructure, including natural gas pipelines as well as LNG,
hydro, and electric transmission facilities.
By exercising these authorities in a prudent and
responsible manner, the Commission can help ensure that our
country produces energy that is reliable, affordable, and
sustainable.
Earlier this year, President Biden designated me as
Chairman of the Commission, and it is an honor to appear before
you the first time in that capacity. In January, at my first
open meeting, I laid out three principal priorities. They were
reliability, transmission reform, and environmental justice. I
am happy to report that in just a few months we have made
significant progress on all three fronts.
I will begin with reliability because it is and always must
be job number one. We face unprecedented challenges to the
reliability of our Nation's electric system. Foreign and
domestic actors are testing our cyber defenses every day.
Physical threats to the grid are on the rise, and extreme
weather of all kinds are threatening power to customers across
the country.
That is why under my leadership the Commission has taken at
least one major action to promote reliability every month since
I became Chairman. The Commission has directed NERC to develop
enhanced cybersecurity standards regarding internal network
security protocols. We approved enhancements to a series of
winter preparedness measures. We established incentives to
reward cybersecurity investments. And just last month we issued
an order focused on inverter-based resources, or IBRs. These
actions represent the blocking and tackling that is absolutely
necessary to ensure that our electric grid remains secure,
reliable, and resilient.
My second priority, electric transmission reform, is itself
a reliability imperative. Transmission plays a critical role in
ensuring the electric system remains reliable while also
facilitating the interconnection of new resources. And
transmission enables us to further increase our energy security
and strengthen our Nation's grid.
To those ends, we are working as quickly as possible on a
number of important rulemakings. First, my highest priority in
the near term is interconnection queue reform. We are also
working to finalize regional transmission planning and cost
allocation, and we are working to finalize our new backstop
siting authority. It is my hope that collectively these
measures will represent the Commission's most significant
action to promote the development of needed electric
transmission in at least a generation.
My third priority is environmental justice, and this one is
personal. I grew up in an environmental justice community in
Alabama. I know well the significant impact that these heavy
industrial communities face. But I have also seen the benefits
that investment can provide to historically underserved
communities in the form of jobs, tax revenue, and community
benefits. Having seen both sides, it is my goal as Chairman to
do all that we reasonably can to ensure that environmental
justice communities do not bear too great a share of the
burdens or too small a share of the benefits that new energy
infrastructure can provide.
Here too we have made strides. In March, we hired a new
senior counsel for environmental justice and equity, and later
that month we held the first-ever roundtable on environmental
justice and equity in infrastructure permitting.
And finally on that point, I would be remiss not to mention
the significant strides we have made with respect to
permitting. Our country urgently needs energy infrastructure of
all kinds. As Russia's war in Ukraine has made clear, energy
infrastructure is essential to any country's national security.
What we as a nation must do is make sure that we bring abundant
energy resources online and deliver it to our customers. I am
proud of the steps that we have taken to streamline our
permitting processes.
I thank you again for the opportunity to be here, and I
look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Phillips follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Duncan. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I will now recognize
Commissioner Danly for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF JAMES P. DANLY

Mr. Danly. Chairman Duncan, Ranking Member DeGette, members
of the subcommittee, it is a pleasure to be here.
So the United States is heading towards a reliability
crisis in our electric markets. This reliability crisis is
being driven by two primary factors. The first is the effective
subsidies, and the second is the Commission's let's call it
abandonment of its longstanding commitment to rule of law.
The subsidies that are both State and Federal have the
effect of skewing market prices. The purpose of these markets
is to ensure the least cost dispatch of the generation
available to make sure that the rates are as low as possible
within the physical constraints of the electric system and to
send the price signals necessary to incentivize the investment
to ensure that there is adequate capacity to serve load over
the long haul. When you have the number and quantity of
subsidies that we currently have available, the generators of
certain types, specifically for intermittent wind and solar
primarily, those price signals get warped.
When FERC abandons its, as I said, longstanding commitment
to the rule of law, primarily removing the guardrails for
ensuring that price formation can happen absent the effects of
the price-warping effects of those subsidies, we find that
there is no ability to accurately price new entry to the
market, and it--and the markets fail to retain the needed
existing generation that have the attributes necessary to keep
the system stable.
So--and this, as I say, has been partially FERC's fault
because we have approved various orders like that, getting rid
of the minimum price rule which ensured that generators
actually had to bid in their actual costs. This is a problem
because in the market areas, the old system of vertically
integrated utilities in which a public utility commission and
the State authorities would oversee the integrated resource
plans that ensured that there was sufficient capacity, the
right type to meet load. Those States have, for the most part,
seeded resource adequacy as a duty to the markets, and if the
market's price signals aren't correct, then that sole backstop
to ensure that there is sufficient capacity is not going to
function as intended.
We have seen the effects of this. Our markets have been
warning us now for years. In the case of PJM, very recently
they have raised the hue and cry. And to give you a clear
indication of how we know that the markets are failing to send
correct price signals despite the fact that PJM is right now
warning us that there is an impending shortfall of capacity, in
the last capacity auction, prices went down. So anybody who
understands basic economics knows that in times of scarcity,
prices are supposed to rise.
There has been a--there has been this move afoot in which
the markets have become something closer to a mechanism by
which to harvest these subsidies rather than what they were
intended to do, which is ensure least cost dispatch of
available resources and to incentivize new investment. And the
largest barrier at the moment to the harvesting of those
subsidies is the physical interconnection of what are typically
remotely located resources to the markets. You can't get, for
example, the production tax credit if you aren't connected to a
market and you don't sell.
And so there has been this concomitant effort to either
mandate or speed the development of transmission specifically
for the purpose of ensuring that, let's say, the asset managers
that have ownership stakes in these renewable resources that
are being developed have access to their revenue stream through
building the transmission to get access to the market so that
they can then get the subsidies.
The--it would be a shame if we removed and socialized the
cost of the development of this transmission because, at the
moment, at any rate, the cost of interconnecting to the
electric system is one of the few disciplining factors
remaining in the development of infrastructure. And at the
moment, what's happening is we are sending price signals in
which renewables bid into the capacity markets at a price of
zero, sending the message that electricity costs zero, which,
of course, it doesn't. And if we then socialize the cost of the
transmission to get those resources connected to the bulk
electric system, then we are going to send a further signal
that the transmission costs less than it actually does.
If we are going to set up an electric system in which the
success or failure of a generation asset relies not upon the
efficiency with which it is run or the cost of the fuel, let's
say, that powers it but instead the availability of subsidies,
then one questions whether or not we need to have markets at
all since the markets' very premise is being undermined by all
of these let's call them adjacent public policies.
I would urge everybody when having these discussions about
transmission and about reform of permitting to understand that
the question of cost allocation for transmission and the
question of permitting reform are completely separate and
distinct. Permitting reform has to do with the mechanisms by
which government makes decisions for whether or not a project
that is proposed gets approval and the means by which that
approval occurs. Cost allocation is something completely
different. That has to do with who bears the cost of a
particular asset that is being developed over the period of its
useful life.
So I see--I apologize, I ran over time there. Those are the
main issues I want to press upon the subcommittee's attention
and understand that we are headed for--toward resource adequacy
failure in the near future. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Danly follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Duncan. Thank you. I will now go to Commissioner
Clements for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF ALLISON CLEMENTS

Ms. Clements. Chairman Duncan, Ranking Member DeGette, and
members of the committee, thank you for having us here this
morning.
Our energy system has always been the backbone of the U.S.
economy and continues to provide the basis for our Nation's
global economic success and security. In the past decades, we
have seen that system grow, change, develop to meet the needs
and expectations of the American people and markets. And in
this important moment, that system is again at a crossroad.
We face new extreme weather challenges. We are also living
with new geopolitical and economic realities: Russia's war in
Ukraine, economywide inflation, and evolving cyber and physical
threats to the grid. At FERC, as you all have mentioned, our
plain responsibility is to work towards reliable and affordable
energy for all Americans in the face of these challenges.
Today I will take a moment to highlight some of the actions
we have been taking to improve reliability and affordability.
First, FERC has actively been responding to the changing needs
of the grid in the face of extreme weather events. We must do
all we can to avoid costly, devastating outages like those
experienced during Winter Storm Uri and Winter Storm Elliott
when Americans needed the system to work the most.
Since Winter Storm Uri, FERC has made progress on several
recommendations, including the issuance of new cold weather
reliability standards to address one of the key issues that was
experienced during the storms. I am also looking forward to an
upcoming report from FERC staff about Winter Storm Elliott that
may spur additional action.
Second, FERC is taking a regional approach to these
concerns. Later this week, we will be hosting a forum to
examine reforms that are needed to PJM's wholesale markets.
Next week, FERC will be hosting its second New England Winter
Reliability Gas Electric Forum to address the threats the
region may face over the next few winters and in the longer
term.
Third, FERC has been considering reforms that directly
impact consumer costs, including at our cost management
conference last year and in comments submitted in that docket.
As we anticipate increasing levels of transmission investment
in the next decade and beyond, which has required whatever kind
of resources are hooking up to the grid if this country wants
to maintain its place as an international superpower. It is
important that somebody, FERC, is minding the store on behalf
of consumers.
Fourth, I want to highlight FERC's outstanding notices that
some of you have mentioned on transmission proposed--excuse
me--proposals on transmission and interconnection reform. A
major regional transmission line can increase reliability and
decrease customer cost in a whole host of ways. And it is
equally important that new resources of any type are
interconnected to the system in a timely and cost-efficient
manner to reduce customer cost.
These two bipartisan proposals that the Commission has put
forth take important first steps to reduce customer cost and
give them the most bang for their buck by optimizing our
investments. Moreover, we are considering opportunities for
establishing a minimum interregional transfer capability
requirement and for encouraging the use of grid-enhancing
technologies which can increase the efficiency of our existing
system at modest cost. We continue to scrutinize rates for
transmission and pipeline services, and we continue our
critical work to assess the public need for and impacts of
natural gas pipelines and LNG infrastructure.
The work that FERC does is complex and challenging, and we
rely on the participation of a broad variety of stakeholders.
In particular, it is critical to engage early and effectively
with frontline and fence-line environmental justice
communities, both to minimize and avoid impacts on those
communities when possible and also to avoid the time and risk
with potential litigation challenging the Commission's
decisions.
I want to end with a note of praise for our new Office of
Public Participation that Chairman Pallone mentioned. It has
been a resource around the country by facilitating public
involvement in our proceedings. Better participation leads to
stronger decisions and more lasting outcomes. It remains my
honor and privilege to serve the American people, and I am
pleased to answer any questions you may have. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Clements follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Duncan. Thank you. I will now recognize Commissioner
Christie for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF MARK C. CHRISTIE

Mr. Christie. Thank you, Chairman Duncan, Ranking Member
DeGette, members of the subcommittee. I appreciate the
opportunity to be here with my colleagues from FERC and speak
to you.
Your focus is reliability, and I am going to speak to
reliability. I think we are heading for potentially very dire
consequences, potentially catastrophic consequences, in the
United States in terms of the reliability of our grid, and I
think that the basic reason is we are facing a shortfall of
power supply. You know, the term we use is resource adequacy,
but what we are really talking about is potentially a shortfall
in power supply.
You have to remember about the grid, the grid has to have
power being fed into it every second of every minute of every
hour of every day to keep the lights on. It--you can't store it
up and bring it out the next day. So because of that, you have
to have a power supply that is feeding into the grid on a
continuous basis. We can't tolerate shortages, because
shortages means the lights go out.
So what is going on now and what is the threat to
reliability? In summary, what the threat is is this: We are
facing cascading retirements of dispatchable resources,
specifically coal and to a lesser extent gas. And the problem
with losing that many dispatchable resources is you are losing
the supply that is going to keep the lights on. And the problem
is not the addition of wind and solar, really the problem is
subtraction of coal and gas and other dispatchable resources,
which are the ones that we need during this transition to keep
the lights on. That is the fundamental problem.
This is not just Mark Christie saying this. We have been
warned repeatedly from NERC, the reliability experts for the
country, that this is exactly what is going on. We are losing
dispatchable resources at a pace that is unsustainable for
keeping the lights on. NERC has been telling this--us this over
and over and over.
We are hearing it from the major RTOs: PJM, which is the
largest RTO in terms of consumers serviced; MISO, which is the
largest RTO in terms of geography, it covers the Midwest and
parts of the Southeast. We just heard it last week from New
York system operator, the New York ISO. All the same message:
We are losing dispatchable resources at a pace that we can't
keep the lights on if we continue to do this. And so that is
the fundamental problem that we are facing that threatens
reliability.
So what are the two reason--I will give you two reasons why
this is happening, because I always get asked why is this
happening. Well, first of all, it is happening in both the RTOs
and the non-RTOs. This is not a uniquely RTO problem. Now in
the RTOs, it is a problem of market design. It is a problem in
which the resources that are retiring--and a lot of them are
retiring prematurely, and by prematurely what I mean is they
have--these units have many years of useful life remaining that
they are retiring. And it is a problem of market design in the
RTOs. They are simply not getting the compensation that it
takes to keep units open, keep units operating.
In the non-RTOs, it is largely a problem of the IRPs of the
utilities are taking these units out and retiring them
prematurely. It is sort of a self-correcting problem in the
non-RTO States because in the non-RTO States there are State
regulators who are supposed to be looking at this and watching
this and supervising these IRPs.
The second reason we are seeing these premature
retirements--and particularly we are talking gas. I'm going to
focus on gas. Gas has become an increasingly more important
dispatchable resource as we increase the percentage of wind and
solar in the grid because wind and solar are intermittent, as
everyone knows. And so you have to have, you know, a
dispatchable backup, and gas has become the dispatchable
resource of choice.
But for gas to run, gas has to have supply. It has to have
the supply of the fuel, and that takes transportation, and that
means pipelines have to be built, and there's a lot of people
that don't want to build pipelines. Pipelines are--there is a
national legal campaign to try to keep pipelines from being
built. But the only way you can have backup gas that provides
the power when wind and solar are not generating is you have to
have gas units that have sufficient supply. And just last
winter in Winter Storm Elliott, at PJM we had a lot of gas
units didn't run. One of the reason was a lot of them didn't
have firm supply. They couldn't get the fuel. So that is the
second big reason, I think.
So as we move forward, I think this is a problem that is
going to be become increasingly salient. I think that the
warnings have been going on, we have been getting warnings from
all the RTOs, from NERC. We have got to be aware of this. This
problem is not just coming, I think it is already here, and it
is coming here very quickly.
And with that, I will be glad to answer any questions you
have, and thank you again for the opportunity, Mr. Chairman.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Christie follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Duncan. Well, I want to thank all of the Commissioners
for your testimony. We will now go into the question-and-answer
portion of the hearing, and I will begin the questioning and
recognize myself for 5 minutes.
Commissioner Danly, in a recent dissent to a transmission
planning and cost allocation proposed rulemaking, you noted
that ``the majority of FERC seeks to establish policies
designated--or designed rather--to encourage the massive
transmission buildout that will doubtless be required to
transition to an aspirational renewable future. To do so, they
need to socialize the cost of this transmission across as broad
a population of ratepayers as possible.''
Do you believe that Congress requiring FERC to order the
buildout of massive amounts of transmission connecting the
different regions and integrate more renewable energy is
consistent with the just and reasonable standard under the
Federal Power Act?
Mr. Danly. Thank you. The--if any action is taken pursuant
to a congressional enactment, it is going to be for us to try
to reconcile the two, because both have the force of law. The
constraint for the socialization of transmission costs doesn't
really come from the just and reasonable rate standard directly
but rather the invariant case law that we have had for decades
now. The original case was Illinois State Commerce Commission
versus FERC, in which there has to be a commens--a roughly
commensurate benefit to the amount paid. So most of the
undertakings that FERC has now in its transmission planning in
which it is attempting to socialize those costs will
ultimately, I think, fail on appeal because they violate that
case law that is basically unchanged for decades.
To the extent to which, though, Congress changes that
through an enactment, who is to say how that is going to shake
out, but the sine qua non of just and reasonable rates now is
that you cannot charge anybody for any benefit that they don't
get, and that benefit has to be in some way articulable. Our
recent transmission planning NOPR seemed to, by explained
terms, expand that concept of benefits so broadly that it would
include the public policy choices not only of other States but
even other municipalities. That is not contemplated in the case
law now, and I think it is not only bad policy, but it is
illegal.
Mr. Duncan. Yes. Thanks for that answer. I mean, if Iowa
has surplus wind power and California wants it, the power lines
to transmit that power are going to have to go across Colorado.
Colorado won't pull any of the power off of that, why should
Coloradoans pay for the cost of the transmission line they get
no benefit from? So great answer, and I appreciate you sharing
that.
What about requiring ratepayers that do not benefit? We
have covered that one, I am going to skip on.
Chair Rodgers and I recently wrote a letter to each of you
requesting the Commission to take a more active role in
ensuring reliability in wholesale electricity markets. We have
witnessed energy rationing and blackouts in many of these
regions and others over the past few years. Two regions in
particular are the California Independent System Operator and
the Electric Reliability Council of Texas have experienced
blackouts and energy rationing.
So, Commissioner Danly, are such markets that experience
blackouts just and reasonable for ratepayers?
Mr. Danly. The--in a word, no. The market design requires
ratepayers to pay money, and in return for that, they are
supposed to get electricity and they are supposed to get it on
a consistent basis. It has to be reliably delivered.
In particular, if you take cases like, let's say, PJM or
ISO New England in which they are actually capacity markets,
there is a specific product that the ratepayer pays for, which
is the capacity payment. And if you have a market that is
incapable of delivering proper capacity outcomes, despite the
fact the ratepayers are paying for it, I think that is an
obvious case of an unjust and unreasonable rate.
Mr. Duncan. Thank you. As I noted in my opening statement,
electric reliability across the country is deteriorating. The
main reason for this is not a lack of transmission capacity or
extreme weather, it is because we lack insufficient firm
generation that can quickly respond to meet demand. And,
Commissioner Clements and Commissioner Christie, thanks for
recognizing that fact.
I have a yes-or-no question for each of you, starting with
you, Chairman Phillips. Has electric reliability worsened or
improved over the past 3 years? Worsened or improved? Electric
reliability, has it worsened or improved?
Mr. Phillips. I think the response to your question is that
we have seen a trend where electric reliability has worsened
somewhat. We are beginning to change that trend under my
leadership.
Mr. Duncan. Thank you. Chairman--Commissioner Danly?
Mr. Danly. It has worsened.
Mr. Duncan. Worsened. Commissioner Clements?
Ms. Clements. I think it is a region-specific question.
Given any time of year, it is a seasonal question. It is a
question of extreme weather and what types of stressors hit our
electricity system----
Mr. Duncan. Worsened in some areas and improved in others.
Thank you.
Ms. Clements. Yes.
Mr. Duncan. Commissioner Christie?
Mr. Christie. I think it has generally worsened because we
are losing the dispatchable resources that are necessary to
keep the lights on.
Mr. Duncan. Yes, that's perfect. Spot on. Dispatchable
resources. Natural gas, natural gas infrastructure to get the
resources produced in this country delivered to where it needs
to be used, utilized by the utilities to improve the lives of
electricity generation and for our constituents, and then
potentially exported to improve the lives of people around the
world.
With that, I will go to the Ranking Member DeGette for 5
minutes with the questions.
Ms. DeGette. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Phillips, one of the goals of FERC is, in fact, to
improve and strengthen reliability, is that right?
Mr. Phillips. That is right.
Ms. DeGette. Now, in my opening statement I talked about
the work that FERC is doing on transmission issues--and again,
I want to say that this interregional transfer capability study
that was required by the debt limit deal does not prohibit FERC
from completing the outstanding transmission roles or any work
on interregional transmission or minimum transfer capacity. So,
Mr. Chairman, I want to ask you, do you believe that the
interregional transfer capability study required by the debt
limit deal prohibits FERC from advancing any transmission work
while the study is pending?
Mr. Phillips. The answer to that question is no. I believe
that NERC is directed to do a study under the debt limit deal.
We also have an ongoing proceeding at FERC where we have had a
forum, we have had a technical conference, we have received
comments. It is my belief that those two proceedings can move
forward in parallel.
Ms. DeGette. And do you think you could get information
from this study that was required in the debt ceiling deal?
Mr. Phillips. Yes. I believe it could very well be
valuable. the information that NERC finds in its report. And
what I would like to do is make sure that, if and when NERC
completes its report, FERC is also ready to act on our
proceeding so that we continue to move forward, NERC moves
forward, and we can incorporate their findings in what we are
doing.
Ms. DeGette. But you are not going to delay in your
proceeding based on this study?
Mr. Phillips. I am not aware of any requirement that we
wait for NERC to----
Ms. DeGette. Is it your intention to wait?
Mr. Phillips. It is not my intention to wait.
Ms. DeGette. Commissioner Clements, I want to ask you if
you can talk briefly about the importance of finalizing the
strongest possible version of the rule along with the
importance of getting the regional transmission planning and
cost allocation right.
Ms. Clements. Thank you. Finalizing a rule on interregional
transfer capability is critical. We have seen that in real life
through the experience in Winter Storm Uri when the mid-
Atlantic was able to help out to keep the lights on in the
Midwest. The Midwest was able to keep the--help keep the lights
on in the South. But the South couldn't help Texas keep the
lights on because there was a lack of interregional transfer
capability. The same thing happened to the Southeast during
Winter Storm Elliott.
And so absolutely, we need to move forward and finalize a
strong interregional transfer capability rule. The good news is
there has been broad consensus across the industry and across
stakeholders that that is the case, and we are working on what
kind of methodology might be appropriate.
Ms. DeGette. And having a strong rule like that would go to
what the Chairman was talking about, increasing the overall
reliability of the grid.
Ms. Clements. That is right. Every year--well, last year,
EEI suggested that utilities spent $28 billion on transmission
investment. Money is getting spent, so the question is, is it
getting spent in the way that most cost-effectively protects
customers, and that is what we need to be thinking about at
FERC.
Ms. DeGette. Now, Commissioner Clements, I wonder if you
can talk for a minute about how FERC can better leverage grid-
enhancing technologies that can maximize the existing
infrastructure.
Ms. Clements. Thank you, Congresswoman. This is a really
important question and something I spent a lot of time focusing
on: Before we expose customers to the cost that Commissioner
Danly has expressed concern about, how can we make lower-cost,
modest investments on our existing grid to help squeeze more
juice effectively out of the existing grid and bring more
resources online without costly transmission investment? Grid-
enhancing technologies is our number-one tool, and we have put
forward some proposals that I hope we will move forward with.
Ms. DeGette. Thank you. Mr. Chairman, I--it is really
persuasive to me when you talk about your own experience with
growing up with environmental justice issues. And, of course, I
told you when I met with you, we have an area in my district,
an EJ area. So I'm wondering if you can briefly talk about the
tangible steps that you plan to implement to advance
environmental justice.
Mr. Phillips. Thank you, Congresswoman. We had the first-
ever--I mentioned this in my opening statement--roundtable on
environmental justice and equity. What I am looking to do and
we are working on right now is an outward-facing document that
both frontline communities, utilities, stakeholders, everyone
across the board can understand how we define environmental
justice, what factors we are looking for as we consider
projects going forward. This is something that I believe will
be critical to help move forward, and not just have projects
approved but to ultimately have them built.
Ms. DeGette. Thank you.
Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Duncan. The gentlelady yields back. I will now go to
the gentleman from Virginia, Mr. Griffith, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Griffith. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
It is really good to see all of you here today but
particularly my friend Commissioner Christie. It has been a
long time since you, me, others, including Terry Kilgore, used
to have midnight dinner at the Third Street Diner in Richmond,
Virginia, but it is good to see you here today.
You talked about several things in your opening, including
dispatchable resources. And while this is a great hearing for
all of us to dig into the weeds, the folks watching back home
who may be seeing it a couple days from now in the middle of
the night may not know what that means. Can you define
dispatchable resources for the folks back home?
Mr. Christie. Yes. I remember being asleep most of those
midnight dinners. But dispatchable resources are resources that
are not weather dependent. You--they run all the time. Nuclear
runs literally for months at a time without shutting down. Coal
and gas can run all the time.
Now, it doesn't mean they are not weather impacted. What we
saw in Elliott--Winter Storm Elliott, we had a lot gas units
that didn't perform because they were not winterized or they
couldn't get firm supplies. So units can be certainly weather
impacted, but a dispatchable unit is a unit that is not weather
dependent to run. Obviously, wind and solar are weather
dependent to run; that makes them intermittent. It doesn't mean
they don't have a tremendous role. They certainly have no fuel
cost, which is good.
But we have to understand the characteristics of generating
units, and when you are trying to keep the lights on--and
again, you have to remember about the grid. The power that is
coming out of these lights right now was generated nanoseconds
ago. Power has to be generated and used within seconds, and so
because of that, you have to have power sources feeding into
the grid every single second of every minute, otherwise the
lights go out. And dispatchable resources are great for that
because they run for days, weeks, even months at a time without
concern about what the weather forecast is going to be. So that
is the difference.
Mr. Griffith. And, obviously, knowing my end of the State,
it is heavily reliant in many of the communities on the coal
and natural gas industries, and it has just been somewhat
bothersome to us that folks don't realize the intermittency of
some of the renewables and that you have to have the pipelines
and you have to have high-voltage power lines to wield that
electricity from one part of the country to another.
Can you go into a little bit about how long it is going to
take to build the capacity even if we want to take wind or
solar from an area where there is good weather to an area that
weather may not be so good right then?
Mr. Christie. Well, building generating capacity takes
time, but the biggest problem we have right now is we are
losing existing generating capacity that could be running, and
it is shutting down, and it is shutting down prematurely, so we
are losing assets that could be providing power right now.
With regard to transmission, you know, you have to have
transmission to move power from the supply source to the
ultimate consumer, so transmission is absolutely essential. I
would say on transmission, and based on 17 years as a--at the
Virginia State Corporation Commission and doing transmission
line cases, every case comes with its own unique set of facts,
and what you are trying to do is--look, consumers are going to
pay for transmission. Consumers are going to pay for it.
So you want to make sure that the consumers who are going
to be forced to pay for transmission are getting the best deal
and are getting a line that serves their interest and not the
interest of developers. It should be serving consumers, and it
should be the--a solution to a reliability problem. And all
these cases have unique sets of facts, and as a regulator, you
sit down and determine is it needed, is it cost prudent. Those
are the two biggest things you look at in a power line case.
And if it is, and if it--and if you find yes on both, then
it should be built, and that means they are extremely
controversial. They go through--some of them go through a
hundred miles, 200 miles, and you have to use eminent domain
oftentimes. They become controversial.
But once you have determined it is needed, then they
absolutely must be built, no question about it.
Mr. Griffith. Yes. And, you know, everybody wants to run
from coal, and some folks want to run from natural gas, but
they have been the most dispatchable--nuclear as well, but they
have been the most dispatchable over time, and I don't see that
changing. One of the things that I think we should do--and this
is not your jurisdiction, I understand that--but we should be
doing research to make the burning of the fossil fuels cleaner
so that we can export it to the rest of the world. Do you have
any thoughts on that?
Mr. Christie. Well, I think the carbon capture is a tech--
and I am not a--I am getting off on here, but it would be
wonderful if carbon capture technology could be mature to where
you could run coal- or gas-generating units with carbon capture
and actually remove all the carbon and have that benefit. I
don't think the technology is anywhere near being mature yet,
but time will tell.
Mr. Griffith. Time will tell. And I think we are a lot
closer than you might realize, but we need to put some--instead
of putting all our eggs into the basket of renewables, we need
to put a few of our eggs into the basket of fossil fuels so
that we can improve it for the rest of the world because, in
all fairness, folks, the rest of the world is going to burn
coal. sub-Saharan Africa, India, China, they are going to
continue to build--burn coal. If we can figure out how to do it
cleaner in the United States, we can do it better for the
entire world and actually help the carbon issue in the--on the
planet.
And I yield back.
Mr. Duncan. The gentleman's time is expired. I will now go
to the ranking member of the full committee, Mr. Pallone, for 5
minutes.
Mr. Pallone. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I want to start with environmental justice. As I mentioned
in my opening statement, Ranking Member DeGette and I wrote to
Chairman Phillips last week about the importance of
incorporating environmental justice into his decision making,
and while the steps the Commission has taken over the last 2
years have been vital, it still has a long way to go.
So let me start with Commissioner Clements. Many
communities have pointed to the Office of Public Participation,
which you helped stand up, as a rare bright spot for first
engagement with EJ communities. Can you talk briefly about what
has made the office so successful and how it will continue to
build on its success so far? Briefly.
Ms. Clements. Thank you for the question, Ranking Member.
The first reason it has been so successful is who we put in
charge of it. The inaugural Director, Elin Katz, who has since
left, and the current Director, Nicole Sitaraman, have taken
their time and been deliberate and worked with not only all of
us as Commissioners but with stakeholders to establish the kind
of credibility that a new office like this needs to get
results. That is the first reason.
The second reason is that the public has been hungry for a
way to engage with this esoteric, technical, you know, kind of
arcane commission, and they are learning how to speak about it
in English and inform people, neutrally, they take a neutral--
they don't get engaged in any position in any dockets, but they
help people to understand that this agency over here makes--has
an impact on their lives. And they have been doing that not
only on the gas infrastructure side but also on the electricity
side, and I think that is really important.
Mr. Pallone. Thank you. Now let me go to Chairman Phillips.
FERC held its first-ever environmental justice roundtable in
March. I found the perspectives directly from frontline
communities in the second panel of the day especially
impactful. So can you talk about what actions the Commission is
taking in response to the input it received at that roundtable?
Again, briefly.
Mr. Phillips. Thank you for the question. I am extremely
proud of the work we have already done on environmental justice
at FERC. We are looking to, as I mentioned a moment ago, put
out a public-facing guidance document that all of our
stakeholders can use. We are also--and this is a public-
interest determination that every Commissioner has to make when
a project comes before us.
I consider environmental justice, I have always considered
environmental justice in my public-interest determinations for
projects, and that is borne out now. Just recently, the
Commission, sua sponte, for the first time in its history, took
action to protect environmental justice communities for air
pollution regarding a project. This is the type of progress
that we are looking to make at FERC regarding EJ communities.
Mr. Pallone. All right, thank you. Now, I--you heard me say
earlier that, although FERC is a five-member Commission, right
now there are only four Commissioners. So let me just go down
the line and ask briefly each of you, do you agree, yes or no,
that FERC is at its best and most effective when it has a full
complement of Commissioners, yes or no?
Mr. Phillips. Yes, absolutely.
Mr. Pallone. Commissioner Danly?
Mr. Danly. Not invariably.
Mr. Pallone. Not invariably? OK.
Ms. Clements. Yes.
Mr. Pallone. Commissioner Clements?
Ms. Clements. Yes.
Mr. Pallone. And Commissioner Christie?
Mr. Christie. Not necessarily.
Mr. Pallone. OK. Chairman Phillips, if the Senate does not
confirm additional Commissioners, FERC will be down to three
Commissioners in January. Can you talk about the danger that
poses to FERC if it was just one Commissioner away from losing
a quorum?
Mr. Phillips. I believe--I have been a regulator for over
10 years. When the Commission is at a full complement, it
absolutely functions best. There's five members for a reason.
Having those voices, they give us better orders, they give us
better decision making, better deliberation. If we go down to
just three and we can lose a quorum, the Commission may not be
able to act on important matters for the American people.
Mr. Pallone. All right. Let me get one more question in.
One of the five key actions identified in the Equity Action
Plan was ensuring that natural gas project certification and
siting policies and processes are consistent with environmental
justice, and the document noted that reviewing FERC's
regulations and policy statements on natural gas pipeline
authorizations was a key component of FERC's approach to
aligning pipeline certification with environmental justice
principles.
So 30 seconds left, Chairman Phillips, can you talk about
where FERC currently is in its process of reviewing the natural
gas policy statements that it issued last year?
Mr. Phillips. Very quickly, we are now--those are now draft
policy statements. We are using the 1999 policy statement. We
are moving projects. Of course, what I am looking for--still an
ongoing proceeding--I want a bipartisan approach to these
policy statements, something that we can build consensus on. I
also want something that stakeholders can embrace.
It is extremely important that when we do this that we
don't do it in a way that if the composition of the Commission
changes, it can be flipped over at the snap of a finger. I want
something that is lasting and durable for the utilities and for
the work that we do.
Mr. Pallone. Thank you so much.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Duncan. The gentleman's time is expired. I will now--it
is my honor to recognize the chair of the full committee, Mrs.
McMorris Rodgers, for 5 minutes.
Mrs. Rodgers. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
FERC's core mission is ensuring abundant, affordable
supplies of energy at just and reasonable rates, and FERC is
supposed to operate as an independent agency. Yet, under the
Biden administration, we saw--we have seen a strong shift with
FERC unnecessarily delaying natural gas permits and supporting
a forced transition to less reliable, weather-dependent wind,
solar, and battery resources. Last year, NERC warned that half
of the country is at heightened risk for electricity blackout.
This year, that has increased to two-thirds of the country at a
heightened risk for electricity blackout, so this trend is very
concerning.
Yes or no, do you--do each of you believe that FERC has
upheld its statutory obligation to ensure abundant supplies of
energy at just and reasonable rates? And I will begin with the
Chairman.
Mr. Phillips. Yes.
Mr. Danly. Sometimes, sometimes not.
Ms. Clements. I think it is a work in progress.
Mr. Christie. I agree.
Mrs. Rodgers. Thank you. Commissioner Danly, can you expand
and just discuss what you believe FERC could do to get back to
its core mission?
Mr. Danly. Certainly. We need to establish stable market
rules and adhere to the rule of law. We need to make certain
that the electric markets--we have to speak about both the NGA
and the FPA. So under the FPA, we have to make sure that our
electric markets have stable rules, that we do not
retroactively change the results of auctions, as we did in a
recent order for PJM because we didn't like the outcome of the
system we had already put in place. We have to make certain
that the markets actually are protected from the effects of
subsidies and that they have proper price formation. All of
that is necessary to ensure resource adequacy and J and R
rates.
Under the NGA, we have to constrain our analyses to the
requirements of the Natural Gas Act, the purpose of which, you
rightly point out, is to ensure abundant quantities of natural
gas at reasonable prices. And remember that, though the public
interest determination may have, as the Supreme Court has
pointed out, subsidiary purposes, that is its primary purpose,
and to the extent to which other elements enter the balancing,
they have to be subsidiary to the main purpose of the statute.
Mrs. Rodgers. Thank you. The district that I represent in
eastern Washington, and the entire Pacific Northwest, is
powered by hydroelectric power, and the licensing and
relicensing process is entirely too burdensome. Hydropower is
clean, reliable, and it is affordable and one of the drivers of
economic development in eastern Washington.
Yesterday, I introduced the Hydropower Clean Energy Future
Act to expand the production and streamline FERC licensing and
the relicensing process. Chairman Phillips, as you know, almost
half of the Nation's existing hydropower dams, this investment
that we made in this important infrastructure, is required to
go back to FERC to be relicensed within the next several years.
What is FERC doing to meet this challenge?
Mr. Phillips. We are very aware that there is--some people
call it an avalanche, some people call it a cliff--of coming,
renew--license renewals, excuse me, regarding hydro. It is
critically important, I believe, our hydro fleet within the
country. I applaud you for the efforts that you are taking to
introduce the legislation.
FERC has made a priority to streamline our processes
regarding hydro. We have a pilot project where we are looking
to approve hydro facilities within 2 years. These are the types
of steps that we are taking.
Mrs. Rodgers. Do--so this is the largest renewable in
America, is waterpower, it is in every State. We could double
hydroelectricity without building a new dam. Only 3 percent of
the dams actually produce electricity. So as a followup to the
Chairman and all the Commissioners, do you agree that the
United States has tremendous opportunity to expand hydropower
production, and will you work with me on my legislation?
Mr. Phillips. Yes, absolutely. FERC provides technical
assistance. When asked, I would love an opportunity for our
staff to work with your staff to make sure that we have a
workable solution to really empower this great resource, which
is hydropower, in the country.
Mrs. Rodgers. Thank you. You know, part of the--it is
really important that in this legislation it gives FERC the
tools to hold other agencies accountable to FERC's permitting
schedule, and that is where I really could use all of your
help, if you agree with the goal. So maybe I will move on down
the line.
Mr. Danly. So the goal of improving hydro permitting?
Mrs. Rodgers. Yes.
Mr. Danly. Yes, of course I agree with that.
Mrs. Rodgers. Yes. OK, thank you.
Mr. Danly. Yes, so to the extent you need help, I am
around.
Mrs. Rodgers. Thank you.
Ms. Clements. Absolutely.
Mrs. Rodgers. Thank you.
Mr. Christie. I think one of the reasons it takes so long
to get relicensing--we get criticized a lot and are asked how
come it takes so long to get a dam relicensed--is that FERC has
been given so many duties that are not really related to our
primary function as an economic regulator that when we
relicense a dam it takes forever because there are so many
other boxes we have to check that have really nothing to do
with economic regulation. We even have to, like, determine
whether relicensing affects recreational opportunities. And I
said in the Senate committee, we are not the parks and rec
department, shouldn't be.
But that's why if you really want to do something about the
length it takes us to relicense these dams, it would be nice to
just take away a lot of the jurisdiction that we have on the--
on these noneconomic duties and give it to another agency.
Mrs. Rodgers. Thank you.
Mr. Christie. Because that is why it takes so long.
Mrs. Rodgers. Yes. Well, I thank you all, and thank you,
Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Duncan. I have got one in my district that has taken
more than a decade. I will now go to Mr. Peters from California
for 5 minutes.
Mr. Peters. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I see--I think there
is a lot of bipartisan opportunity on that issue as well.
A modern interconnected and reliable electric grid is
essential to our energy and national security, and despite this
shared reality, the current grade is--grid is vulnerable and
outdated. Congress, the Federal Government, including FERC,
have to act to strengthen the reliability of our grid while
maintaining affordability for consumers. And it is not a
partisan issue, because everybody needs access to power, and
transmission is essential for every energy source, whether it
is coal, nuclear, hydropower, natural gas, solar, or wind.
And I want to look to the great State of Texas, home to
significant energy innovation and leadership, as a perfect
example. In 2005, the Texas legislature, including my friend,
Mr. Veasey, at that time passed legislation to set up
competitive renewable energy zones, and they built transmission
lines to deliver cheap power to consumers. This plan led to
3,600 miles of new high-voltage transmission lines, which isn't
a lot, but it was 23 percent of all high-voltage lines added in
the United States between 2008 and 2020.
And while these lines largely focused on expanding vast
wind resources in Texas, the transmission also boosted another
sector: the booming oil and gas industry in the Permian Basin.
During the shale boom in the 2010s, oil and gas companies used
hydraulic fracturing and horizontal drilling to access vast oil
and gas resources. The increased electric transmission capacity
helped cheaply power oil and gas infrastructure in rapidly
growing towns. Transmission is not partisan or technology-
specific.
Mr. Chairman, I would love to work with you and Ranking
Member DeGette and all my colleagues to find bipartisan
compromise on transmission policy because every day we wait,
Americans will be vulnerable to blackouts and higher prices.
Before I proceed to questions, I just want to address the
notion of the--that came up before about the study. I would
like to point out that we have a lot information about this
already, and I would ask unanimous consent for the admission to
the record of the following documents: the February 2023
Department of Energy's ``Natural Transmission Needs Study,''
the February 2023 study from Lawrence Berkeley National Labs,
the February 2023 study from Grid Strategies, the October 2022
GE and NRDC study, the May 2022 NREL Interconnections Seam
Study, and the July 2021 study from Grid Strategies.
I would like to enter all of those into the record.
Mr. Duncan. Without objection, so ordered.
[The information appears at the conclusion of the
hearing.\1\]
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ The Department of Energy, GE, and July 2021 Grid Strategies
studies have been retained in committee files and are included in the
Documents for the Record at https://docs.house.gov/meetings/IF/IF03/
20230613/116094/HHRG-118-IF03-20230613-SD055.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Mr. Peters. OK, thank you.
A more connected, interconnected electric grid could cut
consumer electric bills by more than a hundred billion dollars
cumulatively, or $300 per household annually. More
interregional transmission can also help with reliability. As
Commissioner Clements pointed out, Winter Storm Elliott caused
blackouts across North Carolina and Tennessee which could have
been avoided if available power in the Midwest was diverted to
the region.
Commission Clements, in your written testimony, you
mentioned the benefits of major regional transmission lines.
Can you please elaborate on how more regional lines can help
reduce costs for consumers and provide reliability benefits?
Understand that we are not all experts like you are.
Ms. Clements. Thank you, Congressman. A robust regional
transmission system brings a myriad of benefits. It can reduce
congestion and therefore reduce prices. It increases resiliency
in the face of extreme weather. It can transport zero marginal
fuel cost resources from distant locations to customers where
they need them. It increases the ability to do reserve sharing.
The list goes on and on.
And every transmission line has some component of a
reliability benefit, some component of an economic benefit. So
it is hard to parse them out.
FERC has put forward a proposal to improve upon over a
decade-old planning proposal related to regional transmission
planning and cost allocation. That will get at the issue. That
will start to solve the problem, and I think it is imperative
upon this Commission to move forward with finalizing that rule.
Mr. Peters. I was happy to work on and introduce the Power
On Act, which became the backstop authority that Senator
Manchin put into the infrastructure bill--the Bipartisan
Infrastructure Bill. This year I am working with Senator
Hickenlooper on a bill to establish minimum levels of power
capabilities, the Big Wires Act, between regions. Can you
comment on how a minimum transfer requirement could help with
grid reliability?
Ms. Clements. Absolutely, I would be happy to. And I think
that the Big Wires proposal you put forward can--is a good idea
related to providing a clear minimum threshold for regions to
understand how much they should be able to share between each
other, because that is the place where, despite the fact that I
think there is broad support across the industry and
stakeholder groups for more interregional transfer capability,
the question is how do we get it done.
Mr. Peters. We need to force regions to be able to work
together.
Ms. Clements. We hope they will on their own. Yes, we would
like to be able to help them and to facilitate that cost-
effectively.
Mr. Peters. To encourage them.
Ms. Clements. The reliability benefits are simply undoubted
based on all those studies you demonstrate and real-life
experience.
Mr. Peters. Thanks. My time is expired, but I should have
said encouraged.
Mr. Duncan. Thank the gentleman.
Mr. Peters. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Ms. Clements. I will go to Mr. Latta, but before I do, I
want to thank him for helping me out chairing something
yesterday, and I recognize you for 5 minutes.
Mr. Latta. Anytime for my friend. Thank you, Mr. Chairman,
and thanks to the Commissioners for being with us today.
Commissioner Danly, I have been concerned with high-profile
attacks on our electric substations throughout the country and
the possible consequences if these attacks cease being random
occurrences and become a coordinated effort. Last year, FERC
commissioned the North American Electric Reliability
Commission, NERC, to study physical threats to the bulk power
system. Would you highlight the findings of the report?
Mr. Danly. So it was--NERC has written a lot on and talked
a lot about the dangers to the bulk electric system both from
cyber attacks and physical--from a physical security
standpoint. The bottom line is, without getting into all the
details, the--this is a distributed system and it is vulnerable
to any number of asymmetric attacks of various types.
Mr. Latta. So pretty much are you saying that we are
vulnerable but didn't really give us any specifications of what
we should be doing in the meantime or how we can protect
ourselves?
Mr. Danly. Well, so there are any number of means by which
you can physically harden the infrastructure. The problem with
that is, at a certain point, people have to pay for it. And so
this is typically a--most of the vulnerability is in the
distribution system, which is not the bulk electric system,
that is the state jurisdictional distribution system. That is
run in our system by the division of jurisdiction by the States
and the State POCs who would offer cost recovery to the
utilities that would put the physical security in place.
Mr. Latta. So I guess on two questions, what can FERC do to
help the local communities out there if something would occur
like a--more of a mass attack instead of an individual attack.
Is there anything that FERC can be doing to help our local
communities?
Mr. Danly. Well, FERC already has an Office of Energy
Infrastructure Security, which is extremely active in engaging
with utilities and local jurisdictions in talking about best
practices, conducting audits, trying to figure out ways that
they can enhance the security of their facilities. They are
really very good at it.
And there is, of course, FERC's bully pulpit, being able to
talk about the issue and convene discussions, which we have
done over the last few years.
Mr. Latta. And here is the wild card question: What can
Congress do to help either FERC or the local communities if
something like this would occur?
Mr. Danly. Well, I would caution Congress in trying to make
FERC the locus for anything having to do with physical security
because we are so distant and removed from the physical assets
that are in question. That is really more a local government
and State POC issue, I think, properly.
But to the degree to which you want to cooperate with the
States, I think you ought to. They are probably the ones that
have a better view as exactly what they need.
Mr. Latta. OK, thank you. Well, I am working on legislation
right now, and so I think as we work on the legislation, I
would like to work with you and FERC on that.
If I could turn to Commissioner Christie. In addition to
the grid security, as the co-Chair of the Grid Innovation
Caucus, I am an advocate for the development and deployment of
new, innovative technologies within the bulk power system. How
is FERC working to ensure the reliability of the bulk power
system as new technologies are deployed onto the grid?
Mr. Christie. Well, if you are referencing grid-enhancing
technologies, I think that is what Commissioner Clements was
asked about earlier. Some of these technologies work really
well, and when they are deployed, they absolutely provide a lot
of benefit. Some work not so well--or don't work so well in
certain places and work well in others. It is all very fact-
specific.
FERC can encourage the use of--in fact, we did an order not
too long ago encouraging the use of what are called dynamic
line ratings, DLR, or adjusted ambient ratings. So FERC's role
is--and also we put out the reliability standards through NERC,
which is essentially transmission line standards.
So FERC's role is to ensure that the reliability standards
that apply to all the bulk power system, particularly
transmission, and also to encourage the use of these
technologies as they develop and are deployed to ensure that
they are being developed and deployed in a--in the most cost-
effective way. I hope that answers your question.
Mr. Latta. Thank you. Well, and back to Commissioner Danly
real quickly in my last 40 seconds. You know, back in 2008,
Republicans came out with an all-above energy strategy, so we
wanted to have, you know, everything from nuclear and clean
coal and natural gas and hydro, and then all of the other clean
energy systems out there. But can we rely on just an
intermittent system out there that some people sometimes
advocate? What would happen if we had the intermittent go down,
do we have to have that backup baseload capacity?
Mr. Danly. There is no way, and it certainly has never been
tested, to have a large-scale electric interconnection run
entirely on intermittents. The spinning mass that has been the
basis for our generation fleet for ages is what allows us to
ride through the voltage disturbances that are inevitable in a
dynamic system like this. And even if you have grid-forming
inverters, the likelihood that they would have that level of
resilience, given the fact that intermittents can turn and on
off in a moment's notice, is very unlikely.
There has to be some amount of backup, which is why,
counterintuitively, the greater the penetration of
intermittents in a region, the more natural gas transmission
capacity you need, because when all of the intermittents do
turn off, you have to have the entire fleet backed up with that
quantity of capacity in natural gas, typically.
Mr. Latta. Well, thank you very much.
Mr. Chairman, my time is expired, and I yield back.
Mr. Duncan. I thank the gentleman, and now as an honorary
Texan, it is my pleasure to recognize the gentlelady from the
Lone Star State, Mrs. Fletcher, for 5 minutes.
Mrs. Fletcher. Thank you so much, Mr. Chairman, and thanks
to Ranking Member DeGette too, for organizing this hearing, and
thank you, Chairman Phillips and Commissioners Danly, Christie,
and Clements, for taking the time to testify before us today.
I also appreciated Representative Peters' comments about
innovation in my home State of Texas, where we really have been
and continue to be at the forefront of all kinds of energy,
both traditional and renewable. But we have also experienced
the very worst of the failures that we are talking about here
today. And so the work that you do is incredibly important to
us, and it is really important that we are talking about these
issues here today.
So I do want to talk a little bit about an issue that we
haven't covered as much in detail today, but I think it is
really important, especially because it relates to a lot of the
work that we are doing in my hometown of Houston. We are very
focused on capitalizing on the great investments that were made
in the last Congress in the Infrastructure Investment and Jobs
Act, the Inflation Reduction Act, in particular, and the
emerging technologies that we think can help us address our
current challenges and really power our future while also
addressing the climate challenge and reducing emissions.
So what we are seeing in Houston is an increased demand in
the market for hydrogen. It is something we have been very
actively working on. Currently there are about 1,600 miles of
hydrogen pipelines, and they are generally concentrated along
the Gulf Coast, as I am sure that you know, and nearly all
hydrogen shipment occurs in dedicated hydrogen infrastructure
because of its chemical nature.
So if we want to see the hydrogen programs that are
included in the IIJA and the IRA succeed, we are really going
to need to build out the necessary infrastructure to move
hydrogen at scale. And so I really want to focus my questions
to you all on these issues because I think there are some open
questions right now.
Currently, the regulation for siting, commercial service,
security, and safety of hydrogen infrastructure is divided
between various Federal agencies, including FERC, and the
Surface Transportation Board, Transportation Security
Administration, Department of Transportation. This large
collection of jurisdictional oversight and the ambiguity
associated with it has, I think, led to a lot of regulatory
uncertainty in this space, and I think that that has the
potential to hinder a lot of the projects that we are very
interested in seeing move forward. So clear siting authority
for unmixed hydrogen really is needed to provide the clear
pathway for potential projects that the folks who are
developing it really need to see.
So I want to ask each of you this question, whether, in
your opinion, FERC is the best-situated agency to play a lead
role for siting interstate hydrogen infrastructure projects,
similar to its responsibilities for natural gas and petroleum
pipelines. And I would like to start with you, Chairman
Phillips.
Mr. Phillips. Thank you for the question. I believe, given
FERC's experience with natural gas pipelines--and as you
mentioned, we currently have regulatory authority over blended
hydrogen and natural gas--I believe FERC could absolutely take
on the responsibility of pure hydrogen. Of course, I urge
Congress, any new authority that they give us in this area,
please be specific. Be specific. It helps us implement down the
road and avoid costly litigation or delays.
Mrs. Fletcher. Thank you, Chairman Phillips.
Commissioner Danly?
Mr. Danly. I am not certain that we actually have
jurisdiction under either the ICA or the NGA, so it would
probably require an enactment to make that clear, but I
generally would advise that you not subject nascent industries,
especially those that you actually wish to promote, to the full
panoply of Federal regulation immediately. So, even if we are
the best, I'm not sure it should be regulated at all
immediately at the Federal level.
Mrs. Fletcher. You are not sure that hydrogen pipelines
should be regulated----
Mr. Danly. Requires----
Mrs. Fletcher [continuing]. At all at the Federal level?
Mr. Danly. No, no, no. By--I should have said that--by FERC
at the Federal level, because the entire panoply of regulations
that attend FERC jurisdiction are quite onerous, and these are
typically borne by well-established companies that have been
operating for the better part of a century. I just am always
cautious when people talk about giving additional jurisdiction
to FERC. I always suggest they slow down and think through the
consequences because it can be difficult operating under a FERC
paradigm.
Mrs. Fletcher. Well, I am going to run out of time, so I am
going to move on to the other Commissioners, but I may have
some questions to follow up with you on the record after this
hearing.
Mr. Danly. Please.
Mrs. Fletcher. Commissioner Clements?
Ms. Clements. Thank you. I would agree with Commissioner
Danly that we would need clarification as to this
responsibility and support the Chairman's perspective on both
the need for specificity and also the need for the staff to
support something like that.
Contrary to Commissioner Danly, I have had stakeholders
coming in to me and saying, ``Can you let us know how you are
going to do this. Can you please talk about this?'' So I do
think there is a desire for some sort of regulatory certainty
at the Federal level. Thank you.
Mrs. Fletcher. And Commissioner Christie?
Mr. Christie. I think it is--if you convert a natural gas
pipeline to a hydrogen pipeline, I think it is very
questionable whether we would have authority under the Natural
Gas Act, so I would urge Congress, if you want us to regulate
hydrogen pipelines that used to be natural gas pipelines or
build new ones, that you really need to pass legislation and
make that clear.
Mrs. Fletcher. Well, thank you very much. I will submit
some additional questions for the record. This is a really
interesting topic, and I thank you so much, Mr. Chairman, for
allowing us to have this exchange this morning, and I yield
back.
Mr. Duncan. I thank the gentlelady, and I will now go to
the Chair of the Environmental Subcommittee, Mr. Johnson, for 5
minutes.
Mr. Johnson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Commissioner Christie, in my subcommittee just last week we
examined the reliability impacts of proposed EPA regulations,
and I want to kind of build on that this morning. In your
testimony, you discussed the threat to reliability due to the
rapid subtraction of dispatchable resources, especially coal
and gas, with no replacement. You further discussed that 1
megawatt of wind or solar is simply not equal to 1 megawatt of
gas, coal, or nuclear energy. I agree with that, by the way.
But RTOs like PJM, which includes Ohio, have warned us
about this. I am especially concerned about the public health
impacts of systemwide outages. If you look at the EPA's own
website, you look at the mission of the EPA on the White
House's website, it is to protect public health and the
environment. Public health is primary.
So these outages, these potential outages resulting from
taking dispatchable energy off the grid before anything can
replace it, can lead to loss of life in extreme heat and cold
scenarios when folks in places like rural Appalachia don't have
power. And it can result in negative impacts on nutrition when
families, especially low-income families, can't cook their food
because they can't power their kitchen appliances. You yourself
characterize this situation as a ``serious threat to
reliability that is looming on the horizon.''
So, Commissioner Christie, in your view, would you agree
that current and proposed EPA power generation regulations are
making this potential situation more precarious?
Mr. Christie. Yes, because they are going to drive up the
cost of operating a coal-generating unit, and if you drive up
the cost, obviously that has to be paid for. Now if the unit is
in rate-based--meaning in a vertically integrated state--well,
then consumers ultimately would have to pay the cost because
cost in a--for a unit that is in rate-based, they get cost
recovery through that mechanism, so that unit could potentially
stay open with consumers paying the additional cost.
If the unit is in one of our RTO markets and they are
already at a point where they are not recovering their capital
costs or their operating costs due to the market, then, you
know, it--you add additional cost. It just makes them even less
financially viable, so they will close even sooner.
Mr. Johnson. OK. And would you agree, to avoid catastrophe,
we need to work to preserve more of our reliable dispatchable
coal- and gas-fired power?
Mr. Christie. That is exactly what NERC and the RTO
management has been telling us. You can't just shut down your
dispatchable generation overnight or within a matter of a few
years and think that you can keep the lights on by simply
trying to replace--my point about the megawatt versus the
megawatt is the capacity value of a wind or solar megawatt is
simply not equal to the capacity value of a megawatt----
Mr. Johnson. That is right. That is science. That is fact.
Mr. Christie. That is engineering. And it is engineering,
and you can't keep the grid running with a one--you don't get a
one-for-one replacement so----
Mr. Johnson. That is right.
Mr. Christie [continuing]. The numbers don't add up.
Mr. Johnson. Well, what about the future? Renewables need
to be backed up with something. Is there enough new gas-fired
power plant to be built and integrated into our grid? Can you
quickly touch on the current barriers to building out more gas-
fired generation?
Mr. Christie. Well, you look at the PJM queue, what is
called the queue, which is the line of units that want to get
in and get interconnected. About 90 percent of it is wind,
solar, or battery, and some other--I think some DR. And then
the--it is only about 4 percent, I think, gas. So the problem
is not only that we are--are we getting enough new gas
generation to provide backup to the increased deployment of
wind and solar. The answer is, no, we are not getting enough
new.
But the bigger problem is the gas units that we have
increasingly can't get the fuel supply to run as either
baseload units that run all the time or as peaker units that
have to be called in on a--you know, it is really a matter of
supply. If they can't get the fuel supply, then they can't
provide the power supply.
Mr. Johnson. OK. Let me go quickly to Commissioner Danly. I
want to pivot to LNG exports. You wrote in September 2021, you
discussed, and I quote, ``lingering apprehension that the
Commission may not actually have authority to oversee the
safety of liquefied natural gas (LNG) facilities under Section
3 of the Natural Gas Act.'' And you noted that ``there is no
language in the NGA that explicitly grants power to either the
Commission or the Department of Energy to take responsibility
for LNG safety.''
I am concerned about duplication of efforts from multiple
Federal agencies here. And I know my time has run out. I will
ask this question, Commissioner Danly, and then if you would
respond later in writing, that would be great: Can you share
with our committee your perspective on FERC's authority for LNG
safety and the cause of your apprehension, and are you still
concerned about the Commission's interpretation of its
authority? If you would get back to me on that question, I
would appreciate it.
Mr. Danly. Certainly. Thank you.
Mr. Johnson. Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Duncan. The gentleman yields back. I will now go to Ms.
Matsui for 5 minutes.
Ms. Matsui. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
And first of all, I want to start by thanking all of you
for your work on transmission planning, cost allocation, and
interconnection queues. And I want to encourage you to make the
most of the authorities Congress has given you to take further
administrative action.
Now, study after study has confirmed the dire need to build
more transmission infrastructure and to build it faster than we
have in decades. DOA's national transmission need study had
found that additional investments in transmission
infrastructure would improve reliability and resilience in
nearly every region in the United States. Meanwhile, the
National Renewable Energy Lab found that significantly
expanding transmission infrastructure would save more than $300
billion in power system costs. These upgrades would not only
make our grid more reliable, they could also pay for
themselves.
Long distance, high-voltage transmission between regions
can provide the flexibility to distribute energy from a diverse
energy portfolio to where it is needed the most.
Commissioner Phillips, in your opinion, would more long-
distance transmission infrastructure between regions likely
reduce wholesale electricity prices?
Mr. Phillips. Yes.
Ms. Matsui. Yes?
Mr. Phillips. Absolutely.
Ms. Matsui. OK, great. So would more long-distance
transmission between regions likely reduce the threat of
blackouts or brownouts?
Mr. Phillips. [Indiscernible.]
Ms. Matsui. OK, thank you. Now, in California there are
times when we have more solar power than we need. In April
alone, California curtailed more than 700 megawatts of wind and
solar energy because there is simply no one to take it.
Meanwhile, other areas of the country are curtailing more wind
power, which tends to peak at different times of the day and
different times of the year.
Commissioner Clements, if we had a fully integrated macro
grid allowing uncongested transmission from California to the
Midwest and beyond, could California's abundant solar power
potentially reduce energy prices for ratepayers elsewhere in
the country?
Ms. Clements. Indeed. The West in particular has a real
opportunity for increased integration to the benefit of
customers, but it does require transmission investment to get
there.
Ms. Matsui. Absolutely. So if we had uncongested
interregional transmission, could the otherwise curtailed wind
energy in the Plains and Texas potentially lower energy prices
in California?
Ms. Clements. I think we would have to get into the
specifics, but absolutely, resources in one region can lower
prices far from home.
Ms. Matsui. Thank you. In my district, the Sacramento
Municipal Utility District, or as we call it, SMUD, plans to be
zero-carbon by 2030, making SMUD one of the first utilities in
the country to achieve this benchmark. At the same time, SMUD's
electricity rates are some of the cheapest in California, and
SMUD has among the highest consumer satisfaction ratings of any
western utility.
Commissioner Clements, your mandate is affordability and
reliability and achieving those goals. FERC is resource-
neutral, correct?
Ms. Clements. Correct.
Ms. Matsui. Now, as part of SMUD's 2030 zero-carbon plan,
SMUD plans to retire two gas-fired power plants over the next
few years, replacing that capacity with renewables and battery
storage. Generally speaking, from a cost and reliability
perspective, why are we seeing so many fuel--fossil fuel
retirements across the country right now?
Ms. Clements. That requires a longer answer, Congresswoman.
I think it is important to ground this conversation in the
facts. Today in the U.S., 82 percent of our electricity supply
is dispatchable, is what is known as dispatchable.
Ms. Matsui. Right.
Ms. Clements. Is that going to change over time? Yes,
absolutely. But if basic supply-and-demand economics tell us
anything, a good amount of thermal generation will stay online
and be important in the reliability mix over time. So when we
are talking about the risk and when NERC or any grid operator,
including CAISO, stands up and says we should be concerned, it
is FERC's job to take notice and to take that seriously.
But let's talk specifically about what we need. Are we
talking about resource adequacy? In that case, the answer is to
get more steel in the ground. Are we talking about energy
adequacy? In that case, the answer is how do we build up
resilience against extreme weather events that the system
wasn't designed to endure. Are we talking about reliability
services? Then let's talk about what services the grid isn't
getting that it needs, and let's move market rules quickly so
that those resources we need online, whether they are new or
those to stay online, can get the signals they need to act.
And so to me, we have a lot of tools in the toolbox to
address these reliability issues in the timing--in the planning
timeframe. It is a long ballgame, right? We are only in the
third or fourth inning. We don't know what is coming, and we
will have some needs to prioritize higher-cost reliability
things upfront, but over time the market constructs we have can
provide this reliable transformation.
Ms. Matsui. OK. Well, thank you very much.
Ms. Clements. Thank you.
Ms. Matsui. I ran out town--time. Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Bucshon [presiding]. The gentlelady yields back. I now
recognize myself for 5 minutes.
I want to thank the Commissioners for joining us today in
the hearing during a crucial time as we see electricity prices
continuing to rise. I will speak for Indiana's 8th
Congressional District. On average, Indiana residents spend
about $189 per month on electricity. That is 12 percent higher
than the national average electric bill.
I am a strong supporter of an all-above energy approach. In
order to get reliable and affordable electricity to ratepayers,
we must be sure that energy projects of all kinds are able to
develop without unnecessary delays or uncertainty. This
Commission routinely discusses the reliability of the electric
grid, its consequences to Americans, and FERC's role in
reliably administering it. Yet recently FERC pipeline
certificate matters have experienced unusual delays.
Unfortunately, one such example of the Commission failing
to act in a timely manner relates to a project close to my
home: a pipeline that would deliver natural gas to a southern
Indiana power plant from Kentucky. This project could deliver
reliable and cost-effective electricity to Hoosiers in my
district and throughout the State.
Commissioner Christie, how does the Commission reconcile
these recent delays in the--in certificate proceedings with the
Commission's critical obligation to providing for a reliable
power grid for the Nation?
Mr. Christie. Well, I don't want to talk about a pending
proceeding, but we have to get certificates approved, but we
have to get them approved in a way that they are going to be
legally sound and address the issues that opponents of
pipelines bring up. And one thing that is going on, I have
mentioned it, you know, there is a national legal campaign,
very well-funded, against every single natural gas pipeline or
even facility from--down to the compressor station. And so it
has driven up the cost of even processing and investing in
these facilities.
And yet we know that as gas becomes a much bigger portion
of the resource mix and is absolutely essential, as you deploy
more wind and solar, you are going to have to have gas backup.
But they have to have supply, and that takes transportation.
You have to transport the fuel to the generating units, and
that is going to take natural gas pipelines. There is no way
around it.
And so FERC's job is we have to--when the evidence shows
that a line is needed--and, of course, obviously we go through
the Natural Gas Act and determine whether the evidence shows
it--then we have to put orders out quickly, we have to put
orders--I say quickly, I mean, within the time limits of the
statute, and orders that hopefully address the issues that are
raised because, if we don't address them, they are going to be
addressed in the court anyway, because every one is going to be
appeal----
Mr. Bucshon. And so in a recent--for example, in a recent
FERC proceeding, the Commission failed to issue a rehearing
order in a case where rehearing had been pending since November
of 2022, CP 21467-001. The record in that case has been
transferred to the DC Circuit without a rehearing order, which
is not the Commission's standard practice. The Commission's
actions in this case presumably increase the likelihood of an
appeal for a project that the Commission held to be in the
public interest last October.
I guess, Commissioner Danly, how can project sponsors of
critical energy infrastructure projects required for reliable
and resiliency of the electric grid rely on the Commission's
process if the Commission itself fails to provide the requisite
regulatory certainty?
Mr. Danly. They can't. And, in fact, we have seen the
effects of the regulatory uncertainty that FERC has created, in
part with the issuance of the now draft certificate policy
statements and in the changing standards that we have applied
and in the intentional slow walking for a couple of years of
many of those projects with unnecessary EISs, that is, the
longer NEPA reviews.
The result is that last year saw the least number of
additional--the least quantity of additional transfer capacity
added to the interstate gas system since the 1990s, and we have
seen a chilling of investment because the companies are unable
to rationally allocate capital and cannot assess the right risk
premium given that regulatory uncertainty.
Mr. Bucshon. Yes, I mean, I am just going to give my
opinion. This is purposeful in order to increase the likelihood
of lawsuits against these projects and delay them for years, if
not decades.
So I guess another question for you maybe is, does FERC
have the authority to require pipelines to mitigate downstream
or upstream greenhouse gas emissions?
Mr. Danly. No, not under the NGA.
Mr. Bucshon. OK. Does FERC have the authority and
capability to determine whether the emissions from a specific
project are significant?
Mr. Danly. We don't have a metric by which to do so that
would survive the requirements of reasoned decision making, so
it would fail on that basis.
Mr. Bucshon. Great. Thank you. I yield back.
Now I recognize Mr. Tonko for his line of questioning.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you, Mr. Chair. And to the Chair and
Commissioners of FERC, thank you for your presence here today
and for the service that you provide.
Chair Phillips, FERC is consistently rated one of the top
places to work in the Federal Government, but we know it can be
difficult to recruit and retain the technical experts needed to
make the Commission function effectively and have it at its--
top of its game. Can you discuss what pay scale and direct
hiring authority changes Congress could consider to ensure FERC
has the economic, environmental, engineering, legal personnel
necessary to complete timely reviews?
Mr. Phillips. Thank you for the question. First of all, I
want to just say some nice things about our staff. I think we
have an outstanding staff. I continue to be impressed with
their dedication.
What we've done, we are hiring. Everybody watching this
right now: FERC is hiring. If you want to serve the public,
please apply here, and I mean that in a very sincere way. We
are looking to staff up our energy projects department, our
division, but what we need, we have to keep pace with the
industry. We have to compete with them for these very technical
engineers, lawyers, professionals up and down the line. We need
to make sure that we have every tool available.
I would like to see our pay scale on par with other
technical agencies like the SEC. That will help us work faster
and get our work done better.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you. I also want to express my
appreciation for the Commission's focus on transmission policy
in recent years. As we continue to discuss potential threats to
reliability, it is critical that Members of Congress recognize
the important role the--that transmission infrastructure plays
in making our grid that more resilient.
I want to strongly encourage the Commission to move forward
with its open transmission proceedings as quickly as possible.
There is no reason to wait. We know our electricity system is
changing, and making certain that grid operators are doing
effective, long-term regional and interregional planning is
foundational to maintaining an affordable and a reliable grid.
So, Chair Phillips, how does the regional planning
proceeding require grid operators to take a longer view of
their transmission needs, and will those plans have reliability
in mind?
Mr. Phillips. Absolutely. Right now, the way transmission
works, it is very siloed. It is siloed when you talk about
economic benefits, it is siloed when you talk about reliability
benefits. What we are proposing to do in our regional planning
is to have a longer view, to look at the reality on the ground
so that we can plan for what we know is a changing resource
mix. This is critically important.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you. And, Commissioner Clements, I want to
get your thoughts on this. What is the role for better long-
term transmission planning in maintaining grid reliability?
Ms. Clements. Thank you, Congressman. I think about it as
reality-based planning. All infrastructure is hard to build, as
we have been talking about. All types. And so, if what we need
to do is ensure that we have a reliable grid and an affordable
grid over time so that costs are spread out over time and in 20
years you don't have customers in every State left holding the
bag, what you need to do is look forward, take all the inputs
that we have, and do--plan for various scenarios. In the face
of uncertainty, what are the trends we are seeing? What are the
set of no regrets or low regrets regional transmission planning
lines that will help to ensure reliability out 10, 15, 20 years
and beyond? And so I think it is a really important effort, and
it is a pretty practical requirement as well.
Mr. Tonko. Great. And, Commissioner Clements, the--I heard
the earlier discussion you had with Ranking Member DeGette
about the importance of grid-enhancing technologies. We know
even if major transmission reforms are put into place, it will
still be challenging to plan, site, permit, and build new
infrastructure. I strongly believe we must maximize the
efficiency of our existing infrastructure.
So, Commissioner, what do you see as the role for grid-
enhancing technologies and reconductoring as part of an
holistic approach to grid planning that seeks to achieve
affordability, reliability, and certainly public policy
requirements?
Ms. Clements. Thank you. It is a really important
opportunity. There has been, just like in every industry, a lot
of innovation in transmission equipment. Now, as Commissioner
Christie said, any given grid-enhancing technology, whether it
is an enhance power flow control or a dynamic line rating,
won't help the situation in every circumstance. But there are
some set of circumstances where lots of these technologies can
help clear up room on the grid, reduce congestion, allow for
more use of the lines at times when the weather is good or, you
know, not too hot, to bring on more resources.
When we talk about these retiring resources, all of the
grid operators say that, while there are not one-for-one-for-
one replacements, the ability to accelerate additions of new
resources--wind and solar and other resources--to the grid is a
critical component of maintaining reliability in the face of
these retirements. And so if we can clear up room today and the
next couple of years by using these relatively low-cost
technologies, let's do that, right? Let's do that and make room
for these new resources.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you, Commissioner.
And with that, Mr. Chair, I yield back.
Mr. Bucshon. The gentleman yields back. I now recognize Mr.
Walberg for 5 minutes.
Mr. Walberg. Thank you, Mr. Chair, and thanks to the
Commission for being here.
As Michigan acquiesces to more and more renewables, we see
the loss of flexible generation like natural gas. Grid
operators such as MISO have acknowledged that this transition
may lead to reliability concerns in the loss of essential
attributes like ramping capabilities, voltage stability as
well. In fact, in Michigan, like the broader MISO region, it is
fast approaching the renewable penetration inflection point of
30 percent that a 2021 study found could result in reliability
concerns as soon as 2027. That is close.
We can't allow this to happen. I assume that you don't want
it to happen either. But we have seen the impacts and loss of
life and high prices and lack of reliability that happened to
the EU last winter. Even a day without power in Michigan could
be devastating.
Commissioner Christie, does FERC share the concern
expressed by MISO that retirement of flexible generation
without the necessary placements could lead to decreased grid
reliability in the next few years?
Mr. Christie. Well, I'm not going to speak for FERC or my
colleagues. I do. I think MISO has been very vocal about this.
The CEO of MISO has been very vocal about the loss of
dispatchable resources in the MISO territory. It is threatening
reliability. That has been something MISO has been very vocal
about.
Mr. Walberg. Very much so. And I think there is evidences
to prove that they do have those major concerns justified. How
is FERC driving markets to incentivize new resources with the
necessary attributes to ensure hour-by-hour reliability?
Mr. Christie. I think it is important to understand that
FERC doesn't order generating units to be built and FERC
doesn't order generating units to be shut down. We regulate the
markets that have a big effect on whether the--on how those
decisions are made. In MISO and really throughout the country,
it is States who decide what to build, and States can decide
what to retire.
FERC has a huge impact because of the way we regulate the
markets, but it all interacts. And so what FERC needs to be
doing in terms of regulation of the markets is to determine
whether these markets are serving reliability and look at the
rate designs and see whether these rate designs actually are
producing just and reasonable rates and have the right
incentives in them. So that is really our job, is regulating
the markets.
But I want to emphasize, States decide what units get
built, States decide what units get shut down.
Mr. Walberg. And, of course, when you set those rates, set
some continuity there, that encourages or discourages States in
some of the things they decide to do.
Mr. Christie. Well, it absolutely--because we are
regulating the markets, and the markets are going to send
signals to units, you know, whether they shut down or not. That
is why I think that really the vertical--a--it is a better
system when--in a State when the State is doing an IRP and
which is saying we want these units to stay open and we are
going to put these units in the rate base if that is what it
takes to keep these units financed and keep them open.
That is a much bigger debate than a few minutes. And the
country is really very different. There's a lot of different
areas in the country which don't--no one does it all the same
way, and that is a huge issue which really would take about a
couple hours to go----
Mr. Walberg. Well, I am glad to hear you say that, but that
is crucial.
Mr. Christie. Right.
Mr. Walberg. The Nation is big, it is different.
Commissioner Danly, to what extent does interregional
transmission make up for this loss of flexible generation?
Mr. Danly. Interregional transmission can on the margins
help with reliability, but I think that people have a tendency
to believe it to be a panacea. If we look at the recent
reliability event over this Christmas, it wasn't entirely
driven by a lack of transmission capacity. In the Southeast
where I live, there were outages driven by the fact that
counterparties, with whom the utilities in the Southeast had
contracts, failed to show up, and the power wasn't there.
So you can have plenty of interregional transfer capacity
that could even be mandated, but if you don't have the
electricity that is needed--the power to actually be shifted,
then you don't have any benefit from it, right? And until we
deal with the resource adequacy problem--which I argue is
driven primarily by poor market design--until that issue is
dealt with, then the marginal benefits to be gained by the
transmission that people are contemplating, especially for the
regional development, is really probably not worth the amount
of money it is going to cost because it will be very, very
expensive.
Mr. Walberg. OK, thank you.
Chairman Phillips, I have a question on cybersecurity, but
in 11--10 seconds you can't answer it, so we will submit it for
your answer later. Thanks so much.
Mr. Phillips. Thank you, sir.
Mr. Walberg. I yield back.
Mr. Duncan [presiding]. The gentleman yields back, and Ms.
Kuster is recognized for 5 minutes.
Ms. Kuster. Thank you so much for hosting this important
hearing. I am going to jump right into my questions.
I want to start by asking about interconnection. Before a
developer can connect a new electricity-generating product--
project into our transmission system, the transmission system
operator must complete an interconnection study to see how the
new project will impact the existing transmission system. If
there is inadequate capacity on the transmission system to
support the new project, then upgrades must be made to the
transmission system.
Compared to traditional steel transmission lines,
alternative transmission technologies like advanced conductors
can increase capacity on the transmission system, reduce
viewshed impacts, which are important in a State like mine in
New Hampshire, and improve reliability. While alternative
transmission technologies may cost more up front, there are
dramatic cost savings for customers over the long term. Yet
transmission system operators are hesitant to evaluate
alternative transmission technologies in the generator
interconnection study process.
Commissioner Phillips, what can FERC do to ensure that
system operators and utilities incorporate alternative
transmission technologies, including advanced conductors, into
their interconnection study process?
Mr. Phillips. Thank you for the question. This is exactly
one of the issues that we are addressing in several of the
transmission reform NOPRs that we have ongoing right now. I
believe that it is important that we consider grid-enhancing
technologies that the industry considers at every phase of our
transmission development. At the interconnection queue phase,
as you mentioned. During transmission planning, implementation,
and buildout.
It is critical to--we cannot build our way to a clean and
renewable energy system. We have to take advantage of advanced
reconductoring, ambient line ratings, dynamic line ratings,
issues that we have taken up here at FERC to, as Commissioner
Clements said, squeeze as much juice as we can out of the
current system.
Ms. Kuster. Thank you. Next I want to turn to grid
reliability. Commissioner Phillips, I want to ask you about an
esoteric but important subject: ancillary services. Ancillary
services, the performance attributes an electricity system
needs to function reliably. I would like to focus on the market
for two important--on the moment for two important ancillary
services: spinning and nonspinning reserves.
Spinning reserves and nonspinning reserves are provided by
energy generation resources that can quickly ramp up generation
or come online to respond to changing grid conditions. One
resource that does this very well without carbon emissions is
hydropower. As our electric generation system moves toward more
variable energy resources, it is important for system operators
to ensure resources that provide spinning and nonspinning
reserves remain on the electric system to manage changes in
grid conditions.
Despite spinning and nonspinning reserves' importance for
ensuring grid reliability, the ancillary service markets that
compensate generators for providing these resources provide
just a fraction of the revenue in organized markets. For
example, ancillary services provided just .5 percent of the
revenue in the ISO New England market in 2021. To be sure,
resources that provide ancillary services also participate in
energy markets, and energy markets provide the bulk of revenues
in organized markets. But the ancillary service market should
send a signal that ensures we preserve resources that provide
carbon-free ancillary services.
Again, Chairman Phillips, how can FERC ensure organized
markets adequately compensate resources that provide carbon
free spinning and nonspinning reserves?
Mr. Phillips. Thank you for the question. You are right.
When you look at hydro--and there is another nonthermal
spinning reserve demand response. We have seen that come into
play when there were emergencies like what we saw in California
over Labor Day just last year.
FERC has ongoing proceeding. We actually in 2021 and 2022
had technical conferences on this issue to address compensation
of ancillary services. We require regions to submit a report to
FERC on this issue. We are now looking at that report, looking
at those reports, studying it to see what, if anything, we need
to do to address compensation for these services. But I do
agree, they do play a critical role for the reliability of our
system.
Ms. Kuster. Great, thank you very much. I did have one more
question on U.S. LNG exports, but given the time, we will
submit that. And I yield back.
Mr. Phillips. Thank you.
Mr. Duncan. The gentlelady yields back, and the Chair will
now recognize a former Bear Bryant football player, Mr. Palmer,
for 5 minutes.
Mr. Palmer. I always have to correct the record. I
practiced for him. Thank you for holding the hearing.
I have a number of questions. And one of my concerns is
about the rush to renewables and how it impacts our grid
security. NERC put out a report back in summer of 2021 that
listed the top threats to our power grid, and I think most
people were surprised that it wasn't a cyber attack, it was
changing the resource mix. And I just wonder how seriously, Mr.
Phillips--Chairman Phillips--you guys at FERC take that.
Mr. Phillips. We take the reliability--the reliability of
our grid, Congressman, is job number one.
Mr. Palmer. Now I--that is not the question. The question
is, do you take seriously the threat to the reliability of the
grid of changing the resource mix--in other words, shifting to
making this major shift to renewables?
Mr. Phillips. Yes, absolutely.
Mr. Palmer. OK, thank you. What concerns me is that, when
we look at what has happened in Europe and in the UK--there was
an article in The Economist just a couple of weeks ago that
said there are 68,000 people died, classified as excess winter
deaths, because they couldn't afford to adequately heat their
homes.
Commissioner Christie, are you familiar with that?
Mr. Christie. Are you talking about Winter Storm Uri in
Texas? Is that what----
Mr. Palmer. No, sir. This is what happened in--last winter
in Europe. And it was a rather warm winter for Europeans
standards. But they estimate that 68--are you not familiar with
this?--that 68,000 people died because of higher energy prices?
That's----
Mr. Christie. I am familiar that in Europe they had a huge
spike in energy prices following the invasion of Ukraine.
Mr. Palmer. Well, it wasn't just that. In Germany, because
of the massive shift to renewables, energy prices spiked up 46
percent.
But, Commissioner Danly, are you familiar with this, the
threat that it creates to low-income households when energy
prices spike?
Mr. Danly. The specific story about the excess deaths in
Europe, I didn't remember the specific number, but I know that
they attributed a large number of deaths to the fact that
people were unable to afford to pay for heating. And this
should stand as an object lesson to anybody when we are
considering market design. If we have markets that make it
impossible for price formation to be adequate to incentivize
new renewal--new arrival generation, then we are going to face
similar problems here. The consequences of the electric system
failure are dire.
Mr. Palmer. Right. And it really surprises me that,
Commissioner Phillips and Commissioner Christie, you are not
aware of this, because it is a huge problem. I mean, in the UK,
it has become a scandal. This has been going on since--with the
UK shifting the way they have, I think one of the reports I
read that residential energy consumption has declined by 10
percent not because they have become more efficient, but
because they can't afford it.
Mr. Christie. I would say this: I am very familiar with
European energy policy. I have been over there a lot and
lectured over there. Their energy policies over the last 20
years I think have been borderline just crazy.
Mr. Palmer. I agree.
Mr. Christie. And they are paying the price in increased
prices and reduced supply. In Germany in particular--we could
talk about that for an hour--has been pursuing policy--they
shut down all their nukes, which I think was a terrible policy
decision.
Mr. Palmer. Yes.
Mr. Christie. And what they did in Germany, they shut down
their nukes but yet they reopened coal. So it is ironic that
they----
Mr. Palmer. Which is against the law in Germany, I think.
Mr. Christie. Well, one thing I think that shuts--that is
absolutely undeniable is energy prices, when they skyrocket,
threatens people's--not only their comfort, but their health
because people----
Mr. Palmer. Well, I want to close this out because we have
got less than a minute. My point is there's a couple of things
here that should be very instructive to FERC and to the Biden
administration in regard to energy policy. When prices spike,
they have a disproportionately negative impact on low-income
people, even to the point--and particularly people who are
struggling with respiratory and cardiac issues.
The other thing about it is, is that what Germany and the
rest of Europe just learned is how devastating it can be to be
reliant on an adversarial nation for something that is critical
to their economy and their national security as energy. And
that is where we are heading with renewables. We have the
hydrocarbon resources we need to be a world superpower in
energy, yet we want to make ourselves reliant on China for
renewables, which will drive up cost and which are intermittent
and which I think, Mr. Chairman, will be a threat to public
health.
With that, I yield back.
Mr. Duncan. The gentleman's time is expired, and now we go
to the gentlelady from the Northwest, Ms. Schrier, for 5
minutes.
Ms. Schrier. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you,
Chairman and Commissioners, for appearing here today. I read
all of your testimonies and today, again, we have heard a lot
about uneven playing fields and criticism from some of you of
incentives for clean energy as being disruptive to the free
market.
I agree that the energy market is an uneven playing field.
It has been for quite some time. Estimates are that the U.S.
gives $20 billion in direct subsidies to the fossil fuel
industry every year and hundreds of billions more in indirect
subsidies. So fossil fuels have had an unfair advantage in the
U.S. and also with FERC, where it is my understanding much,
much easier to get an interstate natural gas pipeline approved
than an interstate transmission line.
Commissioner Clements, could you walk me through the powers
that FERC has to site interstate natural gas pipelines that it
lacks for interstate transmission lines? And is there any
reason in your opinion that we should be giving more favorable
treatment to natural gas lines than transmission lines?
Ms. Clements. Thank you, Congresswoman. There is different
legislative histories of FERC's authority when it comes to
responsibility for the siting of interstate natural gas
pipelines, over which FERC has full authority, and the way that
the Federal Power Act has divided responsibility between the
Federal Government and the States. So on the transmission side,
electric transmission, we only have authority over the planning
of that and the paying for that, but then States have the
ultimate authority over siting.
And so on both the planning side and the permitting side,
there are more regulatory hoops to jump through when it comes
to electric transmission than interstate gas pipelines. Now, I
am not suggesting either is easy. Both are hard and both are
important.
I think the one thing that we can say about transmission--
electric transmission planning is that we have robust regional
planning processes set up, and we have a proposal out to
improve upon those processes so that when a line comes through
that rigorous analysis that happens at the regional level, we
can say with confidence, the grid operators and the utilities
can say with confidence, ``That line is going to provide
benefits to customers that outweigh the costs, so let's move
forward with building it.''
That is why I think we can feel confident in these
transmission lines that are coming out, despite the fact that
we need to work really closely with States and with the
utilities and the stakeholders at the State level who then have
the ability to provide input onto the siting of electric
transmission.
Ms. Schrier. And are you finding that States are generally
receptive and cooperative with that, like there is a common
goal and interest, or are you getting pushback?
Ms. Clements. That is a 50-part answer. But we have--one
thing that I am proud of since we--I have been at the
Commission is that we have worked closely with States. We have
set up a joint task force that continues today to work with
States on some of these harder issues to get at. But when you
think about the interstate highway system, for example, if
President Eisenhower and Congress hadn't decided to take
Federal action, getting those roads built would have just been
up to the counties and the States.
Ms. Schrier. Right.
Ms. Clements. And hope--we could hope that they would
decide that those projects were beneficial.
Ms. Schrier. Thank you.
Ms. Clements. Thanks.
Ms. Schrier. Thanks for working with the States. I have
another comment. I come from the Northwest. It is a unique
region where a significant percentage of transmission is owned
and operated by a Federal entity that is--that FERC does not
have jurisdiction over, the Bonneville Power Assoc--
Administration, excuse me. And this fact can present challenges
for interconnecting vast amount of new renewable generation
that Washington State's Clean Energy Transformation Act is
spurring.
And FERC's recent notice of proposed rulemaking on
generation interconnection would require significant
coordination among agencies whose transmission systems could be
affected by these kinds of interconnections: large wind farm,
solar farm, for example. Again, Commissioner Clements, can you
talk about how FERC--and you only have about 30 seconds--how
FERC is planning to ensure that this coordination is going to
ensure, even though you don't have jurisdiction over
Bonneville?
Ms. Clements. Thank you. There's regional differences akin
to Bonneville around the country. What the Commission has done
is put forward a proposal that gets at some of the nuts and
bolts reforms required to fix the long interconnection lines
for generating resources to hook up. As we have put out this
proposal, we know that even if we past this final rule--or
finalize a rule in some form, there will be more to do. That
includes the impact in some cases of proposed inter--you know,
proposed new generation hookups on affected systems around it,
and it is one of the things that we really need to commit
ourselves to continuing to move forward on should we finalize
the proposal that we have before us today.
Ms. Schrier. Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Duncan. The gentlelady is expired. I will now go to the
vice chair of the committee, Mr. Curtis, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Curtis. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
I would like to kind of change all of our paradigms for a
minute from a national grid and pull you down to a very local
level: municipal power. My power that I receive in--from--my
hometown is a municipal power city. They are part of a larger
organization called UMPA, Utah Municipal Power Authority. I had
the opportunity to actually chair that commission for a number
of years, and so I am very sympathetic to these municipal
powers and the way they operate. And I actually had the
responsibility to, as mayor of my city, to stand in front of my
residents and introduce a rate increase, the first one in 20
years. I'm telling you, you talk about price sensitivity, that
was a big deal.
I am also very sympathetic to, let's say, a municipality
that is a municipal power that has a new transmission line.
Passing those rates on sometimes to a city with just a few
thousand people in it, you can see the disproportionate impact
that might happen in a small municipal power agency like that.
Last fall, FERC--and by the way, the first time I heard the
name FERC, I was in this role, and you might imagine it wasn't
spoken with kindness. Nothing personal, I am sure all of you
were not part of FERC at the time. But last fall you invited
comments on fixing the current queue problems for applying to
interconnect new generation facilities to the grid.
The current practice to interconnect a new generation
facility, if it is wind, solar, geothermal, or natural gas,
requires that all the stakeholders submit an application to the
grid operator to be studied. The interconnection request is
placed into a study queue managed by the grid operator. The
study process is costly and painful--painfully long an effort
to weed out unfeasible projects. This backlog is clogging up
the system for getting good and viable projects, generating
projects out in a timely manner.
Municipal utilities and cooperatives have obligations to
serve. As we have talked about them, you know, I mean, this is
folks you see in the grocery store, right? And if they are not
being responsible, they feel that impact quite directly.
However, if UMPA, Utah Municipal Power Authority, selected
the best solar or wind project through an RFP in negotiations
or wanted to develop the site themselves, they would be delayed
by the current backlog for the transmission queue system.
So, Commissioner Christie, you mentioned--I am going to
loosely quote you, these aren't your exact words, I am going to
paraphrase: ``We are losing dispatchable resources at a pace
that we can't sustain.'' Given that, is there any consideration
from FERC to filtering these applications by either quality of
applicant or quality of project?
So, you know, hypothetically you have got, you know, a
hundred solar projects out here, and you have got one that is
dispatchable that is getting clogged up with all of these, and
the applicant might be somebody like UMPA that knows the
process, is very good, it has got it exactly nailed down versus
somebody who has never applied before. Is there any thought
that you could actually build a filter in that would prioritize
quality of applicant or quality of project?
Mr. Christie. Well, I mean, I think that is the advantage
in a non-RTO vertically integrated environment, where the State
is determining what resource mix they want and what kind--and
what type of resources they want. In the markets, no, we can't
say, ``build this'' and ``don't build that,'' that is just not
FERC's role. FERC regulates the markets for just and reasonable
rates, and we have to determine--like in the interconnection
queue regulation, again, it is all about getting just and
reasonable rates and not being unduly discriminatory.
So if you want to prioritize, if you want to pick certain
resources over others, that is really much more suited for a
vertically integrated State-regulated model than it is for an
RTO model.
Mr. Curtis. So, Chairman, can you--are--would you be
willing to look specifically into this queue in Utah, take a
look at the comments that were submitted to FERC last fall, at
your request, and see if there is anything that FERC can do to
move this queue along or to prioritize the better projects for
the grid?
Mr. Phillips. Yes, sir. In fact, we receive some comments
on our interconnection queue reform NOPR. We are--what we are
trying to do is get some of these speculative projects out of
the queue so that we can move forward with projects that are
actually ready to go. Now we are moving from a serial first-
come, first-served approach to a more clustered first-ready,
first-served approach. That is exactly the type of policy I
think that can help with the issue that you are talking about.
Mr. Curtis. Yes. And as I understand it, that is what my
folks are concerned about, is you may have a project that is
just not viable or the builder is not viable, and that is
getting the same priority as a--the dispatchable, reliable
project from somebody who knows exactly what they are doing. So
I would love you to look into that. And I am out of my time.
Thank you all for your service.
Mr. Duncan. The gentleman's time is expired. I now go to
the Sunshine State, Ms. Castor, for 5 minutes.
Ms. Castor. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you to
the FERC Commissioners. You all have a very important role
ensuring a safe, reliable, and efficient electrical grid. And
this is an exciting time as we put all of the historic
investments of the Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act and
the Inflation Reduction Act to work. Already we have seen,
according to reports, over 140,000 jobs created, over $240
billion of private-sector dollars invested across the country,
with much more to come.
But in order to fully realize the benefits and our
potential, what you all are doing is absolutely critical on
transmission reforms, on public participation, environmental
justice, and more. I was very heartened to see your emphasis on
environmental justice and what has been going on at FERC on
this. In fact, Chair Phillips, you--I liked the way you put it.
You--having--you say, ``We need to do all that we reasonably
can do to ensure that environmental justice communities
affected by the Commission's decision do not bear too great a
share of the burdens or too small a share of the benefits that
new energy infrastructure can provide.''
And, Commissioner Clements, you have also emphasized this
and worked hard on it. How does FERC consider the burdens and
benefits as electrical transmission proceeds, and how do you
consider it in your decisionmaking process?
Ms. Clements. Thank you, Congresswoman. FERC has authority
under the Natural Gas Act and under the Federal Power Act, and
it is different in each case. When we are considering project
or proposals under the Natural Gas Act, the law tells us that,
under the Natural Gas Act and under NEPA--and the courts have
affirmed--that the Commission has a responsibility to consider
environmental factors. We also have SEQ guidance that speaks to
any Executive orders that speak to specific treatment of
environmental justice communities.
And so when I go in to do my own public-interest
determination, which we have to all speak to ourselves, I
believe it is imperative that we follow the responsibilities
and the statute and as interpreted by the courts very clearly
to consider environmental factors.
Ms. Castor. Thank you. And it has been heartening to hear
so many of my colleagues talk about the traffic jams on the
grid, the problems with interconnection queues. I learned a lot
chairing the House Select Committee on the Climate Crisis, and
we led a bicameral letter encouraging FERC to act. I filed a
bill, the Efficient Grid Interconnection Act, to encourage FERC
to do proactive planning on transmission to connect anticipated
future generation. Also encourage you to consider the multiple
benefits of a proposed project and ensure the cost allocation
project accounts for the widespread benefits for consumers.
You have also highlighted this, Mr. Chairman, as one of
your priorities. What--with the rulemaking, what is the
timeframe?
Mr. Phillips. So we are working as fast as we can, our
staff. In the near term, our immediate focus is on
interconnection queue reform. I do believe that is probably the
biggest bang for our buck, something that we can do immediately
to help unlock the bottleneck that we see right now, getting
new resources onto the grid.
We continue to work on the other reforms as well. My hope
is that within the next 12 to 24 months we will have all of
these reforms landed and helping bring new transmission----
Ms. Castor. Why 12 to 24 months?
Mr. Phillips. So it takes----
Ms. Castor. Two years is a long time.
Mr. Phillips. It has to run its course. So everything is
changing in our industry, and we have to make sure that we get
this right.
Ms. Castor. OK.
Mr. Phillips. If we get it wrong, it will set back
everything that we are doing.
Ms. Castor. OK.
Mr. Phillips. That is why it takes the time that it takes.
Ms. Castor. Thank you very much. I am also very concerned
with the number of scandals we have seen across the country and
just overly concerned about--or overtly concerned about
ratepayer money possibly being used for unauthorized purposes,
for politics. For example, in Florida they were--FPNL was
involved in election interference, in Ohio massive scandals,
Illinois.
Commissioner Clements, are utilities allowed to use
ratepayer monies to lobby for political purposes?
Ms. Clements. They are not. We have a uniform system of
accounting that requires what types of expenses that utilities
can put in what box. We have put forward a proposal to--excuse
me, a notice of inquiry to look at this type of spending.
Ms. Castor. Is anything happening on that notice of
inquiry?
Ms. Clements. I am--I would--we don't speak to internal
timing, but it is out there----
Ms. Castor. Is----
Ms. Clements [continuing]. And we have a great deal of
comments on it.
Ms. Castor. Because, obviously, the rules that are in place
right now aren't working. You--do you agree the guardrails can
be improved?
Ms. Clements. I--yes, I absolutely believe that it is an
important duty of this Commission to protect customers, and
part of protecting customers is ensuring that utilities are
spending money appropriately per our system of accounts.
Absolutely.
Ms. Castor. Thank you very much.
Mr. Duncan. The gentlelady's time is expired, and I will go
to another leader on energy, Dr. Burgess, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Burgess. And I thank the Chair.
Commissioner Danly, let me just ask you a question. In
your--and I apologize for not being here, we have got multiple
things going on at the same time, as we typically do, all of
them very important. And, of course, this is extremely
important.
But, Commissioner Danly, in your written statement dealing
with the issue about the possibility of a looming reliability
crisis, you make the statement, ``As an engineering matter,
there is no substitute for reliable, dispatchable generation.
Intermittent renewable sources like wind and solar are simply
incapable by themselves of ensuring stability of the bulk
electric system.''
So I guess a lesson for us as policy makers is you can't
legislate physics, it actually--physics is the law, we just try
to administer it. Can you speak to the distortion of the
wholesale electricity markets because of what has happened with
subsidization of the less reliable renewable markets?
Mr. Danly. Certainly. So in our--in the ISOs and RTOs, the
FERC jurisdictional markets, the subsidies have effectively
allowed intermittents to bid into the capacity markets at a
price of zero. That bid of zero sends the price signal that
that electricity, that power, is free, which of course it
isn't, and it depresses the prices for the entire market, such
that those units that have to bid in their actual costs are not
going to clear the market, and they will not get a capacity
award. The result of that is premature retirement.
And the dispatchable resources are the ones that have
things like fuel costs, right? Regardless what that fuel is, if
you have a fuel cost, you have to bid in your actual cost. They
are pushed out of the market before their useful life is over,
and the intermittents will end up making up a larger percentage
of the fleet going forward.
Mr. Burgess. So the problem thereby compounds and becomes
even more pronounced as you increase the component that is
brought by the renewables.
Mr. Danly. And the longer these subsidies have their
effect, the more this happens with each successive auction. And
I mentioned earlier but I will say it again, that we have proof
of the effect of the--of these subsidies in the actual numbers
from the market. PJM has recently said that we are facing
imminent resource adequacy scarcity, or scarcity of resources,
and yet in the last procurement auction, the capacity prices
dropped. And during times of scarcity, if a market functions
correctly, obviously the prices should go up. This is proof
that the subsidies are doing--are working ill in the markets
right now.
Mr. Burgess. Well, and I just don't think it can be
overstated. They can bring their product to market with
essentially a zero cost, but that is not true. I mean, the
dollars have been expended in the subsidies that have been
provided in various pieces of Federal legislation that have
come forward. Is that not correct?
Mr. Danly. Of course it is. And, in fact, if we look at the
system as it is developing right now based on public policy and
FERC prom--FERC's promulgations, we have something even worse
than that, which is the active contemplation of the sub--of the
socialization of cost of transmission to get many of those
subsidized renewables' power to the markets. And thus, the
taxpayer is going to suffer a double insult and injury. They
are taxed for the subsidies that distort the markets, and then
if these issuances by FERC actually go forward, they are going
to have the pleasure as ratepayers for paying so that the
speculators and project developers, the asset managers are
going to be able to actually realize their revenue streams.
Mr. Burgess. But, in fact, the electricity future cannot
exist if there is no place to plug it in, so that is going to
have to happen, is it not? I mean, all EVs, all the charging
stations that are contemplated, they do have to have some place
to plug in.
Mr. Danly. Certainly, but more importantly, there has to be
generation of the right type to keep the system stable. Every
theoretical future that people talk about depends upon actually
having a stable bulk electric system, which requires
dispatchable reliable power, and the way that we get that in
our markets--or at least we are supposed to--is by having price
signals that incentivize either the retention or the arrival of
new assets as needed. And that is not happening, and it is
eventually going to come home to roost, this problem.
Mr. Burgess. I could not agree with you more, and I just
frankly do not understand why we are willing to give that up.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. In the interest of time, I will
yield back.
Mr. Duncan. The gentleman yields back. I now go to Maryland
to Mr. Sarbanes for 5 minutes.
Mr. Sarbanes. Thanks very much, Mr. Chairman. Thank you all
for being here.
So I am a novice on this stuff. I am trying to understand
this balance that needs to be struck during a transition period
between maintaining a certain capacity of dispatchable
resources and introducing more renewable but intermittent
resources into the mix. I do think there is some fearmongering
going on, though, about the dispatchable resources and giving
up through, you know, premature retirement of those resources,
something that, you know, we have to hold onto for dear life,
so I am trying to navigate that conversation.
Earlier this year, PJM, which is the electricity market in
which Maryland sits, as you know, flagged that roughly 40
gigawatts of generation capacity was at risk of retirement by
2030. It didn't mention in all of that that it currently has
over 200 gigawatts of renewable generation capacity stuck in
the interconnection queue. And obviously there is a difference
in logistical requirements between a gigawatt of solar or wind
capacity and a gigawatt of natural gas or coal-fired capacity.
But PJM in theory has now excess capacity that is five
times the capacity of projected retirements within the system.
And, again, I know it is not an easy dynamic here. It does
bring us back, though, to the same question line you have been
getting now for the last few minutes since I have been here,
which is what is going on with the interconnection queue. And I
think you said that the timeline for this proposed reform rule
being out and completed and implemented is 24 months, is that
what I heard? No?
Mr. Phillips. So for interconnection queue reform----
Mr. Sarbanes. Yes.
Mr. Phillips [continuing]. We are looking to move a lot of
faster than that.
Mr. Sarbanes. OK.
Mr. Phillips. I can't talk about specific timelines.
Mr. Sarbanes. OK.
Mr. Phillips. It is my hope that within the coming months
we will have a final rule to act on.
Mr. Sarbanes. And in the meantime, are the RTOs effectively
just stopped and waiting for that reform to come out, or are
they able to proceed, and how much--I don't mean that they are
not taking applications and processing them. I mean, in terms
of looking for any opportunity to expedite or sort the
applications coming in, do they have some tools at their
disposal to do that even as this rule is pending?
Mr. Phillips. You make an excellent point. I think just
FERC taking action on the proposed rule, we have seen different
regions throughout the country implement their own reforms----
Mr. Sarbanes. OK.
Mr. Phillips [continuing]. Regarding interconnection queue
reform, and we have acted on some of those. And I think that we
are going to see the benefits of this. It is a region-by-region
issue. Flexibility is important. What works in the Southeast
may not work in the Northeast. What works in the West may not
work in the Midwest. We want to make sure that we recognize the
nuances----
Mr. Sarbanes. OK.
Mr. Phillips [continuing]. Of the different regions as we
move forward.
Mr. Sarbanes. That's good. So there is kind of an iterative
feedback loop going on in this process, which is helping to
move the whole enterprise forward.
I did want to touch briefly on some issues related
specifically to PJM. I know you are having a forum coming up--I
want to thank you for that--on PJM's capacity markets later
this week, I believe, which is obviously an important issue
related to reliability. I was troubled to hear, though, that
FERC's--this forum that you are putting together doesn't have
any representation from the clean energy industry, which, as we
just mentioned, is dominating the majority of the
interconnection queue right now.
So I would love to have you commit that any decisions that
the Commission is going to make coming out of that forum will
adequately consider the views of the clean energy industry
within PJM's territory, if you might.
Mr. Phillips. We are absolutely focused on including voices
of all stakeholders. In fact, just 2 days ago we added a new
panelist to the PJM forum, Abigail Hopper from SEIA, who will
represent the voices that you mentioned.
Mr. Sarbanes. Thank you very much, I appreciate it.
Mr. Phillips. So thank you for the concern.
Mr. Sarbanes. And I yield back.
Mr. Duncan. The gentleman's time is expired. I now go to, I
believe, Mrs. Lesko for 5 minutes.
Mrs. Lesko. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you all for
being here and also doing your job. I mean, it is absolutely
important, as you know, to keep our lights on.
On June--this first question is for Commissioners Danly and
Christie. On June 1, 2023, the CEO of the North American Energy
Reliability Corporation, Jim Robb, testified before the Senate
and plainly said, I quote, ``Conventional generation is
retiring at an unprecedented rate. North American Electric
Reliability Corporation is concerned that the pace of change is
overtaking the reliability needs of the system. Unless
reliability and resilience are appropriately prioritized,
current trends indicate the potential for more frequent and
more serious long duration reliability disruptions, including
the possibility of national consequence events.''
I am actually working on legislation to address this issue,
so your input is helpful to me. Some of you on--NERC also
pointed out that the retirement of existing firm power
generation and the lack of new firm generation to replace it is
the concern.
Commissioners Danly and Christie, besides transmission,
what new authorities, if any, does FERC require to establish
reliability markets for each ISO or RTO and to address grid
reliability in general? And I guess first to you, Mr. Danly.
Mr. Danly. I would argue that we don't need any new
authorities, that what we need to do is not ignore the
obligations we already have to ensure that rates are just and
reasonable. And as long as we violate certain basic legal
principles--like the requirements of our statute that they be J
and R rates, or that if we ignore the Filed Rate Doctrine and
do things like go back and retroactively change the results of
a procurement auction because we didn't like the outcome--as
long as we keep doing that, you are not going to have a
reliable system and have insured resource adequacy. What we
need to do is add fidelity to our statutes.
Mrs. Lesko. Thank you. And Commissioner Christie?
Mr. Christie. I just want to say one thing, and alluding to
your mention about NERC speaking in the Senate energy
committee. We just heard about there is some--there is an
accusation there is fearmongering going on with those of us
expressing concerns about loss of dispatchable resources. I
don't think the head of NERC is fearmongering when he
repeatedly says that this is a coming danger. I don't think the
head of PJM is fearmongering when he has said we are losing
dispatchable resources at a rate we cannot sustain. I don't
think the head of MISO is fearmongering when he says we are
losing dispatchable resources at a rate we can't sustain. I
don't think it is fearmongering when the head of New York ISO
last week said the same thing.
I think we need to listen to the engineers, not the
lobbyists, and I think we need to be doing what is right for
ratepayers and not political narratives. We are losing
dispatchable resources. All the experts are saying--who know
how to operate a system, the people who actually know how to
operate a system, are saying this is a huge incoming problem,
and I think we ought to be listening to them.
Mrs. Lesko. Thank you. My second question is for Chairman
Phillips. In 20--in June 2021, FERC established a rule, I guess
you would call it, and it allowed California basically to steal
energy that was contractually obligated for Arizona. And so I
sent a letter to FERC about it saying I don't think this is
fair.
But now there is another concern, and it is a concern
because Arizona stakeholders felt that the law was violated in
that respect, and so now there is a concern related to the
current Western Area Power Administration, WAPA, negotiations
about joining the Southwest power pool RTO. In Section 1232D of
the Energy Policy Act of 2005, Congress expressly prohibited
the Commission from exercising any authority over the electric
generation asset's electric capacity or energy of the Federal
utility that the Federal utility is authorized by law to
market, or the power sales activities of the Federal utility.
Chairman Phillips, in the event that WAPA joins a regional
transmission organization, will the Commission refrain from
exercising authority over WAPA as stakeholders in Arizona
believe is required by law?
Mr. Phillips. Thank you. I am aware of the negotiations
that's going on in the West and the issue that you raise with
WAPA joining the pool. I have to take a careful look at the
facts and circumstances that you talk about to see what exactly
our rules require, what our obligations are. But I absolutely
commit to taking a look at that and working with you and your
staff to get a response to that question.
Mrs. Lesko. Thank you. And my time is expired, and I yield
back.
Mr. Duncan. The gentlelady yields back. I will now go to
California to Mr. Cardenas for 5 minutes.
Mr. Cardenas. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and Ranking Member,
for having this important hearing. I appreciate the four
Commissioners for being here today and sharing some time with
us and enlightening the public about what may or may not be
going on out there.
Last Congress, we successfully passed three significant
energy-related laws, and in the years to come these laws will
transform the electricity sector of our country. In fact, the
investments made in the Bipartisan Infrastructure Law and the
Inflation Reduction Act have already started to propel our
Nation toward a cleaner energy economy. These laws also took
long-overdue actionable steps to advance environmental justice.
FERC has unique authority over the energy infrastructure in
this country, and as we build out clean energy it is vital that
the Commission similarly prioritize environmental justice in
its decisionmaking processes. I would like to talk about the
role of environmental justice in the making--in making
determinations for authorizations of natural gas pipelines and
LNG facilities under the Natural Gas Act.
Commissioner Clements, can you speak about the role
environmental justice considerations play when the Commission
is making determinations about if individual applicants satisfy
the criteria for certificates or authorizations under the
Natural Gas Act?
Ms. Clements. Thank you, Congressman. As part of our NEPA
review for any application for certification of an interstate
natural gas pipeline, the Commission does consider
environmental justice impacts. We have had a difference of
opinion sometimes about whether that consideration has been
sufficient, but that is the place where that consideration
comes in as part of making our determination under the Natural
Gas Act.
I think it is a legal requirement, and therefore, if we
don't--if we cut corners and don't fully consider the
communities impacted by our decisions, what we do is we add
months if not years onto the end of those processes because of
the litigation risk involved. It also makes our decisions
better when we think about the impacts, our public-interest
determinations about the impacts on the communities impacted by
those decisions.
Mr. Cardenas. Now when you say impacts on the communities,
you are talking about the impacts of human beings, children,
men, women, elderly?
Ms. Clements. That is right. Any environmental justice
community or otherwise disadvantaged community.
Mr. Cardenas. Thank you very much. Chairman Phillips, to my
knowledge, FERC has never withheld certification or opposition
for a pipeline or LNG facility on environmental justice
grounds. Can you expand upon the criteria that would have to be
satisfied for the Commission to withhold or deny approval to a
project on environmental justice grounds?
Mr. Phillips. Under NEPA and with our NEPA review process,
and also under the NGA, we are required to consider
environmental impacts of a project. That includes environmental
justice communities. And you are right, we are not aware of any
circumstance where we have actually had to deny a project based
on environmental justice concerns.
Hypothetically, it is possible, though, that there could be
significant enough impacts where we would have to consider
that. That has not happened.
Mr. Cardenas. Thank you. When it comes to environmental
impacts and public comment and open hearings and things of that
nature, have there been--are there any examples where a project
has been improved because of this activity of open meetings and
public comment?
Mr. Phillips. Yes. We have a prefiling process, especially
with our natural gas projects, hydro projects where we have a
public comment process. And based upon those comments and
feedback from the community, we can go back to the applicant
and say, ``Make these adjustments, make these modifications.''
It absolutely helps a better applicant--a better application
from the applicant as well as a better decision from the
Commission.
Mr. Cardenas. Good, thank you. In FERC's fiscal year 2024
budget request, the Commission indicated it was interested in
supporting intervenor funding through the Office of Public
Participation. Can--Commissioner Clements, can you discuss the
importance of intervenor funding, specificallyt, how will it
allow FERC to hear from communities traditionally sometimes
excluded from its proceedings?
Ms. Clements. Thank you, Congressman. We do not currently
have an intervenor funding program. What we have done as we
have set up the Office of Public Participation is invited
representatives of States that have set up intervenor funding
programs, including California, to take lessons learned and
figure out how we might approach this. I would certainly defer
to the Chairman on further consideration of that opportunity at
the Commission.
Mr. Cardenas. When somebody is making a comment and they
have the opportunity to hire experts in the field or--and/or
attorneys who have tremendous experience in this, does it help
that community have representation and involvement in the
process?
Ms. Clements. Absolutely. If we don't have that evidence or
that perspective in the record, we cannot consider it in our
decision making.
Mr. Cardenas. Thank you so much. My time having expired, I
yield back.
Mr. Duncan. The gentleman yields back. I will now go to the
Crossroads of America, Mr. Pence, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Pence. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you all for
being here today.
I really appreciate my colleague's comments just now. Our
grid is on an unsustainable path, as a few of you have
mentioned today. Last summer, in the State of Indiana we had to
fire up a coal plant that had been--I call it mothballed, that
is not a technical term. That is because we didn't have enough
electricity. And that is not even the growth. We have lots of
windmills and lots of solar panels. That is not even the growth
of the electrification of the transportation industry yet.
Unfortunately, decisions affecting electricity markets and
their impact on our grid are not overnight decisions. These
affect long-term investments and could take years to be fully
realized, as you've mentioned. If we do not change our
direction now, we could be heading towards catastrophic
failures now. Last summer.
Even though the entities charged with building and
maintaining our electric grid continue sounding alarms, that
has not slowed down the administration's top-down
federalization approach to forced electrification. I am
concerned that the Commission's order to implement new
transmission backstop authority will trample States' rights and
subject ratepayers to foot the bill for a project they did not
ask for.
The Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act provided limited
authority to clarify Section 216 of the Federal Power Act.
However, the Commission seemed to have taken matters into their
own hands to grow their authority over transmission siting and
inject environmental justice goals to fulfill a Green New Deal.
Now, maybe that hasn't inhibited anything yet. But,
Commissioner Christie, I have a question: How do you think the
use of Section 216 authority under the proposed rule would
impact States' ability to govern themselves, and do you
envision a scenario where ratepayers will be required to pay
for misguided transmission facilities that may not fit the
unique needs of that State, that community in which their local
government or State have already rejected?
Mr. Christie. I think there's two questions there. The
first question is, who should do the review of whether it is
needed or prudent? And I absolutely believe the State
regulators should. I think they are much more suited to
understand whether a transmission line is going to serve
consumers in that State. I don't think it is the question of
States--State rights, I think it is the question of who is best
suited to determine whether a power line, which consumers are
going to pay for--let's never forget that, consumers are always
going to get stuck with the bill for power lines.
So before you can justify charging consumers, you have to
make sure that the consumers are going to be served by the
line. And I think that the best people in the best position to
do that are State regulators.
Now, RTOs are going to do planning criteria, and they are
going to vet these lines, and they are going to determine that
these lines have an interregional value, and that is good. But
before you build them, it ought to have to go to a State
regulator and do that vetting. And that is what I think is so
important.
Now, cost allocation is a separate issue. Cost allocation
when you are talking about a line that--and, again, we are in
an RTO scenario now. So RTOs do cost allocation for regional
lines and allocate them across consumers in different States. I
think when it is a--when you go into an RTO, you know that is
going to happen, as I say, but you do it because you assume
that the lines are going to either provide a reliability
benefit or an economic benefit such as reducing congestion
cost, and everybody sort of agrees on what the formula is going
to be.
When a line is built that is--as NARUC, the State regulator
commission, put it--would not be built but for a State policy,
then I think the State regulators have to be the ones
determining how you allocate cost to their own consumers,
because they shouldn't have their consumers charged for a
policy project unless the State agrees to it. To me, that is
just a no-brainer.
Mr. Pence. I am going to have to--I got one more question,
and this question is for Mr. Danly. In my view, pipeline
modifications and upgrades that have minimal environmental
impact should not be subject to lengthy and burdensome
recertification requirements. If the Commission follows through
on an environmental agenda, I am concerned this could open
opportunities to inject environmental justice goals into these
types of recertifications and exasperate delays in upgrading
technology, further deterring investment.
How should FERC refocus authorities from the Natural Gas
Act to ensure that the Commission does not delay these types of
technological upgrades and modifications?
Mr. Danly. FERC should conduct its Section 7 reviews and
the--produce the NEPA document that is the minimally invasive
and least difficult document for that project. That means doing
EAs where EAs are acceptable as opposed to more burdensome
EISs. But, unfortunately, the fact of the matter is all of our
Section 7 issuances are going to be subject to some degree of
litigation risk, because if people choose to attack it on the
basis of our NEPA document, they are going to be operating
under a cloud until that is resolved in the courts.
So absent some kind of profound permitting reform in which
that back-end litigation risk under NEPA is changed----
Mr. Pence. Which you had mentioned before, the last time we
were together, so OK.
Mr. Danly. Yes. With--in the absence of that sort of a
reform of the back-end litigation risk----
Mr. Pence. So we have got to take action here.
Mr. Danly. Something has to happen, otherwise it is all
going to be under a cloud. But----
Mr. Pence. And I am out of time, so I yield back, Mr.
Chair.
Mr. Duncan. I thank the gentleman, and I now go to Ohio,
Mr. Balderson, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Balderson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you all
for being here today.
Ms. Clements, I Googled you, and you are from Dayton, Ohio,
so it is nice to see another Ohioan here.
This question is for Mr. Danly. And during the hearing with
Administrator Regan last month, I expressed my concerns with
the EPA's tailpipe emissions proposal and the increased demand
that would bring while at the same time pushing policies aimed
at forcing the early retirement of the existing generation.
PJM, NERC, and others raised alarm bells on reliability well
before the EPA's latest proposal on fossil-fuel-fired power
plants was released.
Just last week, New York's grid operator expressed grave
concerns on declining reliability margins across the State. If
these rules are finalized, can you discuss the consequences
they could have on reliability and ultimately what this means
for our constituents?
Mr. Danly. So any rule that comes out that increases the
cost for dispatchable generation to operate, when those
dispatchable generators have to seek part of their revenue in
our capacity markets, and those capacity markets are subject to
the effects of subsidies that are preferably given to one type
of generation over them, it is going to drive them into
retirement. And I realize that was several steps through the
chain, but the higher the cost, the harder it is to recoup
those costs in a market that is warped by subsidies.
So you are going to see further retirements of the
dispatchable generation that is necessary to keep the system
stable, and that is going to impair our reliability.
Mr. Balderson. Thank you. A followup: Mr. Danly, do you
think this administration is seriously considering grid
reliability and listening to concerns from grid operators and
energy producers when developing these policies?
Mr. Danly. I have no idea who was consulted in that
process. I didn't participate in that docket so I would be
reticent to say.
Mr. Balderson. Yes, sir. Thank you. Next question: Mr.
Danly, can you discuss the importance of natural gas and
balancing weather-dependent resources?
Mr. Danly. Oh, certainly. So the--as you have greater
penetration of intermittent resources like wind and solar,
somewhat counterintuitively you actually require a greater
quantity of natural gas transmission--the reason being, when
both wind and solar go offline, which they inevitably will at
certain times of the day and during certain conditions, you
need to back up that entire number of megawatts with something
immediately dispatchable, and that has become natural gas.
In fact, in the case of New England, the total quantity of
natural gas transmission capacity they are going to need going
forward if their State policies are implemented is going to
have to increase drastically, just as an example of that.
Mr. Balderson. OK, thank you. My next question is for Mr.
Danly or Mr. Christie, but I am going to go with you, Mr.
Christie, since I have spoken with Mr. Danly a couple of times.
Commissioner, you have said in terms of capacity value, one
nameplate megawatt of wind or solar is not equal to one
nameplate megawatt of gas, coal, or nuclear. And even if every
unit waiting in the PJM queue was interconnected, it would not
solve the reliability problem caused by rapid loss of
dispatchable generation. You touched on this a little with my
colleague from Ohio, Mr. Johnson, but why is that, and can you
expand on the inherent issues with weather-dependent resources?
Mr. Christie. So PJM right now has told us that they are
looking at the loss of about 40 gigawatts of generating
capacity in the next 5 years. And I have also been told by the
market monitors it is really closer to 50 gigawatts. So whether
it is 40 gigawatts or whether it is even worse at 50 gigawatts,
so you lose that generating capacity, most of which is
dispatchable.
So in the queue, if you clear the whole queue you don't--90
percent of the queue is wind, solar, or battery. And so, since
one megawatt of--in terms of capacity value, a mega--a rated
capacity, let's say, of a hundred megawatts on a generator but
it is wind, it is not a hundred megawatts that's going to run
24/7/365, it is going to run intermittently. And so valuing
capacity is one of the big challenges that RTOs do.
Nuclear is going to run 90 percent-plus of the time. Gas--
combined cycle gas can--is--has a capacity factor north of 90
percent as well, it runs all the time. So when you look at what
your resources are in the future, if you lose 40 to 50
gigawatts of a dispatchable--of dispatchable resources and you
are putting on an equal number of megawatts of wind or solar,
you just aren't getting the same capacity value.
Now there are other ways to make up the gap. You have to
make up the gap. And so how you make up that gap is the big
challenge that the RTOs face. But that is the problem, and it
is arithmetic. It is--you know, you are just not replacing the
resources that you are losing.
Mr. Balderson. Thank you very much.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back. Thank you.
Mr. Duncan. I thank the gentlemen and now go to the
gentleman from Augusta, Georgia, home of Vogtle Nuclear Power
Plant, Mr. Allen, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Allen. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and, you
know, this important hearing with our Federal Energy Regulatory
Commission, and thank you for being here today.
Ensuring reliable, affordable energy is critical to the
mission of--it is critical to your mission, so I am glad to
have this opportunity to discuss some impacts in my home State
of Georgia. My district is home to the first new nuclear units
being built in the U.S. in more than three decades. The Vogtle
project has created thousands of jobs and will provide long-
term reliable and affordable power to Georgians.
The Georgia Public Service Commission had the ability to
approve a project like this, a project that will change the
energy landscape in our State and country, because Georgia's
energy regulatory structure values reliability and holds
utilities accountable for keeping the lights on.
Commissioner Christie, should all States and markets be
focused on building and investing in reliable assets like
nuclear plants?
Mr. Christie. Well, your State is a vertically integrated,
State-regulated State, and so those decisions are made by the
State, the State regulator, the PSC. In RTO States, it is not
that simple. In RTO States, especially if they what is called
deregulated--and PJM is a good example--then they are going to
have to seek their reliability resources in what we call the
capacity market. And we have a lot of problems in the capacity
markets right now, a lot of problems as to whether they are
delivering the incentives to get the resources built that
actually are necessary for reliability.
So I think every State ultimately has to determine what is
the best way for it to achieve resource adequacy. Georgia does
it in a vertically integrated, State-regulated model where
units are built in rate-based, and so they are not worried
about capacity markets and the assurance of getting financing.
Mr. Allen. Have you all looked at the impact of States that
are vertically integrated versus those States that are dealing
with this situation and are actually shutting down certain gas,
coal, nuclear power? And obviously their citizens are already
experiencing brownouts in difficult weather situations. I mean,
so what is the impact going to be State to State if some States
allow this to happen?
Mr. Christie. You know, I think every State's got to decide
how they want to serve their consumers. I think that the
vertically integrated, State-regulated model has worked very
well, and I think if you look at the RTO versus non-RTO States
and the data, the rates are actually lower in non-RTO States
than they are in RTO States.
Mr. Allen. Right.
Mr. Christie. Now there's outliers both places, OK? But
overall, the rates are lower in non-RTO States than in RTO
States. But it is really, ultimately the States have got to ask
themselves, looking at the various--and there is a lot of
different models around the country. There's RTOs that have
capacity markets like PJM. There is an RTO that does not have a
capacity market. SPP is the example.
So States have really got to step up and ask themselves,
``What is the best model for us?'' And I don't think FERC ought
to be telling them what they ought to do.
Mr. Allen. Right.
Mr. Christie. I think the States have got to decide what is
the best model for us. And you certainly got a whole wide array
across the country that you can choose from. I think States
ought to be looking at the different models. I think Georgia's
model, frankly, is a very good one. I think they ought to stick
with it.
Mr. Allen. Right.
Mr. Christie. But that is the decision for Georgia to make.
Mr. Allen. Well, but the public needs to understand the
repercussions of some of the--what some of these States are
deciding is--and particularly residents in those States and--
let me ask you this, the reliability risk if we stop building
assets like natural gas and nuclear generation, and try to
transition too quickly to renewable energy--which is what we
are seeing right now--if you look down the road, where are we
going to be?
Mr. Christie. As I said at the very beginning of this, I
think if we continue to lose dispatchable resources, I think we
are going to be in a catastrophic situation with loss of power
and outages, and those are--you know, a weeklong outage such as
we saw in Texas during Winter Storm Uri is catastrophic. There
is no other word for it. People die. They freeze to death. And
we don't want that in the United States of America. And I
don't--and I think we have got to have the resources to make
sure that we don't suffer that kind of catastrophic outcome.
Mr. Allen. Well, thank you for that. And you did write a
letter--or we wrote a letter. In a letter you wrote back to
Chairwoman Rodgers and Chairman Duncan in May of 2023, ``While
no regulatory construct is perfect, all have their flaws, I
believe that on balance, the State-regulated integrated
resource plan construct is the most effective in dealing with
consumer cost'' and that sort of thing. And you obviously still
believe that that is the best way to go, is the State-
integrated system.
Mr. Christie. If I was in a State and somebody asked me how
would you do it, that is how I would do it. I think that is--
that model served the United States for a long, long time to
give us one of the best and most enviable power systems in the
world.
The whole RTO system--we could talk about this for hours.
The whole RTO system really is rooted in what was called
deregulation in the late 1990s and early 2000s. And I think
there has been a lot of flaws that have been exposed in that,
but even that, they are different models. I mean, my State,
Virginia, we went into an RTO, but we kept the vertically
integrated, State-regulated model, so we were sort of half in,
half out, you could put it that way. But I am glad we kept the
model we kept.
Mr. Allen. Right.
Mr. Christie. But, again, there is no--there are flaws in
every system. There is no perfect system. And it is--you are
not choosing the best model, you are choosing the tradeoffs you
want to make.
Mr. Allen. Right. Thank you.
Mr. Duncan. I thank the gentleman. I will now go to Idaho
to Mr. Fulcher for 5 minutes.
Mr. Fulcher. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you for
being here and--to the panelists, and for the information
today.
I am going to direct the first part of this to Mr. Christie
but probably try to get some input from Mr. Danly as well as
least here. But we have a natural gas pipeline system that runs
through the Pacific Northwest, including my State of Idaho and
also California. It is called the GTN Xpress. And there is some
relatively small improvements that need to be made on the
compressor stations for that pipeline, and they are all--and it
is already in place. Those are on private lands.
Last October, the Idaho delegation, the entire delegation,
and our Idaho Governor sent FERC Commissioners a letter in
support of this upgrade. And, Mr. Chairman, I would like to
enter that letter into the record if I may, please.
Mr. Duncan. Without objection, so ordered.
[The information appears at the conclusion of the hearing.]
Mr. Fulcher. FERC's response to us came on November 29, and
it simply wanted to look at the elements of the EIS that it
received in November. And that was generally the response. But
it has now been 8 months, and nothing has happened on that. And
this was also not included on the June 15 open meeting agenda,
so I have to assume that it is still outstanding and that delay
is ongoing.
The delay appears to have started with former Chair Glick's
decision to have FERC staff complete a lengthier EIS rather
than the environmental assessment under NEPA, and I just need
to underscore this is not a new project, and so I am trying to
contemplate why this would need to be done over again with a
new I--EIS is difficult here, because there has been no
significant environmental impacts.
So I would just like to ask, Mr. Christie, if you could
address that, bring that to bear, why the delay on this?
Mr. Christie. Are you asking the Chairman, or are you
asking me?
Mr. Fulcher. Mr. Christie.
Mr. Christie. That is me, OK.
Mr. Fulcher. OK.
Mr. Christie. Well, I think that is a pending proceeding,
and so we can't talk about it anyway.
Mr. Fulcher. So----
Mr. Christie. I don't think we are allowed to talk about
it.
Mr. Fulcher [continuing]. Nothing for 8 months, and so--and
nothing on the agenda.
Mr. Christie. Well, if it is a pending proceeding, we can't
talk about it. I can't answer why a letter that was sent to----
Mr. Fulcher. OK, then we will ask the Chairman. Mr.
Chairman?
Mr. Christie [continuing]. The former Chairman didn't get
answered.
Mr. Phillips. Mr. Christie made a good point. This is a
pending proceeding. You are right, we had--EIS was performed
for this particular project, just talking procedurally here.
Mr. Fulcher. So why----
Mr. Phillips. That was----
Mr. Fulcher [continuing]. Did we need to do a new EIS?
Mr. Phillips. That was a decision that was made----
Mr. Fulcher. By?
Mr. Phillips. Not by me.
Mr. Fulcher. Well, you are the Chairman.
Mr. Phillips. What I have tried to focus on is moving
forward expeditiously as we can and speeding up our reviews.
Mr. Fulcher. Mr. Chairman, it has been 8----
Mr. Phillips. Based upon advice from our----
Mr. Fulcher. It is 8 months, nothing on the agenda.
Mr. Phillips. We will act on projects when they are ready.
Mr. Fulcher. The level of dependence on this is very
significant, and we just don't seem to be getting any kind of a
response.
Mr. Phillips. We understand. We are working as diligently
as we can. I am very proud of the progress that we have made on
projects. This is another project that is a part of the backlog
that we have inherited----
Mr. Fulcher. Mr. Chairman, there appears to be a pattern,
and it appears to be a political one. If there is anything that
has to do with infrastructure, energy infrastructure, the
extraction industries, there appears to be a pattern here that
things just get delayed and all of the sudden there has got be
a whole other set of processes done on something that is in
existence. And so please take that as constructive as you will,
and we are going to continue to stay on top of this.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Duncan. All right, the gentleman yields back. I'll go
to North Dakota, Mr. Armstrong, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Armstrong. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Commissioner Danly, FERC's 2022 draft policy statement
appears to incorporate the feedback of activist groups that
call for weighing end use when making certification
determinations. This would seem to me to adjust FERC's economic
regulatory goal to one of a regional planning entity. Isn't
that inconsistent with FERC's statutory mission?
Mr. Danly. Yes, it would be.
Mr. Armstrong. Does FERC actually have jurisdiction over
upstream production or downstream use?
Mr. Danly. Not only do we not have conduc--jurisdiction
conferred, it is specifically excepted from our jurisdiction in
the NGA.
Mr. Armstrong. You note in your dissent to the 2022 updated
policy statement that the Natural Gas Policy Act, Wellhead
Decontrol Act, and the changes to the Fuel Use Act altered the
natural gas market. You go on to say that these deregulatory
changes were not at play in the Transco case. Can you explain
how the statutory and regulatory changes in the decades after
Transco are instructive for limiting FERC's ability to consider
end use?
Mr. Danly. So we have two different statutes that we have--
that--in every Section 7 case. We have NEPA, which requires a
review of the environmental consequences of a major Federal
action, then we have the Natural Gas Act. The Natural Gas Act
gives us clear jurisdiction over the actual facility, the
pipeline, from beginning to end of the pipeline. And our
obligation under the NGA is to ensure the orderly development
of the infrastructure that gets plentiful supplies of natural
gas to customers at reasonable prices.
We do not have jurisdiction over the ultimate end use of
the gas nor over the production or gathering facilities. And so
our NGA inquiry is not--is cabined to the actual facility. And
under NEPA, we are not obligated to consider any effects over
which we don't have jurisdiction. That is a Supreme Court case,
Public Citizens, unambiguous. You do not have to consider those
effects that are outside your jurisdiction. And because we
don't do things like license gathering facilities or the
generators that burn the gas, it is not obligate--we are not
obligated to consider it.
Mr. Armstrong. So when you guys are continuing--I mean,
doing these, are you taking into account Supreme Court cases
from other agencies that are going on at this point in time,
like West Virginia v. EPA or--I mean, is anybody taking those
analyses and applying it to what I would argue is a
nonstatutory expansion of FERC's role?
Mr. Danly. I will speak for myself. You will find cases
like that in my dissents when I disagree with the Commission's
decisions. But, ultimately, even if we don't restrain
ourselves, the hope is that ultimately the courts are going to,
and they will chastise us and tell us to stay in our lane
properly.
Mr. Armstrong. I have a different viewpoint from that. I--
my position is whether we want to or not, the Supreme Court is
going to start forcing Congress to do its job, which I think
would be a good thing as well.
For decades, States have cooperated in the pipeline
approval process by responsibly acting on the requirements in
Section 401 of the Clean Water Act. But over the last 10 years,
certain States seem to have abused this authority to meet
political end goals outside the intent of the law. Do you think
States' recent misuse of Section 401 has undermined the Natural
Gas Act?
Mr. Danly. Yes. And, in fact, the Natural Gas Act was
specifically amended to give the condemnation authority to the
certificate holder because decades and decades ago States began
refusing to use their condemnation power for projects that they
were opposed to, and so to create a coherent statutory
universal scheme for the country, it was amended. Section 401,
though, is only one of the two keys to this. The other is NEPA
reform. And in the absence of reforming both of those, we still
have a lot of potential litigation risk to all the Section 7s
ahead--in front of us.
Mr. Armstrong. Well, a lot of ink has been spilled all
across the country about the increase in the debt ceiling last
week, but one of the positive notes I think coming through that
has been some of that--the initial stages to NEPA reform. And
by the way, that is going to help all energy infrastructure
projects, not just gas, not just coal. But one agency
permitting shot clocks and time limits are going to be a really
huge issue.
I am going to end with just one of these things, and this
is kind of a statement from somebody who--you talk about power
outages in Texas causing loss of life. I live in a different
part of the country. Power outages in January in North Dakota
are going to signifi-- I mean, would be absolutely
catastrophic. And FERC needs to make sure RTOs like MISO are
significantly more accurate in their forecasts.
MISO's load forecast for 2023 to 2024 is 92,000 megawatts.
MISO's load during the Winter Storm Elliott in December of 2022
was 104,000 megawatts. And the low load forecast equal less
resources to needed--needed to meet power needs and
ridiculously low payments for capacity because it is not
needed. Meaning my traditional--or my baseload power sources in
places like North Dakota are not rewarded for providing power
to the system when it is needed, and it disincentives baseload
units because they are not rewarded for providing the power
when they have to.
And at the very least, this is going to force early
retirements, all of this because we are not requiring RTOs to
be more realistic in how much power they need. And just
yesterday somebody really smart told me that you can provide
renewable power for 360 out of 365 days a year, but you better
have dispatchable power for the other 5 days. And until we
figure that out, the least we could do from FERC is make sure
that these estimates are actually rewarding the people
providing baseload power, because the financial disincentive is
going to be catastrophic to places like my home State of North
Dakota.
And with that, I yield back.
Mr. Duncan. The gentleman yields back. I now go to Mr.
Pfluger from Texas.
Mr. Pfluger. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate the
witnesses for being here.
I am very concerned about the regulatory environment that
we have in this country as it relates to what my colleagues
have been talking about, which is the ability to produce that
reliable power when we need it.
After the Supreme Court ruled in West Virginia v. The EPA,
the EPA began issuing rulemaking on May 11, 2023, that would
limit greenhouse gas emissions for fossil fuel-fired power
plants, including both new and existing gas-fired plants and
from existing coal-fired plants as part of the Clean Air Act.
And the U.S. EIA explained that, of all the utility-scale
electricity last year, 39.8 percent was generated by natural
gas, 19\1/2\ by coal, 21.5 by renewables, unreliables, and the
EPA's proposal would directly basically attack 59.3 percent of
the electricity generation.
So when Secretary Granholm was in front of this committee,
I asked her the question, where is this power going to come
from and how much will it take if we do the EV plan that the
administration is proposing, and she said it will double. The
electricity demand will double.
So, Commission Danly, when you think about this, how will
the EPA's Clean Power Plan 2.0 impact FERC's mission to deliver
affordable and reliable energy to consumers across the country?
Mr. Danly. Anything that raises the cost of providing
dispatchable power in our jurisdictional markets, the RTOs and
ISOs--anything that raises the cost of those generators is
going to drive them into early retirement as long as those
markets are--have their prices skewed by subsidies and do not
compensate the preexisting generation to keep them economically
viable.
Mr. Pfluger. Are we--has anybody done the math on this if
we do this EV plan by 2032 or whatever the latest year is?
Mr. Danly. I have every confidence that somebody has done
the math. FERC's role, of course, is simply to ensure----
Mr. Pfluger. Sure.
Mr. Danly [continuing]. That the rates for power and
interstate commerce are just and reasonable. We can establish
compensation mechanisms, but until we actually insulate our
markets from the effects of subsidies and we compensate
correctly to ensure solvency, we are going to see more
premature retirements and we are going to see the reliability
of the system jeopardized.
Mr. Pfluger. Yes. It is a national security issue. We have
the resources here, and we need to use these.
Commissioner Phillips--Chairman Phillips, I want to switch
to some issues with our LNG export terminals, and I want to ask
you, are you aware of the additional recommendations that FERC
staff have placed and are placing on the LNG export facilities?
Mr. Phillips. I'm sorry, could you repeat the question?
Mr. Pfluger. Yes. Are you aware of the additional
recommendations that FERC and the staff has placed on LNG
export facilities?
Mr. Phillips. We have actually--since I have taken over in
January, I have instructed staff to actually streamline our
processes regarding LNG. Based upon recommendations from our
staff, we have chosen to institute EAs as opposed to EISs where
appropriate. This is not a categorical decision, but this is
done on a case-by-case basis.
Mr. Pfluger. I would like to work with you on this, because
currently there are seven LNG export terminals in the lower 48
that went through a multiyear review by FERC before receiving
their authorizations to construct and operate. And it is my
understanding that while these facilities have been in
operation that FERC staff over the past several years have
recommended changes and modifications to the facilities even
after they have been reviewed and fully approved. That is my
concern right now.
So if you are saying that you have streamlined this
process, we need these facilities to be up and running in order
to get that product to market, and that--and we are having
complaints that that is actually not happening.
Mr. Phillips. I understand your frustration. I would love
to work with your staff to get----
Mr. Pfluger. We need to follow up on that. Lastly, in
February of 2022, FERC issued two draft policy statements that
I believe overstepped the agency's permitting authority: a
certification of new interstate natural gas facilities and
consideration of greenhouse gas emissions and natural gas
infrastructure project reviews.
My question, Chairman Phillips, is that I know that these
were issued under your predecessor, Chairman Glick, but these
policies hang over industry's head and are a deterrent to
investment in reliable baseload energy production. Can you
provide me an update as to the status of these policy
statements?
Mr. Phillips. Absolutely. They are now draft policy
statements. We are using the 1999 gas policy statement right
now to move forward projects. It is working. I think there are
opportunities for us to improve the legal durability of our
decisions.
We are one of the most litigated agencies in all of
government, so where we can improve what we do, I think we
should try to do that. I am working with my colleagues. We
continue to negotiate. I want a bipartisan policy statement to
come out, something that can live beyond this composition of
the Commission and it can give expectations to utilities as
well as communities and every stakeholder that we have in our
process.
Mr. Pfluger. Chairman, my time is expired. We would love to
have bipartisanship on this issue, but we have to get to the
point where we could build things in this country and we can
have sustainable, reliable, affordable energy, and we need your
help doing it instead of stopping projects that are on their
way to being built.
Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Duncan. The gentleman yields back. In 1984, Kevin
Butler kicked a field goal to--for Georgia to beat my Clemson
Tigers as time expired. The gentleman from Georgia just beat
the clock, and he is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Carter. And go Dawgs.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you for having this
hearing, and thank all of you for being here. Thank you for the
work that you do. It does not go unnoticed. We know it is not
an easy job, it is a tough job, but it is a necessary job, and
sincerely, we appreciate all of your efforts and your work.
We all understand how abundant and affordable energy, how
important it is. And I know that--I believe all of you agree
with that, and I believe all of you work toward that same
common goal that we have. And--but, unfortunately, as we have
seen, and particularly over the past few years, that one
essential ingredient has been taken for granted, and that is
the reliability, and that is certainly something that we need
to make sure that we have.
Many of you pointed it out, in fact, saying there is a
looming reliability crisis in our electrical market--
electricity markets. Commissioner Danly said that. And the
United States is heading for a very catastrophic situation in
terms of reliability. Commissioner Christie said that.
And that is what concerns me, is that--and we talked about
this before. It is almost as if it is going to take a
catastrophic event in order to get our attention. And I hate to
see that happen. I hope that we can do something about it
before we witness that catastrophic event, and I think we would
be better served--obviously we would be better served if that
did happen.
Chairman Phillips, you said we face unprecedent challenges
through reliability of our Nation's electric system, and I
couldn't agree more. But I have to say that these issues are
different across the country. Now, I live in southeast Georgia,
in the Southeastern United States. Georgia has been selected as
the best State to do business in for, I think, 9 straight years
now.
And one of the reasons for that is because we have
reliable, affordable energy. If we didn't have that, businesses
wouldn't be coming to the State of Georgia. So that is one
thing that we are very proud of and certainly that we have
worked hard on.
I want to ask you, Commissioner Clements, you submitted
test--your submitted testimony suggests that conducting studies
and holding conferences to try to solve the reliability issues
and other concerns in the RTO markets. Are there lessons to be
learned that we can learn from the success of markets that are
already providing long-term reliable and affordable energy like
in Georgia and in the Southeast region?
Ms. Clements. Thank you, Congressman. As Commissioner
Christie has discussed, the regions have different regulatory
frameworks. There are lots of lessons to be learned from
looking at both the regions that don't have RTO markets and the
regions that do. In the regions that do have those markets, I
think what we are seeing now and the reason that prices have
stayed low in capacity markets and PJM, is that they are
talking about resource adequacy. That is how much steel do we
have in the ground.
The trouble we are facing right now in the winters across
the country is an energy adequacy problem. The problem is none
of these resource types were designed to withstand freezing-
cold temperatures for 8 days at a time, and so they all failed.
All types of resources had trouble. So did the production of
gas, so did the transport of gas.
So what we have to do is say, OK, how do we evolve these
market rules? They are not static. They are not stuck. They are
not an end to themselves. What we need to do is evolve them so
that on a going-forward basis, the markets are sending signals
that generators fix these problems, that they produce the kind
of resources we need, and that they are will--they are able to
perform in times of shortage such as extreme weather.
Mr. Carter. OK. Well, thank you for that. Now, I want to
shift kind of a little bit here and talk more about natural gas
because natural gas is a big part of what we do in the State of
Georgia. We don't generate energy in the State of Georgia, with
the exception of, and I am sure my colleague to my--my
delegation colleague mentioned the fact that we just have two
nuclear reactors started up in the State of Georgia, which we
are very proud of and worked hard on that.
But we don't really generate a lot of electricity, so we
depend on natural gas and particularly on pipelines, and we
don't have enough pipelines, and we all understand that.
Commissioner Christie, you have said that the U.S. is not--
is already not building enough pipelines to transport a
sufficient amount of gas to maintain a steady and reliable
supply of energy. What is FERC doing to ensure that we have got
adequate pipeline capacity to meet demands?
Mr. Christie. Well, what FERC is doing is, when
applications are filed with us, of course, we are going to act
on those applications. The problem is, I think last year or the
year before, we hit the lowest number of new constructed
pipelines in, like, the last 30, 40 years.
Mr. Carter. Is there a reason for that? I mean, are they
being denied and they have just not applied?
Mr. Christie. FERC is approving pipelines in due course as
they come into us. I think the numbers dropped, but a lot of
the pipelines that FERC approves, they end up being appealed.
Every single one is challenged. Every single gas facility,
Greenfield pipeline, Brownfield pipeline where you are
replacing an existing pipeline with an updated, better-
engineered pipeline, compressor stations, you name it, they are
being challenged in this national legal campaign, which is
deliberately trying to drive up the cost of even starting a
pipeline or any kind of facility in the hope that, well, if you
raise the cost through litigation, eventually they will just go
away and stop, and no one will invest in them.
And that is what is happening. And we are not getting
nearly enough of the capacity we are going to have to have. Gas
is the backup fuel of choice. Gas is--the head of NERC has
described gas as the balancing fuel of the future because gas
is what has to balance the system when the intermittent
resources are not producing. And so you have to have them
together. You can't have wind and solar by themselves. You have
to have gas as the balancing fuel to run when they don't. It is
just--you have to be an engineer to figure that out.
Mr. Carter. Right.
Mr. Christie. But we are not building the pipeline capacity
to serve those gas-generating units that are critically
important to balance the system. Again, the system has to be
balanced every second of every minute of every hour or every
day. You----
Mr. Carter. Right. And I am way over time.
Mr. Christie. OK.
Mr. Carter. But I appreciate your response. And, again,
thank all of you for the work that you do. It does not go
unnoticed.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Duncan. I thank the gentleman. It is not always saving
the best for last.
Seeing there are no further Members wishing to ask
questions, I would like to thank all of our witnesses. Chairman
Phillips, Commissioner Danly, Commissioner Clements,
Commissioner Christie, great testimony. Thanks for answering
the questions today.
I ask unanimous consent to insert in the record documents
included on the staff hearing documents list.
So without objection, that will be it.
[The information appears at the conclusion of the hearing.]
Mr. Duncan. And we will stand adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 1:19 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]
[Material submitted for inclusion in the record follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
