- TIKTOK: HOW CONGRESS CAN SAFEGUARD AMERICAN DATA PRIVACY AND PROTECT CHILDREN FROM ONLINE HARMS

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

TIKTOK: HOW CONGRESS CAN SAFEGUARD AMER-
ICAN DATA PRIVACY AND PROTECT CHILDREN
FROM ONLINE HARMS

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

MARCH 23, 2023

__________

Serial No. 118-13

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Published for the use of the Committee on Energy and Commerce

govinfo.gov/committee/house-energy
energycommerce.house.gov

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
53-839 PDF                      WASHINGTON : 2023

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE

CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington
Chair
MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas            FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey
ROBERT E. LATTA, Ohio                  Ranking Member
BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky              ANNA G. ESHOO, California
H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia         DIANA DeGETTE, Colorado
GUS M. BILIRAKIS, Florida            JAN SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois
BILL JOHNSON, Ohio                   DORIS O. MATSUI, California
LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana               KATHY CASTOR, Florida
RICHARD HUDSON, North Carolina       JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland
TIM WALBERG, Michigan                PAUL TONKO, New York
EARL L. ``BUDDY'' CARTER, Georgia    YVETTE D. CLARKE, New York
JEFF DUNCAN, South Carolina          TONY CARDENAS, California
GARY J. PALMER, Alabama              RAUL RUIZ, California
NEAL P. DUNN, Florida                SCOTT H. PETERS, California
JOHN R. CURTIS, Utah                 DEBBIE DINGELL, Michigan
DEBBBIE LESKO, Arizona               MARC A. VEASEY, Texas
GREG PENCE, Indiana                  ANN M. KUSTER, New Hampshire
DAN CRENSHAW, Texas                  ROBIN L. KELLY, Illinois
JOHN JOYCE, Pennsylvania             NANETTE DIAZ BARRAGAN, California
KELLY ARMSTRONG, North Dakota, Vice  LISA BLUNT ROCHESTER, Delaware
Chair                            DARREN SOTO, Florida
RANDY K. WEBER, Sr., Texas           ANGIE CRAIG, Minnesota
RICK W. ALLEN, Georgia               KIM SCHRIER, Washington
TROY BALDERSON, Ohio                 LORI TRAHAN, Massachusetts
RUSS FULCHER, Idaho                  LIZZIE FLETCHER, Texas
AUGUST PFLUGER, Texas
DIANA HARSHBARGER, Tennessee
MARIANNETTE MILLER-MEEKS, Iowa
KAT CAMMACK, Florida
JAY OBERNOLTE, California
------

Professional Staff

NATE HODSON, Staff Director
SARAH BURKE, Deputy Staff Director
TIFFANY GUARASCIO, Minority Staff Director

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hon. Cathy McMorris Rodgers, a Representative in Congress from
the State of Washington, opening statement.....................     2
Prepared statement...........................................     5
Hon. Frank Pallone, Jr., a Representative in Congress from the
State of New Jersey, opening statement.........................     8
Prepared statement...........................................    10

Witnesses

Shou Chew, Chief Executive Officer, TikTok, Inc..................    12
Prepared statement...........................................    14
Answers to submitted questions \1\

Submitted Material

Inclusion of the following was approved by unanimous consent.
Article of March 10, 2023, "A former TikTok employee tells
Congress the app is lying about Chinese spying," by Drew
Harwell, Washington Post.......................................   121
Article of March 22, 2023, "TikTok Generation: A CCP Official in
Every Pocket," by Kara Frederick, Director, Technology Policy
Center, Heritage Foundation....................................   126
Article of June 17, 2022, "Leaked Audio From 80 Internal TikTok
Meetings Shows That US User Data Has Been Repeatedly Accessed
From China," by Emily Baker-White, Buzzfeed News...............   141
Article of October 25, 2022, "A China-Based ByteDance Team
Investigated TikTok's Global Security Chief, Who Oversaw U.S.
Data Concerns," by Emily Baker-White, Forbes...................   149
Article of November 28, 2022, "TikTok Couldn't Ensure Accurate
Responses To Government Inquiries, A ByteDance Risk Assessment
Said," by Emily Baker-White, Forbes............................   158
Article of October 20, 2022, "TikTok Parent ByteDance Planned To
Use TikTok To Monitor The Physical Location Of Specific
American Citizens," by Emily Baker-White, Forbes...............   168
Article of December 22, 2022, "EXCLUSIVE: TikTok Spied On Forbes
Journalists," by Emily Baker-White, Forbes.....................   177
Article of March 21, 2023, "India Banned TikTok In 2020. TikTok
Still Has Access To Years Of Indians' Data," by Alexandra S.
Levine, Forbes.................................................   187
Article of April 24, 2022, "TikTok Insider: Zhang Yiming's
Journey of Giant Waves," from Jiemian News.\2\
Report of the Innovation and Training Division, National Cyber
Security Centre, Lithuania, "Assessment of cybersecurity of
mobile devices supporting 5G technology sold in Lithuania,
Analysis of Products Made by Huawei, Xiaomi and OnePlus,"
August 23, 2021.\2\
Analysis, "Banning TikTok: What's At Stake and Would a Ban
Address the National Security Risk?," by Sarah Kreps and Joshua
Clark, Cornell Brooks Tech Policy Institute....................   192

----------

\1\ Mr. Chew's responses have been retained in committee files and are
available at https://docs.house.gov/meetings/IF/IF00/20230323/115519/
HHRG-118-IF00-Wstate-ChewS-20230323-SD030.pdf.
\2\ The information has been retained in committee files and is
included in the Documents for the Record at https://docs.house.gov/
meetings/IF/IF00/20230323/115519/HHRG-118-IF00-20230323-SD030.pdf.
Report by Rachel Lee, et al., "TikTok, ByteDance, and their ties
to the Chinese Communist Party," March 14, 2023, submitted to
the Australian Senate Select Committee on Foreign Interference
through Social Media, March 14, 2023.\2\
Article of September 8, 2021, "How TikTok Serves Up Sex and Drug
Videos to Minors," by Rob Barry, et al., Wall Street Journal...   197
Article of March 23, 2023, "China Says It Opposes Forced Sale of
TikTok," by Raffaele Huang, Wall Street Journal................   203
Twitter post by Ron Deibert concerning Citizen Lab and TikTok,
re-Tweeted by John Scott-Railton, March 23, 2023...............   205
Article of March 22, 2023, "Crunch Time for TikTok and Americans'
Freedom of Speech," by Caitlin Vogus, Center for Democracy and
Digital Inclusion..............................................   207
Letter from PEN America, et al., to Member of Congress...........   211
Statement of the Electronic Frontier Foundation, "The Government
Hasn't Justified a TikTok Ban," by Adam Schwartz and David
Greene, March 16, 2023.........................................   214

----------

\2\ The information has been retained in committee files and is
included in the Documents for the Record at https://docs.house.gov/
meetings/IF/IF00/20230323/115519/HHRG-118-IF00-20230323-SD030.pdf.

TIKTOK: HOW CONGRESS CAN SAFEGUARD AMERICAN DATA PRIVACY AND PROTECT
CHILDREN FROM ONLINE HARMS

----------

THURSDAY, MARCH 23, 2023

House of Representatives,
Committee on Energy and Commerce,
Washington, DC.
The committee met, pursuant to call, at 10:01 a.m. in the
John D. Dingell Room 2123, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon.
Cathy McMorris Rodgers (chair of the committee) presiding.
Members present: Representatives Rodgers, Burgess, Latta,
Guthrie, Griffith, Bilirakis, Johnson, Hudson, Walberg, Carter,
Duncan, Palmer, Dunn, Curtis, Lesko, Pence, Crenshaw, Joyce,
Armstrong, Weber, Allen, Balderson, Fulcher, Pfluger,
Harshbarger, Miller-Meeks, Cammack, Obernolte, Pallone
(committee ranking member), Eshoo, DeGette, Schakowsky, Matsui,
Castor, Sarbanes, Tonko, Clarke, Cardenas, Ruiz, Peters,
Dingell, Veasey, Kuster, Barragan, Blunt Rochester, Soto,
Craig, Schrier, Trahan, and Fletcher.
Staff present: Kate Arey, Digital Director; Sean Brebbia,
Chief Counsel, Oversight and Investigations; Jolie Brochin,
Clerk, Health; Deep Buddharaju, Senior Counsel, Oversight and
Investigations; Sarah Burke, Deputy Staff Director; Michael
Cameron, Professional Staff Member, Innovation, Data, and
Commerce; Lauren Eriksen, Clerk, Oversight and Investigations;
Sydney Greene, Director of Operations; Jack Heretik, Press
Secretary; Slate Herman, Counsel, Communications and
Technology; Jessica Herron, Clerk, Innovation, Data, and
Commerce; Nate Hodson, Staff Director; Tara Hupman, Chief
Counsel; Noah Jackson, Clerk, Communications and Technology;
Sean Kelly, Press Secretary; Peter Kielty, General Counsel;
Emily King, Member Services Director; Chris Krepich, Press
Secretary; Tim Kurth, Chief Counsel, Innovations, Data, and
Commerce; Giulia Leganski, Professional Staff Member,
Communications and Technology; Kate O'Connor, Chief Counsel,
Communications and Technology; Kaitlyn Peterson, Clerk, Energy
and Environment; Brannon Rains, Professional Staff Member,
Innovation, Data, and Commerce; Olivia Shields, Communications
Director; Lacey Strahm, Fellow, Innovation, Data, and Commerce;
Michael Taggart, Policy Director; Teddy Tanzer, Senior Counsel,
Innovation, Data, and Commerce; Dray Thorne, Director of
Information Technology; Hannah Anton, Minority Staff Assistant;
Ian Barlow, Minority FTC Detailee; Jennifer Epperson, Minority
Chief Counsel, Communications and Technology; Austin Flack,
Minority Junior Professional Staff Member; Waverly Gordon,
Minority Deputy Staff Director and General Counsel; Daniel
Greene, Minority Professional Staff Member; Tiffany Guarascio,
Minority Staff Director; Perry Hamilton, Minority Member
Services and Outreach Manager; Lisa Hone, Minority Chief
Counsel, Innovation, Data, and Commerce; Liz Johns, Minority
GAO Detailee; Mackenzie Kuhl, Minority Digital Manager; Una
Lee, Minority Chief Health Counsel; Will McAuliffe, Minority
Chief Counsel, Oversight and Investigations; Dan Miller,
Minority Professional Staff Member; Joe Orlando, Minority
Senior Policy Analyst; Christina Parisi, Minority Professional
Staff Member; Caroline Rinker, Minority Press Assistant; Harry
Samuels, Minority Oversight Counsel; Michael Scurato, Minority
FCC Detailee; Andrew Souvall, Minority Director of
Communications, Outreach, and Member Services; Johanna Thomas,
Minority Counsel; Caroline Wood, Minority Research Analyst; and
C.J. Young, Minority Deputy Communications Director.
Mrs. Rodgers. The committee will come to order. Before I
begin, I would like to take a moment to address the guests in
the audience.
First of all, thank you for coming. We think engaged
citizens are welcome and a valuable part of the political
process. I do want to remind the guests in the audience that
the Chair is obliged under the House rules and the rules of the
committee to maintain order and preserve decorum in the
committee room. I know that we have deep feelings on these
issues and that we all may not agree on everything, but I ask
that we abide by these rules and be respectful of our audience
members, our viewers, and our witnesses. The Chair appreciates
the audience cooperation in maintaining order as we have a full
discussion on these important issues.
The Chair recognizes herself for 5 minutes for an opening
statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, A
REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF WASHINGTON

Mr. Chew, you are here because the American people need the
truth about the threat TikTok poses to our national and
personal security. TikTok collects nearly every data point
imaginable, from people's location to what they type and copy,
who they talk to, biometric data, and more. Even if they have
never been on TikTok, your trackers are embedded in sites
across the Web. TikTok surveils us all, and the Chinese
Communist Party is able to use this as a tool to manipulate
America as a whole.
We do not trust TikTok will ever embrace American values,
values for freedom, human rights, and innovation. TikTok has
repeatedly chosen the path for more control, more surveillance,
and more manipulation. Your platform should be banned.
I expect today you will say anything to avoid this outcome,
like you are 100 percent responsible for what TikTok does, that
you suddenly endorse a national data privacy standard, that
Project Texas is more than a marketing scheme, that TikTok
doesn't harm our innocent children, or that your ties to the
Chinese Communist Party through ByteDance is just a myth. We
aren't buying it.
In fact, when you celebrate the 150 million American users
on TikTok, it emphasizes the urgency for Congress to act. That
is 150 million Americans that CCP can collect sensitive
information on, and control what we ultimately see, hear, and
believe.
TikTok has repeatedly been caught in the lie that it does
not answer to the CCP through ByteDance. Today the CCP's laws
require Chinese companies like ByteDance to spy on their
behalf. That means any Chinese company must grant the CCP
access and manipulation capabilities as a design feature. Right
now ByteDance is under investigation by the DoJ for surveilling
American journalists, both digital activity and physical
movements, through TikTok.
We also know that many of your employees still report
directly to Beijing. Internal recordings reveal there is a back
door for China to access user data across the platform. Your
employees said, ``Everything is seen in China.'`
A gateway to spy is not the only way TikTok and ByteDance
can do the bidding of the CCP. TikTok has helped erase events
and people China wants the world to forget. It has even
censored an American teenager who exposed CCP's genocide and
torture of Uyghur Muslims. The facts show that ByteDance is
beholden to the CCP, and ByteDance and TikTok are one and the
same.
TikTok also targets our children. The For You algorithm is
a tool for TikTok to own their attention and prey on their
innocence. Within minutes of creating an account, your
algorithm can promote suicide, self-harm, and eating disorders
to children. It encourages challenges for them to put their
lives in danger and allows adults to prey on our beautiful,
beloved daughters.
It is also a portal for drug dealers to sell illicit
fentanyl that China has banned, yet is helping Mexican cartels
produce, send across our border, and poison our children. In
China the CCP proactively prohibits this type of TikTok content
that promotes death and despair to kids.
From the data it collects to the content it controls,
TikTok is a grave threat of foreign influence in American life.
It has been said it is like allowing the Soviet Union the power
to produce Saturday morning cartoons during the Cold War, but
much more powerful and much more dangerous.
Banning your platform will address the immediate threats.
Make no mistake, this committee is also looking to the future.
America needs to be prepared to stop the next technological
tool or weapon China will use for its own strategic gain. We
must prevent any app, website, and platform like TikTok from
ever spying on Americans again, and we must provide the
strongest protections possible for our children.
That is why this committee is leading on a national privacy
and data security standard. It restricts sensitive American
data from reaching our adversaries to begin with, and what Big
Tech and data brokers collect, process, store, and sell. It
makes it illegal for any platform to track and target children
under 17.
Mr. Chew, the committee has requested that TikTok appear
before us for a long time. For those we serve, we are glad the
day has finally come. Today the world is watching. ByteDance is
watching. The Chinese Communist Party is watching. But the
answers you owe are to the American people, a free people who
cherish their God-given unalienable, rights to life, liberty,
and the pursuit of happiness for all. They deserve the truth.
Complete honesty is the standard and the law you are being
held to before this committee as we seek to get answers and a
full understanding of what happens at TikTok under your watch.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mrs. Rodgers follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mrs. Rodgers. The Chair now recognizes the ranking member,
Mr. Pallone, for 5 minutes.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. FRANK PALLONE, Jr., A REPRESENTATIVE
IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF NEW JERSEY

Mr. Pallone. Thank you, Madam Chair, and let me say that I
agree with much of what you just said, and I certainly
appreciate your enthusiasm and your commenting on being a
mother and concerned about children. And I am glad that we are
having this hearing today.
Big Tech has transformed the information superhighway into
a super spreader of harmful content, invasive surveillance
practices, and addictive and damaging design features. Data is
Big Tech's most valuable commodity, and by collecting far more
user data than they need, Big Tech platforms can use, share,
and sell information to generate billions of dollars in
revenue.
Today the American people are powerless to stop this
invasion of their privacy, and we can't wait any longer to pass
comprehensive national privacy legislation that puts people
back in control of their data. We must hold Big Tech
accountable for its actions, and transparency is critical to
that accountability.
In the past several Congresses, this committee has heard
from senior executives of other social media platforms about
troubling and repeated instances where they put profits over
people. Now, today, we intend to bring more transparency to
TikTok, which is controlled by its Beijing, communist-based
parent company, ByteDance. And while TikTok videos provide a
new, fun way for people to express their creativity and enjoy
the videos of others, the platform also threatens the health,
privacy, and security of the American people. And I am not
convinced that the benefits outweigh the risks that it poses to
Americans in its present form.
More than 130 million people in the United States use
TikTok every month, including two-thirds of American teenagers.
TikTok collects and compiles vast troves of valuable personal
information to create an addictive algorithm that is able to
predict with uncanny accuracy which videos will keep users
scrolling, even if the content is harmful, inaccurate, or feeds
destructive behavior or extremist beliefs.
Now, the combination of TikTok's Beijing, communist-based
China ownership and its popularity exacerbates its danger to
our country and to our privacy. The Chinese Communist
government can compel companies based in Beijing like TikTok to
share data with the communist government through existing
Beijing law or coercion.
National security experts are sounding the alarm, warning
that the Chinese Communist government could require TikTok to
compromise device security, maliciously access American user
data, promote pro-Communist propaganda, and undermine American
interests. Disinformation campaigns could be launched by the
Chinese Communist government through TikTok, which has already
become rife with misinformation and disinformation, illegal
activities, and hate speech. A recent report found that 20
percent of TikTok search results on prominent news topics
contain misinformation.
Social media's profitability depends on growth and
engagement. More eyes on their content for longer time leads to
more advertising dollars and revenue generation. Addictive
algorithms are fine-tuned to optimize growth and engagement
without necessarily taking into account potential harms to
users.
Children and teens are particularly vulnerable. Frequent
online use of interactive media on digital devices is
associated with increased levels of depression among middle and
high school students. Research has found that TikTok's
addictive algorithms recommend videos to teens that create and
exacerbate feelings of emotional distress, including videos
promoting suicide, self-harm, and eating disorders.
Public outrage and hollow apologies alone are not going to
rein in Big Tech. Congress has to enact laws protecting the
American public from such online harms, and we simply cannot
wait any longer to pass the comprehensive privacy legislation
that I authored with then ranking member, now Chair Rodgers,
last Congress that overwhelmingly advanced out of the
committee. It ensures that companies, wherever they live--it
ensures, I should say, that consumers, wherever they live in
this country, will have meaningful control over their personal
information.
Our legislation establishes baseline data minimization
requirements, ensuring that companies only collect, process,
and transfer data necessary to provide a service. And it
provides heightened privacy protections for children and
teenagers. So I think it is time to make this legislation the
law of the land.
And we also have to examine the reforms needed to section
230 of the Communications Decency Act. The liability shield for
social media platforms has for too long been abused and led to
a lack of accountability for social media platforms. So I hope
we can find a bipartisan path forward on that issue too--and I
think you are having a hearing next week on it--so we can stop
the very real harms to our country and democracy under the
current law.
I look forward to the discussion today as we continue to
bring accountability to Big Tech.
And let me say to Mr. Chew I know this is about TikTok, but
I am focusing all my attention not only on TikTok but on these
concerns, wide concerns about social media and the protection
of privacy.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Pallone follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Pallone. And with that, I yield back. Thank you again,
Madam Chair, for having this very important hearing.
Mrs. Rodgers. Our witness today is Mr. Shou Chew, chief
executive officer of TikTok.
You are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF SHOU CHEW, CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER, TIKTOK, INC.

Mr. Chew. Thank you. Chair Rodgers, Ranking Member Pallone,
members of the committee, thank you for your time.
I am Shou Chew, and I am from Singapore. That is where I
was born, as were my parents. And after serving in Singapore's
military, I moved to the U.K. to attend college, and then here
to the U.S. to attend business school. I actually met my wife
here. By the way, she was just born a few miles away from here
in Virginia.
Two years ago I became the CEO of TikTok. Today we have
more than a billion monthly active users around the world,
including over 150 million in the United States. Our app is a
place where people can be creative and curious, and where close
to 5 million American businesses, mostly small businesses, go
to find new customers and to fuel their growth.
Now, as TikTok has grown, we have tried to learn the
lessons of companies that have come before us, especially when
it comes to the safety of teenagers. While the vast majority of
people on TikTok are over 18, one of--and one of our fastest-
growing demographics are people over 35, we have spent a lot of
time adopting measures to protect teenagers. Many of those
measures are firsts for the social media industry.
We forbid direct messaging for people under 16, and we have
a 16-minute watch time by default for those under 18. We have a
suite of family pairing tools so that parents can participate
in their teens' experience and make the choices that are right
for their family.
We want TikTok to be a place where teenagers can come to
learn, which is why we recently launched a feed that
exclusively features educational videos about STEM. STEM videos
already have over 116 billion views on TikTok, and I think
TikTok is inspiring a new generation to discover a passion for
math and science.
I would also like to talk about national security concerns
that you have raised that we take very, very seriously. Let me
start by addressing a few misconceptions about ByteDance, of
which we are a subsidiary. ByteDance is not owned or controlled
by the Chinese Government. It is a private company. Sixty
percent of the company is owned by global institutional
investors, 20 percent is owned by the founder, and 20 percent
owned by employees around the world. ByteDance has five board
members; three of them are American.
Now, TikTok itself is not available in mainland China. We
are headquartered in Los Angeles and in Singapore, and we have
7,000 employees in the U.S. today. Still, we have heard
important concerns about the potential for unwanted foreign
access to U.S. data and potential manipulation of the TikTok
U.S. ecosystem. Our approach has never been to dismiss or
trivialize any of these concerns. We have addressed them with
real action. Now, that is what we have been doing for the last
2 years: building what amounts to a firewall that seals off
protected U.S. user data from unauthorized foreign access.
The bottom line is this: American data stored on American
soil by an American company overseen by American personnel. We
call this initiative Project Texas. That is where Oracle is
headquartered. Today U.S. TikTok data is stored, by default, in
Oracle's servers. Only vetted personnel operating in a new
company called TikTok U.S. Data Security can control access to
this data.
Now, additionally, we have plans for this company to report
to an independent American board with strong security
credentials.
Now there is still some work to do. We have legacy U.S.
data sitting in our servers in Virginia and in Singapore. We
are deleting those, and we expect that to be complete this
year. When that is done, all protected U.S. data will be under
the protection of U.S. law and under the control of the U.S.-
led security team. This eliminates the concern that some of you
have shared with me that TikTok user data can be subject to
Chinese law.
This goes further, by the way, than what any other company
in our industry has done.
We will also provide unprecedented transparency and
security for the source code for the TikTok app and
recommendation engine. Third-party validators like Oracle and
others will review and validate our source code and algorithms.
This will help ensure the integrity of the code that powers
what Americans see on our app.
We will further provide access to researchers, which helps
them study and monitor our content ecosystem. Now, we believe
we are the only--the only--company that offers this level of
transparency.
Now, trust is about actions we take. We have to earn that
trust with decisions we make for our company and our products.
The potential security, privacy, content manipulation concerns
raised about TikTok are really not unique to us. The same
issues apply to other companies. We believe what is needed are
clear, transparent rules that apply broadly to all tech
companies. Ownership is not at the core of addressing these
concerns.
Now, as I conclude, there are more than 150 million
Americans who love our platform, and we know we have a
responsibility to protect them, which is why I am making the
following commitments to you and to all our users.
Number one: We will keep safety, particularly for
teenagers, as a top priority for us.
Number two: We will firewall protect U.S. data from
unwanted foreign access.
Number three: TikTok will remain a place for free
expression and will not be manipulated by any government.
And fourth, we will be transparent and we will give access
to third-party independent monitors to remain accountable for
our commitments.
I will be grateful for any feedback that you have, and I
look forward to your questions. Thank you very much.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Chew follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mrs. Rodgers. As you know, the testimony that you are about
to give is subject to title 18, section 1001 of the United
States Code.
As you state in your testimony, ByteDance is TikTok's
parent company. Is it accurate to say that you are in regular
communication with the CEO of ByteDance, Liang Rubo?
Mr. Chew. Chair Rodgers, yes, I am in----
Mrs. Rodgers. Thank you.
Mr. Chew [continuing]. Communication with him.
Mrs. Rodgers. OK. Kelly Zhang is the CEO of ByteDance
China, overseeing Douyin, the Chinese version of TikTok. Are
you in regular communication with Kelly?
Mr. Chew. I am not in regular communication with her.
Mrs. Rodgers. The ByteDance editor in chief is Zhang
Fuping, correct?
Mr. Chew. I believe so.
Mrs. Rodgers. And Wu Shugang is a Beijing ByteDance
Technology board member, and also an official of the Cyberspace
Administration in China. Is this correct?
Mr. Chew. I believe so. I--they are not in the right----
Mrs. Rodgers. Thank you. All of these individuals work or
are affiliated with the Chinese Communist Party, are at the
highest levels of leadership at ByteDance, a company where you
previously served as the chief financial officer and where you
regularly communicate with their CEO.
TikTok has told us that you weren't sharing data with the
CCP. But leaked audio from within TikTok has proven otherwise.
TikTok told us that you weren't tracking the geolocation of
American citizens. You were. TikTok told us you weren't spying
on journalists. You were.
In your testimony you state that ByteDance is not beholden
to the CCP. Again, each of the individuals I listed are
affiliated with the Chinese Communist Party, including Zhang
Fuping, who is reported to be the Communist Party Secretary of
ByteDance and who has called for the party committee to ``take
the lead'` across all party lines to ensure that algorithm is
enforced by ``correct political direction.'`
Just this morning The Wall Street Journal reported that the
CCP is opposed to a forced sale of TikTok by ByteDance, quoting
a CCP spokesman as saying the Chinese Government would make a
decision regarding any sale of TikTok. So the CCP believes they
have the final say over your company. I have zero confidence in
your assertion that ByteDance and TikTok are not beholden to
the CCP.
Next question. Heating content is a way of promoting and
moderating content. In your current or previous positions
within Chinese companies, have employees engaged in heating
content for users outside of China? Very quickly, yes or no?
Mr. Chew. Our heating process is approved by our local
teams----
Mrs. Rodgers. So----
Mr. Chew [continuing]. In the various countries.
Mrs. Rodgers [continuing]. The answer is yes. Thank you.
Have any moderation tools been used to remove content on
TikTok associated with the Uyghur genocide, yes or no?
Mr. Chew. We do not remove that kind of content. TikTok is
a place for freedom of expression and, Chair Rodgers, like I
said, if you use our app you can go on it and you will see a
lot of users around the world----
Mrs. Rodgers. Thank you.
Mr. Chew [continuing]. Expressing content----
Mrs. Rodgers. Thank you.
Mr. Chew [continuing]. On that topic and many others.
Mrs. Rodgers. Thank you. What about the massacre in
Tiananmen Square, yes or no?
Mr. Chew. I am sorry, I didn't hear the question.
Mrs. Rodgers. The massacre in Tiananmen Square.
Mr. Chew. That kind of content is available on our
platform. You can go and search it.
Mrs. Rodgers. I will remind you that making false or
misleading statements to Congress is a Federal crime.
Mr. Chew. I understand. Again, you can go----
Mrs. Rodgers. OK, thank you.
Mr. Chew [continuing]. On our platform. You will find that
content.
Mrs. Rodgers. Next question--OK, thank you. Reclaiming my
time, can you say with 100 percent certainty that ByteDance or
the CCP cannot use your company or its divisions to heat
content to promote pro-CCP messages for an act of aggression
against Taiwan?
Mr. Chew. We do not promote or remove content at the
request of the Chinese Government.
Mrs. Rodgers. The question is----
Mr. Chew. We will----
Mrs. Rodgers. The question is are you 100 percent certain
that they cannot use your company to promote such messages?
Mr. Chew. It is our commitment to this committee and all
our users that we will keep this free from any manipulation----
Mrs. Rodgers. If you can't--OK.
Mr. Chew [continuing]. By any government.
Mrs. Rodgers. If you can't say 100 percent certain, I take
that as a no.
As I previously referenced, TikTok spied on American
journalists. Can you say with 100 percent certainty that
neither ByteDance nor TikTok employees can target other
Americans with similar surveillance techniques?
Mr. Chew. Chair Rodgers, I, first of all, disagree with the
characterization that it is spying. It was an internal
investigation on----
Mrs. Rodgers. Surveillance. Yes or no, can you do
surveillance of other Americans?
Mr. Chew. We will protect the U.S. user data and fire it
all from all unwanted foreign access is a commitment that we
have given to the committee.
Mrs. Rodgers. So I guess my question is, can--I want you
to--I wanted to hear you say with 100 percent certainty that
neither ByteDance nor TikTok employees can target other
Americans with similar surveillance techniques as you did with
the journalists.
Mr. Chew. Again, I disagree with the characterization as
surveillance, and we have given our commitments, Chair Rodgers,
the four commitments. I think--is our commitment that we will
not be influenced by any government on these issues.
Mrs. Rodgers. DoJ is investigating this surveillance right
now.
To the American people watching today, hear this: TikTok is
a weapon by the Chinese Communist Party to spy on you,
manipulate what you see, and exploit for future generations. A
ban is only a short-term way to address TikTok. And a data
privacy bill is the only way to stop TikTok from ever happening
again in the United States.
I yield back. I now yield to the ranking member for 5
minutes.
Mr. Pallone. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Let me just start out by saying, Mr. Chew, that I don't
find what you suggested with Project Texas and this firewall
that is being suggested to whoever will be--will be acceptable
to me. In other words, you know, the--I still believe that the
Beijing communist government will still control and have the
ability to influence what you do. And so this idea, this
Project Texas, is simply not acceptable.
According to a recent report, TikTok is on target to make
between 15 and 18 billion dollars in revenue this year. Is that
an accurate forecast?
Mr. Chew. Congressman, as a private company we are not
sharing our----
Mr. Pallone. I thought that is what you would say.
Mr. Chew [continuing]. Numbers publicly.
Mr. Pallone. How much money will TikTok make by delivering
personalized advertisements just to your users in the United
States? Will you give me that information?
Mr. Chew. Again, Congressman, respectfully----
Mr. Pallone. I thought----
Mr. Chew [continuing]. As a private company, we are not
disclosing that.
Mr. Pallone. I thought that is what you would say.
Look, my--the impression you are giving--and I know, you
know, I can understand why you are trying to give that
impression--is that, you know, that you are just performing
some kind of public service here, right? I mean, this is a
benign company that is just performing a public service. I--
maybe you are not, maybe that is not what you are saying, but I
don't buy it, right?
My concern here is primarily about the privacy issue, the
fact that TikTok is making all kinds of money by gathering
private information about Americans that they don't need for
their business purposes, and then they sell it.
And I mentioned this legislation that the ranking--that the
Chair and I have that would minimize data collection and make
it much more difficult for TikTok and other companies to do
that. So what--if you want to make some commitments today, why
don't--I will ask you to make some commitments with regard to
this legislation. And, you know, you are going to tell me,
well, ``The bill isn't passed, and so therefore I don't have to
do it.'' But, you know, you say you are benign, you want to do
good things for the public.
So let me ask you, why not--what about a commitment that
says that you won't sell the data that you collect, would you
commit to that, not selling the data you collect?
Mr. Chew. Congressman, I believe we don't sell data to any
data brokers.
Mr. Pallone. You don't sell to anyone.
Mr. Chew. We don't sell data to data brokers.
Mr. Pallone. I didn't ask you--data brokers. Do you sell it
to anyone?
In other words, under our bill, you could only use the data
for your own purposes, not to sell it to anyone. Would you
commit to not selling your data to anyone?
Mr. Chew. Congressman, I actually am in support of some
rules about privacy----
Mr. Pallone. I didn't ask you whether----
Mr. Chew. Yes.
Mr. Pallone [continuing]. Rules. I asked you whether the
company, TikTok, would commit to not selling its data to
anyone, and just using it for its own purposes internally.
Mr. Chew. I can get back to you on the details of that.
Mr. Pallone. OK, get back to me. All right.
Another thing that is in our bill says that we would
prohibit targeting marketing to people under the age of 17.
Would you be willing to agree to prohibit targeted marketing to
people, Americans, under the age of 17?
Mr. Chew. Congressman, we have actually stricter rules for
our advertisers in terms of what they can show to our users----
Mr. Pallone. So do you prohibit----
Mr. Chew [continuing]. Under the age of 18.
Mr. Pallone. Would you be willing to prohibit targeted
marketing to those under 17? That is what is in our bill.
Mr. Chew. I understand that there is some talk and some
legislation around this around the country----
Mr. Pallone. Well, again, I am not interested--I wanted you
to make that commitment without the legislation. Since you say
you are a good company, you want to do good things, why not?
Mr. Chew. It is something we can look into and get back to
you.
Mr. Pallone. OK, I appreciate that. OK, we also have in our
bill a requirement of heightened protection for sensitive data,
particularly location and health data. Would you commit to not
gathering or dealing with location or health data unless you
get affirmative consent from the consumer?
In other words, under our bill those are categorized as
sensitive. And unless the person specifically says, ``I want
you to collect that data,'` you wouldn't be able to, location
and health data. Would you commit to that?
Mr. Chew. Congressman, in principle I support that, which--
by the way, we do not collect precise GPS data at this point,
and I do not believe we collect any health data.
Mr. Pallone. All right. So would you be willing to make
that commitment, that from now on you won't collect location
and health data without--well, you are saying at all. Is that a
commitment?
Mr. Chew. Congressman, this is data that is frequently
collected by many other companies.
Mr. Pallone. I know other companies do it. I don't think
they should without affirmative consent. You said you want to
be a good actor, so why not make that commitment to me today?
Mr. Chew. We are committed to be very transparent with our
users about what we collect. I don't think what we collect--I
don't believe what we collect is more than most players----
Mr. Pallone. You see----
Mr. Chew [continuing]. In the industry----
Mr. Pallone [continuing]. My problem here is you are trying
to give the impression that you are going to move away from
Beijing and the Communist Party. You are trying to give the
impression that you are a good actor. But the commitments that
we would seek to achieve those goals are not being made today.
They are just not being made. You are going to continue to
gather data. You are going to continue to sell data. You are
going to continue to do all these things and continue to be
under the aegis of the Communist Party through the--through
your, you know, organization that owns you. So in any case,
thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Mrs. Rodgers. The gentleman yields back. The Chair now
recognizes the gentleman from Texas, Mr. Burgess, for 5
minutes.
Mr. Burgess. I thank the Chair. Thank you, Mr. Chew, for
joining us today.
I think we have heard you say multiple times that TikTok is
not a Chinese company, that ByteDance is not a Chinese company.
But according to an article in today's Wall Street Journal--
quoting here--``China's Commerce Ministry said Thursday that a
sale or divestiture of TikTok will involve exporting technology
[that has] to be approved by the Chinese Government.'`
Continuing to quote: ``The reported efforts by the Biden
administration would severely undermine global investors'
confidence in the U.S., said Shu Jueting, a ministry
spokeswoman.'` Continuing to quote: ```If [the news] is true,
China will firmly oppose it,' she said, referring to the forced
sale.'`
So despite your assertions to the contrary, China certainly
thinks it is in control of TikTok and its software. Is that not
correct?
Mr. Chew. Congressman, TikTok is not available in mainland
China. And today we are headquartered in Los Angeles and
Singapore. But I am not saying that, you know, the founders of
ByteDance are not Chinese, nor am I saying that we don't make
use of Chinese employees, just like many other companies around
the world. We do, you know, use their expertise on some
engineering projects.
Now----
Mr. Burgess. But according to their ministry spokeswoman,
it would be a divestiture of exporting technology from China.
So they--again, China thinks they own it, even though you do
not.
Madam Chair, I would just like to ask unanimous consent to
put today's Wall Street Journal article----
Mrs. Rodgers. Without objection, so ordered.
Mr. Burgess [continuing]. Into the record.
[The information appears at the conclusion of the hearing.]
Mr. Burgess. Now, Mr. Chew, I wouldn't ask you to discuss
any privileged attorney-client materials, but did anyone, aside
from your lawyers, assist you in preparation for today's
hearing?
Mr. Chew. I prepared for this hearing with my team here in
DC.
Mr. Burgess. Did anyone at ByteDance directly provide
input, help, or instruction for your testimony today?
Mr. Chew. Congressman, this is a very high-profile hearing.
My phone is full of well-wishers, you know, but I prepared for
this hearing with my team here in DC.
Mr. Burgess. Are you willing to share who helped prepare
you for this hearing with the committee? And you can do that in
writing.
Mr. Chew. I can follow up with you, if you like.
Mr. Burgess. OK. Can you guarantee that no one at ByteDance
had a role in preparing you for today's hearing?
Mr. Chew. Like I said, Congressman, this is a high-profile
hearing. A lot of people around the world were sending me
wishes and unsolicited advice, but I prepared for this hearing
with my team here in DC.
Mr. Burgess. Are the attorneys representing TikTok also
representing ByteDance?
Mr. Chew. Yes, I believe so.
Mr. Burgess. What percentage of TikTok revenue does
ByteDance retain? Just give me a ballpark estimate, if you
don't precisely know.
Mr. Chew. Congressman, like I said, as a private company we
are not prepared to disclose our financials in public today.
Mr. Burgess. Can we ask you to get back to us with a
ballpark? We are not asking for the precise figures, but to
get--so the committee can have some understanding of the
percentage of TikTok revenue that ByteDance retains.
Mr. Chew. I understand the question. Respectfully, as a
private company we are not disclosing our financials today.
Mr. Burgess. Prior to today's hearing, did anyone
affiliated with the Chinese Communist Party discuss this
hearing with you or anyone else on TikTok's senior management?
Mr. Chew. Congressman, since I have been CEO of this
company I have not had any discussions with Chinese Government
officials.
Mr. Burgess. So what--but what about the Chinese Communist
Party itself? Have any of those officials discussed this with
you?
Mr. Chew. Like I said, I have not had any discussion with
Chinese Government officials. I don't know the political
affiliation of everybody I speak to, so I can't verify the
statement.
Mr. Burgess. Let me ask you a question in a different
direction.
A few weeks ago this committee had a field hearing down in
McAllen, Texas, and it was on the issue of fentanyl and illegal
immigration. And one of our witnesses, Brandon Judd, a 25-year
veteran Border Patrol agent, said that all social media
platforms play a role in illegal immigration. That is one of
the ways cartels advertise their services throughout the world
and convince people to put themselves in their hands and come
to the United States. The cartels all use social media
platforms. Are you aware of this phenomenon?
Mr. Chew. Any content that promotes human abuse is
violative of our community guidelines, which dictates what is
allowed and not allowed on our platform. We proactively
identify and remove them from our platform.
Mr. Burgess. Well, it would be very helpful if you would
share with the committee examples of how you have removed
people, because what we heard at the hearing was that TikTok
was one of the platforms that recruits adolescents in the
United States to help with transporting people who are in the--
who have been trafficked into the country, as well as
contraband substances. Would you help us with that,
understanding who you have removed from your platform?
Mr. Chew. Congressman, I would be delighted to check with
my team and get back to yours and be collaborative.
Mr. Burgess. Thank you.
I yield back.
Mrs. Rodgers. The gentleman's time has expired. The Chair
recognizes the lady from California, Ms. Eshoo, for 5 minutes.
Ms. Eshoo. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman.
Mr. Chew, thank you for being here today.
As Members of Congress, our very first and top
responsibility is to protect and defend, protect and defend our
Constitution and the national security of our country. So I
view this entire issue--now, there are many parts of it that
are not part of our national security, in my view, but first
and foremost, for our national security.
So in examining TikTok breaking away from ByteDance, I
would like to ask you some questions about that, and how a
severance in terms of the relationship with ByteDance, how user
data, American user data, would be protected.
Now, under Beijing's security laws, article 7 compels
companies to provide data; article 10 makes the reach of the
law extra--extraterritorial. Now, this is very clear. I don't
need to read all of it into the record, but that--those are the
laws of the PRC.
How does ByteDance--how does TikTok, rather--how do you
convince the Congress of the United States that there can be a
clean break? Why would the Chinese Government sidestep their
national law, including article 7, article 10, in terms of user
data?
Mr. Chew. Congresswoman, thank you for the question. I am
glad you asked this.
As I said in the opening statement, our plan is to move
American data to be stored on American soil by an American
company----
Ms. Eshoo. I understand that. I understand that. But you
are sidestepping--or I haven't read anything in terms of
TikTok--how you can actually say--and you spoke in your opening
statement about a firewall relative to the data, but the
Chinese Government has that data. What--how can you promise
that that will move into the United States of America and be
protected here?
Mr. Chew. Congresswoman, I have seen no evidence that the
Chinese Government has access to that data. They have never
asked us. We have not provided.
Ms. Eshoo. Well, you know what? I find that----
Mr. Chew. I have asked that question----
Ms. Eshoo. I find that actually preposterous.
Mr. Chew. I have looked, and----
Ms. Eshoo. I really do.
Mr. Chew [continuing]. I have seen no evidence of this
happening. And in order to assure everybody here and all our
users, our commitment is to move the data into the United
States, to be stored on American soil by an American company,
overseen by American personnel. So the risk will be similar to
any government going to an American company asking for data, if
that----
Ms. Eshoo. Well, I am one that doesn't believe that there
is really a private sector in China. And when you look at their
national law, and what--specifically, these two articles,
article 7 and article 10, are very clear. So I think that there
is a real problem, a real problem relative to our national
security about the protection of the user data.
I don't believe that TikTok has--that you have said or done
anything to convince us that that information, the personal
information of 150 million Americans, that the Chinese
Government is not going to give that up. So can you tell me----
Mr. Chew. Congresswoman, if I----
Ms. Eshoo. Can you tell me who writes the algorithms for
TikTok?
Mr. Chew. Today the algorithm that powers the U.S. user
experience is running in the Oracle Cloud infrastructure.
Yes, you know, in the--initially, there were parts of the
source code, especially in the infrastructure layer, that
doesn't touch the user experience. Now, that is a collaborative
global effort, including built by engineers in China, just like
many other companies, by the way. The phone you use, the car
you drive is a global collaborative effort. Now, but today the
business sites and the main parts of the code for TikTok is
written by TikTok employees.
And, Congresswoman, what we are offering is third-party
monitoring of our source code. I am not aware of any company,
American companies or otherwise, that has actually done that,
because we are saying we want to give you transparency and rely
on third parties to make sure that we get all the comfort that
we need about the experience.
Ms. Eshoo. Well, I--my time is up, and I yield back. Thank
you.
Mrs. Rodgers. The lady yields back. I am pleased to yield
to the gentleman from Ohio, Mr. Latta, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Latta. Well, thank you, Madam Chair. Unlike the Chinese
Communist Party, the United States believes in individual
freedom, innovation, and entrepreneurship. That is in part why
Congress enacted section 230 of the Communications Decency Act.
Our goal is to promote growth of the online ecosystem in the
United States and to protect companies from being held liable
for good-faith efforts to moderate their platforms.
Last year a Federal judge in Pennsylvania found that
section 230 protected TikTok from being held responsible for
the death of a 10-year-old girl who participated in a blackout
challenge also known as the Choking Challenge. TikTok actively
pushed this video on her feed. Unfortunately, this is one of
the many devastating examples of children losing their lives
because of content promoted by TikTok.
Section 230 was never intended to shield companies like
yours from amplifying dangerous and life-threatening content to
children. Do you consider this to be a good-faith moderation?
Mr. Chew. Congressman, as a father myself, when I hear
about the tragic deaths of----
Mr. Latta. And my question----
Mr. Chew [continuing]. People, it is heartbreaking.
Mr. Latta. Do you find that good-faith moderation?
Mr. Chew. Well, Congressman, section 230 is a very complex
issue.
Mr. Latta. OK, you know, yes or no?
Mr. Chew. We are very focused on safety, and all these
dangerous----
Mr. Latta. OK, I am going to have to----
Mr. Chew [continuing]. Challenges are removed when we find
them.
Mr. Latta [continuing]. Assume that is a no.
Do you believe TikTok deserves this liability protection?
Mr. Chew. I am sorry, Congressman, I didn't----
Mr. Latta. Do you believe that TikTok deserves this
liability protection under section 230?
Mr. Chew. Congressman, as you pointed out, 230 has been
very important for freedom of expression on the Internet. It is
one of the commitments we have given to this community and our
users, and I do think it is important to preserve that.
But companies should be raising the bar on safety. I really
agree with that----
Mr. Latta. Let me follow up real quickly, from your own
testimony. When you told us--and you repeated it--``We will
keep safety, particularly for teenagers, a top priority for
us,'` you are saying you are making that following commitment.
Why did you have to wait until now to make that following
commitment now, and not having done it before, when this 10-
year-old lost her life?
Mr. Chew. Congressman, I am reiterating the commitment
internally in all my priorities, which is public to my
employees----
Mr. Latta. OK, this is a----
Mr. Chew. Safety has always been a priority.
Mr. Latta. This company is a picture-perfect example of why
this committee in Congress needs to take action immediately to
amend section 230.
When we recently met I asked you if the Chinese Communist
Party can currently access user data, and you did not have a
clear answer. So today I want to follow up. You heard it a
little bit, but I want to be absolutely sure of this answer.
Are employees of ByteDance subject to Chinese law,
including the 2017 national intelligence law which requires any
organization or citizen to support, assist, and cooperate with
State intelligence work in accordance with the law?
Mr. Chew. Like many companies, including many American
companies, we rely on a global workforce, including engineers
in China.
Mr. Latta. OK, but yes or no----
Mr. Chew. So in the past, yes. In the past, yes, yes. But
we are building Project Texas, and we are committing to
firewall off----
Mr. Latta. OK, I am taking that as----
Mr. Chew [continuing]. All protected data from unwanted
foreign access.
Mr. Latta. I am taking that as a yes, because, again, your
article 7--the article 7 of the 2017 national intelligence law,
which I just said, because it says, in addition--as was asked a
little bit earlier--the 2014 counterespionage law states that,
when the State security organ investigates and understands the
situation of espionage and collects relevant evidence, the
relevant organizations and individuals--it does not say
``maybe,'' it says ``shall'' provide it truthfully and may not
refuse.
Yes or no, do any ByteDance employees in China, including
engineers, currently have access to U.S. user data?
Mr. Chew. Today all U.S. user data is stored by default in
the Oracle Cloud infrastructure----
Mr. Latta. Answer the question.
Mr. Chew [continuing]. And access to that is controlled----
Mr. Latta. The question is do any ByteDance----
Mr. Chew [continuing]. By American personnel.
Mr. Latta [continuing]. Employees in China, including
engineers, currently have access to U.S. data?
Mr. Chew. Congressman, I would appreciate--this is a
complex topic. Today all data is stored by default----
Mr. Latta. Yes or no? It is not that complex. Yes or no, do
they have access to user data?
Mr. Chew. We have--after Project Texas is done, the answer
is no. Today there is still some data that we need----
Mr. Latta. Yes, we have----
Mr. Chew [continuing]. To delete----
Mr. Latta. Yes, we have heard already from the ranking
member that he hasn't, and--that he doesn't really see that
Project Texas is going to be useful.
So I think I am taking that as a no because, again, the
question is--come up earlier--that on December the 22nd of last
year, when ByteDance confirmed some of its Chinese employees
had accessed TikTok data to monitor and track the physical
location of journalists. So I took that as a yes from an
earlier answer.
You know, earlier this week you posted a TikTok video
asking American users to mobilize in support of your app and
oppose the potential U.S. Government action to ban TikTok in
the United States. Based on the established relationship
between your company and the Chinese Communist Party, it is
impossible for me to conclude that the video is anything
different than the type of propaganda the CCP requires Chinese
companies to push on its citizens.
And I yield back.
Mrs. Rodgers. The gentleman yields back. The Chair
recognizes the lady from Colorado, Ms. DeGette, for 5 minutes.
Ms. DeGette. Thank you--thank you very much, Madam Chair.
Mr. Chew, like my colleagues I am concerned about the
influence of China on TikTok and what that does for U.S. users.
But I am also concerned about how the content in TikTok is
being distributed, particularly to young people.
This is not a problem unique to TikTok, but TikTok has 150
million users in the United States, and so I think you will
agree that TikTok has a particular responsibility to monitor
content to make sure that it is safe and accurate. Would that
be fair to say?
Mr. Chew. Yes, I agree with that.
Ms. DeGette. So, you know, I know you said in your opening
statement there is a ban for or limited for kids under 13 and
under 18 and so on, but I am--I know it won't be news for you
that computer-savvy kids actually can bypass some of those
restrictions quite frequently, and they can do it even if they
have parental oversight.
And so what I want to ask you is, rather than putting the
burden on young people and parents to accurately put in the
birth date and so on when registering for TikTok, I want to ask
you what TikTok can do to make sure to monitor this content.
And I want to give you some examples of some of the extreme
content. Mr. Latta talked about the Blackout Challenge and
the--some of the dangers to young people's safety. But there is
also extreme content around healthcare information.
In one study, 13 out of 20 results for the question ``Does
mugwort induce abortion?,'` it is--it talked about herbal so-
called abortifacients like papaya seeds, which don't work. And
so, if people searching for information on safe abortions went
on TikTok, they could get devastatingly incorrect information.
Another study showed that TikTok was--had a
hydroxychloroquine tutorial on how to fabricate this from
grapefruit. Now, there's two problems with that. Number one,
hydroxychloroquine is not effective in treating COVID. So that
is one issue. The second issue is you can't even make
hydroxychloroquine from grapefruit. So, again, this is a really
serious miscommunication about healthcare information that
people looking at TikTok are able to get. And in fact, it is
being pushed out to them.
So I want to know from you--and I will give you time to
answer this--you have current controls, but the current
controls are not working to keep this information mainly from
young people, but from Americans in general. What more is
TikTok doing to try to strengthen its review to keep this
information from coming across to people?
Mr. Chew. Thank you for the question, Congresswoman. The
dangerous misinformation that you mentioned is not allowed on
our platform. It violates them.
Ms. DeGette. I am sorry to report it is on your platform,
though.
Mr. Chew. Congresswoman, I don't think I can sit here and
say that we are perfect in doing this. We do work very hard----
Ms. DeGette. So how can you make yourself more perfect? I
don't want you to say it is not there, or you apologize. What
can you do to limit it as much as possible, more than what you
are doing now?
Mr. Chew. We invest a significant amount in our content
moderation work. I shared that number in our--in my written
testimony.
Ms. DeGette. I know you are investing.
Mr. Chew. Yes.
Ms. DeGette. But what steps are you taking to improve the
AI, or whatever else you are doing to limit this content?
Mr. Chew. For example, if you search for certain search
terms, we do direct you on TikTok to resource--safety
resources. That is one of the things we have done. We will
continue to invest in this.
I recognize and fully align with you that this is a problem
that faces our industry, that we need to really invest and
address. I am very in alignment.
The vast majority of our users come to our platform for
entertaining, safe content. But there are people who do have
some--who do spout some dangerous misinformation, and we need
to take that very seriously, invest in it, proactively identify
it, and remove it from our platform.
Ms. DeGette. OK. I am going to stop you right now. I asked
you specifically how you were increasing--how you were trying
to increase your review of this, and you gave me only
generalized statements that you are investing, that you are
concerned, that you are doing more. That is not enough for me.
That is not enough for the parents of America.
I am going to ask you to supplement your testimony and have
your--have your experts tell me what you are doing to make this
a higher level of scrutiny, not just pablum at a hearing. Thank
you.
I yield back.
Mr. Chew. Thank you.
Mrs. Rodgers. The lady yields back. The Chair recognizes
the gentleman from North Carolina, Mr. Hudson, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Hudson. Thank you, Chairwoman McMorris Rodgers, for
holding this important hearing. I appreciate the witness, Mr.
Shou Chew, for making yourself available here today.
While many consider TikTok to be just another video-sharing
app, in reality TikTok has been functioning as a massive
surveillance program, collecting vast swaths of personal data
from more than a billion people worldwide. This includes data
from the personal devices of Federal employees, contractors,
and, most concerning, U.S. military service members and their
families at places like Fort Bragg in North Carolina.
As Fort Bragg's congressman, I have serious concerns about
the opportunities TikTok gives the Chinese Communist Party to
access the nonpublic, sensitive data of our men and women in
uniform. This personal data and location information can be
harvested and could be used for blackmail, to conduct
espionage, and possibly even reveal troop movements.
While the Department of Defense and most agencies have
banned TikTok on Government-issued devices, I believe more
needs to be done at the command level to urge troops and their
dependents to erase the app from the personal devices and keep
them off home WiFi. Having an app banned on a device in one
pocket but downloaded on your device in the other doesn't make
a whole lot of sense to me. I believe Congress and DoD should
address the continued use of TikTok on military installations,
as well as any use that depicts U.S. military operations.
Mr. Chew, does TikTok access the home WiFi network?
Mr. Chew. Only if the user turns on the WiFi. I am sorry, I
may not understand the----
Mr. Hudson. So if I have the TikTok app on my phone, and my
phone is on my home WiFi network, does TikTok access that
network?
Mr. Chew. It will have to access the network to get
connections to the Internet, if that is the question.
Mr. Hudson. Is it possible, then, that it could access
other devices on that home WiFi network?
Mr. Chew. Congressman, we do not do anything that is beyond
any industry norms. I believe the answer to your question is
no. It could be technical. Let me get back to you.
Mr. Hudson. OK. I would appreciate it if you could answer
that.
I would like to change directions real quick. Do you
receive personal employment, salary, compensation, or benefits
from ByteDance?
Mr. Chew. Yes, I do.
Mr. Hudson. What is your salary from ByteDance?
Mr. Chew. Congressman, if you don't mind, I would prefer to
keep my compensation private.
Mr. Hudson. OK. Do you personally have any company shares
or stock in ByteDance or Douyin?
Mr. Chew. Congressman, if you don't mind, I would like to
keep my personal assets private.
Mr. Hudson. Is TikTok, the company, your only source of
employment compensation? Where is your other source of income
outside of TikTok?
Mr. Chew. It is my only source of compensation.
Mr. Hudson. Do you have any financial debts or obligations
to ByteDance, Douyin, or any other ByteDance-affiliated entity?
Mr. Chew. Personally? No, I do not.
Mr. Hudson. Does your management team receive separate
salary, compensation, or benefits from ByteDance?
Mr. Chew. We receive salaries from the employer--the
entities that we are employed in, but we----
Mr. Hudson. Is that----
Mr. Chew [continuing]. Do share in the employee stock
option plan that is available from the ByteDance top company.
Mr. Hudson. So your primary salary comes from TikTok, but
you have other compensation that comes directly from ByteDance?
Mr. Chew. You can characterize it as that, yes.
Mr. Hudson. Does your management team have company shares
or stock in ByteDance or Douyin?
Mr. Chew. Yes, we--some of our employees are compensated in
shares in ByteDance.
Mr. Hudson. Does TikTok share technological resources with
Douyin?
Are the two technology systems or IT systems interconnected
in any way?
Mr. Chew. They are. As with many companies, some share
resources on some services, but it doesn't include--anything
that involves U.S. user data, Congressman, is in Project Texas,
as we talked about, stored by default in American soil by an
American company.
Mr. Hudson. Well, but currently there is shared technology
or interconnected IT systems.
Mr. Chew. Congressman, with respect, I have to get back to
you. This could be a very broad question. Like, for example, we
could all be using Microsoft Windows.
Mr. Hudson. If you could get back with details on that, I
would appreciate it.
Mr. Chew. Yes.
Mr. Hudson. Can Douyin personnel or employees access TikTok
user data?
Mr. Chew. Not after Project Texas. This is not allowed.
Mr. Hudson. Are there employees who are employed by both
Douyin and TikTok?
Mr. Chew. I do not believe so.
Mr. Hudson. OK. So, ``I don't believe so,'` is that a--I
mean, again, I will allow you to come back in written response,
if you could give me a definitive answer.
Mr. Chew. I will go back and check to be very sure.
Mr. Hudson. OK. Thank you. I am also concerned about an
issue that our chairwoman brought up about an apparent pattern
of misinformation or misrepresentation from your company in
regards to the amount and extent of data that you are
collecting, as well as how much has been accessed from inside
China.
There are dozens of public reports that conclude
individuals in the People's Republic of China have been
accessing data on U.S. users, directly contradicting several
public statements by TikTok employees. And I am referencing
Project Raven, which was first reported on by Forbes last
October. Their investigation revealed--I am sorry, I am about
out of time. Do you want to respond to that?
Mr. Chew. Yes, Congressman. We do not condone the effort by
certain former employees to access U.S. TikTok user data in an
attempt to identify the source of leaked confidential
information. We condemn these actions.
After learning about them, we found a highly reputable law
firm to thoroughly investigate the incident. We took swift
disciplinary action against employees who were found to be
involved and are implementing measures to make sure this
doesn't happen again. We have made this team available to you.
They--I think they have briefed many of you in this committee
very extensively, and I will continue to make them very
available to you as part of our transparent commitment.
Mr. Hudson. Thank you. My time is expired.
I yield back.
Mrs. Rodgers. The gentleman yields back. The Chair
recognizes the lady from Illinois, Ms. Schakowsky, for 5
minutes.
Ms. Schakowsky. Thank you. So today in The Wall Street
Journal, they said--today China's commerce minister said that
China opposes the sale of TikTok because it would involve
exporting China's technology and would--and this is the
important part--and would need to be approved by the Chinese
Government, would need to be approved by the Chinese
Government.
So all of what you have been saying about the distance
between TikTok and China has been said to be not true in the
paper today. And I would like to see what you have to say in
response.
Mr. Chew. Congresswoman, I do disagree with that
characterization. I think we have designed Project Texas to
protect U.S. user interests and to move forward here in the
U.S.
Again, it is the protections of storing American data on
American soil by an American company looked after by American
personnel. And I do not think that the--you know, our
commitments to this committee and all our users is impacted by
any event that you mentioned.
Now, the whole, you know, discussion on this, the
resolution of this, is an ongoing and developing event. So we
will continue to pay attention to this, and we will get back to
you when we have more specifics. But my commitment stands----
Ms. Schakowsky. So if--OK.
Mr. Chew. Yes.
Ms. Schakowsky. So if it is an ongoing debate, apparently,
with China, so it is hard to say with any certainty that China
would not have any influence.
But let me ask another question. So last fall, along with
Gus Bilirakis, who--were chair and cochair of the subcommittee
together--were told that TikTok had surveilled--was involved in
surveillance of users' very personal information. And you might
say, well, not more than other companies. And I agree with
Ranking Member Pallone that I really don't want to go by that
standard, particularly, but that TikTok's in-app browser
surveilled everything from Americans, including passwords and
credit card numbers, et cetera.
So I just want to ask you if TikTok did track and collect
this sensitive data that Americans don't want to have
disclosed.
Mr. Chew. Congressman, thank you. I am glad you asked this
question because, like you pointed out, we actually do not
believe we collect more data than any other social media
company out there. A lot of these reports--and I--we can talk
about which specific one you are talking about--a lot of them
are not that accurate. Some of them we have contacted, we have
actually gotten in touch with the authors to help them
understand the data that we are collecting. A lot of it is
speculation. You know, this is something they could do, they
could do.
But if you look at the subtext, this is something that any
company could do----
Ms. Schakowsky. So I am running out of time. Let me just
say that if TikTok chose not to take the sensitive--this
sensitive information that you don't need for a transaction and
support our comprehensive privacy bill, that would be--that
would be very helpful.
The other thing I wanted to ask--so really, this is a yes
or no, that TikTok--does TikTok share user information from
companies, from parent companies, from affiliated or--or send
user information to--overseas?
Mr. Chew. In the past, yes, for interoperability purposes.
Now, after Project Texas, all protected U.S. data will be
stored here, with the access controlled by a special team of
U.S. personnel.
Again, Congresswoman, this is something that, as far as I
understand, no other company, including American companies, are
willing to go. So maybe this is something that we can ask the
industry to provide, not just us, to protect U.S.----
Ms. Schakowsky. But in the case of sharing information, I
do want to quote from employees that you had that--and here is
the quote--``Everything is seen in China'` is really what they
said. People who were in touch with the sensitive data were
saying that. How do you respond to that?
Mr. Chew. I disagree with that statement.
Ms. Schakowsky. Well, I know you disagree with that
statement. But my point is, how does that happen that employees
of the company are saying that if, in fact, that is not true?
Mr. Chew. I cannot speak to--I don't know who this person
is, so I cannot speak to what a person has or has not said.
What I can say is, you know, based on my position in this
company and the responsibility that I have, that statement is
just not true.
Ms. Schakowsky. OK. Unfortunately--and I will close, I
guess I am over my time--we need to look into the facts of
this, and so do you.
And I yield back.
Mrs. Rodgers. The gentlelady yields back. The Chair
recognizes the lady from Florida, Mrs. Cammack, for 5 minutes.
Mrs. Cammack. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman.
Mr. Chew, are you aware of Chinese Communist Party leader
Chairman Xi Jinping's comments in May 2021 during a Communist
Politburo study session, where he instructed colleagues to
target different countries, different audiences with short-form
video? Are you aware of these comments, yes or no?
Mr. Chew. Congresswoman, I am not aware of these comments.
Mrs. Cammack. OK. Well, and as was pointed out by
Chairwoman Rodgers, you have regular contact with Chinese
Communist Party Secretary Mr. Zhang Fuping, who is your boss at
ByteDance, correct?
Mr. Chew. No.
Mrs. Cammack. No?
Mr. Chew. No.
Mrs. Cammack. Interesting.
Mr. Chew. He is neither my boss, nor do we have frequent
contact.
Mrs. Cammack. But you have regular contact with ByteDance.
Mr. Chew. With the CEO of ByteDance.
Mrs. Cammack. Who is--Mr. Zhang Fuping is the editor in
chief.
Mr. Chew. He is not----
Mrs. Cammack. My colleague, Representative Burgess, a few
minutes ago exposed that TikTok and ByteDance share legal
teams. You confirmed this, correct?
Mr. Chew. Our general counsel is----
Mrs. Cammack. Yes? Yes or no?
Mr. Chew [continuing]. An American lawyer, a veteran of
Microsoft----
Mrs. Cammack. Yes. Also----
Mr. Chew. And----
Mrs. Cammack [continuing]. My colleague, Representative
Latta, confirmed that your parent company, ByteDance, currently
can access user data. Yes?
Mr. Chew. Let's----
Mrs. Cammack. Yes.
Mr. Chew. We have to be more specific.
Mrs. Cammack. Yes.
Mr. Chew. After Project Texas, no.
Mrs. Cammack. You say--I am not asking after Project Texas.
I am asking now. Yes.
Mr. Chew. Some user data is public data, Congresswoman,
which means everybody----
Mrs. Cammack. So you confirm that.
Mr. Chew [continuing]. Can search around the Internet.
Mrs. Cammack. What is interesting to me is that you have
used the word ``transparency'` over a half a dozen times in
your opening testimony and subsequently again in your answers
to my colleagues. Yet the interesting thing to me is that
ByteDance, your parent company, has gone out of their way to
hide and airbrush corporate structure ties to the CCP, the
company's founder, and their activities.
You can look no further than the fact that ByteDance's
website has been scrubbed. In fact, we found web pages from the
Beijing Internet Association, the industry association charged
with Communist Party building work of Internet companies in
Beijing. They have been archived but since deleted. It makes
you kind of wonder why.
Yes or no, ByteDance is required to have a member of the
Chinese Government on its board with veto power. Is that
correct?
Mr. Chew. No, that is not correct. ByteDance owns some
Chinese businesses, and you are talking about a very special
subsidiary that is----
Mrs. Cammack. Mr. Shou----
Mr. Chew [continuing]. For Chinese business licensing----
Mrs. Cammack. Mr. Shou, I am going to have to move on.
You have said repeatedly that there is no threat, that this
is a platform for entertainment and for fun. I have to ask you
then, if there is no threat to Americans, if there is no threat
to our data privacy, security, why did an internal memo from
TikTok corporate headquarters explicitly coach senior
management to ``downplay the parent company ByteDance'`? Why
would they say, downplay the China association and downplay AI?
This is from an internal memo from your company. Why, if
you had nothing to hide, would you need to downplay the
association with ByteDance in China?
Mr. Chew. Congresswoman, I have not seen this memo.
Mrs. Cammack. You can't answer that question.
Mr. Chew. I can say----
Mrs. Cammack. Mr. Shou, I would like to direct your
attention to the screen for a short video, if you don't mind.
[Video shown.]
Mrs. Cammack. Mr. Shou, that video was posted 41 days ago.
As you can see, it is captioned ``Me asf [sic] at the House
Energy and Commerce Committee on March 23rd of this year.'`
This video was posted before this hearing was publicly noticed.
I think that is a very interesting point to raise.
But more concerning is the fact that it names this
chairwoman by name. Your own community guidelines state that
you have a firm stance against enabling violence on or off
TikTok: ``We do not allow people to use our platform to
threaten or incite violence, or to promote violent extremist
organizations, individuals, or acts. When there is a threat to
public safety or an account is used to promote or glorify off
platform violence, we ban the account.'` This video has been up
for 41 days. It is a direct threat to the chairwoman of this
committee, the people in this room, and yet it still remains on
the platform. And you expect us to believe that you are capable
of maintaining the data security--privacy and security of 150
million Americans, where you can't even protect the people in
this room?
I think that is a blatant display of how vulnerable people
who use TikTok are. You couldn't take action after 41 days,
when a clear threat, a very violent threat to the chairwoman of
this committee and the members of this committee, was posted on
your platform. You damn well know that you cannot protect the
data and security of this committee or the 150 million users of
your app, because it is an extension of the CCP.
And with that I yield back.
Mr. Chew. Can I respond, Chair?
Mrs. Rodgers. No, we are going to move on. The gentlelady
yields back.
The chairman recognizes the lady from California, Ms.
Matsui, for 5 minutes.
Ms. Matsui. Thank you very much, Madam Chair. And I am
really glad that we are having this very important hearing here
today.
And let me just say, make no mistake, the Chinese
Government represents a real and immediate threat. Look no
further than even the vulnerable gear still in our telecom
networks that needs to be ripped and replaced.
But we can't lose sight of the important Internet
governance issues TikTok and other social media companies
represent. I am especially committed to demanding transparency
from large platforms about the algorithms that shape our online
interactions, especially for teenagers and young users. And
that is why I introduced the Algorithmic Justice and Online
Platform Transparency Act to bring greater visibility into this
ecosystem.
My bill would require--would prohibit algorithms that
discriminate on the basis of race, age, gender, ability, and
other protected characteristics. It also would establish a
safety and effectiveness standard for algorithms, while
requiring new forms of inner sight--oversight. Now, this bill
would require online platforms to publish annual public reports
detailing their content moderation practices, which I believe
should be a baseline requirement to enable meaningful oversight
and consumer choice.
Mr. Chew, just yes or no: Do you believe a requirement for
annual content moderation practices for social media platforms
would be beneficial? Yes or no.
Mr. Chew. Yes.
Ms. Matsui. This transparency bill would also require
online platforms to maintain detailed records describing their
algorithmic process for review by the Federal Trade Commission
in compliance with key privacy and data de-identification
standards.
Mr. Chew, does TikTok currently maintain records describing
their algorithmic processes? Yes or no.
Mr. Chew. Congressman, I would need to check and get back
to you on what kind of specific records you are talking about.
Ms. Matsui. I wait for that.
Over the past few years, alarming information brought to
light by whistleblowers have shown that social media companies
are intimately aware of the effect their products have on young
women, political extremism, and more. Despite this, they
withheld those studies or declined to investigate further. In
either case, it shows a pattern--evasive or negligent behavior
that I find concerning in the extreme.
Mr. Chew, does TikTok conduct its own studies on the effect
of its algorithms and content distribution models on mental
health or safety?
And if so, how and when are those findings made public?
And if not, do you believe they are necessary?
Mr. Chew. Congresswoman, we rely on external third parties
and fund their research to help us understand some of these
issues. For example, we worked with the Digital Wellness Lab at
the Boston Children's Hospital to understand the 60-minute time
limit that we put for all our under-18 users. And we are
supportive of legislation that provides more funding for
research like, for example, for the NIH.
Ms. Matsui. OK. TikTok tailors its recommended content
based on user activity to encourage people to spend more time
on the app. While this practice is by no means unique to
TikTok, given the prevalence of young users and the digestible
nature of short-form video, I am concerned about the app's
tendency to exacerbate existing mental health challenges.
Mr. Chew, does TikTok have different policies for
amplifying content that would be related to depression or
dieting, versus content like gardening and sports? If yes,
describe these policy differences. If no, why not?
Mr. Chew. Congresswoman, thank you for that. This is a
great question. The answer is yes. We are trying out some
policies together with experts to understand certain contents
that are not inherently harmful, like extreme fitness, for
example, but shouldn't be seen too much. And this is--these are
models that we are building, and we are trying to understand,
you know, together with experts, how to best implement them
across our platform, particularly for younger users.
Ms. Matsui. OK, so----
Mr. Chew. Under 18, yes.
Ms. Matsui [continuing]. In cases where users have been
engaging with potentially harmful content, I believe it is
imperative that the app takes steps to moderate that behavior
rather than continuing to promote it. That means, in a sense--
--
Mr. Chew. I apologize, I----
Ms. Matsui [continuing]. Very intentional about that.
Mr. Chew. I wasn't clear. First, anything that is violative
and harmful we remove. What I meant to say were things--content
that is not inherently harmful, like some of the extreme
fitness videos about people running 100 miles, it is not
inherently harmful, but if we show them too much--the experts
are telling us that we should disperse them more, and make sure
that they are not seen too regularly----
Ms. Matsui. So you are very intentional----
Mr. Chew [continuing]. Especially by younger users.
Ms. Matsui [continuing]. About that, then. It is something
that you are----
Mr. Chew. We are working on it, yes, yes.
Ms. Matsui. You are working on it?
Mr. Chew. Yes.
Ms. Matsui. OK, I yield back.
Mrs. Rodgers. The gentlelady yields back. The Chair
recognizes the gentleman from Florida, Mr. Bilirakis, for 5
minutes.
Mr. Bilirakis. Thank you, Madam Chair. I appreciate it very
much. Thanks for holding this hearing.
Mr. Chew, your algorithms have prioritized providing
harmful content directly to children, like self-harm challenges
and even suicide. Just 3 days ago, Italy opened an
investigation into the TikTok over user safety concerns after
the so-called French Scar Challenge went viral on your
platform.
I know you know about the Blackout Challenge, which others
may know as the Choking Challenge that encourages children to
bring them to the point of unconsciousness or, in some cases,
tragically, death. If that isn't enough, I want to share the
story of Chase Nasca, a 16-year-old boy from New York who
tragically ended his life a year ago by stepping in front of a
train.
I want to thank his parents again. They are here. I want to
thank his parents for being here today, and allowing us to show
this.
Mr. Chew, your company destroyed their lives. Your company
destroyed their lives. I admire their courage to be here and
share Chase's story in the hopes that it will prevent this from
happening to other families. The content in Chase's For You
page was not a window to discovery, as you boldly claimed in
your testimony. It wasn't content from a creator that you
invited to roam the Hill today, or STEM education content that
children in China see. Instead, his For You page was, sadly, a
window to discover suicide. It is unacceptable, sir, that, even
after knowing all these dangers, you still claim TikTok is
something grand to behold.
I want you to see what Chase would see. And I think if you
want--again, would you share this content with your children,
with your two children? Would you want them to see this?
And again, I want to warn everyone watching that you may
find this content disturbing, but we need to watch this,
please.
[Video shown.]
Mr. Bilirakis. Mr. Chew, please, your technology is
literally leading to death. Mr. Chew, yes or no: Do you have
full responsibility for your algorithms used by TikTok to
prioritize content to its users? Yes or no, please.
Mr. Chew. Congressman, I would just like to--respectfully,
if you don't mind, I would just like to start by saying it is
devastating to hear about the news of----
Mr. Bilirakis. Yes, yes.
Mr. Chew. As a father myself, this is tragic.
Mr. Bilirakis. Sir, yes or no. I will repeat the question:
Do you have full responsibility over the algorithms used by
TikTok to prioritize content to its users? Yes or no, please.
Mr. Chew. Congressman, we do take these issues very
seriously.
Mr. Bilirakis. Yes or no?
Mr. Chew. And we do provide resources for anyone who types
in anything that----
Mr. Bilirakis. Sir, yes or no.
I see you are not willing to answer the question or take
any responsibility for your parent companies, the technology,
and the harms it creates. It is just very, very sad. Very sad.
Mr. Chew. It is very sad. I----
Mr. Bilirakis. This is why Congress needs to enact a
comprehensive privacy and data security law to give Americans
more control over their information, and to protect our
children. We must save our children from Big Tech companies
like yours who continue to abuse and manipulate them for your
own gain.
And I will yield back, Madam Chair.
Mrs. Rodgers. The gentleman yields back. The Chair
recognizes the lady from Florida, Ms. Castor, for 5 minutes.
Ms. Castor. Well, thank you, Madam Chair.
Colleagues, it is urgent that the Congress pass an online
data privacy law that protects the personal privacy of
Americans online, and particularly our kids. While this hearing
shines a light on TikTok, this hearing also should serve as a
call to action for the Congress to act now to protect Americans
from surveillance, tracking, personal data gathering, and
addictive algorithmic operations that serve up harmful content
and has a corrosive effect on our kids' mental and physical
well-being.
For many years I have sounded the alarm in this committee
of how Big Tech platforms like TikTok and Facebook and
Instagram incessantly surveil, track, gather personal, private
information, and use it along with data brokers to target and
influence our behavior. This is a much broader issue than
TikTok in China. There are other malign actors across the world
who gather data to use it as an element of social control and
influence peddling and worse.
And as I detailed in this committee last year when we
passed the--our online privacy law, the harms to children are
very serious and demand swift action. Big Tech platforms profit
immensely from keeping children addicted. They do not care
about the privacy, safety, and health of our kids. They are the
modern-day tobacco and cigarette companies that for so long
resisted and misled Congress. And it took the Congress--it took
action by the Congress to actually protect our kids and to
outlaw smoking by young people.
In early 2020, based upon the growing body of evidence to
harm of--to kids online, I introduced the Kids Privacy Act and
the KIDS Act. And I want to thank all of the researchers, the
young people, the parents, the Surgeon General of the United
States, who have explained the correlation between social media
usage and body dissatisfaction, disordered eating habits,
anxiety, depression, self-injury, suicide ideation, and cyber-
bullying.
Heck, Frances Haugen, the Facebook whistleblower, was right
here and testified to us that Facebook and Instagram conducted
research on this topic. They knew and understood the harms, but
they continued to elevate profits over the well-being of
children. And TikTok does the same.
Last Congress, when we passed the ADPPA, the committee
incorporated many of these important child online privacy and
safety provisions from my bills. But we can make the 118th
Congress' version of this bill, of this new law, even more
protective of children. And I look forward to working with the
Chair and the ranking member to make that happen.
Mr. Chew, TikTok has incredible sway over children in the
U.S., but you don't have a very good track record. In 2019
TikTok was hit with the largest civil penalty by the Federal
Trade Commission in a children's privacy case. Four years
later, TikTok still has not taken sufficient action to fix the
problems, I assume, because child users are incredibly
profitable to your bottom line.
So answer me this: TikTok allows advertisers to
specifically target advertising to children aged 13 to 17,
correct?
Mr. Chew. Congresswoman, I do want to disagree with the
statement----
Ms. Castor. Yes or no?
Mr. Chew [continuing]. That child abuses are not allowed on
our platform.
Ms. Castor. Just yes or no.
Mr. Chew. It is deplorable conduct, and it is not allowed
on our platform.
Ms. Castor. Do you target--do you target--do you target
advertising to young people aged 13 to 17?
Mr. Chew. We do serve personalized advertising----
Ms. Castor. OK, thank you.
Mr. Chew [continuing]. At this point, but the policies are
very safe for them.
Ms. Castor. And how much money--how much money does TikTok
make off selling ads targeted to minors?
Mr. Chew. Congresswoman, can I clarify? Minors in what age?
Ms. Castor. From just say age 13 to 17.
Mr. Chew. For the teenager population, I want to clarify
that. We do have a 13--under 13 experience, and with zero
advertising on that platform. For those----
Ms. Castor. Well, that is a whole other topic. OK.
Mr. Chew. Between 13 and 17, if you don't mind, I will
check in with my team and get back to you on those answers.
Ms. Castor. You know, TikTok could be designed to minimize
the harm to kids, but a decision was made to aggressively
addict kids in the name of profits. And it is our
responsibility, Members, to act swiftly to address this. This
has gone on for too long. We have dilly-dallied too much. This
committee, thankfully, we have taken responsibility and
enacted, but we have an enormous responsibility to act swiftly,
and get this bill to the floor of the House and passed into law
as soon as possible.
Thank you. I yield back my time.
Mrs. Rodgers. The gentlelady yields back. The Chair
recognizes the gentleman from Ohio, Mr. Johnson, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Johnson. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Mr. Chew, I am an information technology professional. I
have been doing it for the most of my life. You have been
evasive in many of your answers. I am going to talk to you in
some language that maybe you will better understand, ones and
zeros. OK?
Let's talk about the Citizen Lab Report. This is something
your team frequently mentions in hearings as a way to exonerate
yourself. For example, in the limitations section it reads,
``We could not examine every source code component and test in
the apps in every circumstance, which means our methods could
not find every security issue, privacy violation, and
censorship event. So it is an incomplete assessment.'` The
report notes that TikTok's data collection using third-party
trackers was in apparent conflict with the GDPR, and that
multiple themes were censored by TikTok.
What is shocking to me is the shared source code between
TikTok in the United States and the CCP-centered Douyin. The
Citizen Labs Report says that many of the functions and classes
were identical and that the differences in behavior between
TikTok in the United States and Douyin in China are slight
changes in hard-coded values. Incredibly, specific censorship
parameters from Douyin are present in TikTok, but just turned
off. The authors say that, for unknown reasons, the parameter
variable itself is preserved.
So while Citizen Labs may have been afraid to say the
obvious conclusion, Mr. Chew, I am not. TikTok's source code is
riddled with backdoors and CCP censorship devices. Here is the
truth: In a million lines of code, the smallest shift from a
zero to a one on just one of thousands of versions of TikTok on
the market will unlock explicit CCP censorship and access to
American data.
Mr. Chew, as CEO of TikTok, why have you not directed your
engineers to change the source code?
Mr. Chew. Congressman, thank you for the question. I----
Mr. Johnson. Have you directed them to change the source
code?
Mr. Chew. Like what we are offering----
Mr. Johnson. Yes or no, have you directed them to change
that source code?
Mr. Chew. Congressman, if you give me a bit of time to
just----
Mr. Johnson. No, I don't--it is a yes or no question. Have
you directed your engineers to change that source code?
Mr. Chew. I am not sure I understand.
Mr. Johnson. Why are you allowing TikTok to continue to
have the capacity for censorship, and yet you claim here that
you don't?
Mr. Chew. It doesn't----
Mr. Johnson. Let me remind you of something. Do you realize
that making false and misleading statements to Congress is a
Federal crime?
Mr. Chew. Yes, I do.
Mr. Johnson. OK. So have you directed your engineers to
change that source code?
Mr. Chew. I am giving third-party access monitoring by
experts.
Mr. Johnson. OK.
Mr. Chew. And Congressmen, you are an expert on this----
Mr. Johnson. What percentage----
Mr. Chew [continuing]. You could agree with me that no
other company does this----
Mr. Johnson. What percentage of TikTok source code is the
same as Douyin? What percentage?
Mr. Chew. I can get back to you on the specifics.
Mr. Johnson. OK, I would appreciate that.
Where was the source code for TikTok developed? Was it
developed in China or in the United States?
Mr. Chew. It is a global collaborative effort, like a lot
of----
Mr. Johnson. And was it developed in----
Mr. Chew [continuing]. Codes in a lot of countries.
Mr. Johnson. Was it developed in China? Some of it?
Mr. Chew. Some of it is.
Mr. Johnson. OK. And ByteDance.
Can the--when it is compiled in the compilation process,
can byte code be manipulated? We have talked a lot about source
code. What about the byte code, the ones and zeros that
actually execute on the device?
Mr. Chew. That is----
Mr. Johnson. Can it be manipulated?
Mr. Chew. Congressman?
Mr. Johnson. Yes.
Mr. Chew. Congressman, to give you comfort, that is why we
are giving third-party monitors.
Mr. Johnson. As----
Mr. Chew. As an expert, I think you can agree that very few
companies do this----
Mr. Johnson. I have got the report here by Citizen Lab. I
want to read you something from Ron Deibert. Specifically, in
your written testimony to Congress you stated on page 9,
``Citizen Lab found that there was no overt data transmission
by TikTok to the Chinese Government, and that TikTok did not
contact any servers within China.'' You implied that Citizen
Lab exonerated TikTok from any information-sharing with China.
Well, the director of Citizen Lab saw this and issued a
statement correcting the record yesterday. And I am quoting Ron
Deibert, the director of the lab: ``I am disappointed that
TikTok executives continue citing the Citizen Lab's research in
their statements to government as somehow exculpatory. I have
called them out on this in the past, and it is unfortunate that
I have to do it again.''
He goes on to say, and I quote, ``We even speculated about
possible mechanisms through which the Chinese Government might
use unconventional techniques to obtain TikTok user data via
pressure on ByteDance.'`
Mr. Chew, you sent Congress written testimony citing this
lab as a support of your claim that China cannot access user
data, U.S. user data. And now this lab has come out to say,
``We never said that, that is misleading.'` Mr. Chew, I hope
you understand what that is. That is misleading. Mr. Chew, this
is yet another instance of TikTok attempting to mislead
Americans about what their technology is capable of, and who
has access to their information.
Madam Chair, I would like to----
Mr. Chew. Madam Chair, I would like to respond to that very
quickly, please.
Mr. Johnson [continuing]. Enter this statement by Ron
Deibert and the Citizens Lab into the record.
Mrs. Rodgers. Without objection, so ordered.
[The information appears at the conclusion of the hearing.]
Mr. Johnson. With that I yield back.
Mrs. Rodgers. The gentleman yields back. The Chair yields
to the gentleman from Maryland, Mr. Sarbanes. Five minutes.
Mr. Sarbanes. Thanks very much, Madam Chair.
Mr. Chew, I am going to pick up on a theme we have already
covered here, which is the effect that your platform, along
with many other social media platforms, by the way, has in
terms of mental and behavioral health in this country. I won't
speak to what is happening elsewhere in the world, but we have
talked about the impact that it is having on children, on
teens.
We took some action last year in this committee to try to
improve access to resources, reauthorize critical programs to
address mental health needs. But we need to do even more than
that. And we have got to address what the Big Tech companies
like TikTok are doing, because those are platforms that expose
children and teens to additional risks.
The more time that middle and high schoolers spend on
social media, the evidence is, the more likely they are to
experience depression and anxiety. And this is particularly
troubling since, apparently, 16 percent of American teenagers
report that they use TikTok, quote, ``almost constantly.'` That
is, I think, about 5 million teenagers in this country that are
on TikTok all the time.
And we know that Big Tech, including TikTok, uses design
features that can manipulate users, including children and
teens, to keep them engaged, designed to feed them a never-
ending stream of content, keep their attention for hours on
end, which includes capitalizing on the desire for others'
approval through ``like'` features, preying on the fear of
missing out through push notifications, and so forth.
Again, you are part of an industry that is set up to do
this. You, in some sense, don't appear to be able to help
yourselves in reaching out and finding that new user and then
holding onto them. TikTok itself has acknowledged that these
features and others, like the endless scroll feature, can have
an outsized effect on teens, and we have been discussing today
how your app only intensifies that harm by amplifying dangerous
content and misinformation.
I don't want to be too paternalistic here, because we have
young people in the audience. We have got TikTok users that are
watching this hearing, and I am sure they have their own ideas
about how this technology is being managed by TikTok and other
social media platforms. They like to access the platforms, and
they should be able to do that safely. So it is certainly in
their interest, and they can drive this conversation, I think,
perfectly well.
But it is not a fair fight, is it? I mean, the algorithms
are on one side of the screen. The human brain is on the other
side of the screen, drowning in these algorithms, in many
instances, at an age where the brain is not even fully
developed yet. So those addictive impulses are being sort of
perfected by the technology. And again, it leaves the users
sort of helpless in the face of that.
Are you looking at ways to redesign core features like the
ones I mentioned to be less manipulative--excuse me--and
addictive for users, and can you commit to making some of those
modifications here today?
Mr. Chew. Congressman, thank you. We do want to be leading
in terms of safety of our users, particularly for teenagers. We
were the first to launch a 60-minute watch limit.
Mr. Sarbanes. Yes, let's talk about the 60-minute watch
limit.
Mr. Chew. And I am very glad to see people, others in our
industry, follow.
For many of your recommendations, we will study them very
seriously. We actually have a series of features. Like, for
example, if you are under 16 you cannot use a direct messaging
feature because, you know, we want to protect those younger
users. If you are under 16, you cannot go viral by default. If
you are under 18, you cannot go live. And----
Mr. Sarbanes. Let me go back to the 60-minute limit,
because my understanding is that teens can pretty easily bypass
the notification to continue using the app if they want to.
I mean, let's face it, our teens are smarter than we are by
half, and they know how to use the technology, and they can get
around these limits if they want to. Are you measuring how many
teens continue to exceed the 60 minutes of time on that app----
Mr. Chew. We understand----
Mr. Sarbanes [continuing]. How that is working?
Mr. Chew. We understand those concerns. What we--our
intention is to have the teens and their parents have these
conversations about what is the appropriate amount of time for
social media. That is why we give the parents what we call
Family Pairing----
Mr. Sarbanes. Let me ask you this question before I run out
of time. If you concluded that putting some reasonable limits
in place and trying to find a way to enforce them would lead
some percentage of your users to leave TikTok and go somewhere
else, is that something that you are prepared to accept?
Mr. Chew. Yes.
Mr. Sarbanes. Really? Well, I would love to get the
research on how these limits are being implemented, how they
are being bypassed, and the things that you are taking--the
measures you are taking to address those issues going forward.
Please bring that information back to our committee as we move
forward.
Mr. Chew. I will be happy to.
Mr. Sarbanes. I yield back.
Mrs. Rodgers. The gentleman yields. The Chair recognizes
the gentleman from Kentucky, Mr. Guthrie, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Guthrie. Thank you, Madam Chair, for yielding. I
appreciate the time.
Mr. Chew, your terms of service specifically state that
TikTok does--and I quote--``not allow the depiction, promotion,
or trade of drugs or other controlled substances.'` Despite
this content being against your terms of service--and I have
brought this up with other service providers--but despite this
content being against your terms of service, content on your
platform related to illicit drugs like fentanyl, drug
trafficking, and other illicit activity is pervasive and racks
up hundreds of thousands of views.
For example, in 2020 the Benadryl Challenge resulted in the
death of an American teenager. And we heard of another one, a
challenge earlier today that brought a death of a teenager.
While you were at ByteDance--you were the CFO for
ByteDance--did Douyin allow related illicit drug trafficking or
challenges resulting in death or injury to kids?
Mr. Chew. Congressman, I represent TikTok here today. I can
tell you that TikTok does not allow illegal drugs----
Mr. Guthrie. Does Douyin----
Mr. Chew [continuing]. On our platform.
Mr. Guthrie. Does Douyin do it in China?
Mr. Chew. I believe they don't allow this, but I will need
to check. I don't run that business.
Mr. Guthrie. So my question is----
Mr. Chew. I can tell you TikTok does not allow this.
Mr. Guthrie. Because all we are concerned about--and my
guess--and would Douyin allow for 41 days a threat against a
member of the Chinese Communist Party to stand on their site
for 41 days?
Mr. Chew. Again, I cannot speak for Douyin and, I am sorry,
I didn't hear the second part of what you said.
Mr. Guthrie. Well, we had a threat against the chairman of
our committee that was on your site for 41 days. My guess is
that would not be allowed in China.
Mr. Chew. That content is violative. I would look into the
specifics, and I would--if it violates our guidelines, it will
be taken down on TikTok.
Mr. Guthrie. Yes, surely----
Mr. Chew. Yes.
Mr. Guthrie [continuing]. It appears that it does. But the
problem is that--what I am trying to get at is you seem to be
able to prevent this content in China, but you--so not even
taking it down, just prevent it from being posted. And yet it
is all--it is on your website.
So I have a couple of questions about--you said earlier as
soon as you find this information, you take it down. So how
quickly does your algorithm detect keywords or content that
involve illicit drug trafficking before these posts are self-
reported or used by others?
Mr. Chew. We have about 40,000 people working on this now,
together with the machines that we train. I don't think any
company in our industry can be perfect at this. This is a real
big challenge for our industry, but our goal is to get this--
any violative content, including illegal drugs, down to a very,
very small number.
Mr. Guthrie. That is the problem. When we have these
hearings, we have CEOs of different companies, and of your
colleagues and competitors. And we always hear apologies, and
we always hear, ``We want to do better at this,'` but it just
doesn't seem to keep improving. And we are hearing stories of
our children and, obviously, that has been talked about today.
So how many posts and accounts have been identified and
removed from TikTok due to content posts posted related to
illicit drugs or other controlled substances?
Mr. Chew. Congressman, we do publish that in a transparency
report. I can get my team to get the information to yours.
Mr. Guthrie. Thank you. I appreciate that.
Also, we understand that the way that people use TikTok or
other platforms similar to yours is that they ensure flagged
user content isn't permitted to jump from--so my question--so
what we have heard is that the instances--the users see a drug
advertisement and then give a code to go to another site. So my
question is, do you work with other platforms to ensure flagged
user content isn't permitted to jump from one platform to
others?
Mr. Chew. I will check with my team. I would love to work
with our industry to make sure that we stamp out these
problems. You know, violative content should not be allowed on
any platforms, in my opinion.
Mr. Guthrie. Well, this is what is, you know, kind of
frustrating to all of us here, is that we look at what is
happening on your sites and others, and particularly that--we
know, because we have done the research, that you can't have
access to illicit drug information on Douyin, which is a sister
company, as you say, in China. And so it absolutely--if you can
prevent it on one and not the other, you obviously have the
ability to stop it from moving forward, and yet you don't.
Would you like to expand how one of your sister companies
can prevent that, and you not--I know you don't represent
Douyin, but they don't allow it. But it happens on your
platform. What is the difference?
Mr. Chew. First of all, the majority of the content on
TikTok is fun, entertaining, informative, and very positive for
our users. Like other companies that operate in this country,
we have to deal with some bad actors who come and publish some
content on illegal drugs, you know, other----
Mr. Guthrie. But the bad actors don't seem to be able to
access Douyin.
Mr. Chew. The TikTok U.S. experience should be compared to
other U.S. companies, because this is a common----
Mr. Guthrie. But your parent company has the technology to
prevent it, because you prevent it in China, but you can't
prevent it here. What is the difference? That is what I am
asking.
Mr. Chew. Oh, Congressman, there is no technology that is
perfect in doing this. We have to deal with the reality of the
country that you are operating in. And here in the United
States, as with other companies, we share this challenge. We
are investing a lot to address the challenge. But we are--you
know, it is a shared challenge----
Mr. Guthrie. But you invest a lot to--seem to be able to
address it in China, but not here.
Mr. Chew. Again, you know, I think the comparison has to be
within the single country. You know, we face the same set of
challenges here in the U.S.----
Mr. Guthrie. What is the difference--oh, I am sorry, I am
out of time. But what is the difference in China and here?
Mr. Chew. Let me give you an example, Congressman. In my
home country, Singapore, there is almost no illegal drug
content because Singapore has very strict drug laws.
Mr. Guthrie. Thank you.
My time is expired, and I yield back.
Mrs. Rodgers. The gentleman yields back. The Chair
recognizes the gentleman from New York, Mr. Tonko, for 5
minutes.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you, Madam Chair. I am concerned that
TikTok's algorithm prize--preys on vulnerable people, including
those struggling with addiction, eating orders--disorders, and
other mental health conditions. The platform is designed to
push content to users that will watch more frequently and for
longer periods of time.
Unfortunately for many people suffering from certain mental
health disorders, videos that reinforce their fears or negative
self-image are more engaging. On top of that, TikTok has
received sensitive patient health information and records of
browsing activity from multiple telehealth companies like
BetterHelp and Cerebral.
People's personal struggles should not be fuel for TikTok's
profits. People should be able to seek help to address serious
medical concerns without being afraid that their information
will be shared with social media companies trying to push more
products, services, or content at them.
So, Mr. Chew, will TikTok continue to get information from
third parties on its users' health, including their mental
health? Yes or no.
Mr. Chew. We will continue to work with experts--yes, if
that is the question--to identify these issues.
Mr. Tonko. Will you continue to get information from these
third parties, including their mental health? Yes or no.
Mr. Chew. Congressman, I am sorry. I may not understand
your question. If your question is if I am working with them on
these issues, the answer is yes.
Mr. Tonko. It is not the question. It is, will you continue
to get information from these third parties on its users'
health?
Mr. Chew. Get information? We do not get any user health
information from third parties, Congressman.
Mr. Tonko. You have talked a lot about user privacy and
safety. Will you commit here today to no longer using data
about users' health, particularly their mental health, to push
them content or sell ads? Yes or no.
Mr. Chew. We take our users' mental health very seriously.
We----
Mr. Tonko. Yes or no?
Mr. Chew. As far as I am aware, we don't do that,
Congressman. It is not what----
Mr. Tonko. So the answer is no, you will no longer use data
about users' health.
TikTok systematically exploits users' anxieties by pushing
alarming and distressing content onto their For You page. For
example, in May of 2022, the LA Times found that some pregnant
users searching for information about their pregnancies on
TikTok were then shown information about miscarriages,
stillbirths, and delivery room traumas.
Your company knows that distressing content can have the
perverse effect of feeding user engagement. And for TikTok,
engagement means money. In the course of a week, what
percentage of content that a user sees is considered
potentially harmful or distressing content?
Mr. Chew. Congressman, we work with a lot of experts on
this. Even before we set the 60-minute time limit for under
18s, if you spend too much time on our platform--you can try
it. If you spend too much time, we will actually send you
videos to tell you to go out and get some air and get off the
platform.
Mr. Tonko. What percentage of content that a user sees is
considered potentially harmful?
Mr. Chew. I would need to follow up with my team and get
back to you on that, if that is OK.
Mr. Tonko. Well, a ballpark.
Mr. Chew. I would need to follow up with my team.
Mr. Tonko. So are teenagers in particular shown more
distressing content?
Mr. Chew. The opposite is true. We actually put in more
restrictions to make sure that our teenagers get a better
experience, you know----
Mr. Tonko. Are expectant or new parents showing more
distressing content?
Mr. Chew. I know of many parents, including one I met
recently, who actually used our platform to find communities to
connect with other parents and learn a lot more. I have heard
amazing stories of creators who have difficulties, you know----
Mr. Tonko. Reclaiming my time, are individuals with eating
disorders shown more distressing content?
Mr. Chew. We do not--we remove all content that glorifies
eating disorders, and we have worked with experts to look at
certain inherently--certain content that may not inherently be
harmful, like diet trends, and make sure that we disperse them
more throughout our algorithm.
Mr. Tonko. What about those with mental health issues, are
they given----
Mr. Chew. This is an issue----
Mr. Tonko [continuing]. More distressing content?
Mr. Chew. If a user searches, you know, words that
expresses mental health issues, we actually redirect them to a
safety page. Like, for example, if you--I don't know if I
should say this in public--if you search ``I want to die,'` we
will redirect you to a safety page, for example.
Mr. Tonko. So what about those suffering from addiction?
Are they given more distressing content?
Mr. Chew. I am sorry, Congressman, I missed that question.
Mr. Tonko. Those suffering from addiction, are they given
more distressing content?
Mr. Chew. I missed the first few words, I apologize.
Mr. Tonko. Those--what about those suffering from
addiction? Are they given more distressing content?
Mr. Chew. Oh, those suffering from----
Mr. Tonko. Addiction.
Mr. Chew. Addiction? Do you mean drug addiction or----
Mr. Tonko. Yes, or any order of addiction.
Mr. Chew. If people search for content--and you can try it
on a variety of subjects--we will actually direct you to a
safety page to give you more resources.
And a lot of recovering addicts have actually found
communities on TikTok. And it has really helped them, you know,
find the voices and the community and the courage to really
overcome their addiction. I personally have heard stories of
that.
Mr. Tonko. Well, I appreciate your answers, but I was
looking for yes or no, and we did not get those. And again, I
think the more that they watch this distressing content, the
more profit TikTok makes. And that is distressing.
I yield back.
Mrs. Rodgers. The gentleman yields back. The Chair
recognizes the gentleman from Michigan, Mr. Walberg, for 5
minutes.
Mr. Walberg. Thank you, Madam Chair.
And we are glad that you are here, Mr. Chew. As Chair
Rodgers and Representative Burgess mentioned this morning, The
Wall Street Journal reported that China will firmly oppose any
forced sale or divestiture of TikTok. And this is based not on
conjecture, but it is based on comments provided by the
official spokesperson at the Ministry of Commerce, who said
that any TikTok sale or spinoff would amount to a technology
export and would have to adhere to Chinese law and approval.
This spokesperson was quoted as saying the Chinese--and I
quote--``The Chinese Government will make decisions according
to the law.'` The Chinese Government.
Mr. Chew, do you agree with this official? Yes or no.
Mr. Chew. Congressman, I cannot speak on behalf of a
Chinese Government official.
Mr. Walberg. Do you agree with that official?
Mr. Chew. We will need to look at this, because Project
Texas is designed to move forward here in the United States,
and we are not discussing this. So I don't have specifics.
Mr. Walberg. You know, your company is valued at upwards of
$50 billion and has been on the verge of forced sale or ban for
3 years, at least, correct?
Do you expect this committee to believe you haven't already
discussed this scenario with your team?
And you should have an answer to this, yes or no: ``I agree
with the Communist Party'' or ``I don't agree with the
Communist Party.''
So I guess I would say at that point you disagree with the
Communist Party. Explain your discrepancy.
Mr. Chew. Congressman, for 2 years we spent a billion and a
half U.S. dollars to build Project Texas. This is after very
extensive discussions with relevant folks----
Mr. Walberg. Project Texas is just something expanded for
the future. We are talking about now. We are talking about what
you are doing now, what your expectations are now, what your
relationship is with the Communist Party, which is our major
concern of what the impact that will be with a country--let me
rephrase that--with the Communist Party that doesn't care about
America and sees us as standing in their way for super power.
That is our concern.
And for you to have direct relationship, direct ownership
with ByteDance, and to not have a characterization or an
agreement or disagreement that you say--explicitly with this
party policy, it is hard for us to believe what you are saying.
Let me move on. Following up on what Mr. Latta asked about
data access by Chinese engineers, in responding to Mr. Latta
you talked about where American user data would be stored in
the future. But the question was about access today. Storage in
the future versus access today. This is total redirection. This
blows up any trust we could desire to develop.
So to be clear, Mr. Chew, today do ByteDance employees in
Beijing have access to American data?
Mr. Chew. Congressman, we have been very open about this.
We have relied on global interoperability----
Mr. Walberg. You have access to American data.
Mr. Chew. Congressman, I am answering your question, if you
give me just a bit of time. We rely on global interoperability,
and we have employees in China. So, yes, the Chinese engineers
do have access to global data.
Mr. Walberg. They have access to global data.
Mr. Chew. We have heard.
Mr. Walberg. Not storage.
Mr. Chew. No, storage has always been in Virginia and
Singapore. The physical servers----
Mr. Walberg. You have no access to storage, to American
data today.
Mr. Chew. That is not what I said. I said----
Mr. Walberg. So you do have access to American data, and
you have storage of American data.
Mr. Chew. The American data has always been stored in
Virginia and Singapore in the past, and access of this is on an
as-required basis----
Mr. Walberg. As required of who?
Mr. Chew. By engineers for business purposes.
Mr. Walberg. By engineers.
Mr. Chew. This is a private----
Mr. Walberg. ByteDance?
Mr. Chew. ByteDance----
Mr. Walberg. The Communist Party.
Mr. Chew. No, no.
Mr. Walberg. How can you say that----
Mr. Chew. This is a----
Mr. Walberg [continuing]. If they have access?
Mr. Chew. This is a private business. And like many other
businesses, many other American companies, we rely on a global
workforce.
Mr. Walberg. So the global workforce that includes
ByteDance, which is connected directly to the Chinese Communist
Party, has access----
Mr. Chew. That is a characterization that we disagree with.
Now, in the future----
Mr. Walberg. That is not what we can disagree with. That is
a fact.
Mr. Chew. It is not, unfortunately.
Mr. Walberg. The CEO of ByteDance and your relationship to
them----
Mr. Chew. It is not--Congressman, respectfully, in my
opening statement I said this is a private company. It is owned
60 percent by global investors. Three out of the five board
members of ByteDance are Americans. This is a private business.
Mr. Walberg. And you report directly to ByteDance, with a
CEO who is a member of the Communist Party. Let me move on.
Mr. Chew. He is not.
Mr. Walberg. I think we got the answer, sadly, at this
point.
I believe my time is expired, so I yield back.
Mrs. Rodgers. The gentleman yields back. The Chair
recognizes Ms. Clarke for 5 minutes.
Ms. Clarke. Thank you, Chairwoman Rodgers, thank the
Ranking Member Pallone for holding today's hearing.
Throughout this hearing--I also want to thank our witness
for being here to testify on what are very important issues
before us today.
Throughout this hearing, my colleagues have outlined the
potential threat posed by the security of Americans' data by
TikTok being affiliated--and some would say owned--by a Chinese
company. Foreign adversaries having direct access to Americans'
data as well as the ability to influence this content Americans
see on a prolific social media platform represents an
unprecedented threat to American security and to our democracy.
However, the problems of social media platforms' content
moderation, algorithmic discrimination, and safety are neither
new nor unique to TikTok.
Mr. Chew, I share the concerns raised by my colleague,
Congresswoman Matsui, related to algorithms. I believe that
without mitigation against bias, platforms will continue to
replicate, exacerbate discrimination that is illegal under
civil rights law as well as exclude important dialogue about
sensitive topics like race from occurring on the platform. For
example, I was disturbed by reports that TikTok content
moderation algorithm flagged words like Black or Black Lives
Matter as inappropriate content.
So my first question, Mr. Chew, is do you agree that
platforms like TikTok should be subject to regular audits or
transparency requirements to identify whether policies have a
disparate impact on communities that are protected classes like
race, religion, national origin, or gender?
Mr. Chew. I think, Congresswoman, I think platforms should
be very transparent on what they do there and disclose a lot of
information. We can get back on the specifics of what we mean
by an audit.
But I do agree very strongly that platforms should be very
transparent, and it is a commitment that we are giving to this
committee and all our users that our platform will be a place
for freedom of expression. We embrace all diverse points of
view, all ethnic minorities. You can come and say whatever you
want, as long as you don't violate the rules of safety that
were put in place.
And we will--we also commit to be free of all and any
government manipulation. So I think I am in strong agreement
with a lot of what you said.
Ms. Clarke. Well, thank you. My bill, the Algorithmic
Accountability Act, would require platforms to be transparent
about their algorithms, measure disparate impact, and require
risk mitigation. It is vital that the diverse culture of the
United States is reflected online.
But I am concerned the algorithms and content moderation
practices employed by TikTok are ignorant to the fundamental
diversity, while also failing to remove content that is
harmful, like child sexual abuse material, hate speech, or
domestic terrorism content.
My next question to you is, it is my understanding that
users must be in good standing to be eligible for compensation
from TikTok's Creator Fund. For example, they can't have
violated community guidelines. Is this correct?
Mr. Chew. There are some details there, but directionally,
yes.
Ms. Clarke. If TikTok's algorithm is flagging content
incorrectly, resulting in creators violating community
guidelines when in fact they have not, those creators would not
be eligible to receive compensation under the Creator Fund,
correct?
Mr. Chew. We do have an appeals process.
Ms. Clarke. You have an appeals process. OK.
Mr. Chew. Yes----
Ms. Clarke. In my view, if TikTok employs algorithms that
disproportionately misremove content from Black creators, it
disproportionately silences and excludes Black creators from
compensation opportunities. And this problem happens in
parallel to the lack of adequate recognition, attribution, and
compensation to Black creatives for their content.
The exploitation, cultural misappropriations, the erasure
of Black creatives' ownership of their fashion, art, and media
is nothing new. We need transparency, accountability, and bold
action to mitigate against misinformation, bias, and exclusion
of certain communities from the opportunities present on
platforms like TikTok.
So let me--let me just say this: I am concerned about
transparency, I am concerned about algorithmic accountability,
and I am not clear that your organization holds those values.
So I want to ask that you take a look at this, because this is
all part and parcel of what we are concerned about with respect
to social media platforms and the misappropriation, the ways in
which those algorithms can discriminate within the context of
the social media platform.
With that, Madam Chair, I yield back.
Mr. Chew. Congresswoman, is it OK if I just very quickly
respond? This is a very important topic.
Mrs. Rodgers. Unfortunately, we only have 4\1/2\ hours with
you, and I am going to try to get to every Member. So we are
going to keep going.
Mr. Chew. It is very important. I would love to follow up.
Mrs. Rodgers. Well, there will be other opportunities. The
lady yields back. The gentleman from Georgia, Mr. Buddy Carter,
is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Carter. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Mr. Chew, welcome to the most bipartisan committee in
Congress. We may not always agree on how to get there, but we
care about our national security, we care about our economy,
and we sure as heck care about our children. We sure do.
And that is why you are here today, because two-thirds of
all the youth in our country are on your app. They spend an
average of 95 minutes on your app. And, you know, research has
shown that TikTok is the most addictive platform out there. And
the reason for that is, we have been told, is because it has
the most advanced algorithm. And the Chinese Communist Party
knows this. And I don't speak for everyone, but there are those
on this committee, including myself, who believe that the
Chinese Communist Party is engaged in psychological warfare
through TikTok to deliberately influence U.S. children.
[Slide]
Mr. Carter. You know, you see behind me, if you look behind
me, Mr. Chew, you see some of the challenges that we have seen
on TikTok. You know about them. You know about the Milk Crate,
you know about the, about the Blackout Challenge, you know
about the NyQuil Chicken Challenge, the Benadryl Challenge, the
Dragon's Breath Liquid Nitrogen Trend, or the challenge that
promotes car theft.
I want to ask you. As I understand it, there is a sister
app in China, Douyin--I am sorry if I am butchering the
pronunciation. Do they have these same things over there? Do
they have these kind of challenges in China?
Mr. Chew. Congressman, I am really glad you asked this
question.
Mr. Carter. Do they, yes or no?
Mr. Chew. I am not sure, because----
Mr. Carter. Whoa, whoa, whoa, come on, now. You are not
sure?
Mr. Chew. I really am not sure.
Mr. Carter. Remember, you took--the chairlady, she said you
got to tell the truth, OK? Do you know whether they have these
kind of challenges like this over in China? Because it is my
understanding they don't.
Mr. Chew. I am not sure, because I spend my energies
running TikTok.
Mr. Carter. And you don't look at any of your other
competitors, or look at anything similar to yours. So you don't
know whether they have--they don't have this over in China.
Mr. Chew. I did----
Mr. Carter. We have it here, but they don't have it here.
And that is why I am asking you this: Why is it that TikTok
consistently fails to identify and moderate these kinds of
harmful videos?
Mr. Chew. Did----
Mr. Carter. Why is it? Why is it that you allow this to go
on?
We have already heard, God bless you, from parents who are
here with us who have lost children. I submit to you everybody
up here cares about the children of this country. Tell me, tell
me why.
Mr. Chew. This is a real industry challenge, and we are
working very hard----
Mr. Carter. No, no, no. It is not industry. This is TikTok.
Mr. Chew. It is----
Mr. Carter. We are talking about TikTok. We are talking
about why is it that you can't control this?
And--although I believe in giving credit where credit is
due. I want to thank you. It is my understanding that the video
that threatened the life of the chairwoman has been removed.
Thank you for doing that. Sorry we had to bring it to your
attention here, but it has been removed.
Tell me why this goes on.
Mr. Chew. This is an industry challenge for all of us here,
operating in this industry.
Mr. Carter. OK. So much for industry challenge. I want to
shift gears real quick.
I want to talk about biometric matrix, and I want to talk
specifically--can you tell me right now, can you say with 100
percent certainty that TikTok does not use the phone's camera
to determine whether the content that elicits a pupil dilation
should be amplified by the algorithm? Can you tell me that?
Mr. Chew. We do not collect body, face, or voice data to
identify our users. We do not. The only----
Mr. Carter. You don't?
Mr. Chew. No. The only face data that you will get that we
collect is when you use the filters to have, say, sunglasses on
your face. We need to know where your eyes are.
Mr. Carter. Why do you need to know where the eyes are, if
you are not seeing if they are dilated?
Mr. Chew. And that data is stored on your local device and
deleted after use if you use it for facial. Again, we do not
collect body, face, or voice data to identify our users.
Mr. Carter. I find that hard to believe. It is our
understanding that they are looking at the eyes.
How do you determine what age they are, then?
Mr. Chew. We rely on age gating as our key age assurance--
--
Mr. Carter. Age----
Mr. Chew. Gating, which is when you ask the user what age
they are.
We have also developed some tools, where we look at their
public profile to go through the videos that they post to see
whether----
Mr. Carter. Boy, that is creepy. Tell me more about that.
Mr. Chew. It is public. So if you post a video that is--you
choose that video to go public, that is how you get people to
see your video. We look at those to see if you--it matches up
the age that you talked about.
Now, this is a real challenge for our industry, because
privacy versus age assurance is a really big problem.
Mr. Carter. Look, look, you keep talking about the
industry. We are talking about TikTok here. We are talking
about children dying. Do you know how many children have died
because of this? Do you have any idea? Can you tell me?
Mr. Chew. Congressman, again, it is heartbreaking.
Mr. Carter. Can you tell me if----
Mr. Chew. It is heartbreaking.
Mr. Carter. How many children in America have died because
of challenges like this?
Mr. Chew. The majority of people who use our platform use
it for positive experiences. There are----
Mr. Carter. That is not what I asked you.
Mr. Chew. There are some----
Mr. Carter. I asked you, tell me the number of children, of
U.S. children who have died because of these challenges.
Mr. Chew. Congressman, again, the majority of people who
come on our platform get a good experience----
Mr. Carter. I am not talking about the majority of
children. I want to know a number.
Mr. Chew. Dangerous [inaudible] are not allowed on our
platform. If we find them, we will remove them. We take this
very seriously.
Mr. Carter. Obviously, you found one today and you removed
it. We had to bring it to your attention.
And I know I am out of time. Thank you for being here.
Welcome again to the most bipartisan committee in Congress.
Mrs. Rodgers. The gentleman yields back. We will now take a
brief recess and resume in 10 minutes. The committee stands in
recess.
[Recess.]
Mrs. Rodgers. The Chair recognizes the gentleman from
California, Mr. Cardenas, for 5 minutes--Cardenas, sorry.
Mr. Cardenas. That's good. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman. I
appreciate this opportunity for this committee to have this
important hearing regarding TikTok and its effect on the
American people, especially the American children, and the
potential effect--not potential, but the effects that it has
had and may have in the future when it comes to our democracy
and misinformation and disinformation that permeates on TikTok.
It is unfortunate that I think most Americans--or most
parents--think that TikTok is this innocent little thing where
kids get on there, and they do a little dance or something like
that. But TikTok is much, much more, as some of my colleagues--
and I thank them for bringing up some of these serious issues,
literally life and death issues that TikTok is right in the
middle of.
And also, what I would like the witness to acknowledge is
that it appears that Ms. Cammack, my colleague, brought up
those two posters, and since then TikTok has taken them down.
Since then, not before then. Are you aware of that, Mr. Chew?
Mr. Chew. I was briefed during the break that they are
taken down, Congressman.
Mr. Cardenas. OK. How do you feel about the fact that they
were--it was up for apparently 40-some days, 41 days, and yet
in the middle of this hearing it was brought directly to your
attention. And as a result, it has been taken down so quickly.
Mr. Chew. It goes to show the enormous challenge that we
have to make sure that, although the vast majority of our users
come for a good experience, we need to make sure that bad
actors don't pose violative content.
Mr. Cardenas. Yes. And the way, Mr. Chew, that you can make
sure is that you can make sure that you choose to invest more
resources, more money into more ability to pull down damaging
and deadly information from your platform.
Are you investing more and more and more every day into
bringing down that kind of content? That is my question. Are
you?
Mr. Chew. Yes. And I have committed to investing more in
this regard to stay on top of the growth.
Mr. Cardenas. Right here in the United States, many, many
languages are used and spoken. For example, TikTok in the
United States is being used in many languages. Specifically,
when it comes to Spanish language, are you dedicating more
resources today than you did months ago, years ago, on making
sure that you are combing through that content to make sure
that, if content is dangerous or damaging or deadly, that you
are bringing it down as quickly as possible?
Mr. Chew. Yes, we are investing in more Spanish-language
content moderation. And yes, we will--once we identify----
Mr. Cardenas. OK.
Mr. Chew [continuing]. Violative content, we will take it
down as soon as possible.
Mr. Cardenas. And--thank you. And your testimony today
isn't the only opportunity for you to commit to answering
questions to this committee. So I would like you to forward to
this committee--again, I am not asking for trade secrets, but I
would like to get some semblance of understanding as to how
much you are investing with the number of bodies, the number of
people, the number of resources in making sure that you are
investing more in pulling down content that is either deadly or
dangerous on your platform. Can you forward that to the
committee?
Mr. Chew. I will check with my team and get back to you on
this, Congressman.
Mr. Cardenas. Thank you very much. I appreciate that
opportunity.
As was mentioned earlier, it might sound a little funny,
but you have in fact been one of the few people to unite this
committee--Members, Republicans and Democrats--to be in
agreement that we are frustrated with TikTok. We are upset with
TikTok. And yes, you keep mentioning that there are industry
issues that not only TikTok faces, but others. You remind me a
lot of Mike Zuckerberg. He--when he came here, I said to my
staff, ``He reminds me of Fred Astaire, a good dancer with
words,'` and you are doing the same today. A lot of your
answers are a bit nebulous. They are not yes or no.
So I would like to ask you a question. Yes or no, is your
revenue going up at TikTok month over month or year over year?
Mr. Chew. Yes, our revenue is going up year over year.
Mr. Cardenas. OK. And with that, some of the answers I
would like you to forward this committee is, are you investing
more and more money into making sure that content that is
dangerous and/or deadly, you are investing more and more
resources in that aspect of your expenditures and your
commitment to your users and to your organization?
Mr. Chew. Yes, I commit to that, and we will--we are
investing more, and we will continue to do that.
Mr. Cardenas. OK. My last question is this: Are you a
Chinese company?
Mr. Chew. TikTok is a company that is now headquartered in
Singapore and Los Angeles.
Mr. Cardenas. OK.
Mr. Chew. We are not available in mainland China. Our users
are in other countries around the world.
Mr. Cardenas. OK. Is there a corporation that has any
authority above TikTok?
Mr. Chew. TikTok is a subsidiary of ByteDance, which is
founded by a Chinese founder.
Mr. Cardenas. And ByteDance is a Chinese company?
Mr. Chew. Well, ByteDance owns many businesses that
operates in China.
Mr. Cardenas. Is it or is it not a Chinese company?
Mr. Chew. Congressman, the way we look at it, it was
founded by Chinese entrepreneurs----
Mr. Cardenas. No, no, no, no, I am not asking you how you
look at it. Fact. Is it a Chinese company or not?
For example, Dell is a company. It is an American company.
They have activities all over the world.
Is it a Chinese company?
Mr. Chew. I frequently have this discussion with others on
what is a company that is now global.
Mr. Cardenas. That is OK. I prefer you answer the question
and stop dancing verbally on it.
Madam Chair, my time is expired. Thank you very much.
Mrs. Rodgers. The gentleman yields back. The Chair
recognizes the gentleman from California, Mr. Obernolte.
Mr. Obernolte. Well, thank you very much.
Mr. Chew, it is nice to see you again. If I could just
bring us back up to 30,000 feet for a second, I just want to
talk about what we are afraid of here, you know, what we fear
might happen.
Social media companies--and TikTok is unique in this--is
not unique in this--gather a tremendous amount of user data,
and then use powerful AI tools to use that data to make eerily
accurate predictions of human behavior, and then seek to
manipulate that behavior. And that is something that it is not
just TikTok, it is all our social media companies that are
doing this.
Ultimately, the solution is to enact comprehensive Federal
data privacy legislation that will prevent that kind of
behavior, or at least allow users to consent to it. And that
is, I know, something that the Chair is working on, the ranking
member. I hope that this committee will act on that this year.
The specific concern here, though, as regards TikTok is
that this type of capability falling into the hands of foreign
countries is something that has national security implications.
And that is why Congress is getting involved on this issue. So
I know that you have proposed Project Texas in an effort to
alleviate these fears. So I wanted to ask some specific
technical questions about Project Texas, and the way that you
believe that it will solve this problem.
So one of the things that you have said in your testimony
is that part of Project Texas will have engineers at Oracle
going through the source code for TikTok. How large is that
code base?
Mr. Chew. Well, it is not small, but it is not just Oracle,
Congressman. We are also inviting other third-party monitors.
We are in the process of figuring out who the best----
Mr. Obernolte. Sure. So we are talking--are we talking
millions, tens of millions of lines of code? How big is the
base?
Mr. Chew. It is significant, but it is something that we
believe can be done. And again, I want to say that I don't--I
have not heard of another company, American or not, allowed for
this to happen.
Mr. Obernolte. I mean, you are kind of at a unique
position, having to answer these concerns of Congress.
So are they going through the code for just the app, or the
app and the server code?
Mr. Chew. I can get back to you on the----
Mr. Obernolte. OK.
Mr. Chew [continuing]. On the technical details.
Mr. Obernolte. Well----
Mr. Chew. But it is comprehensive, including the software
that powers the--a lot of the software that powers the
experience.
Mr. Obernolte. And how long will that review take?
Mr. Chew. I need to get back to you on the timeline, but we
are progressing quite well on Project Texas, and whenever we
hit a milestone I commit to be very transparent about it.
Mr. Obernolte. OK. So I am wondering, because I am also
concerned, as a software engineer, about the process in which
new code is introduced into the code base. Do you use a
software configuration management system at TikTok?
Mr. Chew. The way we plan for new code to be done is that,
even before the code becomes live, it has to be reviewed. The
changes have to be reviewed by the----
Mr. Obernolte. OK, so you are talking about----
Mr. Chew [continuing]. Third-party monitor.
Mr. Obernolte [continuing]. A code review. That was good.
That was another question I had for you. So the code review, is
it done with a team of engineers or just with a single
engineer?
Mr. Chew. Oh, it is going to be a team effort.
Mr. Obernolte. OK.
Mr. Chew. Yes.
Mr. Obernolte. And that is going to be done at Oracle or
elsewhere?
Mr. Chew. It is going to be done in one of our transparency
centers, so that we--you know, we still need to make sure that
the code itself is secure, and, you know, so----
Mr. Obernolte. OK, so----
Mr. Chew. Yes.
Mr. Obernolte. What I am hearing you say is that, even
though the code might be written by someone not in the United
States, before the code is integrated it will be reviewed in a
code review by a team of engineers within the United States?
Mr. Chew. That is the plan.
Mr. Obernolte. OK. And then back to the question about the
software configuration management system. How do you manage the
integration of that code change into the rest of the TikTok
code base?
Mr. Chew. The long and short of it is we have built a team
of American personnel with security credentials. The person who
leads the team used to work for the Secret----
Mr. Obernolte. No, no, I understand, but, I mean, there is
a software solution for integrating those code changes into the
code base. What solution is that?
Mr. Chew. I would need to check----
Mr. Obernolte. Is it a commercial one?
Mr. Chew [continuing]. And get back to you on the details.
Mr. Obernolte. OK.
Mr. Chew. Yes.
Mr. Obernolte. Well, specifically, what I would like to
know is to make sure that this isn't something that TikTok has
created custom, which many companies do, because that would
mean that you would have to review the source code for that, as
well----
Mr. Chew. Yes.
Mr. Obernolte [continuing]. For security.
How do you protect against threats like the--a malicious
actor being hired not by TikTok but by Oracle, for example, or
by USDS?
Mr. Chew. The approach that most companies take for these
things is to have several layers of monitoring to make sure
that everything that somebody has reviewed, there is a
secondary review so that one malicious actor is not able to
create the damage that the malicious actor can do.
But you rightly pointed out these kind of problems are
industrywide problems.
Mr. Obernolte. Right.
Mr. Chew. Every company has to deal with them.
Mr. Obernolte. OK. Well, let me ask a specific question
about that. I mean, I--in thinking about--if I were a malicious
actor, a software engineer on one of your projects, how I would
go about writing a malicious code, I wouldn't put it right
there and say, ``Hey, I am malicious.'' I would put unrelated
lines of code in different sections of the code that work
together to do something malicious. How do you think that that
could get caught?
Mr. Chew. Again, you know, we have to rely on third-party
experts to help us with that. I think there are enough experts
who can catch a lot of these things. The work on security
globally, on all data security, is never perfect.
Mr. Obernolte. Yes, I understand.
Mr. Chew. But we can have a lot of oversight to keep it
safer than any other experience.
Mr. Obernolte. I appreciate the effort. My concern, Mr.
Chew, is I don't believe that it is technically possible to
accomplish what TikTok says it will accomplish through Project
Texas. I just think that there are too many backdoors through
that process to allow that to be possible, and I think a
malicious actor would succeed in inserting malicious code in
there if they wanted to. But I hope we--I see we are out of
time. I hope we get an opportunity to talk some more about
this.
I yield back, Madam Chair.
Mrs. Rodgers. The gentleman yields back. The Chair
recognizes the gentlelady from Michigan, Mrs. Dingell, for 5
minutes.
Mrs. Dingell. Thank you, Chairman Rodgers and Ranking
Member Pallone, for holding this hearing, and to Mr. Chew for
testifying here today. Your good news: You are halfway through
with me.
As screen time increases, so do inherent risks. And with
the proliferation and popularity of new social media platforms,
so does the potential reach of dangerous, provocative, and
often harmful content and, my fear, the abuse of collected
data.
As a representative from the State of Michigan, I can speak
from experience on how social media has been used to target
members of the Michigan delegation, including a plot to kidnap
our Governor, and how it can be weaponized to perpetuate harms
towards individuals and communities, and you saw firsthand how
it targeted the Chair of this committee.
Today many of my colleagues on both sides of the aisle have
raised legitimate concerns about protecting children online,
misinformation, and securing our data, concerns that I share
and, as has been said by many of my colleagues, are
bipartisanly shared. I think, in many ways, these myriad of
issues highlight the need for comprehensive data privacy
legislation that would ensure the safety and integrity of every
American's data on every social media platform and mitigate
potential harms.
One important area of concern I have regarding data
collection is geolocation data and how it can be abused. I have
seen it abused. I have seen women die because it has been
abused. This subject has dangerous implications for survivors
of domestic violence, people seeking medical care, and
protecting children from potential predators.
Mr. Chew, in your testimony you wrote that current versions
of the app do not collect precise or approximate GPS
information from U.S. users. Yes or no answers, please: Mr.
Chew, have any prior versions of TikTok's app collected precise
GPS information from U.S. users? Yes or no.
Mr. Chew. Yes, from back in 2020, about 3 years ago.
Mrs. Dingell. Are there currently TikTok users who still
hold old versions of the app that collect precise GPS
information from U.S. users? Yes or no.
Mr. Chew. There could be, but that is a small percentage
today.
Mrs. Dingell. Still dangerous. Has TikTok at any time fed
precise GPS information collected from U.S. users into
algorithms to serve user ads? Yes or no.
Mr. Chew. I will need to check on the details, because we
do not currently collect that. So I need to check on the
details.
Mrs. Dingell. Yes, I am sure there is a yes there. But has
TikTok at any time fed precise GPS information collected from
U.S. users into algorithms--I am having--talk today--to make
inferences about users? Yes or no.
Mr. Chew. I am not sure of the specifics. I----
Mrs. Dingell. I would like answers, yes or no, after this.
Has TikTok at any time sold precise GPS information collected
from U.S. users? Yes or no.
Mr. Chew. We do not sell data to data brokers, if that is
the question.
Mrs. Dingell. That--and you have never done that?
Mr. Chew. I do not believe so.
Mrs. Dingell. Has TikTok at any time sold or shared with
third parties algorithmic inferences that were made using, in
part or in whole, precise GPS information collected from U.S.
users, yes or no?
Mr. Chew. Congresswoman, I need to check on these
specifics. What I can tell you is right now we do not collect
precise GPS location data in the United States.
Mrs. Dingell. All right. Does TikTok still use inferences
that were made using, in part or in whole, precise GPS
information collected from U.S. users?
Mr. Chew. I am sorry. Would you repeat that?
Mrs. Dingell. Does TikTok still use inferences that you
have gained that were made using, in part in--or whole, precise
GPS information collected from U.S. users in your algorithms?
Mr. Chew. That will be a very technical question. I would
have to check and get back to you.
Mrs. Dingell. Has TikTok at any time provided the Chinese
Government with either precise GSP information collected from
U.S. users or inferences made from that data?
Mr. Chew. That I can give you a straight--no.
Mrs. Dingell. Mr. Chew, even in Congress--even if Congress
were to ban TikTok, I am concerned that China or others would
still have access to U.S. consumer data by purchasing it
through data brokers. Will you commit not to sell any of
TikTok's data to data brokers now or in the future?
Mr. Chew. We do not do that. We do not sell data to data
brokers now.
Mrs. Dingell. Will you commit to not do it in the future?
Mr. Chew. This is a--there are certain members of our
industry who do this. You know, I think this has to be broad
legislation to help us, the whole industry, address this
problem.
Mrs. Dingell. I think I am out of time.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I will yield back.
Mrs. Rodgers. The gentlelady yields back. The Chair yields
5 minutes to the gentleman from Alabama, Mr. Palmer.
Mr. Palmer. Thank you.
When the Chinese Communist government bought a share of
ByteDance, it has been described as the Chinese Communist
government's way of quieter form of control. And the companies
have little choice in selling a stake to the government if they
want to stay in business.
And what I would like to know is when the Chinese Communist
government moved to buy shares of ByteDance, were you informed
beforehand? Yes or no.
Mr. Chew. No. Congressman----
Mr. Palmer. OK.
Mr. Chew. ByteDance----
Mr. Palmer. Were----
Mr. Chew [continuing]. Hasn't----
Mr. Palmer. Were you or anyone with TikTok asked for your
opinion about the sale of shares of ByteDance to the Chinese
Communist government? Yes or no.
Mr. Chew. It just--this hasn't happened.
Mr. Palmer. Did you or anyone employed by or affiliated
with TikTok state any objections or concerns about the
possibility of the Chinese Communist government, once they had
shares in ByteDance, exercising control over content, using
your platform for conducting misinformation campaigns, or
restrictions ensuring nothing is posted that reflects badly on
the Chinese Communist government, or for surveillance and data
collection for use against anyone?
Did any of your--you or anyone affiliated with TikTok raise
any concerns about that?
Mr. Chew. Congressman, we do not collect--we do not
promote----
Mr. Palmer. I didn't ask you that.
Mr. Chew. We do not promote----
Mr. Palmer. Yes or no, did you raise any concerns about it?
Because that is why we are here.
Mr. Chew. But we do not promote or remove any content on--
--
Mr. Palmer. I didn't ask you that.
Mr. Chew [continuing]. The behalf of the Chinese
Government.
Mr. Palmer. Did you communicate in any form or fashion with
the directors of ByteDance that there might be concerns about
government control over content? Yes or no, did--you either did
or you didn't.
Mr. Chew. Congressman, I----
Mr. Palmer. You didn't.
Mr. Chew. I just want to make this clear. We do not
remove----
Mr. Palmer. Let me ask you this.
Mr. Chew [continuing]. Or promote content at the request of
the Chinese Government.
Mr. Palmer. TikTok insiders have already said that the
company is tightly controlled by ByteDance. It even gets down
to the hours they work. So obviously, you didn't say anything.
There is a serious concern by Chinese companies, privately held
companies, about doing anything against what the Chinese
Communist government wants.
I want to ask you this: Does TikTok screen against
manipulative content from child predators? Yes or no.
Mr. Chew. Do we screen against----
Mr. Palmer. Do you screen against them----
Mr. Chew. Yes, we do this----
Mr. Palmer. How about----
Mr. Chew [continuing]. Child predator----
Mr. Palmer. How about drug cartels?
Mr. Chew. Drug cartels, child predatory content, this is
all violative----
Mr. Palmer. You had a drug cartel that was engaged in a
police chase with Spanish authorities, and they posted it on
TikTok and got over a million views. Why wasn't that taken
down? And are you doing it with human traffickers or
terrorists?
I mean, do you withhold content from nations that might be
committing crimes against humanity? Yes or no.
Mr. Chew. Congressman, our platform is a place of----
Mr. Palmer. Yes or no?
Mr. Chew [continuing]. Freedom of expression. And users
come here, and----
Mr. Palmer. Yes or no? I know, you talk about that. But yes
or no, do you screen against content from nations that commit
crimes against humanity?
Mr. Chew. Congressman, our users come and----
Mr. Palmer. Yes or no?
Mr. Chew. Our users come and----
Mr. Palmer. Yes or no?
Mr. Chew [continuing]. Present any points of views that
they want, and----
Mr. Palmer. You don't.
Mr. Chew. And it is a commitment to keep this free from----
Mr. Palmer. Let me ask you this. Michael Beckerman, who is
your vice president and head of public policy for the Americas,
right? Is he part of the team that helped you prepare for this
meeting? Yes or no.
Mr. Chew. Can I clarify who you mean?
Mr. Palmer. Michael Beckerman?
Mr. Chew. Yes, he is.
Mr. Palmer. OK. Where is he at this moment?
Mr. Chew. I am sorry?
Mr. Palmer. Where is Mr. Beckerman at this moment?
Mr. Chew. He is probably here.
Mr. Palmer. No, you know he is here. He is sitting right
behind you. I want to know why, when Mr. Beckerman was on with
Jake Tapper on CNN and asked repeatedly to condemn Chinese
Communist government's treatment of the Uyghurs when that
treatment has been classified by the United States as a
genocide, when a UN report classifies it as a crime against
humanity, why after multiple questions Mr. Beckerman refused to
address that. Are you afraid of the Chinese Communist
government?
Mr. Chew. No, because you----
Mr. Palmer. Are you concerned that----
Mr. Chew [continuing]. Can find that content on our
platform. Any content that our users want to express their
views on this issue----
Mr. Palmer. Well, why couldn't your----
Mr. Chew [continuing]. Is freely available on our platform.
Mr. Palmer [continuing]. Vice president of public policy,
the guy who is head of public policy for the Americas, and an
American on an American television news channel, why couldn't
he say--why couldn't he condemn that?
Mr. Chew. I think it is very important to look at our
platform. And if you use our--and open our app, and search for
any content----
Mr. Palmer. I am not talking about your platform. I am
asking about your personnel now, because personnel is policy.
Everybody in this room understands that, except maybe you.
Personnel is--let me just conclude with this. And I hate to
bring this up, because I--this is part of the stuff that I have
studied. But deception is fundamental to the Chinese Communist
Party's political intelligence and military strategy. And you
have repeatedly used the word ``transparency'` throughout this
hearing. And every time you have said it, what I have heard is
deception.
And I yield back.
Mrs. Rodgers. The gentleman yields back. The Chair
recognizes the gentleman from Texas, Mr. Veasey, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Veasey. Thank you, Madam Chair. I got to tell you, Mr.
Chew, as a father of a 16-year-old that likes social media,
the--a lot of your evasiveness today in answering many of these
questions really disturbs me, because I can tell you that the
teenagers of today, they really don't want to be on Facebook.
They want--they want your platform. And you were asked to come
before this committee to testify about many things, and a lot
of us are worried about our kids' personal data.
As the cochair of the Congressional Voting Rights Caucus, I
also worry that TikTok is the world's most powerful and
extensive propaganda machine, allowing the Chinese Communist
Party to use TikTok's platform to influence public opinion and
undermine the integrity of our democratic elections.
And I have a report called ``TikTok and Facebook Failed to
Detect Election Disinformation in the U.S., While YouTube
Succeeds.'` And this report was published by the nonprofit
Global Witness and the Cybersecurity for Democracy Team at NYU.
And the purpose of the study was to test platforms like TikTok
and whether or not they can detect and take down false
political ads targeted at U.S. voters, young voters, ahead of
last year's midterm elections. And according to this report, 90
percent of election disinformation ads tested were approved by
your platform.
Again, that is 90 percent of ads containing false and
misleading election misinformation went undetected on TikTok.
And just to add some color to the type of misleading ads that
were approved by TikTok, this included ads that were live on
TikTok that said the wrong election day and actually encouraged
people to vote twice.
You do know that voting twice is a felony. Mr. Chew, you do
know that it is illegal to vote twice.
Mr. Chew. Congressman, any misinformation that comes around
a political action----
Mr. Veasey. OK.
Mr. Chew [continuing]. Is something we take very seriously.
Mr. Veasey. Let me--I am particularly troubled about this
type of information, because it can run rampant on TikTok. And
given that TikTok--again, you all are appealing to a very young
and diverse user base. That is exactly the people that we have
seen targeted time and time again with voter suppression
campaigns run by malicious actors.
Mr. Chew, do you agree with me that is--that it is
completely unacceptable that 90 percent of these ads were
undetected on your platform?
And can you detail for us right now TikTok's policy
regarding election misinformation and paid political ads, and
how the company monitors such information, and how you plan to
get that number down to zero?
Mr. Chew. Well, TikTok is a place for our users to come and
express their points of views freely. We do take
misinformation, dangerous misinformation particularly around an
election, very seriously. And we will work with third-party
experts to identify misinformation----
Mr. Veasey. Do you call allowing 90 percent of false
content, political content on your platform, to be taken--you
call that--you define that as being taken seriously?
Mr. Chew. I need to look into the specifics. I am, you
know, not sure where the number came from, but I can tell you,
Congressman, that we are the only platform that I know of that
doesn't actually take political ads. We don't accept money. I
don't think other platforms can say that.
Mr. Veasey. Mr. Chew, can you detail how you responded to
that report? Did you respond to that report that I just
mentioned?
Mr. Chew. I need to look at the specifics of the report,
Congressman, and I can get back to you on that.
Mr. Veasey. All right, Mr. Chew, I want to shift to Project
Texas.
I know that we have discussed this initiative throughout
today's hearing, but I want to dive deeper into your notion
that promises about Project Texas should give us any confidence
in TikTok's ability to localize U.S. data and discontinue
access to that data to ByteDance employees in China.
Why? Because we have already had a TikTok executive appear
before Congress and give sworn testimony about the comfort that
we should take in TikTok's U.S.-based resources. Well, TikTok
data security practices were being scrutinized by the U.S.
Government--and unfortunately, we have since found out from a--
from journalists and recorded conversations that those
assurances were worthless.
In your testimony you also mentioned that Oracle has
already begun inspecting TikTok's source code and has access to
the platform's recommendation algorithm. Why should this give
the American public any great assurances, particularly given
that Oracle now owns a stake in TikTok and stands to gain
monetarily, the more revenue that TikTok and its algorithm
generates?
Mr. Chew. Congressman, not only is Project Texas
unprecedented in our industry in protecting U.S. user data and
interests, we are inviting third parties to come in and monitor
this. And we will, you know, be transparent in that process.
And this is more--beyond most--all companies that I know of in
my industry----
Mr. Veasey. Thank you, Madam Chair. I am out of time.
Mrs. Rodgers. The gentleman yields back. The Chair
recognizes the gentleman from Florida for 5 minutes, Mr. Dunn.
Mr. Dunn. Thank you very much, Madam Chair.
Mr. Chew, I am aware that on arriving in DC this week you
appeared on TikTok and boasted you had 150 million U.S. users,
5 million U.S. businesses. That represents a lot of data. You
also referenced your appearance before this committee as a
chance to share all that TikTok is doing to protect Americans
using the app.
Mr. Chew, has ByteDance spied on Americans at the direction
of the Chinese Communist Party?
Mr. Chew. No.
Mr. Dunn. Madam Chair, I would like to enter into the
record this October 2022 Forbes article entitled ``TikTok
Parent ByteDance Planned To Use TikTok to Monitor the Physical
Location of Specific U.S. Citizens.'`
Mrs. Rodgers. Without objection, so ordered.
[The information appears at the conclusion of the hearing.]
Mr. Dunn. Thank you. The project assigned this to a
Beijing-led team, and they were going to follow individual
American citizens.
I ask you again, Mr. Chew, has ByteDance spied on American
citizens?
Mr. Chew. I don't think that spying is the right way to
describe it. This is ultimately----
Mr. Dunn. We can differ on that.
Mr. Chew. This is, ultimately, an internal investigation--
--
Mr. Dunn. Any TikTok or ByteDance data that is viewed,
stored, or passes through China is subject to the laws of
China, a one-party, authoritarian state hostile to all American
standards of privacy.
China's court system reports to and falls under the Chinese
Communist Party. And like fentanyl analogues, which we all know
are also manufactured in China, although they are illegal
there, I fear TikTok will grow into a much bigger problem--a
cancer, if you will. And I am deeply worried that it may be too
late to stop the spread of this cancer. Like fentanyl, another
China export which causes addiction and death, dangerous
algorithms and the Chinese Communist Party are not good for
Americans, not good for our families, and definitely not good
for the United States.
Mr. Chew, prior to serving as the CFO of ByteDance, you
served as a CFO and director of global operations for Xiaomi
from 2015 to 2021. Is that correct?
Mr. Chew. Are you asking me in 2015?
Mr. Dunn. Very good----
Mr. Chew. Would you mind repeating that, please?
Mr. Dunn. Madam Chair, I would like to enter another
article into evidence. This is from the National Cyber Security
Centre in Lithuania.
Mrs. Rodgers. Without objection, so ordered.\1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ The information has been retained in committee files and is
included in the Documents for the Record at https://docs.house.gov/
meetings/IF/IF00/20230323/115519/HHRG-118-IF00-20230323-SD030.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Mr. Dunn. Thank you. This report outlines numerous data
security risks, including how the privacy of European users was
violated in clear cases of unauthorized collection of user data
by Xiaomi. This sounds exactly--what many of my colleagues have
been talking about today.
Worse yet, the Xiaomi phones sold to Europeans had a list
of 449 words and phrases which would be automatically censored
on the device. Censored phrases included ``the Voice of
America'' and ``democratic movement,'` among others. This
analysis was conducted on devices which were manufactured and
sold to Europeans while you were the head of operations for
Xiaomi.
It does not follow that you expect us to believe that you
would not censor on behalf of the Chinese Communist Party,
since you have already done so.
Mr. Chew. I want to be unequivocal on this. We do not
remove or promote content on behalf of----
Mr. Dunn. I reclaim my time.
Mr. Chew [continuing]. The Chinese Government.
Mr. Dunn. While TikTok, in your words, strives to deliver
on their ``mission to inspire creativity and bring joy'' to
American users, I assure you that is not the mission or goal of
the Chinese Communist Party, which runs the People's Republic
of China, that TikTok's parent company, ByteDance, is domiciled
in.
Mr. Chew----
Mr. Chew. Congressman, you can check with our users----
Mr. Dunn [continuing]. Straightforward----
Mr. Chew [continuing]. To see the experience that they are
getting.
Mr. Dunn [continuing]. Answer. You have not given
straightforward answers. We don't find you credible on these
things.
And with that, Madam Chair, I would like to yield the
balance----
Mr. Chew. Congressman, you have given me no time to answer
your questions.
Mr. Dunn [continuing]. To Congressman Obernolte of
California.
Mr. Chew. I reject the characterizations.
Mr. Dunn. I yielded to Mr.----
Mrs. Rodgers. Who are you yielding to?
Mr. Dunn [continuing]. Obernolte.
Mrs. Rodgers. Dr. Dunn, Mr. Obernolte?
Mr. Dunn. Yes.
Mrs. Rodgers. OK.
Mr. Obernolte. Well, thank you, Madam Chair.
Mr. Chew, I would like to continue our discussion of
Project Texas, if we could.
Part of Project Texas is that engineers at Oracle will
review the algorithms used by TikTok to confirm that they are
free of foreign influence. I have a question about that,
because we are talking about AI. That is a very generic term.
Do you use machine learning to influence the algorithms at
TikTok?
Mr. Chew. This gets very technical, and we have published
several blogs about this, which I can forward to your team.
Mr. Obernolte. OK.
Mr. Chew. But yes, it is mainly based on interest signals.
Mr. Obernolte. Right, OK.
Mr. Chew. Yes.
Mr. Obernolte. So here is my question: How could looking at
the algorithm confirm that it is for--free from foreign
influence? Because the algorithm is just a neural net
architecture with inputs and outputs and weights, and how to
train that.
I mean, the influence is an external factor. So I would
appreciate it if you could give us--I see we are out of time
again--a written answer to that.
But again, I am concerned that what you are proposing with
Project Texas just doesn't have the technical capability of
providing us the assurances that we need.
I yield back, Madam Chair.
Mrs. Rodgers. The gentleman yields back. The Chair
recognizes Ms. Kuster.
Ms. Kuster is not here. Ms. Barragan for 5 minutes.
Ms. Barragan. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Mr. Chew, TikTok warns users when content is graphic or
disturbing and labels state-affiliated media accounts to ensure
the viewers aren't seeing propaganda. Does TikTok provide
similar information to Spanish speakers--users, as well as
English speakers?
Mr. Chew. I believe so, Congresswoman. I will get back to
you on that.
Ms. Barragan. OK. And do you know if TikTok has a specific
strategy for tackling Spanish-language content that violates
its trust and safety guidelines?
Mr. Chew. We do. I will get back to you on the specifics on
that.
Ms. Barragan. OK. When offensive English-language search
terms or hashtags are blocked for violating community
guidelines in English, is the Spanish translation of the term
or the hashtag automatically blocked, as well?
Mr. Chew. I believe so, but let me check the specifics and
get back to you.
Ms. Barragan. Do you have any idea how many people that you
might have working at TikTok that addresses Spanish
misinformation?
Mr. Chew. I know ballpark. It is quite a significant team,
but I can get back to you on the details.
Ms. Barragan. You said significant. So are you saying it
is--do you have a ballpark at all you can give us? Would you
say it is like 10 percent of your force, or more than----
Mr. Chew. It is an important number, so I want to be
precise, and I will get back to you.
Ms. Barragan. OK. Do you happen to know how TikTok--how--if
TikTok can effectively ensure that Spanish-speaking users
between the ages of 13 and 17 are not being targeted by ads
promoting harmful content?
Mr. Chew. We have very strict policies for our users who
are in the teenage age group, and regardless of what language
that they speak. So we want to make sure that they are given a
very safe experience on our platform, regardless of the
language they----
Ms. Barragan. Well, I know. I am just trying to--I am
trying to ascertain resources you may be putting into Spanish-
speaking--Spanish language.
Last year the Congressional Hispanic Caucus met with
TikTok. This was one of the conversations, and a source of the
discussion was addressing Spanish-language disinformation and
misinformation. It remains an urgent priority for the
Congressional Hispanic Caucus, as Hispanics across the country
increasingly turn to social media for vital information.
We heard earlier in this hearing that there was, you know,
video--there was a TikTok post threatening the Chair of the
committee, and it took some 40 days to take it down. So I guess
I am a little concerned if you--if your team doesn't have the
resources and the capability to flag that, what kind of
capability is it going to have to bring down misinformation,
disinformation to Spanish speakers, which I am assuming is a
smaller fraction of the workers that you have at TikTok?
Mr. Chew. TikTok is a place for, you know, all our users to
come and express their very diverse views. And, you know, we
are open to all ethnicities, you know, and we are open to all,
everyone to come here and express their--freely express their
views.
So it is our commitment to make sure that the safety of
those users, regardless of the language, you know--and of
course, you know, the Spanish-language user base is super
important to us.
Ms. Barragan. OK, so you can't----
Mr. Chew. So we need to make sure that we continue to
invest in that----
Ms. Barragan. OK, so you don't--you don't have an answer,
then. OK. I will look forward in your coming--your coming back.
We have heard a lot about the concerns about children who
may be on TikTok. Mr. Chew, at what age do you think it would
be appropriate for a young person to get on TikTok?
Mr. Chew. We have three different experiences here in the
United States. There is an experience for under 13s, which is
highly, highly restricted.
Ms. Barragan. I am asking what--I am asking what you think
would be the appropriate age to have a child get on TikTok.
Mr. Chew. Our approach is to give differentiated
experiences for different age groups and let the parents have
these conversations with their children to decide what is best
for their family.
Ms. Barragan. So you think that there is a sufficient
safety mechanism for an 8-year-old to be able to access TikTok?
Mr. Chew. An 8-year-old's experience on TikTok would be so
highly restricted that every single piece of content he or she
will see will be vetted by common sense, our third-party child
safety expert, and the 8-year-old would not be able to post,
and the 8-year-old would not be able to see any personalized
feed, and zero advertising in that experience. So I believe,
yes, it is the appropriate experience for an 8-year-old.
Ms. Barragan. Well, then why don't you let your 8-year-old
child on TikTok?
Mr. Chew. I have seen these news articles. I would like to
address that. My kids live in Singapore. And in Singapore we do
not have the under-13 experience. If they lived here in the
United States, I would let them use the under-13 experience.
Ms. Barragan. OK. So you are saying it is because of the
country you live in doesn't have the same mechanisms. Is there
a reason you don't have those same mechanisms everywhere?
Mr. Chew. In principle, we want to provide, you know, a
good experience for our users in general. We don't want to
monetize from people who are under 13. In the U.S. we are COPPA
compliant, and as part of that we will deem as a--I want to get
the specifics right. We will deem as a particular type of
audience--mixed audience app. We want to make sure that that is
right. And as a result of that, we have to provide an
experience to our under-13 users in this country, as well.
Ms. Barragan. My time has expired. Thank you.
I yield back.
Mrs. Rodgers. The gentlelady yields back. The Chair
recognizes the gentleman from Utah, Mr. Curtis.
Mr. Curtis. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Mr. Chew, my children are getting ready to run a marathon.
And I know that during this hearing that they will be running
for about the same amount of time that you will be sitting in
that chair today. Unfortunately, I only get you for 5 minutes.
So instead of a marathon, I would like to do a sprint with you.
And I want to go back up to that 30,000-feet level.
Would you agree with me that section 230 was created to
protect platforms like yours from lawsuits when you distribute
information?
Mr. Chew. I----
Mr. Curtis. Don't overcomplicate it. Just, like, 30,000
feet.
Mr. Chew. I understand.
Mr. Curtis. Yes.
Mr. Chew. Yes.
Mr. Curtis. So then would you agree that there is a line
drawn between publishers of information and distributors of
information in----
Mr. Chew. I----
Mr. Curtis. Specifically in the section 230 language.
Mr. Chew. I think 230 is a very complex topic.
Mr. Curtis. Yes, I understand. But remember, we are at
30,000 feet. So in short, your platform distributes content
that other peoples publish.
One of the early challengers to section 230 was when AOL
refused to take down a post of somebody that had
inappropriately put a phone number--associated a phone number
with the Oklahoma City bombings. The courts ruled that AOL was
not liable for that post because of section 230.
Now, I want you to do a hypothetical with me, because I am
going to use the absurd to try to make a point here. Let's
suppose, hypothetically, that AOL, instead of just posting
that, actually wanted to magnify that voice, and so they took
out an ad in the Wall Street Journal linking that phone number
with the Oklahoma City bombing. And let's suppose they didn't
stop there, but they went further and they took out a Super
Bowl ad linking that phone number with the Oklahoma City
bombing. And let's suppose, hypothetically, they didn't stop
there, they sent a flier to every home in America linking that
phone number to the bombing.
And I guess the question is, would AOL have moved from a
distributor to a publisher in this made-up example?
Mr. Chew. Congressman, respectfully, I----
Mr. Curtis. I think everybody can see that they would. This
is not a hard question. Moving that far away from the intent
would have moved them to a publisher.
So my question is--platforms are protected because they
post content. But I want this room to see--not just you--that
protection has limits. And if AOL moves to a distributor
instead of a publisher, they go outside of those limits.
Now let's talk algorithms just super quickly. We have
thrown that word around a lot today. Let me here again go
30,000 feet, and we will use another platform so it is not
sensitive. But Pinterest, I like to go on Pinterest. My home--
my wife and I are building a home. I am working on the yard
right now. If you went on my Pinterest page, you would see
swing sets and things made for my grandkids.
Now, another hypothetical. Let's suppose there is some
devious intent inside Pinterest, and they decide they want to
influence John Curtis with these algorithms, and they want me
to believe it is the end of the world. And all of a sudden now
I am buying bomb shelters instead of swing sets for my kids.
Have they become a publisher? And should that be protected from
section 230?
And if you don't feel--I am pretty sure the room
understands that they have crossed this line, and you can tell
me if you think they have or not.
Mr. Chew. Congressman, I will have to study that specific
example and get back to you.
Mr. Curtis. It is a hypothetical, but you can see the--at
some point they have crossed a line, and they have become a
publisher and a distributor.
So we have touched on this today, but I want to be super
specific. Is it possible that TikTok had enough data--could get
enough data on me that you could use artificial intelligence
and your algorithms and machine learning to write an algorithm
that could persuade me to change how I view a policy issue?
Does that possibility exist?
Mr. Chew. The way we look at it----
Mr. Curtis. Thirty-thousand feet. We are on the sprint.
Mr. Chew. I will stay very high level.
Mr. Curtis. OK, please.
Mr. Chew. The way we look at it is our users come in and
express whatever views they want.
Mr. Curtis. But that is not the point. The point is you
could write an algorithm that would change. And we have
actually seen--the Washington Post reported the Stop the Willow
campaign shows how TikTokers are tackling climate change. I
think that is all fine, right, and all good, unless somebody
has interjected into that and magnified or diminished voices in
that. And what I am proposing to you today is that that pushes
them across the line from a distributor to a publisher if they
make those decisions.
Now, serious allegations have been made against your
platform and others, many of them here today. And you are not
new to these, right, to these allegations. This isn't your
platform, but some time ago there was an allegation that a
platform recommended ISIS-related videos. We have talked about
the weight loss videos, we have talked about--we didn't talk
about it, but the stealing the elections. Whatever the
motivation, I am trying to point out that as you move from a
publisher, you manipulate this data with algorithms, that you
step out from the protections of section 230. Do you see that
logic?
Mr. Chew. This is a very complex----
Mr. Curtis. I understand it is very complex.
Mr. Chew. Yes.
Mr. Curtis. But you see the logic. In your mind, has TikTok
ever stepped across the line from a distributor to a publisher?
Mr. Chew. Congressman, again, this is a very complex topic.
I would need to get back to you on----
Mr. Curtis. I understand that. OK.
And finally, very quickly, you produced a video that now is
well known about your visit here today in Washington, DC. Can
you tell me 100 percent that no TikTok employees manually
manipulated that to get more views?
Mr. Chew. I checked. And as far as I know, there was no
boosting and heating. I went viral organically.
Mr. Curtis. OK. Madam Chair, I am sorry, I am out of time.
I yield my time.
Mrs. Rodgers. The gentleman yields back. The Chair
recognizes Ms. Blunt Rochester for 5 minutes.
Ms. Blunt Rochester. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Mr. Chew, as I am sure you know, this hearing is part of an
ongoing effort by our committee to examine data security and
other concerns with social media companies broadly. And I have
to tell you, I came to this hearing interested to hear the
actions that TikTok is taking to combat misinformation, protect
our young people, and ensure our national security. But I have
not been reassured by anything you have said so far. And I
think, quite frankly, your testimony has raised more questions
for me than answers.
As some of my colleagues already noted, platforms like
TikTok can easily manipulate and undermine user autonomy with
addictive features, invasive data collection practices, and
disseminating misinformation and disinformation. That is why I
will be reintroducing the DETOUR Act to mitigate this harm.
Mr. Chew, yes or no, would you oppose legislation that
banned the use of intentionally manipulative design techniques
that trick users into giving up their personal information?
Mr. Chew. In principle----
Ms. Blunt Rochester. It is just a yes or no.
Mr. Chew. In principle, I agree that the kind of practices
is not----
Ms. Blunt Rochester. And can TikTok users opt out of
targeted ads, yes or no?
Mr. Chew. At this moment in time, we believe that this is a
very important part of the experience----
Ms. Blunt Rochester. Yes or no? Time is ticking.
Mr. Chew. It is an important part of the experience.
Ms. Blunt Rochester. If--even if someone wants targeted
ads, do you give a user a clear opportunity to prevent TikTok
from using tools like pixels to collect their data and track
them off of the TikTok platform?
Mr. Chew. We give our users a lot of tools to control their
privacy settings on our app.
And by the way, if you are below 16, it is private by
default. So you cannot even go viral.
Ms. Blunt Rochester. An August of 2022 response to a letter
I wrote to your company on abortion misinformation, TikTok
asserted several actions to address abortion misinformation. In
light of recent attacks on safe and effective medication
abortion, I am--remained worried by this misinformation.
And following on Ms. DeGette's questioning, how many posts
did you actually take down that contained abortion
misinformation?
Mr. Chew. Contents and views on both sides of the--on
abortion is allowed on our platform. It is just freedom of
expression. If it is dangerous misinformation, we rely on
third-party experts to help us identify and remove them. I can
get back to you on specifics.
Ms. Blunt Rochester. Yes, please get back with us----
Mr. Chew. Yes.
Ms. Blunt Rochester [continuing]. On the specifics.
Mr. Chew, in your testimony you indicated TikTok has taken
several steps to implement Project Texas. You have said you
have spent--in your testimony--$1.5 billion, you have hired
1,500 full-time employees. Can I ask for some specifics about
the implementation? This $1.5 billion, what was it used for?
The employees, were they people that you already had that you
just transferred over? And what types of roles will they have?
Mr. Chew. Oh, OK. This billion and a half U.S. dollars is
spread across many things, including the infrastructure we have
to build, the migration of the data to a new cloud
infrastructure, and all the third-party security partners that
we are hiring, and, of course, the new employees.
Now, this team will now be run by a gentleman who used to
be the--who has spent his career as a chief security officer in
other companies, and another gentleman who used to work, I
believe, in----
Ms. Blunt Rochester. If you could just follow up----
Mr. Chew. Yes.
Ms. Blunt Rochester [continuing]. With us, that would be
very helpful.
Mr. Chew. I will, I will.
Ms. Blunt Rochester. Because we would really like to
understand the details. Where is the money going? How many
people are--and what will they be doing?
Mr. Chew. OK.
Ms. Blunt Rochester. You know, as I put just kind of a
finer point on this, one of my concerns is that we came here
hoping to hear some actions that would alleviate some of our
concerns and our fears. We have got family members, we have a
lot of folks here that are constituents, that are content
creators. And for us, we were looking for action. We wanted to
see--make us feel like we really can trust, as you use the
word.
What I leave here with is thinking about the fact that your
company is--I learned that you are--you have personalized data
advertising for kids as young as 13. And we have heard until
Project Texas is supposedly stood up, engineers in China still
have access to personal data, and that--that means engineers in
China have access to personal data of 13-year-olds in the
United States. And I think that really summarizes why you see
so much bipartisan consensus and concern about your company.
And I imagine that it is not going away any time soon.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and I yield back.
Mrs. Rodgers. The gentlelady yields back. I yield to the
lady from Arizona, Mrs. Lesko, for 5 minutes.
Mrs. Lesko. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Mr. Chew, do you agree that the Chinese Government has
persecuted the Uyghur population?
Mr. Chew. Congresswoman, you--if you use our app and you
open it, you will find our users who give all sorts of
content----
Mrs. Lesko. That is not my question. My question is, do you
agree that the Chinese Government has persecuted the Uyghur
population?
Mr. Chew. Well, it is deeply concerning to hear about all
accounts of human rights abuse. My role here is to explain----
Mrs. Lesko. I think you are being pretty evasive.
Mr. Chew [continuing]. What our platform does on this.
Mrs. Lesko. It is a pretty easy question. Do you agree that
the Chinese Government has persecuted the Uyghur population?
Mr. Chew. Congresswoman, I am here to describe TikTok, and
what we do as a platform. And as a platform----
Mrs. Lesko. All right.
Mr. Chew [continuing]. We allow our users to freely express
their views----
Mrs. Lesko. All right. Earlier today----
Mr. Chew [continuing]. On this issue and any other issue
that matters to them.
Mrs. Lesko. Well, you didn't answer the question.
Earlier today Chairman Rodgers asked you, and I quote,
``Have any moderation tools been used to remove content
associated with the Uyghur genocide, yes or no?'` Your answer,
``We do not remove that kind of content.'` Yet in 2019 TikTok
suspended the account of Feroza Aziz, an American 17-year-old,
after she put out a video about the Uyghur genocide. So your
answer, sir, does not align with history.
Mr. Chew. That particular case was a mismoderation. I
believe that video had a picture of Osama bin Laden, so we
thought it was----
Mrs. Lesko. No, I----
Mr. Chew [continuing]. Content that was inappropriate.
Mrs. Lesko. Yes, I looked it up. That was a different post
that they banned, TikTok banned.
Mr. Chew. I can get back on the specifics, yes.
Mrs. Lesko. My next question. India banned the use of
TikTok in their country in 2020. New Zealand has banned the
installation of TikTok on devices connected to the country's
parliamentary network. Canada banned the installation of TikTok
on government devices. The United Kingdom has banned the TikTok
app from government-owned devices. Belgium banned the TikTok
from government phones. The European Union banned the
installation of TikTok on government devices. All cited
security risks with the company's data collection and
connection to the Chinese Communist Party.
Recently, our U.S. FBI Director, Christopher Wray, said
about TikTok, ``This is a tool that is ultimately within the
control of the Chinese Government. And it--to me, it screams
out with national security concerns.'`
Mr. Chew, how can all of these countries and our own FBI
Director have been wrong?
Mr. Chew. I think a lot of risks that I pointed out are
hypothetical and theoretical risks. I have not seen any
evidence. I am, you know, eagerly awaiting discussions where we
can talk about evidence, and we then can address the concerns
that are being raised.
Mrs. Lesko. Yes. My next question revolves around an
article, ``India Banned TikTok in 2020.'` A March 21st Forbes
article revealed how troves of personal data of Indian citizens
who once used TikTok remain widely accessible to employees at
the company and its Beijing-based parent, ByteDance.
A current TikTok employee told Forbes that nearly anyone
with basic access to company tools, including employees in
China, can easily look up the closest contacts and other
sensitive information about any user. This current TikTok
employee also said, ``If you want to start a movement, if you
want to divide people, if you want to do any of the operation
to influence the public on the app, you can just use that
information to target those groups.'`
Why would a--Mr. Chew, why would a current TikTok employee
say this if it wasn't true?
Mr. Chew. This is a recent article. I have asked my team to
look into it. As far as I know, there is--we have rigorous data
access protocols. There is really no such thing where anybody
can get access to tools.
Mrs. Lesko. All right.
Mr. Chew. So I disagree with a lot of the conclusions of
that.
Mrs. Lesko. Madam Chair, I request unanimous consent that
the Forbes March 21st, 2023 article be added to the record.
Mrs. Rodgers. Without objection.
[The information appears at the conclusion of the hearing.]
Mrs. Lesko. And I have--would like to turn over the rest of
my time to Mr. Obernolte.
Mr. Obernolte. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Mr. Chew, I would like to continue asking the question that
we were--ran out of time last time.
So, as part of Project Texas, you are going to have
engineers at Oracle review the algorithms, the machine learning
algorithms that TikTok uses to ensure that they are free from
foreign influence. But as you and I were discussing, reviewing
the algorithms doesn't do anything. The algorithms are simple.
That is not where the secret sauce is. The secret sauce is in
the data used to train them and the outcomes that you are
asking them to predict. Would you agree with that?
Mr. Chew. I actually believe that, with third-party
monitoring, you can identify a lot of the motivation of the
code. And with enough third-party experts, you can identify a
lot of what the code is designed to do.
Mr. Obernolte. But how would----
Mr. Chew. So I----
Mr. Obernolte. How would you verify that you couldn't ask
the algorithm for a different outcome than the one that the
rest of the source code is asking for?
Mr. Chew. The algorithm will be trained with this--it gets
very technical, but it will be trained based on weights, for
example. And those are things that we can verify. You know,
what weights are you putting on----
Mr. Obernolte. Well, if you could give us a written
response to that, I would appreciate it, because I am
interested.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I yield back.
Mrs. Rodgers. The lady yields back. The gentleman--
gentlelady yields back. The Chair recognizes for 5 minutes the
gentleman from Florida, Mr. Soto.
Mr. Soto. Thank you, Madam Chair. The genie is really out
of the bottle on this now, so to speak.
A hundred and fifty million Americans are now on TikTok.
That is almost half of America. They are expressing themselves
in art and music, poetry, short film, comedy, among other
creative expressions. And many of them are inspiring, talented
young people. But we also on the committee recognize there is a
darker side to it, right? Violence, adult themes, drug and
alcohol, sexualization, suicide, all major issues on TikTok,
but also Twitter, Facebook, YouTube, and other social media
platforms.
So the solution, as I see it, is to regulate TikTok and
other social media platforms. And that job, Mr. Chew, as you
know, really falls to us. There are real concerns, bipartisan
common ground we have already had. We had a Federal device ban
that was voted on bipartisan in the omnibus. And I cointroduced
a bill with my dear friend, Representative Cammack, about
notices of that Federal ban.
Madam Chair, I think the first key is privacy. We have to
pass the comprehensive legislation that got out of this
committee but eluded us in the last Congress. I am really
hoping we can get that done, and I am really excited about
hearing that from folks.
The other thing is that TikTok needs to be an American
company with American values and end its ties to the Chinese
Communist Party. This is something that will be critical as we
look and go forward.
And then three, we all agree we have to protect our kids.
The committee should consider banning the use for children
under 13 of not just TikTok but all social media platforms, or
at least empower parents.
In addition, have rules of the road for teens that are 13
to 17, so that families can do what is right for their
families.
So for privacy, that is on us. Internet privacy is on us.
As far as being an American company, Mr. Chew, as you know,
the Committee on Foreign Investment in the United States at the
Department of Treasury reviews foreign investment that affects
national security. Right now they have negotiated with your
company about this Oracle setup that you have talked about,
servers in an American company in America, in Texas, and then
Oracle would monitor the algorithms. But pressure is mounting.
So, Mr. Chew, would TikTok be prepared to divest from
ByteDance and Chinese Communist Party ties if the Department of
Treasury instructed you all to do so?
Mr. Chew. Congressman, I said in my opening statement I
think we are--need to address the problem of privacy. I agree
with you. I don't think ownership is the issue here. With a lot
of respect, American social companies don't have a good track
record with data privacy and user security. I mean, look at
Facebook and Cambridge Analytica, just one example.
So I do think that, you know, it is not about the
ownership. It is a lot about making sure we have Project Texas,
making sure that we are protecting and firewalling U.S. user
data from unwanted foreign access, giving third parties to come
in to have a look at this, and making sure that everybody is
comfortable. We are giving transparency and third-party
monitoring, and that is what we are doing for Project Texas.
Mr. Soto. Well, I would at least encourage you all to start
having the dialogue, should that be where the President and the
Congress ends up going.
The third thing is on parents. I had a constituent of mine,
Brandy of Lake Nona, say, ``I am a parent of 2 teenagers, 14
and 18 years old, both of whom have been harmed by social
media. TikTok's algorithms supply my 14-year-old son with a
continuous stream of inappropriate content, and has negatively
influenced his perception of all females. I noticed the
attention span of both of my teens has changed or decreased
dramatically, and social media has made my daughter insecure,
leading to an eating disorder, and ultimately depression.'`
What safeguards do you have, and what should we tell Brandy
of Lake Nona on--about how we can help her protect her
children?
Mr. Chew. We have a differentiated experience. I mentioned
just now about the experience if you are below 13, very, very
restricted. If you are below--13 to 17, Congressman, we
actually have a whole series of things. The first--the content
that you see, you know, we make sure that we remove things that
could be mature themes from your--from your feed. We also, by
default, do not allow under-16s to use direct messaging. We do
not allow under-16s to--we set their accounts to private, by
default. They can't go viral. If you are below 18, we shut off
some features for you. Like, for example, you are not allowed
to post live streams. Neither are you allowed to send virtual
gifts.
So we take this very seriously, and we want to continue to
build to ensure that we are giving our under-18 teenagers on
our platform--although they--today they are only a minority of
our user base today, but we still take it very seriously.
Mr. Soto. Mr. Chew, I would encourage you to continue
thinking about how to get the word out to parents across the
Nation on some of these tools, as well, as we here craft a
privacy law that will help provide well-needed regulation to
social media companies across the Nation.
Thank you, and I yield back.
Mrs. Rodgers. The gentleman yields back. The Chair
recognizes the gentleman from Indiana, Mr. Pence, for 5
minutes.
Mr. Pence. Thank you, Chairwoman Rodgers and Ranking Member
Pallone, for holding this hearing. I love both of your opening
remarks.
Like my colleagues have discussed today, our increasingly
digital world leaves Hoosiers and all Americans in the dark
about who has access to their information. For TikTok users,
that could be third-party data brokers, advertisers, or the
Chinese Communist Party. TikTok aggressively feeds addictive
content to users to glean massive amounts of personal data that
is worth a fortune. For Hoosiers watching at home, this isn't
just data about your favorite sports team.
You know, if there really are 150 million users in the
U.S., this suggests to me that the CCP has a finger on the
pulse of almost half our Nation's population. I find that hard
to believe. But this week I decided I would ask my constituents
in southern Indiana to share their stories with me. I went out
Monday night, and we got 800 responses in less than 12 hours,
OK? Let me share a couple of those with you.
One of my constituents shared, I quote: ``I am a mental
health counselor. Most of my teenage clients are on TikTok.
They spend hours online being negatively influenced by others.
I have seen kids experience self-harm, gender dysphoria, and
many mental illnesses they have picked up from TikTok. I will
not allow my children to have TikTok. The creators know the
algorithms are addicting our children. They know that children
are suffering more anxiety and depression from screen time, but
they do not care. They will not change their algorithms because
it is financially lucrative for them to keep their kids
addicted.'`
Another parent said, ``We let our child, our daughter, try
it out. The feed was continuously suggesting sexually explicit,
stupid, and vulgar videos. We discontinued it within a week.'`
And there has been many more, many more. Like I said, 800, OK?
In your testimony, Mr. Chew, you walked through a number of
supposed actions taken by your company to create a safe
environment, empower parents to oversee content shown to their
children. But virtually everything we have heard reflects the
opposite. And some of your answers are a little confusing.
You know, all of those sitting here and maybe watching on
C-SPAN, this is the 32d hearing we have held about privacy and
Big Tech. Each hearing I have been part of, we have heard the
same stories about our constituents' experience and the same
promises for Big Tech to do better. The truth of the matter is,
this disgusting and dangerous content littered across your
platform is not justifiable, and it is uncontrollable.
Americans' data is not safe, and Big Tech is doing nothing to
protect it.
Putting aside the dangers of the CCP involvement and after
these 32 hearings, I believe it is actually time to change the
narrative, change the focus, and change the outcome by talking
about the money you are making at TikTok. Mr. Chew, I have a
question. How much revenue is generated per user?
Mr. Chew. Congressman, we----
Mr. Pence. It is a private company, and you are not going
to tell me.
Mr. Chew. A private company, yes.
Mr. Pence. Does each user receive a comparable benefit for
the amount of profit their data brings to your company?
Mr. Chew. We do share some revenue with some creators who
produce, say, 1-minute-plus informative content.
Mr. Pence. Thanks. When am I going to get paid for the data
that you are selling or your--or you are getting revenue from
advertisers--when am I going to get paid for the data you are
getting from my children, my grandchildren, my neighbors? I
think that is the only way to get your attention, is talk about
the money you are making, and maybe that will get you all to do
what you are supposed to do.
Mr. Chew. I respect and understand your opinion. The vast
majority of our users have a great experience. I sent a video
recently, as well. I got hundreds of thousands of comments.
Mr. Pence. But what am I getting? It is a great experience?
What about these 800 bad experiences that people in the Indiana
6th district have been getting?
Mr. Chew. We will look into them, and a lot of the issues--
--
Mr. Pence. You are going to look into it? But this is my--
this is the 32d Big Tech hearing, and you are always going to
look at it. Frankly, I think you are all stalling, is what you
are doing. You are just trying to buy time while you are making
the 18 billion, perhaps, whatever you are making.
Mr. Chew. I--the majority of our users have a great
experience on our platform. It is our duty to keep it safe. I
agree with you. That is why our commitment is to make sure that
safety----
Mr. Pence. I think it is----
Mr. Chew [continuing]. Is a priority for----
Mr. Pence. I think it is your duty to pay attention to what
you are doing, and maybe you paying people for the information
that you are getting from it is a way to get that done.
Thank you, I yield back.
Mrs. Rodgers. The gentleman yields back. The Chair
recognizes the gentlelady from Washington, Ms. Schrier, for 5
minutes.
Ms. Schrier. Thank you for being here, Mr. Chew. I am
really concerned about everything that we are hearing in this
conversation today, and I appreciate your good intentions, but
the actions are really falling short.
As a pediatrician and the parent of a teenager, I am
particularly concerned about how social media generally and
TikTok specifically is affecting our kids and teens. We just
heard a lot about this from testimony from a psychologist.
Last year the American Academy of Pediatrics sounded the
alarm about our children's mental health crisis. And as a
pediatrician, I know this has been going on for more than a
decade. In fact, it tracks perfectly with social media
engagement. And during the pandemic, teens who are missing out
on in-person interactions turned even more to social media to
connect with friends.
Social media is designed to be addicting. That is the
business model. And your platform is the most addictive of all.
And this endless, mindless scrolling takes teens away from
human relationships. And here is what is important: It keeps
teens awake all night, well past their bedtime at a time in
their lives when sleep is critical for brain and physical
development. In fact, sleep deprivation alone--ignoring even
content--alone can cause depression, anxiety, social
withdrawal, inattention, poor coping skills, and academic
failure.
So, Mr. Chew, I just want to follow up a little bit on what
my colleague Mr. Sarbanes was discussing. It is your business
model to keep eyes on the app, to keep it addictive. I know you
likely have experts who have advised you on how to design this
to keep those eyes on your platform for the longest possible
time. So I want to know if you have psychologists or other
health experts on staff looking at screen time, hours of use,
and sleep.
Mr. Chew. We worked with the Digital Wellness Lab,
Congresswoman, and--at the Boston Children's Hospital, and we
came up with a 60-minute default limit for any users under 18.
Ms. Schrier. OK, so that is a----
Mr. Chew. We were the first to do it in our industry.
Ms. Schrier. That is an opt out, and I can tell you they
are going to immediately opt out. It is addictive.
Mr. Chew. We also give tools----
Ms. Schrier. It is like asking a chain smoker not to take
the next cigarette. It is not going to happen.
And by the way, so--first I have a question, then I will go
back to Boston Children's. Mr. Sarbanes asked earlier, what is
the percentage of teens who actually adhere to the 60-minute
limit?
Mr. Chew. I would need to check on those numbers and get
back to you on specifics.
Ms. Schrier. I would appreciate those numbers.
Mr. Chew. Yes.
Ms. Schrier. I am guessing it is an incredibly low
percentage who actually heed that.
Now, as far as Boston Children's goes, I know you are
referring to them as a source for these ideas about, you know,
go outside, get some air, take some time out. But I can tell
you, as a pediatrician, I am guessing their suggestions were a
little stronger than that. And so I am wondering, what is the
next step? What are you doing when you find out that almost
nobody is really opting out after 60 minutes, to take this
burden off of the kids and off of the parents and change your
algorithms to make them not so hooked?
Mr. Chew. We give our parents, as you pointed out, the
family--the family pairing tool. And in that tool, if you pair
it with your teenager's phone, you can actually set a
restriction, how many minutes. And we believe it is very
important for parents to have these conversations with their
teenagers, so--to decide what is best for their family.
I also--Congresswoman, a lot of people come to our platform
to have a really informative experience. Like I said, there
were 116 billion pieces of content on STEM, and we are creating
a feed dedicated to that. Book Talk has 115 billion----
Ms. Schrier. We also--we have also heard today that well
over 20 percent of the information is misinformation. We heard
that about medical remedies that are not really remedies. We
have heard it about mental health topics.
I mean, this becomes very dangerous, especially when people
who are not trained to think very critically are being given
information and thinking that it is true. And you have said
many times that the destructive information isn't available to
kids, but it is. Like, we keep seeing examples here.
And so I am just wondering, what are you going to do with
the algorithms? I mean, just because you are removing something
that says ``anorexia,'' ``bulimia,'' or ``eating disorder,''
that doesn't do it. If you show girls repeatedly skinny bodies
and advice on how to cook meals that are less than 300
calories, that is dangerous.
Mr. Chew. We have worked with--first of all, all--anything
that glorifies eating disorders, we remove that from our
platform as violative. We are working with experts now. It is a
challenging problem for our industry, but we are actually
identify--identifying some of these themes that you are talking
about, and trying to build models where that kind of content is
not up for the younger users. So it is something we take very
seriously too.
Ms. Schrier. We are seeing eating disorders in elementary-
age kids now, and I need you to expedite that process as much
as possible, because parents out there are worried, and I am
worried as a pediatrician. Parents can't take themselves off of
these platforms. Kids, there is no way they are going to take
themselves off. And we need you to do your part. It may affect
your bottom line, but it could save this generation.
Mr. Chew. I share your concerns, and I commit to doing
more.
Ms. Schrier. I yield back.
Mrs. Rodgers. The gentlelady yields back. The Chair
recognizes the gentleman from Pennsylvania, Mr. Joyce.
Mr. Joyce. Thank you, Chair Rodgers and Ranking Member
Pallone, for holding this hearing.
According to an August 2022 article in the New York Times,
TikTok's in-app web browser can track every individual
keystroke made by a user. We have heard today about the various
ways in which the app's code could be used to monitor or track
users. And likewise, we have heard concerns that this data may
not be fully isolated from access by the Chinese Communist
Party.
That said, I would like to know more about the historical
nonpublic U.S. personal data that your company has already
amassed. Mr. Chew, you have publicly stated that the nonpublic
information of TikTok users in the United States is being
transferred to an Oracle-based cloud infrastructure because of
safety concerns. Will that be completed by the end of this
week, by the end of this month?
What is the outline for dealing with that data that you
have already amassed?
Mr. Chew. All new data is already stored by default in this
Oracle Cloud infrastructure, with the----
Mr. Joyce. No, I am talking about the data that you have
already amassed.
Mr. Chew. We are in the process of deleting.
Mr. Joyce. What timeline will that data be able to be
stored?
Mr. Chew. We will--I believe we will be able to get it done
this year. I am hiring----
Mr. Joyce. This year. Thank you. It is not going to occur
any time soon.
To be clear, until that data transfer happens, user data
remains accessible to the Chinese Communist Party.
On March 1st of this year, the committee asked you when you
plan to delete nonpublic historical U.S. user data. Are you
aware of this?
Mr. Chew. Congressman, I disagree with this assessment that
the Chinese Government can get access to the data. It is really
for--look, this is a private company. This is what--Chinese
employees----
Mr. Joyce. You responded in writing to this committee. I
have the response that we got back from you on March 7th, just
6 days later. Your attorneys wrote, ``The company'`--I am
quoting--``The company plans to begin the process of deleting
nonpublic historic U.S. user data this month, and anticipates
that the process will be completed this year.'`
You came up with a supposed plan in the summer of 2022,
specifically based on our concerns that the communist Chinese
Government was spying on U.S. users. But you only just came up
with the idea to delete historic nonpublic U.S. data just 2
weeks ago?
Let me read it again: On March 7th, your attorneys wrote--
and I quote--``The company plans to begin the process of
deleting nonpublic historical U.S. data this month, and
anticipates that the process will be completed this year.'`
Mr. Chew, did you just come up with this plan only because
we asked about it on March 1st?
Mr. Chew. No, we started deleting this----
Mr. Joyce. Because that is what it looks like to me.
Mr. Chew. We hired a third-party auditor----
Mr. Joyce. This is incredibly disappointing.
Mr. Chew [continuing]. To help us with this.
Mr. Joyce. Wouldn't you agree that awaiting even minutes
for this personal privacy protection is absolutely wrong, and
it is not in the best interest of your users?
Mr. Chew. Congressman, respectfully, there are many
companies that use a global workforce. We are not the only one.
We are just taking action after hearing----
Mr. Joyce. Given the delay----
Mr. Chew. Many other companies have not.
Mr. Joyce [continuing]. In reading this data, and what we
have already established about the ability of the Chinese
Communist Party to access personal user data, would you agree
that no U.S. Government electronic devices should have access
to TikTok platform, as your lackluster security currently
stands?
Mr. Chew. I disagree with that characterization. Like I
said, the U.S.----
Mr. Joyce. Do you think that any individual should be
utilizing that on any Government platform?
Mr. Chew. I think the Government devices should have no
social media apps, to be honest, but----
Mr. Joyce. And particularly TikTok.
Mr. Chew [continuing]. Targeted to us.
Mr. Joyce. Mr. Chew, during this hearing you have mentioned
several times that there is a ``different experience,'` your
words, for children under the age of 13.
Mr. Chew. That is correct.
Mr. Joyce. A different experience. Mr. Chew, do you allow
your children under the age of 13 to participate in TikTok? Yes
or no.
Mr. Chew. I did just explain this in detail. This
experience doesn't exist in Singapore, where my children live.
If my children lived here, then yes.
Mr. Joyce. Based on what we have heard today, it is clear
to me that TikTok, as a company, cannot be trusted, and that
Americans remain significantly at risk because of the TikTok
app. I still contend that TikTok is the spy in Americans'
pockets.
I want to acknowledge that TikTok does have the ability to
make those changes. But unfortunately, we have not heard that
from you today. We have not heard a commitment to be able to
protect the personal privacy that Americans expect and that
Americans deserve.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and I yield the remainder of my
time.
Mrs. Rodgers. The gentleman yields back. The Chair
recognizes Mrs. Trahan for 5 minutes.
Mrs. Trahan. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Mr. Chew, many Big Tech CEOs have sat where you are
sitted--seated today and tried to run out the clock during a
hearing like this one. They were trained not to answer
questions and just wait for the news cycle to pass so that they
could get on with business as usual. Those same executives want
this moment, TikTok's moment under the microscope, to distract
Congress and the American people from the very real issues that
exist on their platforms.
You have an opportunity to turn the tables on them. While
U.S.-based social media giants have regressed on protections
for children and teens, on protecting our data privacy, and on
embracing transparency, you can lead, and you should lead. Last
month you announced that TikTok would expand access to its
researcher API. But I am concerned that your new policy could
be more bark than bite, that it won't actually lead to the
rigorous research that we, as lawmakers, and that parents and
everyday TikTok users need.
In fact, your terms of service demand that researchers
delete their data at TikTok's unilateral direction. It puts
onerous restrictions on how researchers' findings can be
published, and it only allows access to public data, which
researchers already have access to within the app.
In order to actually address the content moderation and
algorithmic amplification concerns that my colleagues have
raised here today and that I have heard about directly from
parents in my home State of Massachusetts, independent
researchers, not just other tech companies like Oracle, need to
be able to evaluate how TikTok's algorithm is making decisions
to promote content.
Mr. Chew, will you commit to expanding your API to include
data that would let researchers investigate how your algorithm
is pushing content to users, whether it is showing up on your
For You page, the hashtag page, or somewhere else?
Mr. Chew. We are--one of the commitments I gave in the
opening statement is a commitment to transparency and third-
party monitoring. So Congresswoman, I will look into the
details of that and get back to you.
Mrs. Trahan. And as well as the algorithm, including data
on what types of users were targeted by the algorithm so that
researchers can fully understand what content is being
prioritized and who it is being pushed to.
Mr. Chew. Again, we have a commitment to transparency.
These are very important questions, and I will get back to you
on the specifics.
Mrs. Trahan. Under this same proposal, you require that
researchers give TikTok, quote, ``worldwide, free,
nonexclusive, and perpetual,'` end quote, rights to their
papers. This threatens to clash directly with well-established
practices of exclusive publication rights in research journals.
Mr. Chew, why does TikTok need those rights?
Mr. Chew. I would need to get back to you on the specifics,
if that is OK.
Mrs. Trahan. Yes. I don't see how we can expect researchers
to do their work under these terms and then tout transparency.
I am going to shift gears with the time that I have
remaining, Mr. Chew. I would like to talk about TikTok's
efforts to protect children and young users. In 2021 the UK's
age-appropriate design code went into effect, mandating 15
standards that companies like you need to follow to protect
children on your platform. You still operate in the United
Kingdom, which means you should be in compliance with this
code.
So my question is simple: Will you commit to extending the
protections currently afforded children in the UK to the
millions of kids and teens who use your app here in the United
States?
Mr. Chew. We take the safety of the younger users on our
platform very seriously. Every----
Mrs. Trahan. This is a good way to prove it.
Mr. Chew. Every country is a little bit different in
context, and in--so let me look at the specifics, and bring
some of the best practices across the world. But----
Mrs. Trahan. Well, those best practices are in--they are
being executed around the world. We just want the same for our
kids here in the United States.
I mean, Mr. Chew, when we spoke a couple of weeks ago you
indicated interest in taking steps to earn trust, our trust.
And to me, it hasn't happened today so far. But rather, you
have ducked behind industry standards and comparables to your
competitors, which we know are woefully insufficient.
I strongly urge you to consider these terms, these
commitments. Make the case for why you are different from your
American competitors, and do better on--than them on
transparency, which you have mentioned countless times today,
but which we don't really have anything tangible to point to.
Mr. Chew. Yes, I don't want to make excuses for our
industry or ourselves. I think there is a lot of work that
needs to be done. We take this very seriously. Nothing is--it
is not perfect. We need to keep investing to stay ahead of our
growth.
So I agree that, you know, we need to prioritize safety and
continue to do that as part of our company. And----
Mrs. Trahan. Well, I look forward to getting back your
comments and your commitments and those updated terms of
service when you write back to the committee.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Mr. Chew. Thank you.
Mrs. Trahan. I yield back.
Mrs. Rodgers. The gentlelady yields back. The Chair
recognizes the gentleman from North Dakota, Mr. Armstrong, for
5 minutes.
Mr. Armstrong. Thank you, Madam Chair. You know, we have
heard a lot today about the procedural safeguards, independent
code review, server locations, and the corporate independence
between ByteDance and the CCP. But I think there is something
else a little more telling.
You know, when you were asked about Chinese censorship, you
pivoted immediately to drug use in Singapore. You have
absolutely tied yourself in knots to avoid criticizing the
CCP's treatment of the Uyghur population. And I think it begs
the first question: Before we ever get to Project Texas, which
I will get to in a second, if the CCP demanded that ByteDance
hand over all of the data that they had on user--on U.S. users
in their possession and ByteDance refused, I wonder what would
happen. I wonder if Jack Ma might have an opinion on that, and
I wonder if he would be allowed to give it.
But let's talk about Project Texas for a second. Project
Texas envisions a new U.S.-based TikTok subsidiary. You have
stated that this arrangement is unprecedented. I would argue
the reason it is unprecedented is because it requires continual
oversight and monitoring by the U.S. of a private business
because it poses a national security threat.
The new subsidiary's board would report to and be approved
by CFIUS. CFIUS will also specify hiring requirements, as well
as interact with Oracle as it performs its data role. That is
an extraordinary corporate governance structure. I have
questioned whether it complies with corporate law and fiduciary
duty to shareholders.
Yet the core concern is that the--proposes unparalleled
integration with the U.S. Government with a private company,
which will require significant Government resources, all of
that to allow a continued operation of a social media platform
that has serious national security implications. And CFIUs'
workload has already dramatically increased in recent years,
with a 30 percent increase in declarations and a 45 percent
increase in joint voluntary notices. And there is bipartisan
consensus that CFIUS needs to be expanded as we speak.
The only--Mr. Chew, can you identify any similar corporate
arrangement that requires Federal Government to expand such
resources to monitor an alleged data privacy and national
security risk?
Mr. Chew. Congressman, I am not an expert on this matter. I
believe that there are certain similar arrangements, but I am
not the expert on this matter.
Mr. Armstrong. Well, the only one I could find was the UK
created the Huawei Cyber Security Evaluation Center in 2010 to
assess Huawei's tech and to detect malicious activity and guard
UK's networks. That has worked so well that the United Kingdom
is now planning on kicking Huawei out of Great Britain.
You have stated that TikTok has invested $1.5 billion in
Project Texas. Are you aware of any discussions or proposals
that entail TikTok funding or offsetting the costs of CFIUs'
role?
Mr. Chew. Those discussions are--I need to get back on
you--on the specifics. But I can tell you, yes, we did spend
approximately 1.5 billion U.S. dollars on our side.
Mr. Armstrong. You spent $1.5 billion on Project Texas. But
do you have any--I mean, you agree that, if CFIUS takes on this
role, they are going to need a massive influx of dollars in
human resources, right?
Mr. Chew. I cannot speak on behalf of CFIUS, Congressman.
Mr. Armstrong. Should the U.S. Government expend such
resources to create this extraordinary arrangement for TikTok,
especially considering alleged data privacy and national
security risks?
Mr. Chew. Congressman, I cannot speak on behalf of the
United States----
Mr. Armstrong. Well, the Project Texas doesn't work without
CFIUS, right? And Project Texas, as you guys have proposed it,
does not work without CFIUS involvement.
Mr. Chew. The idea behind Project Texas is the firewall of
U.S. user data, make sure it is stored by an American company
overseen by American personnel, and we will invite third-party
monitors to monitor this. So that, in essence, at least as far
as I know, is the majority of the cost, because it will rely on
not just us building the infrastructure, but us, you know,
finding and hiring these third-party monitors who are vetted to
come in and monitor this structure.
Mr. Armstrong. You talked earlier about the shareholder's
ownership of TikTok, and you said 60 percent global investors,
20 percent is employees, and 20 percent is original founders.
Are all those voting shares the same?
Mr. Chew. No, the founder has weighted voting rights, as is
common in our industry.
Mr. Armstrong. So do--as far as a voting block of shares
owned in ByteDance, do you know if the Chinese Communist
Party--not Chinese Communist Party officials, the Chinese
Communist Party--do you know what their percentage of the
actual voting block share of ByteDance is?
Mr. Chew. The Chinese Communist Party doesn't have voting
rights in ByteDance.
Mr. Armstrong. Chinese Communist Party members is a
different question. Do the founders control the voting block of
ByteDance's shares?
Mr. Chew. I do know that the founder himself is not a
member of the Communist Party, but we don't know the political
affiliation of our employees, because that is not something we
ask.
Mr. Armstrong. Does the Chinese Government know the
political affiliation of their Chinese citizens?
Mr. Chew. I cannot answer that question on their behalf.
Mr. Armstrong. I yield back.
Mr. Chew. The gentleman yields back. I yield to the lady
from--the gentlelady from New Hampshire, Ms. Kuster, 5 minutes.
Ms. Kuster. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Mr. Chew, I just want to say I agree with all of the
comments of many of my colleagues today that we need to take a
close look at whether TikTok poses a national security risk.
For today I am going to focus my limited time on how TikTok can
better protect its youngest users. And I think a number of us
have identified as parents today and have serious concerns, as
we relayed to you.
Just this week I heard from a parent in my district in
Nashua, New Hampshire, whose child was served harmful content
on TikTok and has needed counseling as a result. This
experience is not unique to this family, and it underscores the
need for better child protections on your app.
I would like to dig further into TikTok's current safety
and privacy controls for children. I understand that TikTok
restricts certain app capabilities for users under age 18 and
has additional restrictions for users under age 16 or 13, such
as limiting who can interact with them on the platform.
However, these protections are worthless if any savvy child can
easily bypass these age restrictions by deleting their own
account and creating a new one with a different age. And by
``easily,'` I mean you can literally go in and open another
account using the same email address.
So I have been made aware by child safety groups, including
Fair Play for Kids and Common Sense, that it is that simple for
young users to bypass the age restrictions on TikTok. Yes or
no, are you aware of this issue?
Mr. Chew. I apologize. I think that is a great issue--
question that you raised. If a user inputs an age and is
blocked, my understanding is that if the user tries to do it
again within a short period of time--and I won't disclose
publicly----
Ms. Kuster. We did it in our office yesterday. You can go
right back in, use the exact same email address, and open a new
account. So can I get your commitment that you will at least
fix that bug?
Mr. Chew. I will go and have a look at it, yes.
Ms. Kuster. Thank you. If--we are here today to talk TikTok
and not other platforms, but I am happy to look at legislative
solutions.
In the interim, TikTok has a responsibility to do more to
protect its young users, and I will accept your commitment to
take a look at fixing that issue. Will you--let's see--sorry. I
recognize that TikTok has made efforts to provide parents and
guardians--increase options to monitor and limit their child's
activity on the app, including family pairing and time limit
features. But I still have concerns.
In order to access family pairing, parents then must
download the app onto their phone, and this sounds like a
design to lure more users onto the app rather than a practical
safety feature. Furthermore, downloading the app may not be a
viable option for many patients--parents.
Mr. Chew, will TikTok commit to developing other methods
for parents to monitor their child's use of the app without
having to download the TikTok app on their phone?
Mr. Chew. I can look into that specifically, and get back
to you.
Ms. Kuster. OK.
Mr. Chew. But the family pairing that you mentioned is a
very good tool that we developed. I encourage parents with
teenagers to----
Ms. Kuster. But it is not a perfect----
Mr. Chew [continuing]. To use it.
Ms. Kuster [continuing]. Tool, and let me just say one of
my concerns is that the minimum time limit TikTok lets parents
set for their children is 40 minutes, which, for a young child,
is a very long period of time. Actually giving parents control
would mean providing them the freedom to set the screen time
that makes sense for their family.
Now, I have got a copy of the app page that shows just the
four options. Would you commit to adding an ``other'' option,
so that the parent can easily set their own screen time limit?
Mr. Chew. I can take a look at that.
Ms. Kuster. I think it is important. I think parents are
looking for control. They are looking to allow their family to
use these apps without TikTok taking over their child's media
use.
I have heard use reports--I have heard reports of users
struggling to access the feature. And so I will look forward to
hearing back from you on adding an ``other'` so that a parent
can add a custom limit.
So finally, I ask that you commit to report back to this
committee and the American public on how TikTok addresses these
safety issues and the steps that you are taking to default
children's accounts to the most protective possible settings.
And with that, Madam Chair, I yield back.
Mrs. Rodgers. The gentlelady yields back. I yield to--the
Chair yields to the gentleman from Ohio.
Five minutes, Mr. Balderson.
Mr. Balderson. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Mr. Chew, for being here today.
I would like to start by inserting into the record a report
entitled ``TikTok, ByteDance and Their Ties to the Chinese
Communist Party,'` which was published by the Australian
Parliament just over a week ago. If I could add that to the
record, please.
Mrs. Rodgers. Without objection, so ordered. 1A\1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ The information has been retained in committee files and is
included in the Documents for the Record at https://docs.house.gov/
meetings/IF/IF00/20230323/115519/HHRG-118-IF00-20230323-SD030.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Mr. Balderson. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Mr. Chew, we know that your company's algorithm has been
exposed for delivering videos to China that encourages them to
develop eating disorders, promotes challenges that have caused
children to accidentally commit suicide, glorifies the use of
drugs and pornography. Despite the constant media coverage of
this issue, your company continues to feed our children this
dangerous and harmful content.
Can you explain to parents back in my congressional
district why it should be their burden and not TikTok's to set
up the guardian parental controls for their children so that
they do not view content which encourages eating disorders or
committing suicide?
Mr. Chew. Congressman, I take these issues very seriously.
If the user is between--is a teenage user on our platform, we
actually have a differentiated experience, including certain
models that we are building with experts to help identify
certain content that is not inherently harmful but could lead
people to eating disorders. Anything that glorifies eating
disorders is violative of our platform, and we remove that. And
I want to assure you that I take this very, very seriously,
this commitment.
Mr. Balderson. OK. Mr. Curtis, my colleague, mentioned the
use of a heating tool on your platform to make specific videos
go viral or get more views. Does TikTok use a cooling tool,
where employees can manually limit the amplification of content
that TikTok should hide, like content that promotes eating
disorders, drug use, or suicide among children?
Mr. Chew. The only promotion tool that we have is approved
by the local teams--so in the U.S. by the U.S. team--and it is
for commercial purposes. Like Taylor Swift, you know, I think
when she onboarded we, you know, heated----
Mr. Balderson. So would that be a yes or no?
Mr. Chew. My--I just want to make sure that I am answering
your question with specifics.
Mr. Balderson. If this tool exists, why isn't it being used
to cool then the spread of dangerous content? I mean, why is it
still happening?
Mr. Chew. Dangerous content has--that violates, we remove
them. When we see them, we actually remove them from the
platform.
Mr. Balderson. OK. The fact of the matter here is that,
despite whatever action you take, that TikTok is taking to
protect teens, your algorithm continues to promote harmful
content. Wouldn't you agree that indicates there is something
inherently wrong with the algorithm your platform employs?
Mr. Chew. I do respectfully disagree with that. The
algorithm drives a great user experience for many, many users.
Well, I talked about STEM content. That has 116 billion views
on our platform. One more example: Book Talk is a trend that
happened on our platform. It is to encourage people to read.
And globally, it has 115 billion views, and it is fantastic. I
have heard people telling me that they are reading more because
of Book Talk. So there is a lot of good, and joy, and positive
that can be derived from the TikTok experience. Yes, there are
some bad actors who come in and post violative content, and it
is our job to remove them. But the overwhelming experience is a
very positive one for our community.
Mr. Balderson. But if it is your job to remove them, it has
been said many times here today about the 41 days that that
video stood up with addressing Mrs.--the chairwoman.
Mr. Chew. After this I am going to go and look into the
specifics of that.
Mr. Balderson. All right, thank you.
Mr. Chew. Yes.
Mr. Balderson. Madam Chair, I yield back.
Mrs. Rodgers. The gentleman yields back. The Chair
recognizes the lady from Texas, Mrs. Fletcher, for 5 minutes.
Mrs. Fletcher. Thank you, Chairwoman McMorris Rodgers, and
thanks to Ranking Member Pallone for holding today's hearing.
And thank you, Mr. Chew, for appearing today.
It has been a long day, but we are here to learn about a
complex set of issues that relate to TikTok and how to address
them. And I think that is what we are hearing from colleagues
on both sides of the aisle today, is a real effort to grapple
with the challenges that we see for national security, and for
the safety and protection of American citizens, especially our
children and young adults.
And we have already covered today a lot of the information
about the extensive use of the app, the number of users who are
children and young adults. But I think it bears repeating, as
Mr. Veasey mentioned, that TikTok is the preferred platform of
young Americans, and they use it for all kinds of creative and
important things. And we have seen that. But there are also
some dangerous things that we know it has and continues to be
used for, and that--also that the data that is collected is
posing additional dangers. And that is--that is what we are
here for.
Most people using TikTok do not realize that TikTok is
collecting data about their keystrokes or about their browsing
history on other sites, and so much more. And I agree with my
colleagues that we need a comprehensive set of data privacy
laws here in the country, and we have heard some very good
ideas today.
Mr. Chew, you have mentioned several times today that these
are industrywide issues, and I agree with you that there are
industrywide challenges here. But there are also some specific
things relating to TikTok that I want to focus my questions on,
and really want to understand where there is a difference and
how we can craft legislation that addresses the very real
challenges that we have been hearing about today.
As you know, States across the country have joined an
ongoing investigation into possible violations of consumer
protection laws by TikTok as they pertain to TikTok's effect on
the mental health of American children and teenagers. As part
of this investigation, States have requested to review internal
TikTok communications that takes place on Lark. That is
TikTok's primary instant messaging system. Is that right?
Mr. Chew. Yes.
Mrs. Fletcher. OK. And does every TikTok employee have a
Lark account?
Mr. Chew. It is very similar to companies that use Slack or
any other instant messaging tool.
Mrs. Fletcher. But Lark is a proprietary instant messaging
tool. It is not Slack.
Mr. Chew. It is something that was developed, yes, by
ByteDance.
Mrs. Fletcher. And it was developed by TikTok?
Mr. Chew. No, it was developed by ByteDance.
Mrs. Fletcher. It is developed by ByteDance. OK. And so a
couple of questions stemming from that.
Is it true that Lark videoconferencing has a translation
feature in which Chinese is translated to English text and vice
versa?
Mr. Chew. That is correct. It helps with global
cooperation.
Mrs. Fletcher. OK, and those translated conversations are
somehow saved into the Lark system?
Mr. Chew. I would need to get back to you on the specifics.
There is a--you know, I will get back to you on the specifics.
Mrs. Fletcher. OK. That would be great to know. And I
neglected to ask, but does every TikTok employee have a Lark
account?
Mr. Chew. Yes, I believe so. Yes.
Mrs. Fletcher. Including you, do you have one?
Mr. Chew. Yes, I believe so, yes.
Mrs. Fletcher. And then do you have a--there is some kind
of profile for your instant messaging system so every employee
identifies their manager and their department, who they work
for, what they do. Is that all included in their Lark profile,
do you know?
Mr. Chew. It is very common for companies to have
enterprise messaging tools that----
Mrs. Fletcher. Sure.
Mr. Chew [continuing]. Companies use.
Mrs. Fletcher. It does. And I guess I am asking
specifically about Lark, since it is specific to TikTok,
whether it includes information like identifying who, for
example, your manager is. Do you know whether that is something
that is identified in Lark?
Mr. Chew. Yes. Again, some of these HR features are built
into a lot of enterprise tools that we use. And--yes.
Mrs. Fletcher. So, like, for your own profile, does it
identify who your manager is?
Mr. Chew. Yes, it does.
Mrs. Fletcher. And who does it identify as your manager?
Mr. Chew. I report to the CEO of ByteDance.
Mrs. Fletcher. OK. And so that is Zhang Yiming. Is that
identified as your manager? That is the former CEO.
Mr. Chew. He has stepped down from the board. And----
Mrs. Fletcher. OK, so----
Mr. Chew. That is the CEO, yes.
Mrs. Fletcher. OK. So Mr. Rubo is identified now as your
manager on----
Mr. Chew. Yes.
Mrs. Fletcher [continuing]. The system? OK. And as you
mentioned, it was developed by ByteDance. So it is not just
used by TikTok employees, it is also used by ByteDance
employees, is that right?
Mr. Chew. Also by other companies now. I think Lark is
selling it, and it is a good tool for instant messaging.
Mrs. Fletcher. So Lark is available to third parties
outside of the ByteDance system, as well, like Slack?
Mr. Chew. Yes.
Mrs. Fletcher. And do you personally ever use Lark to
communicate with ByteDance?
Mr. Chew. With employees at ByteDance? Yes, I do.
Mrs. Fletcher. You do? OK. Well, I am running out of time,
and I am sorry to say, because this is really interesting. I do
think it underscores some of the concerns that have been raised
in this hearing. So I think it is clear we have work we need to
continue to do here in the Congress to address data protection
and privacy.
And with that, Madam Chairwoman, I thank you, and I will
yield back.
Mrs. Rodgers. The gentlelady yields back. The committee
stands in recess, and we will reconvene immediately following
the third vote being called.
[Recess.]
Mrs. Rodgers. The gentleman from Texas, Mr. Weber, is
recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Weber. Thank you, Madam Chair and, Mr. Chew, thanks for
being here.
Mr. Chew, I am one of six Texans on this committee. I am
over here. So when you invoke the name of Texas, you get my
attention.
Mr. Chew, when you were the CFO of ByteDance, did the
Chinese Government instruct you on how content was to be
moderated on Douyin or TikTok, yes or no?
Mr. Chew. Sorry, Congressman, would you mind repeating that
question?
Mr. Weber. When you were the CFO of ByteDance, did the
Chinese Government instruct you on how content to be
moderated--was to be moderated on Douyin or TikTok?
Mr. Chew. I was not in charge of that. That is the CFO of--
--
Mr. Weber. You were not?
Mr. Chew [continuing]. Of ByteDance.
Mr. Weber. OK, we have a discrepancy there.
Reports have shown that TikTok accounts managed by media
links to be a propaganda arm of the CCP, pushed divisive
content before the recent midterm election. Mr. Chew, yes or
no, has--to your knowledge, has the CCP coordinated or utilized
TikTok to influence users through algorithms, state-paid
content creation, or in any other capacity?
Mr. Chew. No, they do not do that. We do not promote or
remove any content on behalf of the Chinese Government.
Mr. Weber. You don't, but did the Chinese Government? Do
you have any knowledge of that?
Mr. Chew. We do not do--Congressman, we have only one
process of removing content on our platform----
Mr. Weber. OK.
Mr. Chew [continuing]. And the process is done by our
content moderation team headquartered in Ireland, in Dublin--
sorry--Ireland and the U.S. And we will only remove content if
it violates our guidelines. And that is something that we
audit, you know, or if there is a valid legal order. So----
Mr. Weber. OK. Several reports, hearings, and leaked
internal documents have indicated that TikTok has repeatedly
censored or deamplified content that is critical of the Chinese
Communist Party's party policies in the U.S. and abroad. Are
you aware of those reports?
Mr. Chew. I don't think that is accurate, Congressman. I do
not----
Mr. Weber. Are you aware of those reports?
Mr. Chew. There could be some reports that say that, but
that action itself is not something----
Mr. Weber. But your testimony here today is that you can
keep up with stuff and make it as ``clean as possible.'` Are
you aware of those reports?
Mr. Chew. I want to make it very clear that we--there is
content on TikTok that is great and fun, there is content that
is critical of China, and----
Mr. Weber. That is not what I am saying. Are you aware of
the reports citing that fact?
Mr. Chew. Again, like I said, the fact is if you go onto
our platform, you will find content that is critical of China.
Mr. Weber. Well, we are going to talk about that. Now, this
committee is looking at reforming section 230 of the
Communications Decency Act, which has already been mentioned
here today. Do you think that censoring history and--historical
facts and current events should be protected by section 230's
good faith requirement?
Mr. Chew. Congressman, that is a more complex topic. I
would need to speak to my team and get back to you on the
specifics.
Mr. Weber. Is your team behind you?
Mr. Chew. It is my broader team. I will speak to them and I
will get back to you.
Mr. Weber. It is always good to have folks behind you,
isn't it?
Mr. Chew. Not them.
Mr. Weber. Oh, no? OK, I got you.
Here are my concerns with TikTok. Your claims are hard to
believe. It is no secret to us that TikTok is still under the
thumb of CCP influence. And let's be honest, TikTok is
indoctrinating our children with divisive, woke, and pro-CCP
propaganda, all while threatening our national security with
Chinese spyware.
In fact--let me look at my notes here--you had an exchange
with Anna Eshoo. In your exchange with Congresswoman Eshoo you
said that ``extreme fitness videos shouldn't be viewed too
much,'` do you remember that exchange here today?
Mr. Chew. What extremist videos?
Mr. Weber. With Anna Eshoo out of California.
Mr. Chew. I--any content that is--has extremist content----
Mr. Weber. OK.
Mr. Chew [continuing]. Is not allowed on our platform. It
will be--we identify them, and we----
Mr. Weber. Was that also true about the gun video that you
saw today? Was that extreme content that should have been taken
down?
Mr. Chew. I would need to look at the specifics of the
whole video. There was a bit of lag just now. We couldn't see
the whole video.
Mr. Weber. OK. You know it threatened our committee chair
here?
Mr. Chew. That is unacceptable.
Mr. Weber. OK.
Mr. Chew. And, you know----
Mr. Weber. So you are aware of that extreme video. And why
did it take 40-plus days to get it down? Does it take literally
an act of Congress? Should we plan to have a committee hearing
every time, every day, every time there is something brought
up, so that we can limit the content on TikTok? Should Congress
plan to do that, Mr. Chew?
Mr. Chew. Congressman, we work very hard to remove
violative content on our platform.
Mr. Weber. OK. Well, let me move on. With Congressman
Hudson, he asked you about your wages and your stocks, and you
said you would prefer to keep that information private. Now you
know how we feel about American public's information. We prefer
to keep it private, as well, and we don't think TikTok does
that.
So, Madam Chair, my time is up. And if this committee gets
its way, TikTok's time is up.
Mr. Chew. Madam Chair, if I may----
Mrs. Rodgers. The gentleman----
Mr. Chew [continuing]. In my response to an earlier
question----
Mrs. Rodgers. The gentleman--I am sorry, the gentleman's
time has expired, or--yes, I--the Chair recognizes Mr. Ruiz
from California for 5 minutes.
Mr. Ruiz. Thank you, Chair Rodgers. I echo my colleagues'
concerns about TikTok's impacts on the health and well-being of
the American public.
As a doctor and the ranking member of the Select
Subcommittee on the Coronavirus Pandemic, I am troubled that
TikTok is rife with medically inaccurate information, including
dangerous misinformation and the intentional disinformation
about COVID-19 and vaccines. TikTok's community guidelines
state that the company will remove content or accounts that
involve, quote, ``misleading information that causes
significant harm.'` However, since the early stages of the
pandemic, TikTok has been used as a platform for people pushing
misinformation, disinformation, including by those casting
doubt on the safety and efficacy of lifesaving vaccines.
And despite TikTok's pledge to address harmful
misinformation, these videos are being viewed millions of
times. For example, the Institute for Strategic Dialogue found
that a sample of 124 TikTok videos containing vaccine
misinformation were viewed 20 million times. And Media Matters
found that a sample of 18 videos with COVID-19 misinformation
were viewed over 57 million times.
Here is another shocking study: The Journal of American
Medical Informatics Association found that, when searching
``#coronavirus'` on TikTok, almost 30 percent of the videos
that came up contained misinformation. Videos in that sample
containing a high level of misinformation were viewed a median
of 9.4 million times.
Mr. Chew, what are these--why are these dangerous videos
falling through the cracks of your company's efforts to enforce
its own community guidelines and remove harmful misinformation?
Mr. Chew. Before I answer that, in my response to an
earlier----
Mr. Ruiz. No, no, you are----
Mr. Chew [continuing]. Question from Representative Dunn--
--
Mr. Ruiz. You are in my--Mr. Chew you are in my time.
Answer my question.
Mr. Chew. I understand. But if--I would like to clarify
something.
Mr. Ruiz. Clarify, I have 5 minutes.
Mr. Chew. OK.
Mr. Ruiz. In my time. You are in my time now. Answer my
question.
Mr. Chew. Yes. Any dangerous misinformation is--we partner
with third-party experts to be able to identify and help us
with subject domain expertise, and with the expertise that we
recognize we rely on those to develop policies that recognize
and remove content that could be----
Mr. Ruiz. Well, your efforts are--have failed, and they are
dangerous. OK? It's public health risks that--you are putting
millions of people's lives at risk for not being able to do a
better job.
And I am concerned that TikTok's features make it--users
uniquely vulnerable to the spread of this misinformation. For
example, TikTok makes it extremely easy to reuse audio and
videos to create content, which allows misinformation to
quickly spread through the platform and TikTok's algorithm. To
recommend videos means that a user viewing one video containing
misinformation can easily result in their quote-unquote ``For
You page'' becoming filled with videos containing similar
misinformation. This is a dangerous feedback loop.
So is TikTok taking any action to modify these features so
that they no longer facilitate the spread of this
misinformation or this misinformation feedback loop?
Mr. Chew. Congressman, again, like I said, any dangerous
mis- or disinformation we work with third parties to recognize
that, and it is proactively removed from our platform.
Mr. Ruiz. OK, so----
Mr. Chew. So it doesn't get into those loops at all.
Mr. Ruiz. So I can--I can go back and read you the data and
the Journal of American Medical Informatics: 30 percent of
videos after searching for #coronavirus had misinformation.
Like, almost one out of three. Your third party and your
company are missing one--almost one out of three misinformed
videos. So you are telling me what you are doing; I am telling
you the data shows that you are grossly failing at that effort.
The other thing, the other question I have for you is that
TikTok is also in Spanish, and Spanish-speaking populations
have been specifically targeted to misinformation when it comes
to many aspects, especially medical misinformation. And as
chair of the Congressional Hispanic Caucus, we reached out to
you last Congress on this issue.
So what is your intent, or how does your team look like to
address Spanish versus English?
How many staff do you have focusing on Spanish versus how
many staff do you have focusing on English misinformation?
Mr. Chew. Congressman, I was--like I had explained just
now, the Spanish-speaking population is very important to our
platform. We do have a lot of Spanish-speaking moderators, and
we will continue to----
Mr. Ruiz. So how many Spanish-speaking staff versus
English-speaking staff for misinformation do you have?
Mr. Chew. I can get back to you on the specifics, but
dangerous misinformation is moderated, regardless of language.
Mr. Ruiz. Not to the degree that it needs to be.
Mr. Chew. We are--we can continue to work hard to----
Mr. Ruiz. And when there is misinformation, people base
their decisions that oftentimes put them at risk and exposures,
and their families at risk. And with the coronavirus,
especially prior to the vaccines, they--the risk was their
life.
Thank you, I yield back.
Mr. Chew. Madam Chair, I would like to clarify something.
In the followup question to Representative Dunn's question just
now, I misunderstood the followup about ByteDance buying on
behalf of the Chinese Government. My answer to that question
should be a no, because it came very rapidly. I just want to
clarify that.
Mrs. Rodgers. The gentleman's time has expired. The
gentleman--or the Chair, the Chair recognizes the gentleman
from Idaho, Mr. Fulcher, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Fulcher. Thank you, Madam Chairman.
Mr. Chew, we have been going a long time here by now, and a
lot of questions have been answered, and a lot of them have not
been answered. And the primary thing I want to do is just share
some thoughts of what I have seen, learned today, been exposed
to.
First of all, I have got to compliment you on having a
product that is impressive. It is a very influential tool. It
is addictive. And that is what you want users to be exposed to,
something addictive. And it is a data-gathering masterpiece. So
clearly, it has got the potential to sell products, connect
like-minded people with that artificial intelligence capability
in a viral, viral fashion, and perhaps spread information
quicker, better than anything else that has been developed out
there.
Now, I am just going to tell you, I am not a subscriber, at
least a willing subscriber. But probably in that database
somewhere is my preferences with colors or foods or who I have
spoken to or what I have said, my favorite newspapers, I don't
know. But that is available to be sold or given to whomever or
whatever. And the whatever is what bothers me.
And I will use myself as an example again. If for whatever
reason I became a target in this, I became somebody you didn't
like--and I know that would be hard to believe, because you
have got to like me--but let's say you didn't, or your company
didn't. Or for whatever reason, I became an app target. That
artificial intelligence algorithm could be shared or spread
selectively to a targeted audience that--with negative
information that maybe they--has been paired up with that
knowledge and that app to make me look really, really bad. Or
to the converse, the same thing could be done to make me look
really, really good.
Here is the problem. It is someone else or some artificial
intelligence algorithm that has inordinate power to
subjectively combine strategic data with strategic audiences to
shape whatever thoughts and news they want. And I have equipped
it, not even knowing it. And that process could apply to anyone
or anything. There is the danger. It could be the President of
the United States, it could be their kids, it could be a
company, it could be a political party, it could be a news
outlet. Anything could be targeted for that selective viral
spread of just some information.
Mr. Chew, this may be genius, but that doesn't make it
fair, it doesn't make it good, and it doesn't make it
accountable. I wouldn't want my government to have that
ability. I wouldn't want a company or a political party or my
friend August here or my mother to have that capability. And I
certainly don't want that to be accessible to anyone in China.
Now, there is no question it has got immense value. And as
proof that, you are here, because this hasn't been a fun day. I
know that. It hasn't been a fun day for us, either.
Artificial intelligence is difficult to manage once it is
on autocruise control. And it is, as we have talked about,
nearly impossible to wall off data. I know the idea, I know a
little bit about databases, I know a little bit about
corruption of those databases. It is very difficult to wall
things off.
And unfortunately, there is this thing called human nature,
where there's some dark components from time to time. There is
always a temptation to monetize things or perhaps use some of
these tools for nefarious purposes, and they can have
absolutely devastating consequences.
So, Mr. Chew, I am going to wrap up my comments and just
say that this is so attractive. TikTok poses as a Mr. Rogers'
Neighborhood, but it acts like Big Brother. And that has got to
stop.
Madam Chair, I yield back.
Mr. Griffith. Will the gentleman yield?
Mrs. Rodgers. The gentleman yields back. Oh----
Mr. Griffith. Will the gentleman yield?
Mr. Fulcher. The gentleman yields.
Mrs. Rodgers. Yield to Mr. Morgan Griffith.
Mr. Griffith. I thank the gentleman for yielding.
Mr. Chew, earlier we had submitted into evidence the
TikTok, ByteDance, and their ties to the Chinese Communist
Party report that was filed as an exhibit last week with the
Senate in Australia.
If you have any comment, I would like to get it on this
paragraph out of their summary: ``Our research confirms beyond
any plausible doubt that TikTok is owned by ByteDance.
ByteDance is a PRC company, and ByteDance is subject to all the
influence, guidance, and de facto control to which the Chinese
Communist Party now subjects all PRC technology companies. We
show'`--in this report--``how the CCP and the PRC state
agencies together'`--the party state--``have extended their
ties into ByteDance to the point that the company can no longer
be accurately described as a private enterprise.'`
You keep calling it a private enterprise, but all the
countries in the world are saying it is not a private
enterprise, it is part of the Chinese Communist Party. What say
you, sir? Yes or no, is it part of the Chinese Communist Party,
as everybody thinks, or are you still living in some mystical
world?
Mr. Chew. I disagree with many conclusions----
Mr. Griffith. So you are living in the mystical world.
I yield back.
Mrs. Rodgers. The gentleman yields back. The Chair
recognizes Ms.--the lady--gentlelady from Minnesota, Ms. Craig,
for 5 minutes.
Ms. Craig. Well, thank you so much, Madam Chair, for
yielding.
Mr. Chew, I am probably like a lot of parents who are also
Members of Congress out here. I know a number of us--when you
testified earlier today, you mentioned that the over-35 segment
was a growing group of potential users, as if over 35 is old.
And I realize that my own children think that I am ancient, our
four boys.
But like a lot of us up here, we understand that there is
some potential good. And of course, many of your influencers
are doing what they are doing for all the right reasons. But
one thing in your testimony you said a lot was ``safety.'` But
as a mother and as a Member of Congress and as someone who is
very concerned about drug use in our country, I was surprised
that that didn't come up once in your testimony. No real
reference to it here today. You know, I have raised my concerns
in general about social media platforms serving as an illegal
marketplace for drugs in prior Big Tech hearings. And I plan to
continue that focus during today's hearing.
Mr. Chew, a March 8th, 2023 article in the Washington Post
detailed the fact that TikTok has made little progress in
combating the sale of illegal drugs on your platform. In fact,
Colorado Attorney General Phil Weiser said that getting drugs
on platforms like yours was nearly as convenient as using a
phone to order a pizza or call an Uber. That same article
mentions that law enforcement agencies have been frustrated by
TikTok's lack of competition in the form of data sharing.
In my view, TikTok has taken little action in response to
this crisis. According to a May 2022 blog post from TikTok, you
donated $125,000 or 0.001 percent of your 2022 revenue to an
antidrug effort on your platform in the form of ad credits. You
also redirected #drugs, #fentanyl, and other obvious hashtags
away from posts selling drugs to a community resources page, as
if a teenager looking for drugs is going to look for them at
#drugs.
Drug dealers have easily worked their way around this,
using emojis and slang to communicate that they have drugs for
sale. To this day it is possible for anyone to log into your
platform and acquire drugs, and the consequences of that can be
fatal.
What are you doing to move past these token efforts to
prevent teenagers from accessing drugs on your platform?
Look, as parents up here today we not--we may not
understand everything about your platform. I am not a tech
guru. Many of us up here may not use exactly the right
language, but we know when our kids are at risk. And our kids
are at risk on your platform. So what are you going to do to
move past these previous token efforts?
Mr. Chew. Congresswoman, we do take illegal drugs content
on our platform very seriously. It violates our guidelines. We
proactively identify and remove them. And as you pointed out,
if anybody searches for any drugs on our platform, we do point
them to resources to help them with that.
At the same time, we have also taken product changes. Like,
for example, we don't allow our under-16 users to use the right
messaging. And the reason is because, you know, we wanted to--
that was a trade-off here. And we believe that, you know, it
will protect these younger users better from getting contacts
from people trying to push illegal activity.
So we will continue to work on it. Again, no company can be
perfect at this. We are not saying we are----
Ms. Craig. Mr. Chew, I--with all due respect, the ``no
company can be perfect'` line has been used way too much today.
I am going to reclaim my time. You know, clearly, in the 3-
plus hours you have been before us today, what you are saying
about Project Texas just doesn't pass the smell test. My
constituents are concerned that TikTok and the Chinese
Communist Party are controlling their data and seeing our own
vulnerabilities.
If you are an American company, we could look at your 10-K,
we could see who your shareholders are. The answer you provided
earlier today, you would rather not tell us what your
compensation is or how it is derived? Well, no American CEO
would like to tell us that, but they have to because they are
an American company. So what you are doing down in Texas, it is
all well and good, but it is not enough for us to be convinced
that our privacy is not at risk.
So how can you say that you are protecting American users'
privacy with the CCP being so heavily involved with ByteDance?
It is not possible. China won't even carry your product. How is
it that you can convince us that our privacy is not at risk
and, more than that, our kids' privacy is not at risk in this
country?
Mr. Chew. In my opening statement----
Mrs. Rodgers. The gentlelady's time has expired.
Ms. Craig. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Mrs. Rodgers. The gentlelady's time has expired. We are
going to have to continue on. The gentleman from Georgia, Mr.
Allen, is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Allen. Thank you, Madam Chair, and thank you, Mr. Chew,
for being here today.
In September 2021 the Wall Street Journal published an
article titled ``How TikTok Serves Up Sex and Drug Videos to
Minors.'` This article gives a chilling depiction of the types
of content that TikTok's algorithm is curating for our
children. This article claims that your application served an
account that was registered as a 13-year-old ``videos about
drug use'` referenced--it referenced to cocaine and meth
addiction and promotional videos for online sales of drugs.
The algorithm was also found to have delivered countless
videos depicting ``pornography and other adult content'` to the
device of an account that was registered as a 13-year-old.
Could you please explain to the members of this committee
and parents across the country why your company deems it
acceptable for such inappropriate content to be prominently
featured on a child's For You page?
Mr. Chew. The--a lot of the content that you mentioned,
Congressman, are violative of our own policies. And we don't
think they are acceptable, and we remove them when we identify
them. We take this very seriously. I mentioned this.
This is an industrywide challenge. We are investing as much
as we can. We don't think it represents the majority of the
users' experience on TikTok, but it does happen. Some bad
actors try and come in and post some of this content, and we
are doing our best to invest as much as we can to remove them.
Mr. Allen. Well, I would say you are not doing enough.
I have 14 grandchildren, Mr. Chew. Do you personally
believe that such content is appropriate for minor children to
consume?
Mr. Chew. A lot of the content that you mentioned, like
porn, for example, is not allowed on our platform. So no, I do
not think they are acceptable for young people to consume.
Mr. Allen. Earlier this week, the Wall Street Journal
published an article titled ``TikTok's Chinese Partner Has
Another Wildly Popular App in the U.S.'` This app is called
CapCut. It is a video editing tool to help users go viral on
TikTok. While for obvious reasons most of our attention is
focused on TikTok and ByteDance, other companies and their
applications are also continuing to exploit the privacy of
Americans. TikTok, CapCut, Lark, FaceU, all of these apps are
also controlled by ByteDance and pose serious privacy concerns.
In 2022, it was reported that TopBuzz, an international
version of ByteDance-censored Chinese news app was used to
spread pro-China messages to Americans. When it comes to the
data privacy of Americans, we must have a clear set of
guidelines to ensure Americans' data is protected and not
passed along to unknown third-party actors who could pose a
threat to our security.
I urge my colleagues to continue to work together to pass a
national data privacy bill, not just one out of the House
Energy and Commerce Committee but also through the House of
this Congress. It is the only systematic way we can address
privacy concerns. Unfortunately, I have been given no reason to
believe that TikTok does not pose a threat, and cannot be
trusted to follow our laws when they conflict with the desires
of the Chinese Communist Party.
Your firewall that you are talking about, if you had a bad
actor in your--what you call your Texas initiative--could get
through that firewall and send any information that they wanted
to send anywhere direct to the--into--directly to the Chinese
Communist Party, would you deny that?
Mr. Chew. Congressman, this risk that you talk about exists
for every company. Bad actors----
Mr. Allen. I am talking about TikTok, sir.
Mr. Chew. In fact, the risk is lower for us, because
these----
Mr. Allen. It is a risk, correct?
Mr. Chew. The personnel will be vetted.
Mr. Allen. Yes.
Mr. Chew. So the risk is actually lower than most companies
in the industry.
Mr. Allen. Well, that is why we have to deal with your
company.
And with that, Madam Chair, I yield back.
Mrs. Rodgers. The gentleman yields back. The Chair
recognizes the gentleman from California, Mr. Peters, for 5
minutes.
Mr. Peters. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Mr. Chew, thanks for being here today. You know, your
testimony discusses an effort your company has named Project
Texas and the investments your company has made in creating a
firewall between the United States user data and entities in
China susceptible to influence by China's government.
And with your company's recent announcement by CFIUS--that
CFIUS has instructed TikTok to separate itself from ByteDance
or face a ban--TikTok's commitment to retaining this firewall
is at a crossroads. So I want to ask you some questions about
your company's long-term plans to ensure the safety and
security of American data. And this, for me, is the crux of the
concern for me about TikTok.
First of all, does the Chinese Government need to approve
Project Texas for TikTok to agree to it?
Mr. Chew. Congressman, we have designed Project Texas to
move forward in the United States. This is something that we
have described at length in the written testimony and in my
opening statement: the firewall of American data stored on
American soil by an American company overseen by American
personnel. This is designed to move forward in the United
States.
Mr. Peters. But does the Chinese Government need to approve
Project Texas for you to agree to it?
Mr. Chew. We do not believe so.
Mr. Peters. How is TikTok considering the future of Project
Texas in the event of a sale or other ownership changes?
Are there elements of the Project Texas that TikTok would
change prior to, or----
Mr. Chew. I cannot speak on this hypothetical or on, you
know, on potential, you know, owners who would--I cannot
represent.
Mr. Peters. OK. You don't know.
Mr. Chew. I don't know, yes.
Mr. Peters. Despite Project Texas' planned positive
changes, it does include several broad exceptions that would
allow large amounts of U.S. user data to routinely leave the
country. I want to know a little bit more about these
exceptions so I can understand whether Project Texas can live
to--up to its promise of protecting Americans' user data.
I understand that, under Project Texas, business data and
public data will be permitted to regularly leave the United
States. Is that correct?
Mr. Chew. Almost all the data is under the--that is not
public is under the definition of protected data. This excepted
data that you mentioned--I can get back to your team on this--
is really for interoperability purposes, to make sure that the
business can still operate and American users are still getting
the benefit----
Mr. Peters. Can you tell us what data--what date--where the
data goes, and how it is used by the company?
Mr. Chew. It will travel outside of the United States, but
I can get back to you on the specifics.
Mr. Peters. OK.
Mr. Chew. It is data that doesn't--it cannot be used to
identify users, you know, so it really is data that ensures the
interoperability of the platform.
Mr. Peters. And I understand that. I think we would want to
have some understanding of how we would distinguish that by
definition, and then also how it would be enforced.
Mr. Chew. I can get back to you on those specifics.
Mr. Peters. How is the U.S. data used to promote certain
content back in the United States market, for instance?
Mr. Chew. I am sorry?
Mr. Peters. So what--you have--U.S. data feed the--all
right.
How--can you discuss--when you discuss where the data goes
and how it is used by the company, how and at what points of
data transfer does the U.S. data feed the PRC-developed
algorithm used by TikTok?
How would the data that you are talking about----
Mr. Chew. We--TikTok does not--is not available in mainland
China.
Mr. Peters. The PRC-developed algorithm used by TikTok, how
does U.S. data get fed by that?
Mr. Chew. The U.S.--the algorithm that leads to the U.S.
app is in the Oracle Cloud infrastructure, and is trained by
U.S. and global data. Again, TikTok does not--is not available
in mainland China.
Mr. Peters. How can we trust that these exceptions for
Project Texas won't be used abused by China's government or by
foreign adversaries?
Mr. Chew. We can--we--this is the fourth commitment,
transparency, third-party monitors, including the definitions
of these exceptions. And, you know, we can be very transparent
on how they are used.
Mr. Peters. OK. I guess--I guess my question will be,
then--and if you want to get back to me in writing, that is
fine, but how we would distinguish between the data for
interoperability that you suggest needs to be shared with what
data wouldn't be shared?
Mr. Chew. It is--again, you know, it is--first of all,
public data is not part of the protected data definition,
because public data is what users want to share globally. So if
you post a video and you want someone in France to see it, just
by definition it has to leave the United States. Otherwise, the
world cannot see it.
Now, there are certain aggregated and anonymized data sets
that's useful for interoperability, for advertising, for
example.
Mr. Peters. Right.
Mr. Chew. And that is part of what we are talking about.
Mr. Peters. Right.
Mr. Chew. I can get back to you on the specifics, but----
Mr. Peters. I think we would also want to know how it is
anonymized, and how--what oversight and enforcement we can
count on.
Mr. Chew. OK, I can get back to you on specifics.
Mr. Peters. Thank you.
I yield back.
Mrs. Rodgers. The gentleman yields back. The gentleman from
Texas, Mr. Pfluger, is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Pfluger. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Mr. Chew, I got to hand it to you. You have actually done
something that in the last 3 to 4 years has not happened,
except for the exception of maybe Vladimir Putin: you have
unified Republicans and Democrats. And if only for a day, we
are actually unified because we have serious concerns.
Do you--does TikTok support good? I mean, is TikTok a
platform for good? Just yes or no.
Mr. Chew. I believe, yes.
Mr. Pfluger. OK. Does TikTok support freedom of speech?
Mr. Chew. Yes. It is one of the commitments I have given
this committee.
Mr. Pfluger. Do you personally support the First Amendment?
Mr. Chew. Congressman, I am here to talk about----
Mr. Pfluger. As the CEO of TikTok.
Mr. Chew. I am here to talk about TikTok.
Mr. Pfluger. As the CEO of TikTok, do you support the----
Mr. Chew. TikTok supports freedom of----
Mr. Pfluger. Thank you. Does TikTok support genocide?
Mr. Chew. Again, Congressman, I am here to talk about
TikTok.
Mr. Pfluger. Does TikTok support genocide? Does TikTok----
Mr. Chew. No, but----
Mr. Pfluger. OK.
Mr. Chew. But----
Mr. Pfluger. So--reclaiming my time, I am going to go to a
video now, and it is from Enes Kanter Freedom. And I would like
you to see Enes Kanter Freedom, who has spent his entire career
post-NBA fighting against human rights violations within the
Chinese Communist Party.
Go ahead and play this video, which highlights a situation
that allegedly shows some human rights violations inside China.
Please play.
[Video shown.]
Mr. Pfluger. Mr. Chew, this was a video that was posted on
TikTok by Enes Kanter Freedom. Are you familiar with this
basketball player?
Mr. Chew. I am not familiar with the specifics of this----
Mr. Pfluger. Are you----
Mr. Chew [continuing]. But I can tell you that----
Mr. Pfluger. Are you familiar with the player Enes Kanter
Freedom?
Mr. Chew. Congressman, I am not----
Mr. Pfluger. OK.
Mr. Chew [continuing]. Familiar with this. You have--you
just have to open TikTok and just search for this kind of
content.
Mr. Pfluger. OK.
Mr. Chew. It really exists.
Mr. Pfluger. I have read the moderation policy. Let me just
quote what--you have talked about content moderation. TikTok
has a moderation policy. Yes?
Mr. Chew. We do have community guidelines that----
Mr. Pfluger. One of the guidelines says, ``material that in
the sole judgment of TikTok is objectionable.'` Is this an
example, banning Enes Kanter Freedom? Is that an example of
objectionable material inside the Chinese Communist Party in
mainland China?
Mr. Chew. We do not take down content simply because it is
critical of China.
Mr. Pfluger. He was banned 1 week after this video.
Mr. Chew. We do not do that. And I can check about the
specific----
Mr. Pfluger. If you need a note, go ahead.
Mr. Chew. The note says he is not banned.
Mr. Pfluger. His account was taken off 1 week after.
Mr. Chew. Well, we can check on the specifics.
Mr. Pfluger. We can check.
Mr. Chew. Yes.
Mr. Pfluger. So let's get to some other questions. Thank
you for the slide.
Your privacy policy states that you collect a great array
of data: keystroke patterns, app file names and types,
sometimes approximate location, GPS location. Are keystroke
patterns and rhythms part of TikTok gathering--the data that is
gathered by TikTok?
Mr. Chew. If you are talking, Congressman, specifically
about keystrokes, you know, keystrokes, we do not engage in
keystroke logging to monitor what the users say. It is to
identify bots.
Mr. Pfluger. OK.
Mr. Chew. It is for security purposes. And this is a
standard industry practice.
Mr. Pfluger. You gather a lot of data, it is safe to say.
Mr. Chew. We don't gather--we don't believe we gather more
than any other social media company.
Mr. Pfluger. TikTok gathers a lot of data, because your
value proposition, as you sat in my office and told me, was to
connect people to each other around the world. You told me this
in my office. So you gather data on what they like and what
they don't like, and then you show them things that they don't
know they like, but eventually they may. You told me this.
Mr. Chew. I think that is--I don't think that is what I
said. What I said is that we connect people together, yes.
Mr. Pfluger. Reclaiming----
Mr. Chew. And that doesn't mean that we collect more data--
--
Mr. Pfluger. Are you aware of any instances of TikTok
distributing content from Chinese state media?
Mr. Chew. I am sorry?
Mr. Pfluger. Are you aware of any instances of TikTok
distributing content from Chinese state media on the platform?
Mr. Chew. We will label them clearly to--for our users to
understand that.
Mr. Pfluger. Do you disagree with FBI Director Wray and NSA
Director Nakasone when they said that the CCP could have the
capability to manipulate data and send it to the United States?
Do you disagree with their statement?
Mr. Chew. Their statement says ``could.'`
Mr. Pfluger. So do you disagree with that?
Mr. Chew. No, I don't disagree with that.
Mr. Pfluger. OK. So it is possible that the CCP, under the
auspices of ByteDance, which is your parent company, which you
get paid from, has the ability to manipulate content that is
being shared with 130 million Americans. Yes?
Mr. Chew. Congressman, I just want to make sure I am
understanding all these questions.
I don't disagree with them, that there are data risks in
general. That is what I meant.
Mr. Pfluger. There is a big data risk, because----
Mr. Chew. But on us, specifically----
Mr. Pfluger. Are there engineers located inside mainland
China that work on TikTok? Not Douyin, but TikTok.
Mr. Chew. We are not the only company that has that.
Mr. Pfluger. Are there engineers inside mainland China
currently working on the algorithm for TikTok----
Mr. Chew. Congressman, like I said----
Mr. Pfluger [continuing]. As you told me in my office.
Mr. Chew. There are other companies that--as I told you in
your office, there are other companies that----
Mr. Pfluger. I am going to reclaim my time.
Please rename your project. Texas is not the appropriate
name. We stand for freedom and transparency, and we don't want
your project.
I yield back.
Mrs. Rodgers. The gentleman yields back. The gentlelady
from Tennessee is recognized for 5 minutes, Mrs. Harshbarger.
Mrs. Harshbarger. Thank you, Madam Chair, and thank you,
Mr. Chew, for being here today.
Both President Trump and now President Biden have backed
forcing TikTok to sell to an American company. However, the
Chinese Communist Party has put export controls on algorithms
ByteDance owns that power TikTok. And of course, this has
created a gauntlet of regulatory hurdles in China and the U.S.
that prevented the sale of TikTok.
Now, as a longtime business owner, I want to tell you, Mr.
Chew, that waiting until your hands are forced will only drive
down the price of your app. And right now, both your hands are
tied, and you are going to have to make a decision about
whether you choose freedom from the CCP or you continue to be
an agent of the CCP.
And I will tell you why I say it that way. As a former
member of Homeland Security, I point blank asked FBI Director
Wray, ``Is TikTok a national security threat?'`
And without hesitation, sir, he looked at me and said,
``Yes, Congresswoman, it is.'`
Now, how much data is ByteDance collecting through TikTok
that is worth continuing to fight this regulatory gauntlet? You
know, why not take the money and run, like any other company
would do?
Mr. Chew. Congresswoman, we built Project Texas in order to
safeguard, and we listened to the concerns that have been
raised, and we are building something that is unprecedented,
that no other company is offering to protect U.S. user
interests. And we believe it is rigorous and robust. And, you
know, we are even offering third-party transparency and
monitors to come in to verify this.
Frankly, I haven't heard any good reason why this doesn't
work. I have heard a lot of rhetoric around this, but I haven't
heard a good reason why it doesn't work.
Mrs. Harshbarger. Well----
Mr. Chew. I look forward to these conversations, by the
way, with you.
Mrs. Harshbarger. Absolutely. Well, let me go down this
road.
When TikTok was unveiled to the public, its business model
was solely based on generating revenue from advertising. Of
course, ByteDance operated a separate app called Douyin for the
Chinese marketplace. TikTok is embarking on becoming a so-
called super app. In other words, it is a one-stop shop with
everything you do, as Representative Fulcher said.
It is reported that TikTok's algorithms are so powerful
that owner ByteDance has begun to license it to other
companies. TikTok's recommendation engine drives usage on the
platform, and this leads to promises of quick exposure and fame
that leads to even more people joining. And when you sign up,
TikTok starts collecting data about you, your location, your
gender, your age, your facial data. The user never gets to the
end of the content. And that is by design. And obviously, that
makes you a lot of money.
Now, I know that the Chinese Communist Party is preventing
ByteDance from selling TikTok due to export restrictions on the
technology. And this causes me to question how are you going to
power TikTok with your Oracle servers located in the U.S. with
that Texas Project with ByteDance technology, if it can't leave
China? How is that going to happen? I just want you to explain
how it is going to happen.
Mr. Chew. Congresswoman, the way that we design this is so
that any piece of software that is impactful to the code, that
enters, you know, that--some technical details around this will
be reviewed by a third party or a few third-party monitors,
just to make sure that we are all comfortable with the code.
I want to say this again: I don't know of any other company
in my industry who is offering this level of transparency.
Mrs. Harshbarger. Well, why are there two different
versions of apps, one in China and one in the United States?
Mr. Chew. It is just a different business.
Mrs. Harshbarger. Well, I think we all know the reason that
the Chinese get a different version, because ByteDance puts
China first and America last.
And, you know, TikTok has--with everything we have heard
today, sir, when you see 13-year-olds, 16-year-olds, you see
the degradation that is happening to our youth and our society,
you know, it is deceptive, and it is destructive comment, and
it is comments, and the worst thing is that it is deliberate,
sir. And that is not acceptable.
And with that, Chairwoman, I yield back.
Mrs. Rodgers. The gentlelady yields back. The gentlelady
from Iowa, Mrs. Miller-Meeks, is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mrs. Miller-Meeks. Thank you, Madam Chair, and I would just
like to thank our witness, Mr. Chew. Having been in the hot
seat, so to speak, before, when I was in State Senate, I know
how challenging this can be.
And thank you for your demeanor throughout all of this. But
certainly, as you can see, in a bipartisan way we have
concerns, and those concerns are valid.
And this is a yes-or-no question: Does TikTok track users'
individual keystrokes?
Mr. Chew. Only for security purposes, for--like, for
example, like detecting bots. But we don't monitor what users
say.
Mrs. Miller-Meeks. So the only purpose that you would
monitor keystrokes is for security purposes.
Mr. Chew. I can get back to you on more specifics, but this
is not unlike what many other companies in the industry does.
Mrs. Miller-Meeks. So the keystroke monitoring does not go
beyond what common industry practice in comparison to platforms
like Facebook or Instagram use.
Mr. Chew. Yes, I believe so.
Mrs. Miller-Meeks. OK. And does TikTok keep records of
users' credit cards and passwords?
Mr. Chew. I am not aware of that. You don't need that to
log in. Of course, I can get back to you on specifics if you
make a transaction on an e-commerce platform.
But regardless, all that U.S. data will be stored within
the Project Texas firewall, you know, within the Oracle Cloud
infrastructure, and overseen by American personnel.
Mrs. Miller-Meeks. So you would store credit card and
password information?
Mr. Chew. I need to check on the specifics. We are
launching a pilot e-commerce plan, and we are making sure that
the data is very secure within the Oracle Cloud infrastructure.
Mrs. Miller-Meeks. I think you have made a point of saying
that your platform is not different than other platforms on
social media and therefore are no more responsible than
Facebook or Instagram or Twitter or the other social media
platforms.
The concern, however, comes with where the technology is
generated and whom it is owned by. And in the case of other
companies, it is generated in the U.S., under U.S. guidelines,
under U.S. privacy laws with certain parameters, versus
generated through a parent company, ByteDance, which, as we
know, is susceptible to the laws of the Chinese Communist
Party, which has access to all of that data and information.
And I understand that TikTok has just reinstated Enes
Kanter's account recently.
So our concern, and the question I have for you, is why
would China or the Chinese Communist Party be opposed to a
forced sale of TikTok?
Mr. Chew. I cannot speak on behalf of the Chinese
Government.
I can say that we designed Project Texas to take it forward
here in the United States. And again, I believe it offers
unprecedented protection for U.S. user data.
Mrs. Harshbarger. Yes, I think the problem is when there is
a lack of transparency, then that leads people to believe that
there is something more nefarious, and that there is in fact
data that is captured, is stored, and poses a risk not only to
children in the United States, but also poses a risk to
national security.
With that, I yield the rest of my time to my colleague, Jay
Obernolte.
Mr. Obernolte. I thank the gentlelady from Iowa for
yielding.
Mr. Chew, I would like to continue our discussion about
Project Texas and the technical details about what you are
proposing to do. So you are migrating all storage of U.S. user
data to the Oracle Cloud infrastructure, and you think that
that will be done by the end of the year. Was that right?
Mr. Chew. Again, I can get back to you on the technical
parts of it, the migration. Today, by default, all U.S.--new
U.S. data is stored, by default----
Mr. Obernolte. Sir, I am just using what you have said in
your testimony in your opening here. So----
Mr. Chew. It is stored there by default. What I said in my
testimony is I am deleting legacy data.
Mr. Obernolte. I see, OK.
Mr. Chew. This is Virginia and Singapore. That is the
difference.
Mr. Obernolte. So who--when this migration is complete, who
will have access to that data?
Mr. Chew. Right now a team called TikTok U.S. Data
Security, led by American personnel, they have access to that.
We have begun these operations already.
Mr. Obernolte. OK, but the app itself has access to the
data, correct?
Mr. Chew. Only through them. Any employees that have the
data----
Mr. Obernolte. Oh, no. What I mean is, like, if I lose my
iPhone and I reinstall the app, and I put in my username and
password, my app will reconnect to the mothership and download
some of that data, my settings----
Mr. Chew. That is not the way it works, no.
Mr. Obernolte. It is not?
Mr. Chew. That is not the way it works. It will go through
the Oracle Cloud infrastructure, and that team----
Mr. Obernolte. No, no. Yes, I realize that. So let me ask
you this: What would prevent them, someone with detailed
technical knowledge of the way the app is constructed, from
creating an almost identical version of the app that could also
access that data?
Mr. Chew. That is--we are giving you third-party monitors
and transparency----
Mr. Obernolte. Yes, but they are monitoring the source code
for your app. I mean, ByteDance, these engineers, have been
working on this app for years. What would prevent them from
making an app that could also access that data?
Mr. Chew. Congressman, I think we are going into the area
where, you know, what if there is a hacker, what if there is
this.
Mr. Obernolte. OK.
Mr. Chew. You know, this is a common industry problem, as
you know.
Mr. Obernolte. Yes. But, well, I mean, it is just--I see my
time is expired. It illustrates the point----
Mrs. Rodgers. OK----
Mr. Obernolte [continuing]. I am just skeptical that you
are technically able to do----
Mrs. Rodgers. The gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. Obernolte [continuing]. What you promised.
Mrs. Rodgers. The gentlelady's time has expired.
Mr. Chew, I recognize that we have run over. I appreciate
your time. We have just a few Members left and would appreciate
the chance for them to get to answer--or ask their 5 minutes'
worth of questions.
The gentleman from Virginia, Mr. Griffith, is recognized
for 5 minutes.
Mr. Griffith. Thank you very much, Madam Chair.
Mr. Chew, you share legal counsel lawyers with ByteDance,
yes or no?
Mr. Chew. Yes, we do.
Mr. Griffith. And you testified that you prepared
extensively with your legal team for this hearing, yes or no?
Mr. Chew. With my team in DC, including the----
Mr. Griffith. Including some of your legal counsel.
Mr. Chew. Yes.
Mr. Griffith. Right. And did they tell you about the report
to the Australian Senate of March 14th that I referenced
earlier? Did they tell you that that report was out there? Yes
or no.
Mr. Chew. I cannot recall how I found out about the report.
Mr. Griffith. But you know about the report. OK.
Mr. Chew. I can check, and--yes.
Mr. Griffith. And did they tell you to favorably cite the
Citizens Lab in your written testimony today, yes or no?
Mr. Chew. Congressman, I need to get back to you on
specifics----
Mr. Griffith. They helped you with the preparation of your
written statement, though, didn't they?
Mr. Chew. A team prepares, yes.
Mr. Griffith. Yes. And did they tell you that the director
of Citizen Labs says he has called out your company for
misrepresenting their report repeatedly, and has--and did so as
late as yesterday? Did they tell you about that? Yes or no.
Mr. Chew. Congressman, the Citizen Lab is saying they
cannot prove a negative, which is what I have been trying to do
for the last 4 hours.
Mr. Griffith. All right. But you cited it favorably as
saying that it did positive things for you.
That being said, let me ask you this. You keep talking
about transparency, but you haven't been transparent with us
here today. You were asked earlier by Mr. Hudson if you own
stock in ByteDance. You said you didn't want to reveal that.
Well, we are trying to figure out what the ties are between
ByteDance and TikTok. I am not going to ask you how many shares
you own, but do you own shares in ByteDance, sir?
Mr. Chew. Yes, I do.
Mr. Griffith. All right. There you go. How about in TikTok?
Mr. Chew. Right now all employees own shares in one----
Mr. Griffith. Yes, sure. I expected that. I just don't
understand why you didn't tell Mr. Hudson that, and were
transparent earlier. Instead, you made us drag it out of you.
All right. Now let's talk about the kids. You told several
of our folks that there was a 60-minute deadline. You also told
us that, if you were under the age of 18, you couldn't access
the live section, the live option. So I texted my 17-year-old
and my 15-year-old, and I basically got scoffs back--scoffs--
when I said, ``Are you all limited to 60 minutes?'`
My older son said, ``Well, there is a notice I get from
time to time that says I shouldn't be on more than 60 minutes,
but it never has kicked me off.'`
And my younger son said, ``Oh, I am on as long as I want to
be.'`
So I am just informing you whoever told you, particularly
if it was your legal team, that that is not accurate, that they
are on for more than 60 minutes, and they can access the live
section. I believe it was Mr. Carter that you said they
couldn't, under 18, access the live--you know, being on the
live section. He has done it. So whatever it is you think you
are doing, it ain't getting done.
Now, let's talk about the law for a minute. You share a
legal team, but you keep talking about how you got a firewall
between you and ByteDance. You can't have an effective firewall
under the United States interpretation of such if you are
sharing legal counsel, because anything that you say to your
legal counsel, they can share internally. If you have got the
same lawyers--now, maybe you have two different teams of
lawyers in the law firm, but that is not what you said to us
today. You said you share lawyers. There is no firewall,
legally. I am just telling you.
So if you want to clean it up and be transparent, you need
to do something about that. Wouldn't you agree, yes or no----
Mr. Chew. Congressman----
Mr. Griffith [continuing]. That you need to do something
about that?
Mr. Chew. Congressman, I----
Mr. Griffith. You will look into it.
Mr. Chew. Yes.
Mr. Griffith. You will look into it. You have been looking
into it all the time.
All right. You told Dr. Burgess, when asked if your
employees--if your employees who were members of the Chinese
Communist Party had access to TikTok data from the U.S., you
said you didn't know who was a member of the Communist Party.
But then Congressman--to Congressman Walberg you said that the
CEO of TikTok was not a member of the Communist--the Chinese
Communist Party. And to Congressman Kelly you said the founder
of TikTok was not a member of the Communist Chinese Party.
Sir, either you know who is and isn't a member of the
Chinese Communist Party or you don't. Which one is it? I submit
that you know, and you just aren't giving us the straight
story. Clearly you know, but you denied that to Dr. Burgess.
Mr. Chew. Congressman, I can ask one or two people, but we
have no policy to ask all the employees. I can ask one or two
people, but I--you know, who are in----
Mr. Griffith. But it is reasonable to assume that, with a
significant number of members of the country of China being
members of the Chinese Communist Party, logic would tell us--
you are a logical man, I assume--logic would tell us that there
are a fair number of your employees who are members of the
Chinese Communist Party, at least a dozen or so, who have
access to this data. Isn't that so?
Mr. Chew. Again, like I said, I can ask one or two people.
We don't have a policy to ask everybody.
Mr. Griffith. I said earlier you are living in some kind of
a cloud world, because either you know or you don't know.
I yield back. Thank you, ma'am.
Mrs. Rodgers. The gentleman from South Carolina the Chair
recognizes for 5 minutes, Mr. Duncan.
Mr. Duncan. Thank you, Madam Chair. I think it has been
revealed today there is not a degree of separation between
ByteDance and TikTok.
I would like to enter in the record a Heritage Foundation
document, ``TikTok Generation: a CCP Official in Every
Pocket.'`
Mrs. Rodgers. Without objection, so ordered.
[The information appears at the conclusion of the hearing.]
Mr. Duncan. And I would like to yield the balance of my
time to Kelly Armstrong from North Dakota.
Mr. Armstrong. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Mr. Chew, the TikTok Privacy Policy details extensive data
collection on users. One line states that ``we may collect
information about you from other publicly available sources.'`
What publicly available data is TikTok collecting and adding to
the profiles of users?
Mr. Chew. It will be publicly available, but I can get back
to you on specifics.
Mr. Armstrong. OK. What is the purpose of obtaining even
more data on your users beyond the data collected from the
platform?
Mr. Chew. We collect data--we want to give our users, by
the way, a lot of transparency on what data we collect. We give
them choices on the controls of their own privacy settings, and
it really is to serve them a better experience. This is the
reason why so many people love the app. It is a great
experience.
Mr. Armstrong. So how does the non-TikTok-related data
service relate to the service provided?
Mr. Chew. I need to check the specifics and understand the
question, and get back to you.
Mr. Armstrong. OK. Do you think the average TikTok user
knows that you are--and understands that TikTok's data
collection extends to information outside the use of the app?
Mr. Chew. We do give transparent information on this. And
like I said, we--I--we don't--I don't believe we collect more
information than most other social media platforms out there.
Mr. Armstrong. Well, and the reason I ask this--because I
am going to go back into the corporate structure. You described
that TikTok is a subsidiary of ByteDance. Mr. Griffith just
said that you guys share the same lawyers. You have stated that
your direct report is the CEO of ByteDance. But you have also
stated that, at certain levels, TikTok operates without direct
daily control from ByteDance. You have used content moderation
as an example for that.
TikTok's privacy policy states that you may share user data
within your corporate group. Does that corporate group include
ByteDance?
Mr. Chew. If you are talking about that one entity that has
the share for the--for Chinese media licensing purposes, I
think it is called Beijing Douyin Services. If you are talking
about that entity, of the government share, the answer is, you
know, we have cut off, you know, all access of U.S. data sets
to that.
Mr. Armstrong. So----
Mr. Chew. Employees of the entity.
Mr. Armstrong. But your user privacy--so your corporate--
ByteDance is part of your corporate group.
Mr. Chew. ByteDance is the top company.
Mr. Armstrong. So----
Mr. Chew. So, yes, you are talking about the other entities
within the group.
Mr. Armstrong. So you just testified that you firewalled
this. Does that statement--so you are saying the TikTok's
executives you--that operate independently of ByteDance, but
does that statement not hold for sharing of access to data?
Mr. Chew. Well, I was talking about that one entity that
has--that many of you have raised some concerns, you know. That
is the entity that I am talking about, the entity with the
Chinese Government's investment that has--that is for the
purpose of Chinese Internet licensing for the Chinese
business----
Mr. Armstrong. Let me ask it a different way: What other
entities have access to TikTok user data?
Mr. Chew. Well, after Project Texas, we are going to move
it so that only TikTok user data security has controlled access
of that data.
Mr. Armstrong. OK. So--and we could bring you back either--
and after Project Texas is done. But right now, what other
entities have access to TikTok's user data today?
Mr. Chew. Only by requirement. It is really only by
requirement. Certain employees may use--may need--require some
access of data to help build the product.
But for U.S., you know, we have moved it from Project
Texas, and by the end of this year it will be firewalled away.
Mr. Armstrong. But this is your privacy policy today. Like,
I understand what you are telling us, what is potentially going
to happen in the future. I have concerns again about CFIUS and
government involvement, private organization, all of that. I am
just saying this is your user agreement today.
So your user agreement says that you share access with your
corporate group.
Mr. Chew. You know----
Mr. Armstrong. You are telling me what is going to happen
whenever Project Texas gets done. I am asking you today. Who
has access to TikTok's user data?
Mr. Chew. In our user agreement, Congressman, in our
privacy policy, we also added a link so that our users in the
U.S. can be informed about Project Texas. The link is there.
Mr. Armstrong. So the link is there to private--but--I
understand what you are trying to do moving forward. I have my
own concerns about that. But we are sitting here today in a
hearing, and your privacy policy is different than your
testimony. Your privacy policy specifically says that you can
share user data within your corporate group.
So you are saying, even though your privacy policy says
that, you are not doing it?
Mr. Chew. Like I said, no, I don't think there is any
contradiction here. Like I said, Project Texas, when it is
done, we firewall off that data. We still have some legacy data
in Virginia and Singapore that we started deleting, and we will
be done by the end of this year.
Mr. Armstrong. So at the end of this year, then you won't
share it. Does that mean you are sharing it today?
Mr. Chew. I don't believe so, but there is some----
Mr. Armstrong. Then why haven't you changed your privacy
policy? Why haven't you updated it?
Mr. Chew. We did update it, and we gave our users more
information on Project Texas. We did update it.
[Pause.]
Mrs. Rodgers. The gentleman yields back. The gentleman from
Texas the Chair recognizes for 5 minutes, Mr. Crenshaw.
Mr. Crenshaw. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Mr. Chew, for bringing Republicans and Democrats
together. I appreciate that.
I want to get right to the critical point of concern. So
TikTok is able to collect massive amounts of personal data. We
all know that. That means it could, if it desired to, use this
data to influence narratives and trends, create misinformation
campaigns, encourage self-destructive behavior, purposefully
allow drug cartels to communicate freely and organize human and
drug trafficking.
Now, to be fair, all social media companies could do that.
But here is the difference. It is only TikTok that is
controlled by the Chinese Communist Party. All these other
social media companies are not. Mr. Chew, do you agree that
TikTok is controlled by the CCP?
Mr. Chew. No.
Mr. Crenshaw. OK, I thought you would say that. I disagree,
as you thought I might say.
Here is why I disagree: Your parent company is ByteDance,
right?
Mr. Chew. That is correct.
Mr. Crenshaw. It is correct. So, many of the workers who
work at ByteDance are Communist Party members, right?
Mr. Chew. I wouldn't know.
Mr. Crenshaw. Well, I think, for example, the chief editor
at ByteDance, Zhang Fuping, is the Communist Party's secretary.
Correct?
Mr. Chew. He works on the Chinese business, not on TikTok.
Mr. Crenshaw. Right. He works for ByteDance, the parent
company.
Mr. Chew. He works on the Chinese business.
Mr. Crenshaw. Right, the parent company of TikTok.
Mr. Chew. The Chinese business is called Douyin.
Mr. Crenshaw. Yes, but it is all associated with ByteDance,
right?
Mr. Chew. So ByteDance owns a number of businesses.
Mr. Crenshaw. Right. You all report to ByteDance. Everybody
is part of ByteDance. OK? And do you know of any other
employees that work for ByteDance that are part of the Chinese
Communist Party?
Mr. Chew. Like I said, you know, there are--ByteDance has--
owns Chinese businesses, and they operate in China.
Mr. Crenshaw. You don't know how many, but you acknowledge
many must be card-carrying members of the CCP, right?
Mr. Chew. In the Chinese business, yes.
Mr. Crenshaw. Yes. I mean, the CCP holds a--what is called
a golden share in ByteDance that allows the CCP to control one
board seat in ByteDance. That is public----
Mr. Chew. That is not correct.
Mr. Crenshaw. It is not correct?
Mr. Chew. No, it is----
Mr. Crenshaw. It is publicly reported. They admitted to it.
Mr. Chew. It is--on our website we have updated it, so we
have--can give people more transparent information on this.
They have a share in a subsidiary that is only for the
Chinese business. It has nothing to do with TikTok, and it is
for the purposes of content licensing in China.
Mr. Crenshaw. So there is not an internal CCP committee,
which is a regular thing that happens in China, they have a CCP
committee internally inside the company.
Mr. Chew. I run TikTok. I cannot represent the Chinese
business.
Mr. Crenshaw. ByteDance, I am talking about ByteDance. No
arrangement in ByteDance?
Mr. Chew. Again----
Mr. Crenshaw. Here is the main point of concern. China's
2017 national intelligence law states very clearly that ``any
organization or citizen shall support, assist, and cooperate
with state intelligence work in accordance with the law, and
maintain the secrecy of all knowledge of state intelligence
work.'`
In other words, ByteDance, and also your TikTok employees
that live in China, they must cooperate with Chinese
intelligence whenever they are called upon. And if they are
called upon, they are bound to secrecy. That would include you.
So, Mr. Chew, if the CCP tells ByteDance to turn over all data
that TikTok has collected inside the U.S., even within Project
Texas, do they have to do so, according to Chinese law?
Mr. Chew. Congressman, first, I am Singaporean.
Mr. Crenshaw. That is fine. But there are employees of
yours, and ByteDance is in China.
Mr. Chew. We understand this concern. In my opening
statement we said we hear these concerns. We didn't try to
avoid them or, you know, trivialize them. We built something
where we take that data and put it out of reach. This is what
we did. We put it out of reach.
Mr. Crenshaw. Out of reach. But they own you.
Mr. Chew. No, we put it out of reach by storing them----
Mr. Crenshaw. ByteDance owns TikTok. If ByteDance is--and
the CCP owns ByteDance, because the CCP owns everybody in
China.
Mr. Chew. Well----
Mr. Crenshaw. And so, by law, they can make them do
whatever they want, and they say that, by law, you can't tell
anyone about it. So they can make you hand over that data. Is
that correct?
Mr. Chew. That data is stored here, in American soil, by an
American company----
Mr. Crenshaw. Well, you say that. We----
Mr. Chew [continuing]. Overseen by American----
Mr. Crenshaw. We thought that, but leaked audio from 80
internal TikTok meetings shows that U.S. user data has been
repeatedly accessed from China when you said it hasn't been.
And here is the other thing. Following back on my
colleague's line of questioning, in your own privacy policy it
says that you may share information within your so-called
corporate group. Is ByteDance part of that corporate group?
Mr. Chew. If you are talking about the share of the entity
with the share, like I shared with the previous----
Mr. Crenshaw. Is ByteDance part of the corporate group?
Mr. Chew. ByteDance is a holding company. It is part of the
corporate group, yes.
Mr. Crenshaw. It is part of the corporate group.
Mr. Chew. Yes.
Mr. Crenshaw. OK. So your own privacy policy says you have
to share data with ByteDance. And if the CCP says, ``Hey,
ByteDance, you are going to do what we say, and you can't tell
anyone about it'' because by law, according to that 2017
national intelligence law, they have to do it, that is our
concern.
Mr. Chew. This----
Mr. Crenshaw. Maybe you haven't done it yet, but my point
is that you might have to. And that is where our concerns come
from.
I mean, over 300 TikTok employees have worked for China's
state-run propaganda media. That is just from looking at their
LinkedIn profiles. OK?
So here--and my last point is this. I want to say this to
all the teenagers out there and TikTok influencers who think we
are just old and out of touch and don't know what we are
talking about, trying to take away your favorite app. You may
not care that your data is being accessed now, but it will be
one day when you do care about it.
And here is the real problem: With data comes power. They
can choose what you see and how you see it. They can make you
believe things that are not true. They can encourage you to
engage in behavior that will destroy your life. Even if it is
not happening yet, it could in the future.
The long-term goal of the Chinese Communist Party is the
demise of the American power, and that starts with our youth.
At any moment they could demand that all of TikTok's data be
used to design an AI algorithm with the sole purpose of
promoting Chinese interests and destroying our society from
within. You want to know why that is Democrat--why that is--why
Democrats and Republicans have come together on this? That is
why we are so concerned.
Thank you, and I yield back.
Mrs. Rodgers. The gentleman yields back.
I remind the Members they have 10 business days to submit
questions for the record, and I ask our witness to respond to
the questions promptly.
Pursuant to committee rules, I ask unanimous consent to
enter the documents from the staff list into the record.
Without objection, so ordered.
[The information appears at the conclusion of the hearing.]
Mrs. Rodgers. Members should submit their questions by the
close of business on April 6th.
Without objection, the committee is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 3:23 p.m., the hearing was adjourned.]
[Material submitted for inclusion in the record follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
