- BUILDING BLOCKCHAINS: EXPLORING WEB 3 AND OTHER APPLICATIONS FOR DISTRIBUTED LEDGER TECHNOLOGIES

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

BUILDING BLOCKCHAINS: EXPLORING WEB 3 AND OTHER APPLICATIONS FOR
DISTRIBUTED LEDGER TECHNOLOGIES

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON INNOVATION, DATA, AND COMMERCE

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

JUNE 7, 2023

__________

Serial No. 118-42

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Published for the use of the Committee on Energy and Commerce

govinfo.gov/committee/house-energy
energycommerce.house.gov

______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
56-505PDF          WASHINGTON : 2024

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE

CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington
Chair
MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas            FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey
ROBERT E. LATTA, Ohio                  Ranking Member
BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky              ANNA G. ESHOO, California
H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia         DIANA DeGETTE, Colorado
GUS M. BILIRAKIS, Florida            JAN SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois
BILL JOHNSON, Ohio                   DORIS O. MATSUI, California
LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana               KATHY CASTOR, Florida
RICHARD HUDSON, North Carolina       JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland
TIM WALBERG, Michigan                PAUL TONKO, New York
EARL L. ``BUDDY'' CARTER, Georgia    YVETTE D. CLARKE, New York
JEFF DUNCAN, South Carolina          TONY CARDENAS, California
GARY J. PALMER, Alabama              RAUL RUIZ, California
NEAL P. DUNN, Florida                SCOTT H. PETERS, California
JOHN R. CURTIS, Utah                 DEBBIE DINGELL, Michigan
DEBBBIE LESKO, Arizona               MARC A. VEASEY, Texas
GREG PENCE, Indiana                  ANN M. KUSTER, New Hampshire
DAN CRENSHAW, Texas                  ROBIN L. KELLY, Illinois
JOHN JOYCE, Pennsylvania             NANETTE DIAZ BARRAGAN, California
KELLY ARMSTRONG, North Dakota, Vice  LISA BLUNT ROCHESTER, Delaware
Chair                            DARREN SOTO, Florida
RANDY K. WEBER, Sr., Texas           ANGIE CRAIG, Minnesota
RICK W. ALLEN, Georgia               KIM SCHRIER, Washington
TROY BALDERSON, Ohio                 LORI TRAHAN, Massachusetts
RUSS FULCHER, Idaho                  LIZZIE FLETCHER, Texas
AUGUST PFLUGER, Texas
DIANA HARSHBARGER, Tennessee
MARIANNETTE MILLER-MEEKS, Iowa
KAT CAMMACK, Florida
JAY OBERNOLTE, California
------

Professional Staff

NATE HODSON, Staff Director
SARAH BURKE, Deputy Staff Director
TIFFANY GUARASCIO, Minority Staff Director
Subcommittee on Innovation, Data, and Commerce

GUS M. BILIRAKIS, Florida
Chairman
LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana               JAN SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois
TIM WALBERG, Michigan, Vice Chair      Ranking Member
JEFF DUNCAN, South Carolina          KATHY CASTOR, Florida
NEAL P. DUNN, Florida                DEBBIE DINGELL, Michigan
DEBBIE LESKO, Arizona                ROBIN L. KELLY, Illinois
GREG PENCE, Indiana                  LISA BLUNT ROCHESTER, Delaware
KELLY ARMSTRONG, North Dakota        DARREN SOTO, Florida
RICK W. ALLEN, Georgia               LORI TRAHAN, Massachusetts
RUSS FULCHER, Idaho                  YVETTE D. CLARKE, New York
DIANA HARSHBARGER, Tennessee         FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey (ex
KAT CAMMACK, Florida                     officio)
CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington
(ex officio)
C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hon. Gus M. Bilirakis, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Florida, opening statement............................     1
Prepared statement...........................................     4
Hon. Jan Schakowsky, a Representative in Congress from the State
of Illinois, opening statement.................................     6
Prepared statement...........................................     7
Hon. Cathy McMorris Rodgers, a Representative in Congress from
the State of Washington, opening statement.....................     9
Prepared statement...........................................    11
Hon. Darren Soto, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Florida, opening statement.....................................    14
Prepared statement...........................................    16

Witnesses

Carla L. Reyes, Associate Professor of Law, SMU Dedman School of
Law............................................................    17
Prepared statement...........................................    19
Hasshi Sudler, Professor, Villanova University College of
Engineering, and Chief Executive Officer, Internet Think Tank,
Inc............................................................    34
Prepared statement...........................................    37
Answers to submitted questions...............................   106
Ryan Wyatt, President, Polygon Labs..............................    42
Prepared statement...........................................    44
Answers to submitted questions...............................   109
Ross Schulman, Senior Fellow, Decentralization, Electronic
Frontier Foundation............................................    51
Prepared statement...........................................    54
Answers to submitted questions...............................   111

Submitted Material

Inclusion of the following was approved by unanimous consent.
List of documents submitted for the record.......................    94
Letter of June 7, 2023, from Amir Haleem, Chief Executive
Officer, Nova Labs, Inc., to Mr. Bilirakis and Ms. Schakowsky..    95
Report by Electric Capital, ``U.S. Share of Blockchain Developers
is Shrinking,'' March 2023 \1\
Article of February 1, 2022, ``FDA Official Says New Rule Could
Boost Blockchain-Based Food Tracking,'' by Suman Bhattacharyya,
Wall Street Journal............................................    98
Letter of June 7, 2023, from Janay Eyo, Director, Financial
Policy, Chamber of Progress, to Mr. Bilirakis, Ms. Schakowsky,
et al..........................................................   102

----------

\1\ The report has been retained in committee files and is included in
the Documents for the Record at https://docs.house.gov/meetings/IF/
IF17/20230607/116065/HHRG-118-IF17-20230607-SD003.pdf.

BUILDING BLOCKCHAINS: EXPLORING WEB 3 AND OTHER APPLICATIONS FOR
DISTRIBUTED LEDGER TECHNOLOGIES

----------

WEDNESDAY, JUNE 7, 2023

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Innovation, Data, and Commerce,
Committee on Energy and Commerce,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 10:01 a.m., in
the John D. Dingell Room 2123, Rayburn House Office Building,
Hon. Gus M. Bilirakis (chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Members present: Representatives Bilirakis, Bucshon,
Walberg, Duncan, Lesko, Allen, Fulcher, Harshbarger, Cammack,
Rodgers (ex officio), Schakowsky (subcommittee ranking member),
Castor, Dingell, Kelly, Soto, Trahan, and Clarke.
Staff present: Michael Cameron, Professional Staff Member;
Jessica Herron, Clerk; Tara Hupman, Chief Counsel; Peter
Kielty, General Counsel; Emily King, Member Services Director;
Tim Kurth, Chief Counsel; Zane Mandle, Intern; Brannon Rains,
Professional Staff Member; Teddy Tanzer, Senior Counsel; Hannah
Anton, Minority Policy Analyst; Ian Barlow, Minority FTC
Detailee; Camden Burk, Minority Intern; Anthony Choi, Minority
Intern; Daniel Greene, Minority Professional Staff Member; Lisa
Hone, Minority Chief Counsel, Innovation, Data, and Commerce;
and Joe Orlando, Minority Junior Professional Staff Member.
Mr. Bilirakis. The subcommittee will come to order.
The Chair recognizes himself for an opening statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. GUS M. BILIRAKIS, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF FLORIDA

Good morning, and welcome to today's subcommittee hearing.
Cryptocurrencies and certain financial aspects of
blockchains have hijacked the public's attention when it comes
to this emerging technology. Today's hearing will highlight
that blockchains are not just impacting Wall Street but are
also changing Silicon Valley and the internet as a whole.
It is essential that Congress accurately understand what it
is regulating before it does so. That would be nice. This is a
complicated topic, which is why I am looking forward to the
superb panel of experts educating us here today, and welcome.
The core issue is about how data is organized, preserved,
and protected, which is the jurisdiction of this subcommittee.
As I understand it, a blockchain is a linked list or ledger
of transactions stored on a network of computers. Blockchains
are composed of building blocks of data chained together
cryptographically.
We will walk through these technical components today and
discuss what it means for blockchains to be decentralized,
immutable, and open.
But to step back from these terms, what we are really
discussing here is a new foundational technology that can
provide individuals and businesses new ways to access, record,
and validate digital activity online.
Web 1.0, the original world wide web--and I remember it
well--lasted from roughly 1993 to 2004 and was characterized by
dial-up and AOL. I remember those days well because I am old
enough.
It was replaced by Web 2, which is the current internet we
know well and has been characterized by smart phones and Big
Tech platforms.
Web 3, which encompasses the nonfungible tokens, the NFTs,
and other use cases, is the emerging internet built on top of
blockchains and is characterized by increased user control,
decentralization, and transparency.
Using these technologies, developers are building new
decentralized social media, new messaging apps, new ways to
stream music, and new privacy-enhancing technologies, just to
name a few.
Blockchains are not a crypto casino. In fact, according to
one report, despite crypto prices falling roughly $2 trillion,
a 70 percent decline, blockchain developers have only declined
10 percent.
There are respected developers who are not trying to make a
fast buck, but rather, they are building a new evolution of the
internet.
But this technology goes beyond just Silicon Valley.
Blockchains, Web 3, and other distributed ledger technologies
are just tools. Like the internet, blockchains will impact many
areas of our jurisdiction and can help address challenges with
our current internet ecosystem, bolster supply chains, verify
information, and increase efficiencies for businesses.
However, we should not treat this technology as a cure-all.
There are still technical challenges, such as scaling, data
availability, and cybersecurity.
There are also human challenges, such as fraudsters and
compliance with law enforcement. As with any new technologies,
scams do exist in a blockchain ecosystem, unfortunately.
As this committee knows well, the number-one Federal
regulator of scams and fraud is the Federal Trade Commission,
and that is where we want its focus, OK, on scams and fraud.
Instead of diverting resource to fight legal battles over
possible competition theories, the FTC should focus on
protecting Americans from fraudsters as these bad actors
migrate from older technologies to these new technologies,
unfortunately, again. We see it all the time.
Last Congress, my bill, the Ransom Act, was signed into
law. This legislation requires the FTC to increase cooperation
with foreign law enforcement and report on ransomware and other
cybersecurity-related attacks.
When international hackers target Americans using
blockchains, the FTC should take a lead role in ensuring they
are made whole.
Blockchains present an incredible opportunity but also come
with unique challenges. Regardless, the United States must lead
on the international stage so our adversaries do not have an
opportunity to set the rules of the road. That is why we are
having this hearing to educate all of us.
We must lead with our values for freedom, human rights, and
human dignity.
I look forward to working with Members on both sides of the
aisle to ensure these technologies are anchored here in the
United States and we are central to that discussion.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Bilirakis follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Bilirakis. I now recognize the gentlelady from
Illinois, Ms. Schakowsky, the ranking member, for 5 minutes for
her opening statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. JAN SCHAKOWSKY, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF ILLINOIS

Ms. Schakowsky. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
You know, I have had the privilege of being on the Energy
and Commerce Committee, which has the absolute broadest
jurisdiction of any committee, and the subcommittee which I
think of all the subcommittees has the largest jurisdiction as
well.
Mr. Bilirakis. I agree with that.
Ms. Schakowsky. But today we are exploring some new
territory. So here is the title of this hearing, ``Building
Blockchains: Exploring Web 3 and Other Applications for
Directed Ledger Technology.'' Pretty wonky, I would say, but
good for us that we are heading into this territory.
So we are here today to discuss blockchain, which is a
relatively new technology. The blockchains are being used to
solve problems like supply chain management or creating digital
contracts and even wills.
However, this technology has some significant shortfalls.
Some blockchains have large energy and environmental
implications that we need to be concerned of.
But the biggest downfall, I think, is the use of this
technology by scammers and fraudsters and extortionists. Real
people are actually being hurt right now. Some have lost even
their life savings because of the problems they have
encountered.
Just this week, the SEC alleges that two of the largest
cryptocurrency exchanges were absolutely scamming consumers,
and criminals often are demanding--and you were talking about
your legislation--that ransom be paid, and sometimes that even
has affected hospitals in a really negative kind of way.
Between 2017 and 2022, Illinois residents--that is the
State that I am from--allege that they have lost $45 million to
the currency scams.
So we have the tools. That is the good news. We do have the
tools. We have the Federal Trade Commission. And like the
chairman has said, we want to make sure that the Federal Trade
Commission has the resources that it needs to make sure that in
this new developing technology, that they are going to--they
have the tools, but now are they going to have the resources?
And so I look forward to hearing from our witnesses, the
people who really know what they are talking about, and I hope
that you will educate us to the extent that we need to do our
part as Members of Congress to make sure that we can partner
with you and the information that you give us to make sure that
this is a safe environment for consumers and for our economy.
So I want to thank you very much for being here. I look
forward to learning a lot from you today.
Thank you, and I yield back.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Schakowsky follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Bilirakis. The gentlelady yields back, and I appreciate
that.
And now I will recognize the Chair of the full committee.
She gave me the opportunity to chair the subcommittee with the
broadest jurisdiction, and I appreciate that very much.
So I recognize Mrs. Rodgers for 5 minutes for an opening
statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, A
REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF WASHINGTON

Mrs. Rodgers. Good morning. Good morning, everyone. Welcome
to today's hearing.
This committee, and this subcommittee, in particular, play
a vital role in advancing American competitiveness and global
technological leadership with our values, as you stated, Mr.
Chairman: freedom, human rights, and human dignity.
Blockchains, Web 3, and other applications of distributed
ledger technologies represent a new technological shift,
comparable to the breakthrough of the internet, and we need to
ensure that America, not China or Europe, is charting our path
to lead in the deployment and standard setting of these
technologies.
Our mission on Energy and Commerce is to help foster and to
promote innovation and American technological leadership. We
led on passing the Telecommunications Act of 1996, which was
foundational to the evolution of the internet. The innovation
and entrepreneurship that followed represented some of the
greatest accomplishments in American history and the world.
We must ensure that we can lead the next era of American
innovation and entrepreneurship with a regulatory environment
that keeps pace with the constantly evolving tech sector. That
is especially true with blockchains.
For this reason, in 2016 the Energy and Commerce Committee
held one of the first congressional hearings on blockchains. In
the years since, the technology has continued to advance as
entrepreneurs have found new and exciting applications.
Additionally, at the end of 2020 my legislation with the
help of the then-Chair of the subcommittee, Chair Schakowsky,
the American Compete Act, was signed into law, which required
the Department of Commerce to study ways the U.S. can advance
several emerging technologies.
Part of the legislation in the package, led by
Representatives Guthrie and Soto, requires a study on
blockchains and ways for the Federal Government to promote
American leadership and adoption.
We continue to wait for this forthcoming report from the
Biden administration to provide the committee with pro-
innovation recommendations. Unfortunately, the report is now
far beyond the statutory deadline, as well as the requested
extension we allowed.
As with any new technology, we must move quickly. While the
U.S. led in the creation of the internet, we could easily fall
behind with Web 3, the next generation of the internet.
According to public filing data, less than 40 percent of
blockchain companies are headquartered in the United States,
and that number continues to decline.
As we saw with Huawei and 5G, when we do not lead, our
adversaries fill the void. It is critical that America leads,
especially given the implications of these new technologies.
Big Tech has developed tools that interact to track
Americans both online and offline. Technologies like
distributed ledgers can align with the goals of comprehensive
data privacy legislation--I am excited about that--by enabling
people to reclaim control of their personal online data and by
limiting any one company's ability to control and collect the
information that we share online.
As these technologies are deployed, the U.S. develops
standards to regulate them, and we have a responsibility to
ensure entrepreneurs and small businesses can continue to
thrive.
We have often celebrated they are the engine of our
economy. While larger companies can navigate complicated
regulations like GDPR in Europe or a patchwork of State laws,
smaller businesses cannot afford the high compliance cost.
Embracing innovation, entrepreneurship, and free markets is
what has made America a global technological leader, not overly
prescriptive regulation.
While securities and commodities are just one of the many
uses of blockchain technologies, there is reason that the
Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act does not regulate--nor should it--the
use of Americans' personal information outside of the financial
sector.
Congress needs to have a conversation about what
blockchains are and are not to ensure that the heavy hand of
government regulation does not force blockchain startups to
reevaluate if America is the best place to begin their
business.
When this committee worked on the Telecom Act, we never
could have predicted the power of the internet. Now, as then,
we do not know how powerful blockchain technologies will be.
But we do know America should lead the way. So I look
forward to an informative discussion today.
And I yield back.
[The prepared statement of Mrs. Rodgers follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Bilirakis. I thank the Chair.
And I now recognize the gentleman from Florida, my good
friend Mr. Soto, the designee for Ranking Member Pallone, for 5
minutes for his opening statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF DARREN SOTO, A REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS
FROM THE STATE OF FLORIDA

Mr. Soto. Thank you, Chairman.
I know issues like blockchain can be so dizzying for so
many Americans, and at its essence it is a fixed electronic
ledger. Once you add information to it, you cannot take it
away.
And why is that important? Because it adds integrity to
technology and to the internet. We add transactions in the form
of cryptocurrency, which was discussed already. Information,
think of the most complex data that we have added together like
for healthcare or for climate change.
Even Chinese dissidents have added protesting language to
blockchains to protest maltreatment in China.
And then what is Web 3? It is basically a decentralized
version of the internet where you utilize blockchain technology
rather than the centralized version that we have right now.
This is much discussed about cryptocurrency, and I want to
focus on the information part to it.
As the co-Chair of the Congressional Blockchain Caucus
along with Congressman Emmer, we are pleased to work on a lot
of these issues, and in Central Florida, for instance, in my
district, looking down the line we see blockchain technology to
help local producers and retailers track produce shipments and
quickly trace contamination of foodborne illnesses.
Digital assets can be used for remittances, especially a
lot of immigrants in our community that send money back to
their families abroad, perhaps in countries where the economy
and the currency is destabilized.
Travel agents in Orlando can work with tourists from around
the world and have less transitional costs.
I agree with my colleagues that we need to remain a digital
leader here in the United States, and so it is important that
this committee continues to promote innovation and research
into applications of blockchain technology and protect
consumers from this very complex yet critical technology.
That is why we pushed for the Blockchain Center of
Excellence within the Department of Commerce to coordinate
Federal use of blockchain technology.
Here is just a sample of some blockchain initiatives that
we have gotten into both the budget and the National Defense
Authorization Act over the last few years.
Remembrance, making data secure because you cannot change
it afterwards.
So veterans' electronic health records, we secured
amendments in the NDA for data management to study blockchain
technology to help secure our veterans' health records.
Department of Defense, it is helpful in communications so
that whether it is through computer-to-computer or even on use
in warfare with encoded messages using the blockchain.
Department of Energy, using blockchain in the energy sector
to help out with communications between computers and to assess
complex sets of data, such as the nuclear or other uses.
And funding the blockchain for grid modernization.
So there are a lot of ways that we could utilize blockchain
beyond cryptocurrency, which gets a lot of the conversation
going, like our Chair and ranking member mentioned.
Lastly, one that has started working really well is food
traceability through blockchain. By utilizing the blockchain to
trace food and if there are issues like contamination or
others. The FDA is already starting to use effective controls
to track all of this.
So there is a lot to do, and I look forward to working with
the committee on these complex but critical issues to the
future of American innovation.
And I yield back.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Soto follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Bilirakis. I thank the gentleman.
And I now will call our first witness, who is Carla Reyes,
associate professor of law at SMU, Southern Methodist
University.
You are recognized for your 5 minutes.
Thank you.

STATEMENT OF CARLA L. REYES, ASSOCIATE PROFESSOR OF LAW, SMU
DEDMAN SCHOOL OF LAW

Ms. Reyes. Chairman, Chairwoman, Ranking Members, and
members of the Subcommittee on Innovation, Data, and Commerce,
thank you for inviting me to testify regarding blockchain
technology and its nonfinancial use cases.
It is an honor to be here, and I applaud this committee's
persistent and consistent efforts to demystify this technology
for your colleagues, for your constituents, and for the public
and, indeed, to thereby encourage thoughtful policymaking in
the arena.
My name, as you said, is Carla Reyes. I am an associate
professor at SMU Dedman School of Law, but I am not--I should
make clear at the outset--testifying on behalf of SMU Dedman
School of Law or for Southern Methodist University, but rather
I am testifying in my personal capacity, and the views that I
express here are entirely my own.
In this initial statement, I intend to keep my remarks at a
pretty high level to anticipate the discussion that we will
have the rest of the hearing and because of the short time.
But to begin with, it is worth a note perhaps, perhaps a
footnote in my line of work, as to what a blockchain protocol
is. At the absolute highest level of generality--and I cannot
emphasize that enough, but at the absolute highest level of
generality--a blockchain protocol is one type of distributed
database known broadly as distributed ledger technology.
A blockchain protocol uses a specific type of data
structure, namely, a blocked group of data linked together by
one-way cryptographic pointers to thwart malicious efforts to
manipulate the network.
Ultimately, though, blockchains track changes in data, what
we call transitions in state, in order to allow participants in
the network to reach agreement about the existence and
evolution of shared facts between them without relying on a
third-party intermediary.
As discussed more fully in my written testimony, a
blockchain protocol is often referred to as Layer 1 of the
blockchain technology stack.
Another computer program can be layered on top of the
protocol, often referred to as Layer 2 programs.
In my research, I focus specifically on the uses of smart
contracts to build applications and decentralized, autonomous
organizations layered on blockchain protocols.
In that regard, smart contracts can be used to build
regulatory technology tools, or ``regtech'' tools, to help make
regulatory compliance more efficient and transparent and to
experiment with innovative methods of economically productive
activity.
In particular, decentralized autonomous organizations are
building productive organizations in communities with flatter
governance than what is typically found in, say, corporations.
This has the democratizing potential of returning control
over business activity and entity conduct to the owners rather
than requiring trust in the corporate machine.
To ensure the ability of U.S. entrepreneurs to harness the
democratizing, transparency-enhancing power of blockchain
protocols, policy, I think, should embrace three important
principles.
First, the principle of technology neutrality should
predominate. Law and policy should target specific activity and
actions irrespective of the technology used to undertake those
activities or actions.
Second, in the case of blockchain protocols and, frankly,
in the case of any emerging technology, the only way to
understand what activity is being undertaken is to understand
how the technology itself works.
For someone who has just said this law should be technology
neutral, perhaps that is counterintuitive at first. However,
understanding how blockchain protocols function, including
their limits, is the only way to identify how people are using
it and whether that use requires legal or policy attention, in
the first instance.
As a result, when it comes to policy, technical precision
is required in the way we talk about what blockchains do, in
the way we understand what they accomplish, and when crafting
law to effectuate that policy, technology neutrality should
prevail.
Third, blockchain protocols are not monolithic. The
technical details of blockchain protocols and the applications
that are built on top of them vary widely, and those
differences matter for law and policymaking in this arena.
Precision in how we talk about what a particular blockchain
protocol does or the features of a particular cryptocurrency or
token prevents the creation of one-size-fits-all policy in
legal frameworks that leave industry confused and clamoring for
deeper clarity.
Finally, it is my view that, if we keep these principles in
mind, the law itself stands to learn from blockchain technology
and its use cases. Blockchain technology, like other emerging
technology, acts as a mirror for law.
Yes, we ask how does the law apply to the technology and
its use cases, but the technology itself can reflect back to us
places where there are gaps in our law, not just as it applies
to the technology but more broadly as it applies to the thing
it was originally intended to regulate or govern.
And with that, I will end my remarks. Thank you very much.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Reyes follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Bilirakis. OK. Very well done and right on time.
Our next witness is Hasshi Sudler, professor at Villanova
University and CEO of Internet Think Tank, Inc.
You are recognized, sir, for 5 minutes.
Thank you.

STATEMENT OF HASSHI SUDLER, PROFESSOR, VILLANOVA UNIVERSITY
COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING, AND CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER, INTERNET
THINK TANK, INC.

Mr. Sudler. Thank you very much.
Mr. Bilirakis. Thanks for being here.
Mr. Sudler. And good morning. Thank you, Chair Bilirakis
and Ranking Member Schakowsky.
And I would like to also thank all members of the
subcommittee and staff for inviting all of us to discuss this
rather important topic about blockchain technology.
My name is Hasshi Sudler. I am the chairman and CEO of
Internet Think Tank, a technology and science research
institute based in L.A. with research offices in Philadelphia.
I am also the adjunct professor at Villanova University,
teaching in both cybersecurity and blockchain technology.
I am a contributing author to two books in cybersecurity
and blockchain: in cybersecurity, ``The Handbook of Research on
Counterfeiting and Illicit Trade,'' and in blockchain, the book
``Blockchain Impact,'' which outlines a variety of use cases
for blockchain technology.
Over the course of my research at the university and both
in my company, we have looked at a variety of use cases for
blockchain, particularly nonfinancial applications of the
technology, to really explore its potentials.
Two of those technologies lie in healthcare and in space
sciences, both of which I would like to share with the
committee today.
In April 2020, I presented to this very same committee an
innovative technology using blockchain for contact tracing to
address the pandemic led by COVID-19. We used blockchain
technology in cooperation with cell phone devices, where the
cell phones would detect proximity between two individuals and
would push that contact information to a blockchain which can
be global in nature. Its very architecture is very global.
Also it is anonymous, so it masks the actual individual who
may be infected with COVID, but it delivers the critical
information of who has come in contact with someone with an
infection.
This was particularly beneficial when we look at the fact
that COVID not only spread in individual countries, but you had
individuals moving between countries. So infections were being
spread between countries, yet the technologies that countries
were using typically were very local.
Japan had its own contact tracing application, the U.K. had
its own, and the U.S. actually had State-based contract tracing
applications. So we were even further subdivided in the United
States.
So even if a person moved from one State to another, it was
very difficult to trace how that person may be taking COVID to
a different region in this country, let alone different regions
of the world.
The blockchain had a very important benefit to contact
tracing because it could be global. Therefore, if individuals
had the same application on their cell phones and practically
everyone in most regions have cell phones, we would be able to
detect contact between individuals who came within close
proximity.
And if one of those individuals later were found to be
COVID-19 positive, regardless of where they were in the world,
others who came in contact with that individual would be
notified that they may have been infected themselves.
The work itself was very well received. We did some case
studies and reviewed the technology with Presbyterian Senior
Living in Philadelphia. That is an assisted living facility
with aged individuals, obviously a very critical population
that we wanted to protect.
So the technology certainly was very useful, and for that
particular age group, individuals did not like using cell phone
devices. They were rather hard to see.
The other usefulness of blockchain technology is that you
can have different types of devices hanging off of it, whether
it be laptop computers with broader views or mobile devices.
The blockchain itself is device-agnostic, and therefore we can
have various input devices, whether it is thermometers or other
camera scanners, looking at large populations coming together,
and you can read it off the blockchain in a variety of other
devices as well.
The challenges that we found is that there was no global
technology strategy for COVID, and obviously, we were all
figuring out ways and solutions to address the pandemic, but I
feel that given that the virus has no respect for borders, we
need a technology that is also able to work across borders as
well.
So I would encourage for future regulation that we look at
ways in which we can ensure that a technology goes across our
borders between States, but also encourage the Government to
cooperate with other governments and collaborate on perhaps a
standard where we can address such a critical issue such as
COVID in a unified way.
I want to talk a little bit about a second technology that
we are working on and since we are a little short on time, I
will be brief, and that is the application of blockchains on
space satellites.
My company, in particular, is working on building
technologies that will put blockchain on space satellites,
extending it beyond the Earth's surface.
And the benefit there is that now we can have satellites
communicating directly with other satellites and be able to
transfer useful information or the unique information to each
other, enrich the data of other satellites, and to be able to
solve problems based on what those satellites were able to see
and deliver that to individuals on earth in need of that data.
In combination with technologies like zero-trust
technologies, we can encrypt the information on those
satellites and ensure that even the nodes that they are passed
across, the very satellites they move across, it is private
until it reaches the individual it is designated for.
Just to close, the blockchain, yes, is a young technology,
and we would like to ensure that over the coming years that we
have more legislation that helps to encourage the nonfinancial
uses of blockchain technology and to also clear the way in
certain industries that may be a little hesitant to accept
blockchain.
So I look forward to working with the committee on ways in
which we can do that.
Thank you very much.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Sudler follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Bilirakis. Thank you.
Our next witness is Ryan Wyatt, president of Polygon Labs.
Sir, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF RYAN WYATT, PRESIDENT, POLYGON LABS

Mr. Wyatt. Good morning, Chair Bilirakis, Ranking Member
Schakowsky, and members of the subcommittee. Thank you for the
opportunity to testify here today.
My name is Ryan Wyatt. I am the president of Polygon Labs,
which is an international software development company that
builds blockchain infrastructure. Prior to joining Polygon Labs
a year and a half ago, I was an executive at YouTube as a
global head of gaming for almost 8 years.
I am here to speak to you today about the evolution of the
internet, one that is based on blockchain technology. I will
discuss how this enhanced internet, what we call Web 3, can
benefit users and consumers and why it is important for this
technology to be built here in the United States.
Over the past four decades, the internet had been built
primarily by large, centralized corporations. The companies
have been true innovators, creating technology far beyond what
the inventors of the internet could have ever imagined.
That being said, 95 percent of traffic goes to the top 1
percent of sites, and 85 percent of mobile app usage goes to
the top 1 percent of publishers.
This means that large corporations who control these sites
and apps accrue the value of our time, our data, and our money,
and it leaves the average user at a disadvantage. The growth
and innovation from Web 2 have come at a steep cost to the
consumer and everyday user.
This is not only in the form of fees but also in the form
of companies extracting all forms of user data. For example,
maps applications record users' location, social media requires
the user to give up personally identifying information, and
your browser is collecting and sharing searches with other
applications to provide you targeted advertisements for
products and services.
Today, online identities are stored in silos within company
databases. This is how these companies create value for
themselves, by wielding the data for their own benefit and only
sharing the least amount of value to users to ensure continued
use. For this reason, user privacy is inherently compromised in
Web 2, and we have become totally accustomed to it.
A blockchain-based internet corrects this issue.
Blockchains inherently democratize the internet. They are not
run by large corporations but a group of people or entities
running individual computers who receive incentives for
verifying information transmitted to the blockchain and for
securing the network.
Web 3 applications are developed by third parties and built
on top of these networks separate and apart from the original
developers of the blockchains themselves.
Due to the way blockchains work, without intermediaries,
users can connect to Web 3 applications through their own
personal software and decide when, how, and whether to share
any information about themselves, their own data, their
content, their works of art, and their assets.
Users never have to provide any personal information to use
these Web 3 applications. For that reason, instead of
extracting value from users and consumers, Web 3 creates a
value layer of the internet where users are able to control all
of the aspects of their interactions on the web.
The new Web 3 applications being built on Polygon Network
are not only created by startup software developers but also by
a number of other actors who are familiar to us, such as large
American brands like Nike, Starbucks, Coca-Cola, the National
Football League, and even UNICEF for making its various forms
of aid relief more efficient, expedient, and transparent, and
that is just to name a few.
Blockchains are powerful tools that can help us reclaim
control of our online lives. That is why I am so excited about
it, and it is one of the reasons why I believe it is critical
for this technology to be built here in the United States.
This country has long been a leader in technological
innovation, and we should not lose out now. The U.S. is ceding
space to countries like China who are promoting all aspects of
the technology but without any of the privacy and data security
that would be afforded to users here.
A great number of companies and the strong accompanying
jobs are already being lost to countries that have created or
are creating strong regulatory framework, such as the EU.
What we do now is critically important in determining
whether the U.S. users and consumers will have benefits of Web
3 accompanied by a robust and comprehensive consumer protection
framework.
Thank you again for the opportunity to testify before the
subcommittee, and I look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Wyatt follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Bilirakis. Thank you very much.
Our final witness is Ross Schulman, senior fellow at the--
decentralization--Electronic Frontier Foundation.
So, sir, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF ROSS SCHULMAN, SENIOR FELLOW, DECENTRALIZATION,
ELECTRONIC FRONTIER FOUNDATION

Mr. Schulman. Good morning. Senior Fellow for
Decentralization at the Electronic Frontier Foundation.
I thank Chairmen Rodgers and Bilirakis, Ranking Members
Pallone and Schakowsky, and members of the subcommittee for the
opportunity to share EFS' views on blockchain today.
One of the first classes that an aspiring computer
scientist takes at the beginning of their undergraduate studies
is usually called something like Data Structures and
Algorithms. These are the fundamental building blocks of every
computer program.
And blockchains are at their core simply a relatively new
data structure. Like most technologies, they are not inherently
good or evil. They are simply tools that provide particular
features and have particular drawbacks.
They do not require much in the form of targeted regulation
beyond the standard consumer protections, although I will note
that our country still desperately needs a consumer-driven,
enforceable, general privacy law.
Nor do they need particular nudging or assistance in order
to be innovative. They are also not the only route to
decentralization.
Many barrels of ink have been spilled in the quest to sort
of explain how blockchains work. So a full description here, I
think, would be repetitive, but it is nevertheless worth
delving into what exactly they are meant to accomplish.
The biggest problems that blockchains solve is providing a
means for two or more parties to agree on the value of a piece
of data when they do not trust one another or, for whatever
reason, cannot trust a third party to keep track of it for
them.
In a nonblockchain system, those parties might rely on a
bank, a legal contract in the courts, or even just a handshake
and a belief in one's fellow human.
Blockchains instead distribute the necessary trust across a
network of peers in such a way that as long as 51 percent of
the network acts honestly, the result can be relied upon.
In the context of a currency, this is often referred to as
solving the double spending problem. This feature is useful in
more circumstances than blockchain detractors claim it is but
in fewer situations than the past few years of hype may have
led one to believe.
In addition to solving the double spending problem,
blockchains have a few other strengths that might suggest them
as solutions to particular problems. For one, blockchains make
it easier to provide transparency and auditability of their
contents, which could lend itself to government recordkeeping,
tracking business documents for auditing purposes or in legal
proceedings where chain of custody is of the essence.
Another area where blockchains provide value is where they
are tied into a system where they provide compensation for a
service provided by the network itself. For example, the file
claim blockchain uses a unique validation system called proof
of storage in which nodes in the network are compensated,
providing hard drive space to the network.
They also have a few limitations that we should keep in
mind. First of all, they are not inherently good for people's
privacy. In fact, in their most basic form, such as with
Bitcoin or Ethereum, they are affirmatively bad for privacy.
Every transaction must be publicly posted so that the whole
network can analyze them for their correctness.
And while it is true that identities on these networks are
not tied to real names, researchers as well as law enforcement,
including the FBI, have shown that transaction analysis can
easily pierce that privacy.
Indeed, to the extent that there is privacy, it is because
it has been bolted on after the fact by projects such as Zcash.
We have to be very careful in assessing the use of blockchains
where personal data is involved.
The second limitation is relative inefficiency. As many
probably already know, some blockchains require every node in
the network to expend large amounts of resources in an effort
to solve meaningless mathematical equations just to validate
the next group of entries to be included in the ledger.
This proof of work system is used in the Bitcoin network as
well as a number of other networks and leads to waste of energy
and also absurdly high transaction costs, sometimes up to $60
to conduct a single transaction.
This purposeful inefficiency also leads to
recentralization. The research group Trail of Bits reported in
a paper commissioned by DARPA last year that many of the
largest blockchains are susceptible to attacks based on the
fact that only a handful of entities comprise the majority of
the deciding power in many of the largest blockchains.
There have been efforts to solve these problems, most
notably the move to proof of stake by the Ethereum blockchain
in September of 2022, which eliminates those large efficiencies
and, it is claimed, lowers the barrier of entry for validators
by eliminating the large capital costs.
In light of all this, what should Congress be doing? You
should rely on the regulations that already exist to protect
people. Much, if not most, of the harms that may arise from use
of blockchain are going to be well covered by existing
protections, such as the FTC's unfair and deceptive practices
prohibition.
Congress should also focus on two things to protect
Americans from blockchain-related harms. First, as I mentioned
earlier, pass consumer-driven, comprehensive privacy
legislation, and second, adequately fund the FTC so that it can
hire technical and legal experts it needs to properly
investigate and prosecute these harms.
Since the subcommittee is focused on innovation, it is also
worth noting that regulation which targets people who write
code in an open-source system is going to cause more harm than
it is going to cause good. It will stifle innovation, and
further development would grind to an immediate halt.
There can be no doubt that blockchain is a clever solution
to the problem it was originally developed for: preventing the
double spending problem. But the overwhelming hype that this
advancement has generated over the past years has blinded many
to the fact that its usefulness extends to one or two other
cases, but not much further.
And that is OK. Hammers will not help you tighten a bolt,
but there are great when you need to drive a nail. And just as
with other tools, regulating blockchain because it is
blockchain would largely be counterproductive.
It is nearly always more appropriate to regulate harmful
actions than the tools used.
Thank you again for the opportunity to provide this
testimony, and I look forward to answering your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Schulman follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Bilirakis. Thank you very much. I appreciate it.
I really appreciate all of your testimonies. It is very
informative.
So what I will do is I will begin the questioning. I
recognize myself for 5 minutes.
The first question is for Ms. Reyes. The blockchain
ecosystem is incredibly complex, obviously. A few minutes
researching the topic quickly leads to an alphabet soup that
the public will not understand in some case, probably in most
cases.
Help us boil this down. At its most basic form, is this a
new protocol database?
Or in other words, we are really talking about a new way to
send, organize, and preserve, verify, and protect data. Is that
a fair characterization?
We would appreciate a response there.
Ms. Reyes. Thank you so much for the question.
So I entirely agree that if you were to Google it, you
would get an alphabet soup of words that is difficult to
understand. Indeed, I have a series of papers looking at how
different constituents in the ecosystem talk about the
technology themselves and noting that they often talk past each
other. The technical experts use different words. The lawyers
use different words, et cetera.
But so you are absolutely not wrong. But as to the
characterization of it being a new way to store, send,
organize, preserve, verify, and protect data--kind of. So I
think honestly it depends on the blockchain and the purpose to
which it is put. Many blockchains are not general purpose
databases, right?
So take the Bitcoin blockchain, for example. The Bitcoin
blockchain is very good at tracking which UTXOs have been spent
and which have not, and that is what it does. It tracks which
UTXOs have been spent and which have not been spent and who
controls the UTXO.
I should say a UTXO, being one of those alphabet soups, it
is an unspent transaction output. It is essentially what people
refer to as the Bitcoin, right?
Other batches can, however, enable decentralized file
storage. I think Filecoin was already referenced, and another
example might be IPFS.
But generally, I would say the extent to which you can view
a blockchain as a data storage service, it in and of itself
depends a little bit on the architecture of the blockchain
protocol, the purposes to which it was intended to be put, and
a lot of it about understanding the technology stack that a
blockchain operates on.
So the blockchain protocol itself is just the base layer,
right? It is the mechanism by which the nodes communicate with
each other about a specific thing--in the Bitcoin blockchain
context, the transmission of UTXOs, the spending of unspent
transaction output.
On top of that, you can layer other things, but often when
you have to actually host the data, unless you are using
something like Filecoin or IPFS, you may be hosting the data on
centralized servers and simply anchoring that data or
connecting that data to the blockchain protocol, right? So you
can track changes to the data rather than tracking the data
itself, if that makes sense.
So it is often----
Mr. Bilirakis. Let me go ahead. I know it is hard to
explain in a couple of minutes, but you have done a great job,
and maybe we can get together and talk one-on-one on this
particular subject because it is so very important and
complicated.
Ms. Reyes. I would be very happy to submit written answers
for the record if that would be helpful.
Mr. Bilirakis. Thank you.
So let me get to Mr. Sudler, if you do not mind.
As you know, I am from the State of Florida, the home of
space exploration. It gives me an opportunity to elaborate on
what you were saying.
So I was specifically intrigued by your discussion on
satellites in your testimony. In addition to chairing the
subcommittee dealing with innovation and data, I also sit on
the sister subcommittee on telecommunications, where we focus
on broadband internet development.
Can you explain how blockchains apply in this space or how
it will protect security and resiliency?
If you can, elaborate.
Mr. Sudler. Absolutely.
Mr. Bilirakis. How will it further, again, innovation above
our atmosphere as well?
Mr. Sudler. Yes, absolutely. So carrying the blockchains
into space is essentially taking it into a new region of
computing. We are simply taking it higher.
It is the same blockchain, but we have to think of a few
differences in terms of how blockchains exist on Earth and how
they would exist in space.
One major difference that you would see is that servers on
Earth are sitting still in data centers. Blockchains in space
are basically sitting on satellites that are moving very
quickly. They do not see each other for very long. So they have
to synchronize with one another in very short spaces of time.
And you also have this latency issue. The distance between
the satellites may be quite far, and if we kind of think a
little further to how we might use blockchains for the Artemis
Project in sending them as far as lunar orbit, now we are
talking significant distances that might increase latency even
further.
But to the point of why this would be important for our
security is that movement of satellites, in general, is moving
from having individual satellites performing a mission or some
operation to having constellations of satellites that are able
to talk to one another.
This creates greater resiliency, particularly in the light
of any type of cyberattack that may happen by our adversaries
against any of our satellites. In a blockchain network, if one
of our satellites is lost, that is not a problem, because the
other satellites are aware of the transaction history. They
understand what that one particular satellite was tasked to do,
and they can take over the activities of that lost satellite or
disabled satellite.
So we see certain resiliency in having blockchain
structures, and we also see immutability, the ability to store
this information and assure that it is not tampered with. It
becomes more tamper-proof. So if someone wanted to cyberattack,
in particular, a satellite and change information, the
information on the satellites are quite resilient to change
because of the mutability of blockchain.
So we see some very unique cases where blockchain plays a
very nice role in helping to secure the security of the
satellite itself, but also national security because a lot of
our satellites can be tasked for national security purposes.
Mr. Bilirakis. OK. Thank you very much. I appreciate.
My time has expired. I yield back.
And I am going to recognize the ranking member for her 5
minutes of testimony or so. If you want to go over a little
bit, that is fine because I did. So we have got to be fair.
Thank you. We recognize you.
Ms. Schakowsky. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
So I see myself as someone who really wants to protect
consumers against scams. So, Mr. Schulman, I wanted to ask you
if you could describe what blockchain scams look like, what
tactics are used, and if you have any advice, aside from what
we can do as Congress to protect consumers but are things that
consumers ought to be watching out for.
Mr. Schulman. Certainly. Thank you, Congresswoman.
In many ways the scams that we see in the blockchain space
are as old as time itself, right? They have a new sheen on
them. They involve oftentimes paying the scammer in a new way,
using a Bitcoin or some other cryptocurrency, but
fundamentally, you know, they rely on the same human failings
that people have had forever, the fear of missing out, the
ability to see only the upside of risk instead of the downside,
and, you know, the promise of great riches.
And scammers that are operating today are using those same
human failings, but they are using, you know, a better, perhaps
faster method of getting the money out of their target than
perhaps you could have done in an older timeframe.
People today should keep their head on their shoulders in
the same way that they did 10 years, 15 years ago before
blockchain. I think, you know, the FTC has some great resources
that people should absolutely look to in terms of ongoing
scams, the things that they are seeing on a regular basis, and
people should definitely check those out.
I think, generally speaking, unless you are really
expecting it, I think the number one piece of advice would be
if someone tells you to send them cryptocurrency in a way that
you were not anticipating, just do not. That is a good sign
that it is probably a scam unless you really already know what
you are doing, I think.
Ms. Schakowsky. You know, even though we have seen some
dramatic failures, I think that the promises that you can make
a lot of money or that there is zero risk is really a lure,
still continues to be a lure. And I appreciate your warnings.
Now, the FTC has issued reports on crypto, and the report
was that consumers report of $1 billion in losses in 2021 and
2022, and we know, we all read about it, and this is really, I
think, the tip of the iceberg.
But, Mr. Schulman, in your testimony, you mentioned the
importance of the FTC consumer protection work. How would you
elaborate?
If you were on the FTC, what do you think that we need to
do?
Mr. Schulman. Well, I want to first take a moment to laud
the FTC. They do amazing, incredible work, and I would hesitate
to tell them their business. I think honestly the biggest
issue----
Ms. Schakowsky. Well, tell us our business to tell them.
OK?
Mr. Schulman. I also hesitate to tell Congress their--no,
that is not true.
You know, I think the biggest issue for the FTC is not
necessarily that they do not know what to do, but they just do
not have the resources to do it. I think more of the same is
probably what is necessary.
I know a few years ago the then-Chairman of the FTC,
Simons, sent a letter--actually to you, ma'am--talking about
the resources that the FTC had available to it, said at the
time that they had about 40 full-time employees or full-time
equivalents devoted to privacy and data protection, and then
compared that to some of the other nations around the world.
For example, in the UK the Information Commissioners
Office, which is their equivalent of the FTC, had about 500
employees dedicated to that.
Ms. Schakowsky. So we need more technologists. We need to
hire more people who really know what they are doing and what
they are looking for.
Mr. Schulman. Yes, ma'am.
Ms. Schakowsky. OK. Thank you so much. I appreciate it.
And I yield back.
Mr. Bilirakis. I thank the gentlelady.
And now I recognize the gentleman from South Carolina, Mr.
Duncan.
Before I do, Mr. Duncan, I want to clarify. These are not
Clemson colors.
Mr. Duncan. It is Clemson orange.
Mr. Bilirakis. These are Gator colors.
Mr. Duncan. Clemson orange.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to thank you for your
leadership on both blockchains and on name, image, and
likeness, and I especially want to thank you for releasing your
NIL discussion draft, which I am sure we both hope will
ultimately lead to certainty in this space.
My question centers on the overlap between NIL and
blockchain. Student-athletes have a unique platform to create
business opportunities for themselves, and we could potentially
see a case where a student-athlete uses their NIL to create a
digital sports collectible through NFTs.
So, Mr. Wyatt, how are you seeing NFTs being used by
athletes in the digital sports collectibles space?
Mr. Wyatt. Thank you for the question.
Yes, I mean, even Nike has participation in this space. So
I think it is good for athletes that are moving forward.
One way, it is a way for them to uniquely offer
opportunities through their community events. And so what we
are seeing right now is people using almost NFTs like a
membership pass.
So people can come in. They understand that there is a
finite amount of them. It is access, and then the athletes can
use them to do whatever they want, whether it is meet-and-
greets, if they want to do autograph signings. There are a lot
of different opportunities for them.
But it really clarifies when somebody buys this NFT
membership what they are getting from that athlete, and now it
has opened up a whole new monetization stream for them because
these blockchains are open protocols and public goods for
everyone. Anybody can deploy.
So it is great for athletes to be able to really start to
think about it and a unique opportunity with NIL as well.
Mr. Duncan. Thank you for that.
Professor Reyes, how could blockchains be used to track am
athlete's engagements with an agent in NIL deals?
Microphone.
Ms. Reyes. I think this is an excellent question.
I am not sure I would want to speculate entirely, but I
think the first question to ask is whether the athletes, the
agent, and if there is anybody overseeing the whole thing,
whether they trust each other and whether they can trust the
information being passed back and forth.
Otherwise, I am not certain a blockchain is necessarily
needed.
A blockchain, right, is generally, I think, as other folks
have mentioned already this morning, generally used when folks
in an arena do not know each other necessarily and do not trust
each other and do not trust a third party to handle the
information for them. So they use the technology to do the
thing they are not sure of.
Mr. Duncan. Would it not also help the people that oversee
the activities and help them track and monitor the deals,
whether it is the conferences, the universities themselves, or
some other governing authority?
Ms. Reyes. Maybe. Again, if there is an information gap or
a difficulty in getting the information from the participants
in an NIL activity, but otherwise a centralized agency can
always use a just distributive database.
And maybe it is the distributive ledger rather than a
blockchain right of permission distributed ledger that is not
necessarily energy intensive linking blocks of data in
cryptographically linked chain.
It could just be as much of a use case for a distributive
ledger like a permissioned one where you cordon off who can
participate and what kinds of entries they can make into the
system.
Mr. Duncan. Thank you for that.
I want to shift gears. How can blockchain technology combat
fraud, corruption, intellectual property infringement? And I
will go to Mr. Wyatt for that.
Mr. Wyatt. Yes. The one thing that is really beautiful
about blockchains is the inherent transparency for it, and so I
believe because it is a transparent protocol, unlike these kind
of wall gardens that we see databases sitting in today, it
allows us an access that we did not have before.
On the privacy side, you are now moving away from all of
that sitting inside of corporations where you have to rely on
them, big and small corporations, to now taking your own data
and being the controller of that privacy.
So this is now a shift where you have to rely on others,
where you can now rely on yourself, and I think that allows for
a whole other level of privacy and data that we have never had
before.
Mr. Duncan. That is great.
So, Mr. Sudler, in your written testimony, you state that
the U.S. Air Force is using a blockchain-based supply chain
called Base Camp.
You also noted that the Department of Defense has
commissioned a project, Almeda, to support DoD logistics. This
seems like something we would want to be kept highly
classified, yet the DoD is using blockchain to keep track of
everything.
Are there different types of blockchains that can serve
different purposes?
Mr. Sudler. Yes. Different blockchains are created for
different reasons. There are essentially three parameters that
blockchains try to work with.
First is security and how long it takes to secure new
transactions on the blockchain.
The other is speed. How fast can it actually commit those
new transactions to the edge of the blockchain?
And the other is fees. In terms of how large the
transaction is, that can translate into larger fees.
So different blockchains are driven by their consensus
model. The Bitcoin blockchain, which is driven by proof of
work, uses energy to ensure that transaction----
Mr. Duncan. Is the military using a different blockchain
technology?
Mr. Sudler. They are most likely not using proof of work.
They are perhaps using proof of authority or proof of stake,
but for the military they would be using some form of a
permissioned ledger because this is not something that is open
to the public. It is something that only classified individuals
should be able to have the access to, and therefore, their
consensus model would drive that purpose.
Mr. Duncan. Thank you.
My time has expired. Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Thank you.
Mr. Bilirakis. Thank you very much. I appreciate it.
Now, I will yield 5 minutes to the gentlelady from New
York, Ms. Clarke.
Ms. Clarke. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Bilirakis. My pleasure.
Ms. Clarke. And to our ranking member for convening this
hearing.
And to our panelists for joining us today.
The jurisdiction of this subcommittee often requires us to
attempt to address the challenges of tomorrow with only the
information available today. While our collective understanding
of blockchain, distributive ledger technology, and
cryptocurrency has come a long way since this committee first
held a hearing on these issues in 2016, it is apparent that we
have a long way to go to enhance our knowledge as we consider
legislation in this space.
That is why this hearing and others like it are so
important. We as policymakers need to ensure that we have a
deep understanding of this technology in order to be create a
regulatory environment that protects consumers, while fostering
American innovation and leadership.
With all that in mind, I will be keeping my remarks and
questions brief and to the point. My first question is to Mr.
Wyatt. I am interested in cybersecurity implications of
distributive ledger technology as we transition to Web 3.
Can you speak to what impact, if any, this technology may
have on future cybersecurity, both from a defensive and
offensive perspective?
Mr. Wyatt. Yes. Thank you for the question.
I believe right now we do have a lot at the application
layer that we can continue to protect consumers with, both on
the protection and privacy side. I believe with the
transparency that there are a lot more things that we can be
doing as far as just overall making sure that the networks are
secure.
I also think we can do things like standardized code
auditing so that we have a baseline that we adhere to for these
protocols to ensure that these continue to be very secure, very
private.
Obviously, in addition to that, users do own their own
data. So there inherently is more privacy because of that, but
I think these are critical steps that we need to take because I
actually do believe we are behind relative to other countries
on these matters.
Ms. Clarke. Are there any other witnesses that have
anything to add in this regard?
[No response.]
Ms. Clarke. OK. Thank you.
Mr. Schulman, you mentioned in your testimony that
blockchain could have some exciting potential use cases but
should be treated as just another tool in a software
developer's toolkit.
Could you elaborate on that?
Are there limitations of this technology we should be aware
of?
And how should members of this committee think about what
blockchain is and is not?
Mr. Schulman. Absolutely. Thank you. It is a good question.
I think the biggest thing to keep in mind whenever we are
thinking about whether blockchain suits a purpose is, as
Professor Reyes sort of alluded to earlier, is that you need to
look for what you might call a trust gap. Blockchains are
useful where two parties, or more than one party, are trying to
get together to agree on something but cannot trust one another
for some reason and cannot trust a third party to sort of serve
as a middle person and, you know, in a way that, you know,
banks or escrows often do, for example.
In those circumstances, blockchain can be quite handy. It
can be quite useful.
It has drawbacks that we have talked about as well that
makes them unsuitable to other situations where you need, for
example, speed. Blockchains are not the fastest way to figure
out an answer to a question, for example.
They are not great--although they can be messaged to make
privacy useful, but they are not great at privacy because of
the inherent transparency that is necessary in a blockchain
situation, and so those are situations where you would want to
reach for a different tool.
But, yes, I think that is more or less----
Ms. Clarke. And to the entire panel, there has been a lot
of discussion about energy use with respect to blockchain
technology. Would you opine on that?
You know, we are in the midst of a real struggle around,
you know, how we will transition in energy, and clearly, as we
expand and Web 3 becomes sort of the dominant use of the
technology, what would you say to those who are concerned about
energy consumption?
Mr. Wyatt. Congresswoman, I would like to weigh in here.
You know, Polygon Labs is a blockchain software company. We
are incredibly passionate about this topic. It is worth noting
that 19 of the top 20 protocols are proof of stake and not
proof of work, which means they are not as energy intensive.
And, in fact, Polygon Labs ensures that we remain carbon
neutral. It is a big part of our mission. We report third party
audits with maintaining that integrity, and I think this is
something that a lot of people that are building in this space
are quite passionate and care deeply about.
And so I just want to say that we share that importance,
and I think it is an integral part of kind of growing and
scaling this technology.
Mr. Sudler. I would like just to add to that.
We all started with a Bitcoin blockchain which used proof
of work, very energy intensive, and in some countries, the
largest amount of spend is actually on energy due to Bitcoin
mining.
So obviously that is unacceptable and unsustainable.
But as a global society, we are evolving from that. We are
moving to proof of stake. We are moving to proof of authority,
other consensus models that do not use that type of energy.
And certainly as we are applying blockchains into space, it
would be impractical to have proof of work that is so energy
intensive weighing down satellites. It would drain the
batteries of those satellites very quickly.
So we are quickly realizing that there are other
alternatives to how we are doing these consensus models with
blockchain that do not use as much energy. So I am pretty
confident going forward we will all see the future of
blockchains using less energy consumption.
Ms. Reyes. I know the time has expired, but I hope I might
be permitted to comment briefly.
I would say that it is important to note that protocols
that use proof of work versus protocols that use proof of stake
have different technological architecture value propositions.
So Bitcoin blockchain is very focused on the security and
integrity of the blockchain itself, and proof of work is viewed
to maximize the security of the protocol, versus proof of stake
values throughput and scalability.
And so it is not only about energy consumption, but it is
also a technical architecture choice that is made given the
value and proposition of that particular protocol.
Secondly, I would say I think that----
Mr. Bilirakis. We have got to move on. Thank you very much,
and we can have further discussions.
I appreciate the gentlelady yields back.
And I will recognize the Chair of the full committee for
her 5 minutes of questioning.
Ms. Clarke. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Bilirakis. Thank you.
Mrs. Rodgers. Thank you.
Mr. Wyatt, I appreciate you being here today to tell your
blockchain story, and you captured well in your testimony how
Big Tech companies silo our data and create value for
themselves.
Can you explain to us how your company or other similar
services can provide an alternative solution to the
concentration of this data that has led to abuses and breaches?
Mr. Wyatt. Yes. Look, I think largely when you look at
corporations, they may have not had other solutions on where
some of this data can be held, and really if you look at what
blockchains have been doing on the past decade, they finally
have gotten to a point where this technology can meaningfully
scale to really support hundreds of millions if not billions of
individuals building on top of it.
And so I think the big thing about it as I see the movement
moving over into this space is that people now owning their
privacy and owning their data is really critical, whereas
corporations were owning that. We trusted them to own that, and
they monetize it, right? It is how a lot of these businesses
make money that are in the space.
And so just because of that shows that there is an inherent
value of having data, right, or having someone's individual
information.
And so we should be bringing that back to the individuals
where they should be making those decisions on what they own,
how it is used, and what they want to do with it. And that is
what I think the beauty of blockchains do.
Mrs. Rodgers. Thank you.
Enacting a Federal data privacy standard is a top priority
for me, and in some ways it is counterintuitive that
decentralized data could be private because one would think
that one's information is available to everyone.
I know that you referenced zero knowledge proof in your
testimony. Would you explain the concepts of that and how it
can coexist?
Mr. Wyatt. Yes. Without getting too highly technical on the
concept, you are right. One of the things that we tout often
here is the transparency of the blockchain. That is true. There
is a lot that you can do with it, and that is in the beauty of
it. But I think without having the ability to have more
ownership of your privacy, that can, you know, have its own
shortcomings.
And so what zero knowledge does is effectively let you have
the best of both worlds. You can have the transparency of the
blockchain, but you can self-select as an individual what you
want to share with any of these applications that you are
interacting with.
And zero knowledge allows that ability to happen through
cryptography in a trusted way.
Mrs. Rodgers. Thank you, thank you.
Ms. Reyes, you provided a lot of information on smart
contracts in your testimony, as well as the fact that it does
not require mining or more information to complete a
transaction. This has clearly not been the approach Big Tech
has taken historically.
You noted an example of mortgage alerts, which you see this
as being applied to a compliance mechanism when a company
changes its privacy policies to alert users.
Would you speak more about smart contracts?
Ms. Reyes. Sure. So briefly, a smart contract simply, just
by what folks may have said about it being an artificially
intelligent, legally enforceable contract--but that is not what
it is, right?--it is just a computer program that says if X
happens, then Y, execute.
And in the context of privacy policies, for example, I
think your question, Chairwoman, speaks to whether it could be
used as an alert system to indicate to the SEC that a company
has changed their privacy policy.
I do think that that could be an area looking back to,
like, when is the good use case for blockchain technology,
where the SEC does not necessarily trust privacy policy
compliance of the corporations. The users do not always know
when the privacy policies have been updated or even when they
push ``I agree,'' they did not really realize what they did,
right? They did not read it.
Certainly this could be used to alert folks that it has
happened.
I think it could go farther. I am working on research to
think about using smart contracts as the basis for privacy
policies so that you could have granular permissions over how
your data is used in a specific context.
At the moment, I am thinking about that in the context of K
through 12 education, actually.
Mrs. Rodgers. Great. And you mentioned the alerts, the
alerts to the FTC, but it also could be the alerts to the
individual when the privacy contract is being changed because,
right now, I think we all recognize that these people do not
really know what they are agreeing to.
Ms. Reyes. Absolutely.
Mrs. Rodgers. Mr. Sudler, thank you for providing your
insight again today as you have previously done during COVID.
How important is it for the United States to lead on this
technology?
Mr. Schulman. I think it is incredibly important because
essentially when you have the world facing a huge crisis, that
is when leadership is shown. And if the United States is going
to lead in blockchain technology, then it really should
demonstrate that during a point where the world needs it the
most.
So I think what this does is when we are facing situations
like COVID, if the United States shows its power economically,
militarily, and through technology, we demonstrate to the world
that we are not here to just say we are leaders, ee are here to
show it.
So when we can demonstrate technological innovation to
solve very serious problems that affect the world, then the
world sees us as leaders for that very act alone.
So I think it is very important for us to continue
leadership in technology, and I think blockchain is a big part
of that story.
Mrs. Rodgers. Thank you.
And in closing, again, I am looking forward to receiving
the emerging technology reports that were enacted in our
legislation back in 2020.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Bilirakis. The Chair yields back.
And now I recognize Ms. Kelly for her 5 minutes of
questioning.
Ms. Kelly. Thank you so much, Mr. Chair.
And thank you to the witnesses for your testimony to help
us better understand these emerging technologies.
It is clear from witness testimonies that blockchain
technology has and can continue to add value, but this must be
done, as you know, responsibly. As the Chair of the
Congressional Black Caucus Health Brain Trust, my priorities
include protecting health equity and reducing health
disparities in all communities.
So I am interested in the benefits of blockchain technology
in the healthcare sector, but I think it is important that we
understand any potential drawbacks.
Patient healthcare records are very private, and we know
there are bad actors looking to steal the data. And, similarly,
we know healthcare services are disrupted when hospital systems
fall victim to cyberattacks.
So I wonder if data privacy and security can be negatively
impacted should healthcare systems broadly adopt and use
blockchain technology.
But I am also pleased to learn more about the potential
applications in the agriculture sector. My district is urban,
suburban, and rural with recent outbreaks of foodborne illness
and investigations of fraud in the organic food sector.
There are weaknesses in information about agricultural
supply chains. Blockchain technology can have an impact on the
tracking of goods throughout a supply chain system and even
applications for reducing foodborne illnesses by tracking the
prominence of items.
So, Professor Reyes, as a preliminary matter, can you
discuss the differences between permissioned and permissionless
blockchains?
Ms. Reyes. Absolutely. Thank you for the question.
So in permissionless blockchains, to some like the Bitcoin
blockchain or the Ethereum protocol, the idea is that anyone
can download the software and participate as a node in the
protocol, and anyone thereby can initiate transactions in the
network.
In a permissioned system, it is typically not the case that
anyone can simply participate as a node in the system and that
they can simply whenever they want commit transactions to the
network.
But rather, it is more--it is often, I should say, and they
are not all the same, but it is often a consortium or group of
companies or like-minded organizations that come together to
build the network, and there is usually some kind of
application process or screening process to determine whether
you are an appropriate entity to host a node and to have access
to initiate transactions.
Ms. Kelly. Thank you.
What are some of the benefits of blockchain technologies as
they relate to supply chain and logistics?
And are there any potential drawbacks, Professor Reyes?
Ms. Reyes. Thank you.
Yes, certainly in the area of supply chain management,
there is a lot of interest, and the interest stems largely from
the capacity for increased efficiencies, increased
transparency, and audibility of the steps in the supply chain.
The drawback, I would say, is that at any point in the
supply chain you are still relying on someone to connect
whoever initiates the entry into the supply ledger. You are
relying on them to provide reliable data, and they may not
always be incentivized to provide the reliable data.
And so a supply chain management system based on blockchain
will suffer from the same garbage-in/garbage-out problem that
all computer software has. The data that the supply chain
management system keeps an audible record of is only as good as
it was when it was first entered.
Ms. Kelly. In agricultural applications, does zero data in
a blockchain represent events associated with a physical
product?
These events must be recorded by manually recording data or
through manual or automated scanning of digital markers on the
product or its packaging. However, manual data entry could
introduce errors into the blockchain, and I would ask all of
you what blockchain protocols could be used to address such
errors when it comes to manual data entry.
Whoever wants to answer.
Mr. Sudler. Yes. I think when you have data entered into
the blockchain--and there will be errors--the blockchain
certainly will record those errors quite permanently. So at
least it can be viewed and there is some accountability as to
how those errors got in there.
But you could use things like smart contracts. If there is
some range of data that is unreasonable, then the smart
contract itself in seeing that condition can, you know, reply
and alert that this data is out of range. And so that can be a
way in which we can capture, you know, certain types of errors
being put into the blockchain.
Ms. Kelly. Thank you.
I do not know if either one of you want to answer.
Mr. Schulman. I think I would add one small note, and it is
something that once you say it out loud it sort of sounds
incredibly obvious, but I think it is important to sort of note
anyway, and that is that, particularly when blockchains are
representing real-world goods, such as in a supply chain, a
change in the blockchain does not actually mean anything
necessarily.
Nothing happens in the real world just because something
changed on a blockchain, if that makes sense, right?
And this is sort of analogous to the same problem we have
been discussing about data going in, and particularly if you
are using a blockchain, again, it is because you are worried
about a trust gap somewhere. And if you have a trust gap,
blockchain is not going to necessarily fix that in the
situation, because if you do not trust the counterparty, you do
not trust them necessarily to put the right data into the
blockchain in the first place.
Ms. Kelly. Thank you.
Any other comments?
Ms. Reyes. I would just say I think this is where I get
nervous when people call the blockchain the record of
uncensored truth or something similar because that is not
actually what it is a record of. It does not speak to the truth
of the data that is being recorded in the chain.
Mr. Wyatt. I will just add I think healthcare has been, you
know, a tough one to actually digitalize over the years and
companies, you know, like MyChart trying to bring healthcare
together have made tremendous progress.
But I do believe these ideas of permissioned blockchains
where you can actually get the United States healthcare system
on it could actually streamline it in a really, really
efficient way.
So I think there is more to come there.
Ms. Kelly. Thank you so much.
And I yield back.
Mr. Bilirakis. Thank you very much. I thank the gentlelady.
Now I will yield 5 minutes to the vice chairman of the
subcommittee, my good friend Mr. Walberg from the great State
of Michigan.
Mr. Walberg. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
And thanks to the panel for being here.
I am encouraged that we are discussing this new and
transformative technology. That is what this subcommittee is
especially about, and in fact, my staff today informed me that
they used AI to look up some information for me for the
background on blockchain, and so far I think they got it right,
at least what I have heard from you.
America needs to stay ahead in all that goes on here. The
leadership is important.
So, Professor Sudler, as someone who has seen blockchains
used in a variety of contexts, how would you categorize the
primary uses of blockchain technology?
Mr. Sudler. Sure. Thank you for the question.
You know, in my course work, I have developed a framework
that helps my students and other practitioners of blockchain
understand the categories of use cases for blockchain
technology, and it is called the APPS Framework, A-P-P-S. It is
fairly easy to remember, APPS, and what it stands for is asset
management, payments, public records, and supply chain
management.
The A for asset management is essentially representing
something physical or digital with a token. We more commonly
know that as NFTs.
For payments, it all started with payments with Bitcoins.
So we are very familiar with that use case.
With public records, it is essentially committing data to a
blockchain which could be public in nature, such as birth
certificates and so forth, but doing so mutably so no one can
tamper with it.
And finally, supply chain management we have discussed here
at length, looking at an asset going from start to finish and
tracking its status along the way.
Mr. Walberg. Thanks for allowing me to be a student then.
APPS, OK.
Blockchain proponents argue that the security of a
blockchain can be trusted more than we can trust other
intermediaries, like Big Tech.
Professor Sudler, I would like to dig into that a bit more.
Are blockchains really secure is the first question, and can we
really trust this computer code more than we can trust some of
the other intermediaries in our lives?
Mr. Sudler. I think we have to address that in two
different ways. First, we have to look at the network
architecture, and then we have to look at the software. So
there are two components.
If you look at the network, networks' blockchains basically
need to be highly distributed, which basically means they need
to be distributed geographically as well as by ownership.
And it is important that they be distributed in both ways.
If you have a huge concentration of blockchain nodes or servers
sitting in one country, then it is very possible that if that
country is authoritarian, they can declare eminent domain and
simply take control of all of these servers. That destabilized
the security of the blockchain itself. So it is important that
we do have highly distributed blockchain servers across the
world.
The other is the software itself. Now, the software for
blockchains should be open, should be visible by other
programmers to inspect it, and if you are presented with a
blockchain that is not open, that should send off alarm bells
in a lot of ways, to make sure that people can see it and
evaluate what it is doing.
Mr. Walberg. OK. Mr. Wyatt, staying on the same theme of
security, there are a lot of different blockchains out there,
and transferring data between them is not simple. For example,
in 2022, a bridge between two chains was hacked for $325
million.
What steps are being taken that you are aware of both in
industry and in government to prevent these attacks from
happening in the future?
Mr. Wyatt. Yes. First, you know, when networks are
launched, you know, companies are looking at the code itself,
and there are trusting third-party audits as well, but I think
it is particularly important that we standardize and streamline
code auditing.
We should have a bar, an expectation that we are holding
people to to ensure that these things never happen, and I do
think formally legislating code auditing would be really
important to mitigate these issues.
Mr. Walberg. OK. Professor Reyes, I appreciated the way you
described the blockchain as protocol. As you noted, a protocol
is a set of instructions for the compilation and interaction of
objects.
For blockchain technology, this protocol is a set of rules
that allows network computers to track transitions globally in
the network without a centralized third-party intermediary.
Could you explain on other ways you think smart contract
blockchains are similar to the internet?
Ms. Reyes. So I think--absolutely. Thank you for the
question.
I think, first, it is important to note that the blockchain
protocols do not work without the internet, right? You cannot
access the protocol unless you are connected to the internet.
So it is all part of a technology stack, and as part of
that technology stack, the parallel to the internet is that you
can continue to build additional applications on top of the
blockchain protocol. And those additional applications may or
may not be decentralized. Some are more centralized in their
components than others, just like the additional applications
that can be built on the internet, and it is really an asset
application layer that consumers tend to interact with
blockchain technology.
Few consumers transact with Bitcoin directly through
Bitcoin Corp. software, for example. They tend to use
intermediaries because the user interface at the Layer 1 level
is difficult and a little clunky.
And just like the internet, most of the time we interact
with the internet through Google, right? Through web browsers,
not to name Google specifically, but through web browsers and
through other applications. That is similar in blockchain space
as well.
Mr. Walberg. OK. Thank you.
My time has expired. I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Bilirakis. Thank you. Thank you very much. I appreciate
that.
The gentleman yields back. Now, I will recognize Mrs.
Trahan for her 5 minutes of questioning.
Mrs. Trajan. Well, thank you, Chair Bilirakis and Ranking
Member Schakowsky, for calling this hearing.
I am glad that the committee is bringing awareness to the
potential that blockchain technologies have to offer and the
promising applications of Web 3.
However, as we discuss the path forward for this tool, we
must also acknowledge its shortcomings so we can ensure it is
applied correctly and safely.
I share the ranking member's concern that we need to fully
understand how this technology can be used for the wrong
reasons. In particular, the immutability of a blockchain or the
impossibility of changing the past makes cryptocurrencies an
attractive financial avenue for scammers to fleece unsuspecting
consumers.
The FTC has repeatedly warned consumers that cryptocurrency
scams are dramatically on the rise and billions of dollars
being lost. In fact, the losses of crypto scams did not just
double or triple between 2019 and 2022. They increased over 25
times, reaching more than 2\1/2\ billion dollars lost last
year, according to the FBI.
Professor Reyes, in your opinion, would you agree that
blockchain technologies offer some advantages to scammers?
And why do you think that scammers are making so much use
of this technology?
Ms. Reyes. Thank you for the question.
I would say in my view I do not know necessarily that
blockchain technology offers particular advantages to scammers.
I think, as we discussed at length already, many of the scams
that take place in the blockchain industry are simply echoes of
traditional scams: promising money that does not exist, taking
your money to use it for one thing and using it for something
else entirely.
I think what makes it so attractive at the moment to
scammers is the same kind of thing that got people in trouble
in the early days of the internet: unfamiliarity with the
technology on a wide scale and what the risks are.
It is much less likely nowadays to fall for a phishing
scam. We have internal processes to learn how to avoid phishing
scams in emails, for example, and it will take time until that
same kind of education happens around blockchain technology.
I know I am taking up a lot of time, but one note I would
like to make--because I am dying every time it is said out
loud--is the term ``immutability,'' to be precise, does not
actually mean that the records in the blockchain can never be
changed.
In fact, the term ``immutable'' never appears in the
Bitcoin white paper. It is actually a reference to being
computationally improbable, that is very difficult to change
the records in the blockchain protocol. And I think, as was
referenced by Professor Sudler, what that means is the
blockchain protocol is tamper resistant, tamper-proof. You can
tell when it has been tampered with, but not necessarily that
it is impossible to do so.
Mrs. Trajan. Well, I appreciate the clarification.
And also, you know, the recognition that consumers need to
be careful. Do you believe that consumers, especially
vulnerable consumers like children and seniors, have the
information that they need to detect and avoid scams relating
to blockchain and Web 3 or other types of online fraud?
Ms. Reyes. I think a lot more education should be directed
toward seniors. I think that same kinds of scams that target,
like, going to the go get me Target gift cards and send me the
code, the same kind of thing that they are falling for in the
cryptocurrency realm.
I fascinatingly tend to think that children often know more
about cryptocurrency and blockchain ecosystems than we might
expect. They are more sophisticated in it, I think,
increasingly than other populations, but certainly, of course,
they always need extra protection.
Mrs. Trajan. It is a great point about children versus
seniors, and our job and our objective is to safeguard all of
them.
But to follow up, we know that some actors in this space
have made promises they could not keep, be it a stable coin
unable to stick to the promised value or a poorly designed
blockchain platform that is vulnerable to a cyberattack. It is
not surprising for a new industry based on new technology, but
it is also extremely difficult for consumers to accurately
evaluate some claims that blockchain companies make.
And I want to be sure that our regulators are ready and
able to address that.
And, Mr. Schulman, you mentioned in one of your answers
that these types of scams that are happening are as old as
time, and you suggested that in order to prevent, understand,
and remediate scams involving blockchain and Web 3
technologies, that the FTC requires specific technical
expertise and resources.
What makes enforcement against these scams so difficult?
Mr. Schulman. That is a good question. I think there are
probably a couple of different factors.
I think a fundamental one is certainly technical
understanding. As I think we have talked about many times here
today, there is a reason you all invited us here, and it is
because this is hard, right?
It is not that a lot of people are really stupid. It is
that these are really complicated technologies. They are hard
to understand. They are hard to explain. They are very
different from how things that we already know tend to work.
And so when you are an enforcer at, say, the FTC, just
understanding how the technology works and where the fraud
actually happened and who perpetrated it is difficult. And so
hiring the people that can do that is important.
Mrs. Trajan. Great. Thank you for indulging me a little bit
longer than my time, Mr. Chair.
I yield back.
Mr. Bilirakis. The gentlelady yields back. Thank you.
And next we will recognize Mr. Allen from the great State
of Georgia for your 5 minutes of questioning.
Mr. Allen. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you to our
witnesses for being here today.
For 40 years I have worked at building a construction
company in Augusta, Georgia, and when we think about
blockchains, I would like to know how this will help small
businesses like construction companies and Mom and Pop grocery
stores and stores, for example.
Mr. Sudler, from a supply chain perspective, are there
increased efficiencies that small businesses can see from the
adoption of blockchains?
Mr. Sudler. You know, in some of the research that we have
looked at that involve supply chains--and they very much impact
small and medium-sized businesses--we look at the effects of
how, you know, these supply chains can be very difficult to
track.
At MIT, we look at supply chains a lot using a tool called
the Beer Project. It is a beer game. It has nothing to do with
drinking beer, but it tracks a beer supply chain. And what you
find out over the simulation is that, if you change the demand
at the consumer level just once, all of the other players in
the supply chain will become very confused. They will
oversupply, they will underrequest, and this is simply because
information is not openly shared.
Now, this is something blockchain could alleviate very
easily by simply having everyone in the supply chain tied to
this common ledger, and they can see for themselves what the
demands are and what everyone is requesting against that
demand.
So I think that would tremendously help small businesses to
really make sure their margins are good, make sure they are
ordering properly.
Mr. Allen. Thank you, Mr. Sudler.
Mr. Wyatt, you know, the small business community created
almost 70 percent of all the new jobs in the greatest economy
in my lifetime, which is 2017 and 2018. In your testimony, you
highlight that some of America's largest brands are using your
platform.
How can small businesses like my business benefit from
using Polygon?
Mr. Wyatt. I appreciate the question. You know, any
blockchain, Polygon protocol or otherwise, it is an open public
good for anybody to build on, and it is actually really easy to
deploy and start to get up.
So I think when a lot of these companies are having to go
through a very cumbersome process of all the work that needs to
be done to launch in a Web 2 environment, whether it is
thinking about cloud infrastructure and some of the other
things, Web 3 and blockchains make it much easier for anybody
to get on and the cost being very low.
You know, when we talk about a smart contract being
deployed on the Polygon protocol, it can sometimes cost pennies
to do, and so I think the cost efficiencies are a really big
deal for small developers and small companies in keeping costs
down.
Mr. Allen. Right, and the cost benefit could be enormous.
Mr. Wyatt. Absolutely.
Mr. Allen. OK. You know, it is becoming increasingly clear
that blockchain technology is set to play a critical role in
strengthening our supply chains. In fact, the ag industry is
already using distributed ledger technology to trace and
protect their food supply chains, and obviously food supply is
a big, big issue in our country.
I think this is a great example for why we should not limit
the conversation around this technology solely to securities
and commodities. For example, Walmart has already established a
blockchain partnership with Kroger, Nestle, IBM, and Dole to
bolster their food traceability. Sweetgreen, a salad
restaurant, has used blockchains to trace and trace the origins
of the produce that it buys.
In an era where consumers are increasingly concerned about
the origins and safety of their food, blockchains can offer an
unprecedented level of transparency and resiliency for
agriculture-based supply chains.
Mr. Sudler, what lessons can we take from use cases in
agriculture blockchains technology that can be adopted on the
State and Federal level to a regulatory-type framework?
Mr. Sudler. I think what we have learned from agriculture
applications is how effective supply chains can be managed
using blockchains. Now, we can learn from that and apply that
to other forms of projects.
What we have looked at is how do we apply some of these
lessons from agriculture to other projects or even mega
projects that essentially face the same type of supply chain
issue. Mega projects certainly at the State and Federal level
are projects that are $1 billion or more. They are very
complicated. They have, you know, many contractors and
subcontractors, and they do not necessarily trust one another.
So we can certainly learn from the gains we are seeing in
agriculture and say what are the smart contracts that they use,
who is allowed to view certain types of information in these
blockchains, and how do we keep a good flow of the supply chain
in these large projects that the agriculture group is able to
do very well?
Mr. Allen. Mr. Wyatt, I have got about 15 seconds, but we
have seen Big Tech from inside. As an executive, you saw it at
YouTube. Why did you choose to leave, and how will blockchain
impact the way Big Tech extracts and uses our data?
Mr. Wyatt. I love to go into YouTube because I felt that,
you know, it was democratizing education and content. Anybody
around the world could access YouTube, could upload content to
YouTube, and I felt that that was really important.
In a lot of ways, blockchains do the same thing of
democratizing this, and so I felt that this was very aligned
with my personal mission and excited that it is a place where I
can do this.
Mr. Allen. OK. Well, thank you so much.
And I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Bilirakis. Thank you.
The gentleman yields back.
And now I recognize Mr. Soto for his 5 minutes of
questioning.
Mr. Soto. Thank you so much, Chairman.
In the beginning in my opening remarks, I talked about a
lot of the areas we already were able to pass amendments into
both the National Defense Authorization Act and to the
Appropriations Act.
We got actually a lot of the blockchain advanced under
Federal law so far, whether it was, as mentioned by our
colleague, Mr. Allen, the food tracing with the FDA to help
with public safety, whether it was helping with encrypted
communications through our military, whether it is protecting
veterans' records, among other areas that are going forward.
So we here at the Congress want to make sure we are good
partners in advancing this critical technology, whether it is
for economic reasons, security, for advancing critical
research.
So I will start with Mr. Wyatt, but I am going to ask all
of you the same question.
Mr. Wyatt, if there could be one particular partnership the
Federal Government could help advance in some of these areas,
what do you think it should be that we should work on and why?
Mr. Wyatt. Look, I think the best thing that we could do is
have clear regulatory clarity on how to operate with the
nuanced understanding that there are protocols, there are
wallets, there are exchanges, and there is a lot of nuance
there.
So my ask would be to continue to push forward very clear
regulatory guidance on how to operate this new tech, and that
would ensure that, you know, tech innovation would stay here in
the U.S. and that we would continue to foster some of the best
talent in the world.
Mr. Soto. But if there is a particular subject matter, what
would that be?
I get you all want regulatory reform, and that is cool.
Mr. Wyatt. I think, in general, decentralization is such at
the heart of this where we are removing intermediaries, and so
I think the subject of decentralization is of the most
important topic.
Mr. Soto. Mr. Schulman, what would be a great partnership
with the Federal Government to help advance blockchain
technology?
Mr. Schulman. That is an interesting question. I am not 100
percent sure that the Federal Government needs to partner. I
guess I will put it this way. I think----
Mr. Soto. Let me define it more. In the most broadest of
terms, like funding or laws or encouraging research, not like
ownership, right, in the strictest sense.
Mr. Schulman. Sure.
Mr. Soto. Partnership in the facilitating sense.
Mr. Schulman. Sure. OK. I think I will offer two then. The
first, which I have sort of mentioned before already, is the
Federal Trade Commission has a huge role to play in protecting
consumers. I think it needs more funding and more people.
And then I think the other has to do with how the
Government approaches jurisdiction over blockchain entities. I
think there is clarity that definitely needs to come about what
exactly an autonomous organization is, a GAO, how it is subject
to law, how it is not subject to the law.
I think those questions are just starting to percolate in
the courts, and it is going to be very interesting watching
that and figuring out what the answers are.
Mr. Soto. Thank you, Mr. Schulman.
Obviously, neither of you have identified a particular
subject but regulatory, and I get that. But I know Professor
Sudler had mentioned space already.
I represent a district right next to the Space Coast. So
how can we partner with you all in advancing technology to use
blockchain in space?
Mr. Sudler. Yes. I think one of the biggest relationships
that we would look at is with the Department of Defense. You
know, space is open for business. There are more satellites
going into space, and it makes it a target certainly for cyber
criminals, for bad actors, and for nation states who do not
share our interests to attack either individual satellites or
constellations.
So we are very open to really looking at this type of new
problem, because it is in a new area that needs a lot of
solutions, and we would love to certainly look at some of those
national security issues.
Mr. Soto. Thank you.
And, Professor Reyes, where do you think through funding
and incentivizing we would advance blockchain in America?
Ms. Reyes. I think it would be excellent to have a funded
education program for lawmakers and regulators, because the
nuance really does matter, and all of the regulatory clarity we
all have been asking for depends on understanding the
difference between the financial use cases and the nonfinancial
use cases.
I would also really love to see the Federal lawmakers take
a cue from some of their State counterparts where States have
done an excellent job of pushing private law reform around
decentralized autonomous organizations, around the property
rules, for example.
And it would be excellent to see Federal law to the extent
that it is inconsistent in any way or somehow getting in the
way of those reforms being effective. It would be really
excellent to see those changes take shape as well.
Mr. Soto. Thank you so much.
My time has expired.
Mr. Bilirakis. I thank the gentleman.
Now I will recognize Mrs. Harshbarger from the State of
Tennessee, East Tennessee, and I want to tell you how much I
appreciate your patience. You have been here the entire time.
Mrs. Harshbarger. Yes, I want to learn.
Mr. Bilirakis. So I will give you 5 minutes for
questioning.
Thank you.
Mrs. Harshbarger. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you all for being here today.
I have been a licensed pharmacist and business owner for
over 30 years, and I guess one of the most challenging aspects
facing the pharmaceutical industry is the ability to track drug
components, and the drug supply chain is incredibly complex and
difficult to trace exactly where everything is coming from and
where it is going.
And we as pharmacists have to abide by chain of custody,
and under the FDA is the Drug Supply Chain Security Act. We
have to know if the manufacturers are registered, if the
wholesalers are licensed, if the pharmacies are licensed.
So, Professor Sudler, you discussed in your testimony a
blockchain-based contract tracing solution to mitigate the
spread of COVID-19. In your example you stated that blockchain
technologies can report infectious contacts instantly and
anonymously without revealing who is infected. And I am
interested in how this technology could improve the pharmacy
sector.
And how would this blockchain technology help address
supply chain challenges in the pharmaceutical sector, first of
all?
Mr. Sudler. Well, thank you for that question, and I think
it is very powerful to look at how we can do better at applying
blockchain to the medical industry and the pharmaceuticals
because that affects our human health and our human lives.
Mrs. Harshbarger. Yes.
Mr. Sudler. I have done research with a colleague of
Villanova University, Dr. Peggy Chaudhry, which I partnered
with quite a bit on the counterfeiting of pharmaceuticals.
Mrs. Harshbarger. Yes.
Mr. Sudler. Which is very dangerous, obviously, providing
medicine that actually is not the proper medicine, and we
looked very closely at how do we encounter some of that.
Blockchain has played a part in that conversation.
I think what we can do is look at applying blockchain to
the supply chain, understanding who these manufacturers are and
even the actual medications themselves, tracking them along the
supply chain, making sure they get to the proper, you know, end
user who should be taking that as a patient.
So, you know, I am very eager to continue this research
with my colleague and certainly working, you know, with folks
here to see how we can apply that.
Mrs. Harshbarger. That is very good. I will be in touch
with you.
Mr. Sudler. Thank you.
Mrs. Harshbarger. OK. Would these blockchains be able to
help address challenges like prescribing medication from
various healthcare providers and verifying identity?
And if you think so, how so?
Mr. Sudler. I think this gets into this whole area of
electronic health records----
Mrs. Harshbarger. Yes.
Mr. Sudler [continuing]. And how do we, you know, do a
better job of having hospitals, you know, be able to
participate in the prescription process electronically and
making sure they are getting to the right individuals.
The electronic health records have been very slow. It is
maturing to some degree. We have been working with Common
Health, which is a new technology and organization really
dedicated to trying to get electronic health records fed into
by hospitals and health practitioners.
And we are looking at writing to the API of, you know,
these databases so that blockchains can play a role in helping
facilitate those prescriptions getting to the right
individuals.
Mrs. Harshbarger. That is huge because we have got 400,000
companies in China that do the APIs versus 3,000 here. So that
is a big deal.
Mr. Sudler. Yes.
Mrs. Harshbarger. From a consumer and cybersecurity
standpoint, do you believe that the blockchain is a more secure
option for securing health and pharmaceutical-related data than
our current methods? Yes or no?
Mr. Sudler. I think the way we are currently looking at the
technology, there is basic security. I cannot say it is
necessarily bad. We are where we are with the current
technology.
But when you start adding blockchain, that adds another
layer of technology and another layer of security. So, yes, we
are doing OK cybersecuritywise with what we have, but now
adding some of that immutability or the ability to keep it
from----
Mrs. Harshbarger. Yes. Professor Sudler or Mr. Wyatt, where
is China with CCP in their line of development of blockchain?
Do you have any idea?
It is OK to talk.
Mr. Wyatt. No, I appreciate the question.
I think, look, at the end of the day, if China continues to
be the first mover in this space and innovating, they are going
to do it in the wrong way and a way that is not conducive for
our----
Mrs. Harshbarger. Kind of like AI.
Mr. Wyatt. Exactly. And so I think they are going to do it
in a way that does not respect the spirit of blockchains of
being open and transparent and decentralized.
Mrs. Harshbarger. Yes.
Mr. Wyatt. So I cannot stress enough how critical it is
that I think this will be the most important year for us from
an innovation standpoint to make sure that we do not cede it to
Russia or China.
Mrs. Harshbarger. We have a lot of work to do.
Mr. Wyatt. I would agree.
Mrs. Harshbarger. The satellite was very interesting.
Professor Sudler--and I will hurry up--have you talked to Elon
Musk and Starlink? You know, we went over and looked at the
facilities. It is very interesting to know how those satellites
will communicate if something happens.
Have you looked at that?
Mr. Sudler. I have not personally spoken to Elon Musk, but
I am going up on his Falcon 9 rocket this October.
Mrs. Harshbarger. Cool.
Mr. Sudler. So we indirectly do work with each other. He
obviously is using Starlink satellites. They communicate with
each other through optical communications. So they are looking
at the same types of problems in terms of constellations.
Constellations is the buzzword right now in space. So every
company that is interested in putting up satellites is really
considering the network approach to it, which means they are
looking at how to get satellites to talk to other satellites.
We are really one of four or five companies that are
introducing blockchain networks in space. So we are certainly
of the new era of companies that will bring this technology to
test.
Mrs. Harshbarger. Well, best of luck. When you go up, let
us know how it works out.
Mr. Sudler. Thank you.
Mrs. Harshbarger. Thank you.
With that, I yield back, sir.
Mr. Bilirakis. Thank you.
The gentlelady yields back.
Now I will recognize Mr. Fulcher from the great State of
Idaho.
Mr. Fulcher. Thank you.
Mr. Bilirakis. You are recognized for 5 minutes for
questioning, sir.
Mr. Fulcher. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Bilirakis. Thank you.
Mr. Fulcher. Mr. Schulman, one of the topics we have talked
about a lot in this committee has to do with artificial
intelligence, and just listening to the joint comments of the
panel today, we have talked about the helpful side of
artificial intelligence. There are some incredible
opportunities with predicting analytics, things like optimizing
energy generation through increased dispatch efficiency.
There are some really positive employments for artificial
intelligence, but frankly, there are some components to that
that scare me. The potential algorithms that are focused on
shaping, that type of thing.
But it all has to draw from a database, and so I am
wondering with blockchain employing a decentralized data
storage, is there a role for blockchain when it comes to
potentially neutralizing some of the--what could be the
negative impacts of artificial intelligence?
Mr. Schulman. So it is a good question. I think the thing
to remember about blockchain is--and particularly when you are
talking about it with regard to AI--is that blockchain is not
fast. In most of its forms, it cannot move a lot of data very
quickly.
And one of the things that AI fundamentally needs, as it is
sort of used or implemented today, is a lot of data, and so you
might be able to envision some sort of blockchain as a control
mechanism perhaps where the amount of data you needed to
throughput is not big. It is a relatively minor sort of turn-
on/turn-off or some sort of control mechanisms.
But I would say that I think integrating blockchain with AI
is always going to be kind of problematic because of the
inherent throttling that blockchain has in terms of data
throughput.
Mr. Fulcher. Thank you.
Mr. Wyatt, do you care to weigh in on that?
Mr. Wyatt. I think there are three things. One, I want to
acknowledge that AI and blockchain are powerful tools and that
can go either way, and we need to be very thoughtful about how
we talk about them and regulate them. But they can be
enhancements.
There are three things, I think, that are really important
with AI:
Transparent machine learning models so that we can
understand if there are inherent biases in any of these
artificial intelligent models. Blockchains can help do that for
us.
Verifying source materials so we see people producing fake
images that can move markets or change people's minds. I think
it will be really important for us to be able to look and say,
``Is that a verifiable image that is from the New York Times or
not, or is it manipulated?''
And I think, lastly, it could be incredibly helpful for a
phishing code auditing.
So I think these worlds will continue to unite, and
blockchain will be a very powerful part of ensuring the
integrity of AI.
Mr. Fulcher. Thank you.
Mr. Sudler, since we are on the topic: AI, blockchain, that
connection.
Mr. Sudler. Absolutely, it is a powerful connection, and it
is one that we are going to have to take a close look at.
AI can contribute to blockchain in the sense that we can
understand how we can make smart contracts smarter so we can
actually give a little more intelligence to blockchain networks
and how it evaluates conditions that smart contracts can
respond to.
On the other side, blockchains can help AI to give it more
explainability. Oftentimes we see, you know, AI algorithms
produce results. We are not exactly sure how it came to its
conclusion. So blockchain can actually keep track and trace
immutably in its records where those contacts came from such
that they came to a decision.
And so that explainability is very important, particularly
when you talk about AI applied to very human-sensitive, you
know, circumstances like, you know, self-driving cars and so
forth, where accountability is very important.
Mr. Fulcher. Thank you.
Ms. Reyes, just as a reminder, I would like to get your
take on this, and I am concerned about potentially some of the
negative impacts of AI, and I am wondering if the decentralized
nature of the data storage for blockchain might insulate that.
Your take on that issue?
Ms. Reyes. Thank you for the question.
I think that my thoughts are more along the line of Mr.
Schulman insofar as I do not see a blockchain obviously being a
source of data input for AI.
That is not to say it could not happen, I suppose, but at
the moment, the state of technology, I do not see that as being
how it would be used.
Mr. Fulcher. OK. Very quickly, as we have seen in China,
they have got a creation of a social credit system and a
central bank. I am also concerned about the potential of a
Federal Government-type blockchain, and I am going to ask this
of Mr. Wyatt.
With the Federal Government-generated blockchain, could
that be controlled?
I will just leave it at that and ask, is that a benefit or
a drawback if there is a federally created blockchain database
when it comes to a social credit system type system?
Mr. Wyatt. It depends on what you are looking for. I do
think you have the optionality of some of the topics we have
touched on today of permission for public blockchains, and
there are things that you could do in a permission environment.
But there are other use cases that I would find, you know,
that are more beneficial and meaningful right now using
blockchains outside of our current system.
Mr. Fulcher. Thank you.
And I am over my time. Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mrs. Lesko [presiding]. Thank you.
And there are no Democrats to speak, so I recognize myself
for 5 minutes of questioning.
Mr. Wyatt, I am delighted to hear about how blockchains can
improve everyday processes and empower consumers with new
technology, but new technology often comes with new risks, and
some of which being made clear only after widespread
deployment.
What potential problems could you see arising from
increased use of blockchain technology?
And then a followup: What steps could this committee take
to minimize those problems?
Mr. Wyatt. I think the biggest risk that we have here in
our country is not doing anything, and I am not implying that
we are. This committee is a great example of the work that we
are doing here.
But I would say with a sense of urgency so that we can make
sure that we are leading and we are the pioneers and we are
placing kind of the consumer protections that we need to put in
place. So my concern largely would stem around us continuing to
not do anything or act swiftly enough and what implications
that could have.
Mrs. Lesko. OK. And then I guess, Mr. Wyatt, a followup
question. It is related to this, quite frankly.
In addition to me being a member of this subcommittee, I am
also the vice chair of the Subcommittee for Energy and Commerce
on Oversight and Investigations.
In your opinion, what balance should exist between
encouraging innovation by technology startups and government
oversight and regulation?
Meaning what role do you see government playing in shaping
the future of blockchain technology, if any?
Mr. Wyatt. Yes. I do not know that necessarily I would say
that the Government is responsible for shaping it, but I think
it is really important that we establish guidelines,
regulations, and rules of the road so that there is clarity so
that people feel comfortable that they are capable and enabled
to innovate in this country.
Mrs. Lesko. And then, Professor Sudler and Professor Reyes,
when trying to anticipate the potential risks of blockchain
technology and how we can mitigate them, I think it is also
important to discuss regulatory authority. As we have heard
from all of you today, blockchains are a multiuse technology.
So we must make sure that regulatory authority is clear.
What is the best way to prevent unfair or deceptive acts or
practices, ensure data security, and regulate a new technology,
or is it too early to regulate?
Mr. Sudler. That is a very bundled question.
Mrs. Lesko. It is.
Mr. Sudler. But if you take a look at how we treated the
internet in its early days, we were fairly hands off to allow
it to innovate, and I think that is very important for the
blockchain to continue to do that.
Let's keep in mind that the blockchain is only about 15
years old. It is a teenager. Let it be a teenager, and let it
come to some degree of maturity before we talk about huge
regulations.
Having said that though, there are industry-specific
standards that we have to take a look at, things like
healthcare where, you know, HIPPA laws are in place and the
privacy of our data is very critical.
So we need to look at this on an industry-by-industry basis
to see how blockchains are being used and whether or not from
an industry perspective we need to put some guardrails on how
blockchains could potentially threaten our information, our
lives.
Mrs. Lesko. Ms. Reyes.
Ms. Reyes. Thank you.
So I do want to make sure it is clear for the record that
this is not an unregulated industry. It is actually quite
heavily regulated. I have been a blockchain lawyer since around
2011, and most of my counseling was on regulatory matters,
right?
So it is quite heavily regulated. The problem is often that
the regulations that apply are not entirely clear, at least as
applied to the specific subset that folks are interested in. I
think we see this largely in the securities industry at the
moment, in securities regulation.
I think the key to making sure that such clarity is
provided in the regulatory framework is to go through the
rulemaking process--an open process whereby rulemaking is
issued, people get a chance to comment on it--and then clear
rules of the road are provided, because many of the existing
laws and regulations that we have do apply to the activity
undertaken using the technology.
What I think would be a detriment to the United States
legal system is if laws targeted the technology or the software
itself and said the blockchain must look like this and you may
only build a protocol with these features. That would not be
helpful.
I also concur with Mr. Schulman's earlier remarks that
targeting the developers themselves, particularly open-source
developers, is not particularly helpful, particularly
recognizing that blockchain protocols are not the only open-
source software that we rely upon on a daily basis.
If you used a computer today, it is likely that you used
some piece of open-source software while you did so.
So those are my comments on your question.
Mrs. Lesko. Well, thank you.
And I thank all of you for coming here today.
Now I call on my colleague Mrs. Cammack for 5 minutes of
questioning.
Mrs. Cammack. All right. Well, thank you, Madam Chairwoman.
Thank you to our witnesses for appearing before us today.
As you can tell by the attendance in the room, we are all
here. [Laughter.] Kidding.
This is something that I find incredibly fascinating, being
kind of a token millennial, right, in the room. So I am going
to go in reverse and start with you, Mr. Wyatt, talking about
the gaming industry.
So 2019 we were looking at the gaming industry doing about
$260 billion in total economic output, right? They are
anticipating $560 billion by 2030. So it is not just the old
school Tetris and Mario that so many people think of, right?
The gaming industry is huge.
How do you envision blockchain changing the game--not to
put a pun on it--but how do you envision blockchain changing
the future of gaming and even going so far as, like, say, the
metaverse?
Mr. Wyatt. Yes, I appreciate the question, and I am
empathetic to it, especially, you know, having kids and my wife
not being particularly keen with video games too much.
But I think one thing that a lot of folks do not realize is
the way that we think about video games, Mario, Tetris, it is
evolved. They are digital worlds. People are learning. They are
interacting. They are socializing. They are wanting to spend
their time inside of these environments, whatever it is that
they are doing, right? And there is obviously a variety of
things.
So with this is people want to spend money where they are
spending time. It is a very natural behavior for anyone to do.
And so whether you are a kid or an adult that are, you
know, interacting in these digital worlds, that is important.
So, therefore, you see a lot of digital goods being purchased
inside of these games, whether it is a cosmetic item for you to
have some representation in game or whatever the case may be.
As you pointed out, that is generating hundreds of billions of
dollars. YouTube is one of the largest verticals in the
business.
I think what this allows people to do is instead of just
licensing this from the publisher, they can now own it. If you
spend money on something, you deserve to own it. You do not
just license the sweatshirt from Nike, you buy it. It is yours.
You can give it to me. You can trade it to me. You can sell it
to me. I think that is really important.
And so these digital goods deserve more rights. People are
spending a lot of money on it. They deserve more autonomy on
how these things can be used. There is no better way to solve
for that than putting these on open blockchain protocols.
Mrs. Cammack. I appreciate that. Thank you.
Mr. Sudler, did I say that correctly?
Mr. Sudler. Yes, that is correct.
Mrs. Cammack. So I want to shift gears a little bit, and
thank you, Mr. Wyatt, for that on the gaming response.
We have talked a little bit here today about the uses that
can be applicable to Federal Government, and I want to just
expand that a little bit.
How do you foresee--and I am running out of time--but
blockchain technology, how could that be used for, say, foreign
aid, particularly in countries where we do not have the most
sophisticated financial systems, we do not have necessarily the
means?
How can we utilize the technology today to utilize foreign
aid for effectively utilizing blockchain?
Mr. Sudler. I think there are a couple of ways in which you
can do that, and some of my students have explored that very
same topic. If foreign aid is being sent to a country, how do
we make sure it is getting into the right hands, it is not
getting to, you know, adversaries or people who are wasting
that money?
So the blockchain can keep track to some degree of where
that individual is on the receiving side and whether they are
receiving that payment or not. There are some complexities in
terms of, you know, the receiving end and what actually do they
do with it. You know, that obviously gets into tracking. You
know, who is actually spending that money at the end of the
day?
The other way is helping communities really create their
own community coin. So if you go into that country and say, you
know, we are going to help set up some infrastructure where
maybe there is a community coin, allows for self-organization,
allows for some particular region to have an internal economic
system based on a coin that is well structured, has some rules
in terms of how it is used. That could be a way of aiding some
group outside of this country without necessarily just sending
money but actually building, helping build an economy.
Mrs. Cammack. And to take that one step forward or further,
how do you foresee us using blockchain to prevent waste, fraud,
and abuse and cut down cost with Federal programs, things like
SNAP, EBT, et cetera?
Mr. Sudler. Yes. If you have something like SNAP on a
blockchain, now you are starting to track, you know, whether an
individual is using, you know, those particular services
appropriately.
And this does get into identity itself, really tracking,
you know, the individual who is using all those particular
programs and income of their activities on the blockchain.
That does get into a new area of technology of identifying
a person on the blockchain itself and some unique identifier
that would track their identity on the blockchain and then how
they are using some of the Federal programs that they are
allowed to use.
So we are looking very closely at identity. Obviously, that
gets into a lot of privacy and how do we do that correctly, but
there certainly is that type of use case that has some
potential.
Mrs. Cammack. Certainly I have concerns about the privacy
issues surrounding blockchain and how the technology is going
to evolve around the sense that we need our constitutional
rights to be protected. We have a right to privacy, and so kind
of threading that needle is something that I am very interested
in.
But I know my time has expired. Mr. Chairman, I will follow
up with the remainder of my questions for the record.
And thank you to our witnesses again, and I yield.
Mr. Allen [presiding]. I thank the gentlelady for yielding.
And this concludes our hearing today. I want to thank our
witnesses for your expertise and your knowledge around this
technology. It is important for us to understand what you are
dealing with so that your Congress can deal with this issue
appropriately.
I ask unanimous consent to insert into the record the
documents included on the staff hearing documents list.
Without objection?
Mrs. Cammack. No objection.
Mr. Allen. So that will be the order.
[The information appears at the conclusion of the hearing.]
Mr. Allen. I remind Members that they have 10 business days
to submit questions for the record, and I ask the witnesses to
respond to the questions as promptly as you can. Members should
submit their questions by the close of business on June 21st.
And then, without objection, the subcommittee is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 12:08 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]
[Material submitted for inclusion in the record follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
