- REAUTHORIZATION OF THE ANIMAL DRUG USER FEE PROGRAMS

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

REAUTHORIZATION OF THE ANIMAL DRUG USER
FEE PROGRAMS

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON HEALTH

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

MARCH 30, 2023

__________

Serial No. 118-20

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Published for the use of the Committee on Energy and Commerce

govinfo.gov/committee/house-energy
energycommerce.house.gov

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
54-663 PDF                  WASHINGTON : 2024

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE

CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington
Chair
MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas            FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey
ROBERT E. LATTA, Ohio                  Ranking Member
BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky              ANNA G. ESHOO, California
H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia         DIANA DeGETTE, Colorado
GUS M. BILIRAKIS, Florida            JAN SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois
BILL JOHNSON, Ohio                   DORIS O. MATSUI, California
LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana               KATHY CASTOR, Florida
RICHARD HUDSON, North Carolina       JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland
TIM WALBERG, Michigan                PAUL TONKO, New York
EARL L. ``BUDDY'' CARTER, Georgia    YVETTE D. CLARKE, New York
JEFF DUNCAN, South Carolina          TONY CARDENAS, California
GARY J. PALMER, Alabama              RAUL RUIZ, California
NEAL P. DUNN, Florida                SCOTT H. PETERS, California
JOHN R. CURTIS, Utah                 DEBBIE DINGELL, Michigan
DEBBBIE LESKO, Arizona               MARC A. VEASEY, Texas
GREG PENCE, Indiana                  ANN M. KUSTER, New Hampshire
DAN CRENSHAW, Texas                  ROBIN L. KELLY, Illinois
JOHN JOYCE, Pennsylvania             NANETTE DIAZ BARRAGAN, California
KELLY ARMSTRONG, North Dakota, Vice  LISA BLUNT ROCHESTER, Delaware
Chair                            DARREN SOTO, Florida
RANDY K. WEBER, Sr., Texas           ANGIE CRAIG, Minnesota
RICK W. ALLEN, Georgia               KIM SCHRIER, Washington
TROY BALDERSON, Ohio                 LORI TRAHAN, Massachusetts
RUSS FULCHER, Idaho                  LIZZIE FLETCHER, Texas
AUGUST PFLUGER, Texas
DIANA HARSHBARGER, Tennessee
MARIANNETTE MILLER-MEEKS, Iowa
KAT CAMMACK, Florida
JAY OBERNOLTE, California
------

Professional Staff

NATE HODSON, Staff Director
SARAH BURKE, Deputy Staff Director
TIFFANY GUARASCIO, Minority Staff Director
Subcommittee on Health

BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky
Chairman
MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas            ANNA G. ESHOO, California
ROBERT E. LATTA, Ohio                  Ranking Member
H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia         JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland
GUS M. BILIRAKIS, Florida            TONY CARDENAS, California
BILL JOHNSON, Ohio                   RAUL RUIZ, California
LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana, Vice Chair   DEBBIE DINGELL, Michigan
RICHARD HUDSON, North Carolina       ANN M. KUSTER, New Hampshire
EARL L. ``BUDDY'' CARTER, Georgia    ROBIN L. KELLY, Illinois
NEAL P. DUNN, Florida                NANETTE DIAZ BARRAGAN, California
GREG PENCE, Indiana                  LISA BLUNT ROCHESTER, Delaware
DAN CRENSHAW, Texas                  ANGIE CRAIG, Minnesota
JOHN JOYCE, Pennsylvania             KIM SCHRIER, Washington
DIANA HARSHBARGER, Tennessee         LORI TRAHAN, Massachusetts
MARIANNETTE MILLER-MEEKS, Iowa       FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey (ex
JAY OBERNOLTE, California                officio)
CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington
(ex officio)
C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hon. Brett Guthrie, a Representative in Congress from the
Commonwealth of Kentucky, opening statement....................     1
Prepared statement...........................................     3
Hon. Anna G. Eshoo, a Representative in Congress from the State
of California, opening statement...............................     5
Prepared statement...........................................     6
Hon. Frank Pallone, Jr., a Representative in Congress from the
State of New Jersey, opening statement.........................     8
Prepared statement...........................................     9
Hon. Cathy McMorris Rodgers, a Representative in Congress from
the State of Washington, opening statement.....................    10
Prepared statement...........................................    12
Hon. Greg Pence, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Indiana, opening statement.....................................    15

Witnesses

Tracey Forfa, Director, Center for Veterinary Medicine, Food and
Drug Administration, Department of Health and Human Services...    16
Prepared statement...........................................    18
Submitted questions for the record \1\.......................   120
Rachel Cumberbatch, D.V.M., Director, Regulatory Affairs, Animal
Drugs, Animal Health Institute.................................    56
Prepared statement...........................................    59
Answers to submitted questions...............................   123
Stephanie Batliner, Chair, Generic Animal Drug Alliance..........    65
Prepared statement...........................................    67
Answers to submitted questions...............................   125
Lori Teller, D.V.M., President, American Veterinary Medical
Association....................................................    75
Prepared statement...........................................    77
Answers to submitted questions...............................   128

Legislation

H.R. ___, the Animal Drug User Fee Amendments of 2023............    93
H.R. ___, the Generic Animal Drug Advancement Act................   116

Submitted Material

Inclusion of the following was approved by unanimous consent.
Letter of March 21, 2023, from Stephanie Batliner, Chairperson,
Generic Animal Drug Alliance, to Mr. Pence and Ms. Schrier.....   119

----------

\1\ Ms. Forfa did not answer submitted questions for the record by the
time of publication. Replies received after publication will be
retained in committee files and made available at https://
docs.house.gov/Committee/Calendar/ByEvent.aspx?EventID=115630.

REAUTHORIZATION OF THE ANIMAL DRUG USER FEE PROGRAMS

----------

THURSDAY, MARCH 30, 2023

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Health,
Committee on Energy and Commerce,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 9:01 a.m., in
the John D. Dingell Room 2123, Rayburn House Office Building,
Hon. Brett Guthrie (chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Members present: Representatives Guthrie, Bucshon, Latta,
Griffith, Bilirakis, Johnson, Carter, Dunn, Pence, Joyce,
Harshbarger, Obernolte, Rodgers (ex officio), Eshoo
(subcommittee ranking member), Sarbanes, Ruiz, Kuster, Craig,
Schrier, and Pallone (ex officio).
Staff present: Kate Arey, Digital Director; Jolie Brochin,
Clerk, Health; Corey Ensslin, Senior Policy Advisor, Health;
Grace Graham, Chief Counsel, Health; Jack Heretik, Press
Secretary; Tara Hupman, Chief Counsel; Peter Kielty, General
Counsel; Emily King, Member Services Director; Chris Krepich,
Press Secretary; Clare Paoletta, Professional Staff Member,
Health; Lydia Abma, Minority Policy Analyst; Hannah Anton,
Minority Staff Assistant; Waverly Gordon, Minority Deputy Staff
Director and General Counsel; Tiffany Guarascio, Minority Staff
Director; Perry Hamilton, Minority Member Services and Outreach
Manager; Stephen Holland, Minority Senior Health Counsel; and
Una Lee, Minority Chief Health Counsel.
Mr. Guthrie. The subcommittee will come to order, and the
Chair recognizes himself for an opening statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. BRETT GUTHRIE, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE COMMONWEALTH OF KENTUCKY

Today, we take the first step to reauthorizing the Animal
Drug User Fee Agreements through 2028. These must-past
agreements play important roles in keeping our pets and farm
animals healthy and happy. This process gives Congress the
unique ability to help ensure brand-name animal drugs and their
generic equivalents are able to reach the market as quickly and
as safely as possible. Animal health is also important to human
health.
For example, there is currently a severe bird flu outbreak
going around the world. One way to prevent that virus from
potentially mutating and becoming potentially infectious in
humans is to prevent it or cure the disease in animals.
Originally established in 2004, the first Animal Drug User Fee
Agreement transformed the review process for these drugs.
Before the establishment of these agreements, it took
roughly 7 to 10 years to get new animal drugs approved. This
backlog made it more difficult for veterinarians to treat house
pets for treatable and nonlife-threatening conditions. Food was
also delayed getting to the grocery store shelves because of
delays in determining that antibiotics given to food-producing
animals did not jeopardize the safety of that food for human
consumption.
The first ADUFA agreement eliminated the backlog of
applications sitting with the FDA Center for Veterinary
Medicine and decreased the review times for new animal drug
applications from over 600 days to 180 days. The ADUFA
agreement we are considering today will allow the agency to
collect 174 million in fees from the industry from 2024 to 2028
and make critical program enhancements to streamline the review
process for both regulators and industry.
These include more stringent reporting requirements for the
FDA and review times and outcomes of investigational new animal
drug applications. The agreement also includes a third-party
review process of these applications to increase oversight and
help identify ways this process can be more predictable for
drug sponsors.
Today, we are also considering the Animal Generic User Fee
Agreements, AGDUFA. Since Congress backed AGDUFA in 2009, these
agreements have been instrumental in reducing long wait times
for drug reviews and getting more lower-cost generic drugs on
the market. The AGDUFA agreement we are examining would permit
the FDA to collect up to 130 million end-user fees through 2028
on review of the generic animal drugs. This also includes
improved transparency requirements for FDA, who will help
sponsors more effectively work with regulators to address
outstanding issues with the file for which sponsors use to
share information about an abbreviated new animal drug
application.
It also includes a commitment from the FDA to take action
on 90 percent of these requests within 100 days of submission.
Overall, both of these agreements will significantly enhance
our ability to keep household pets and farming animals healthy
while continuing to promote human health in the process. I
would like to thank my subcommittee colleagues, Representatives
Pence and Schrier, for their work in introducing the
legislation before us today that reauthorizes these programs.
As subcommittee Chair, I want to ensure we are taking care
of business by getting this legislation to the President's desk
well before its September 30 deadline. Thank you, and I yield
back.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Guthrie follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Guthrie. The Chair now recognizes the Gentlelady from
California, Ms. Eshoo, the ranking member, for an opening
statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. ANNA G. ESHOO, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA

Ms. Eshoo. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and good morning
colleagues.
Today, we consider the reauthorization of the Animal Drug
User Fee programs. A source of pride of this subcommittee is
our history of bipartisan work to advance user fee agreements
that enable the U.S. to lead the world in innovation and drug
development. I voted for the initial Animal Drug User Fee Act,
known as ADUFA, in 2003 to authorize the FDA to collect fees
for animal drug applications, as well as the Animal Generic
Drug User Fee Act, known as AGDUFA, in 2008 to expand these
authorities to generic animal drugs.
These programs are reauthorized every 5 years to ensure the
center for veterinary medicine can continue to meet the needs
of the animal drug industry as it evolves. Today, we are
considering a new set of agreements negotiated by the FDA and
stakeholders in the animal drug industry. These agreements will
lead to increased transparency, additional pathways for animal
drug approvals, and reduced review times for pioneer and
generic drug applications while maintaining high standards for
safety and efficacy.
Everyone on this subcommittee has a vested interest in
moving these reauthorizations because they are critical to
animal and human health. Millions of American pet owners and
veterinarians rely on the robust animal drug pipeline to keep
their companions safe and healthy. Livestock and poultry
producers also rely on animal health products to protect food-
producing animals from diseases that threaten the safety of our
food supply.
FDA continues to make progress to mitigate the growth of
antimicrobial resistance in food-producing animals, including
ending over-the-counter access to medically important
antibiotics, which are used in both human and animals, but more
needs to be done. ADUFA V and AGDUFA IV are the latest
evolutions to further strengthen the review process for animal
drugs and ensure robust funding for the Center for Veterinary
Medicine. We are also considering Congresswoman Nancy Mace's
legislation, the Generic Animal Drug Advancement Act to allow a
generic animal drug manufacturer to seek approval for fewer
species than were on the original pioneer drugs labeling.
So thank you to Director Forfa for being with us today. I
look forward to hearing from you and our other expert witnesses
about the negotiated animal user agreements, and I remain fully
committed to moving ADUFA and AGDUFA--how do we come up with
all of this; the Federal Government wins the prize for all of
this alphabet soup--and a swift reauthorization as the chairman
of our subcommittee just stated before the programs expire on
September 30.
With that, I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Eshoo follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Guthrie. Thank you. The gentlelady yields back. So the
gentleman from New Jersey, you are recognized for 5 minutes for
your opening statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. FRANK PALLONE, Jr., A REPRESENTATIVE
IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF NEW JERSEY

Mr. Pallone. Thank you. Thank you, Chairman Guthrie.
The two animal user fee programs we are reviewing today
support the timely review of both pioneer and generic drugs at
the Food and Drug Administration while supporting the agency's
public health mission and gold standard for safety and
efficacy. Today's hearing and these user fees highlight, of
course, the importance of medicine for our four-legged friends
at home. At the same time, we have to stress that animal drugs
support a healthy agricultural economy and protect the Nation's
food supply.
User fees are--I am sorry. We have to also remain vigilant
in supporting animal health due to its known impact on human
health. As we have repeatedly seen through outbreaks like
Ebola, Zika, coronavirus, avian influenza, or bird flu,
infectious diseases can be transmitted between species, and
scientists have also drawn a direct connection between our
changing environment and the heightened risk of interspecies
transmission of disease.
And similarly, the careful and responsible management of
animal or antimicrobial use in animals is of critical
importance in our fight against antimicrobial resistant
pathogens that could infect humans. So animal drug user fees
provide critical supplemental funding for the FDA and have
helped ensure faster, more predictable review timelines for new
drugs and generic competition.
But I do want to highlight that user fees are intended to
be supplemental to FDA's appropriated budget allocations. Our
reauthorization of user fees should not be seen by the majority
or anybody as a justification to cut FDA's budget in the
Republican quest to dramatically slash funding across the
Government. So I am committed to seeing these programs
authorized on time well ahead of the September deadline. Of
course, we will see what the Senate does to support the FDA's
mission. I am sure everyone remembers when we did everything
quickly, and then the Senate took like another year to get it
done, so that is why I mentioned that.
But after successfully reauthorizing human drug user fee
programs and enacting the Food and Drug Omnibus Reform Act in a
bipartisan way last year, I am confident that we can come
together and get this done. So I look forward to learning more
today about the new user fee agreements as well as additional
policy proposal that can improve animal health. And welcome to
our witnesses.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Yield back.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Pallone follows:]
[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Guthrie. Thank you. The gentleman yields back. And the
Chair recognizes the Chair of the full committee, Chair
McMorris Rodgers.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, A
REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF WASHINGTON

Mrs. Rodgers. Good morning. Whether or not you know it,
almost everyone in the room relies on animal drugs approved by
the FDA, whether you have a pet, drink milk, eat meat, the FDA
plays a very important role in making sure the drugs we give
animals work and are safe. This is especially important to make
sure food is safe for humans to eat. The Center for Veterinary
Medicine at FDA is responsible for regulating animal drugs and
is funded in part by congressional appropriations and in part
by user fees paid by industry.
If we don't reauthorize this legislation on time, FDA can
no longer collect fees, and the drugs that farmers and pet
owners rely on may not come to market. It is important that we
get this done on time and work in a bipartisan way to keep any
controversial policies from slowing this down.
We are off to good start. I am glad that industry and FDA
submitted recommendations for this reauthorization ahead of the
January 15 deadline, and today we will be considering
legislation that reauthorizes the Animal Drug User Fee
Amendments and the Animal Generic Drug User Fee Amendments. The
agreements before us reflect nearly 2 years of negotiations
between FDA and industry. We appreciate the hard work from
those involved in those discussions.
This will be the fifth ADUFA reauthorization, and fourth
reauthorization of AGDUFA. And in the 20 years since these
authorities were established, we have seen significant
improvements to review times for new animal drug applications
and continued progress towards getting safe and cost-effective
products to the market faster. Over the course of the
negotiation process, we have heard industry and stakeholders on
current challenges within the animal health market, including
rising cost of pet care and limited options available for
treatment.
We are also hearing how the significant growth in new drug
application fees are limiting participation in the Animal Drug
User Fee programs. This ultimately leaves us with fewer and
less-affordable options to treat our country's animals. It is
clear that we need more innovative and affordable medicines on
the market, and I look forward to discussing FDA's plans to
better utilize existing processes to expedite the review and
approval of animal drugs.
The agreements contain several proposals that address
supply-chain issues, funding for preapproval foreign inspection
capabilities, and commitments to exploring additional EU and
U.S. good manufacturing agreements. FDA will also commit to a
third-party evaluation of CVM's utilization of review processes
of animal drug applications.
Independent assessments such as these are critical as this
committee conducts oversight over the agency's mission and
fulfilling its regulatory and public-health responsibilities.
We look forward to reviewing the findings from this assessment.
The proposed agreement for the Animal Generic User Fee Program
should help get more lower-cost animal drugs to farmers and pet
owners. FDA is committed to providing increased engagement with
generic drug sponsors through new meeting processes.
These meetings will provide additional opportunities for
sponsors to engage with the agency's scientific staff to better
understand what data is needed to support new animal drug
applications. I am also looking forward to discussing CVM's
plans to transition staff and resources back to in-person
operations as we continue the corner on 3 years since the
beginning of the pandemic, and as the COVID-19 public health
emergency is set to end May 11.
In addition to the user fee agreements, we are also
considering legislation introduced by Representative Nancy
Mace, the Generic Animal Drug Availability Act. This bill would
improve pathways for generic animal drugs seeking approval for
a single species and as combination products.
I look forward to today's discussion. I believe there is a
bipartisan commitment to reauthorizing these agreements on
time. Thank you. I yield back.
[The prepared statement of Mrs. Rodgers follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Guthrie. Thank you. The Chair yields back. The Chair
reminds Members that, pursuant to the committee rules, all
Members' opening statements will be made part of the record.
Are there any Members seeking for an opening statement?
Mr. Pence, you are recognized for 3 minutes for an opening
statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. GREG PENCE, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF INDIANA

Mr. Pence. Thank you, Chairman Guthrie, and Ranking Member
Eshoo and Director Forfa for being here. I am proud to champion
the fifth reauthorization of the Animal Drug User Fee Act with
my colleague, Congresswoman Schrier. This important legislation
is critical to ensuring safe and effective drugs for our
Nation's livestock industry and farm animals for the next 5
years. Farmers, ranchers, and rural communities across southern
Indiana rely on veterinary medicines and therapeutics produced
by animal drug manufactures.
Innovators in the Hoosier State, like Elanco Animal Health,
are leading the charge to keep America's farm animals safe and
healthy. The fees associated with this legislation is a
collaborative investment between the FDA and America's animal
health companies. In addition to providing the FDA with
resource to expedite reviews and approvals, my legislation
would ensure the agency is transparent and held accountable for
performance goals.
This legislation would preserve security of our Nation's
food supply by making certain the medications administered to
food-producing animals are safe for animal and human health. I
look forward to working with my colleagues on the Energy and
Commerce Committee to get this legislation across the finish
line. Since 2004, fees paid to the Center for the Veterinary
Medicine at FDA have increased exponentially across both
programs while the workload and number of animal drug approvals
have declined.
Within the ADUFA program, supported full-time equivalents
at CVM have also increased. However, approval timelines are
still far behind our counterparts around the world, such as the
European Medicines Agency. This places the United States at a
competitive disadvantage as foreign producers gain access to
cutting-edge medicines before producers here in the United
States.
Director Forfa, I hope today that you will answer a few--
give us some thoughts on some of the issues involved here going
forward, and I hope you will commit to executing the
independent third-party assessment of the program. And I hope
that you will explain what the timeline for when CVM plans to
begin this assessment and the process to keep industry
stakeholders is formed. And then I hope you can share your
thoughts in how the negotiated goals and authorized fees in my
legislation could reverse this trend of approval delays at the
FDA.
And with that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Guthrie. The gentleman yields back.
Any opening statements from the Democrat side?
No opening statements. Seeing none, I will introduce--we
will move into witness testimony. I will introduce our witness.
Our first witness today is Tracey Forfa, Director for the
Center for Veterinary Medicine at the U.S. Food and Drug
Administration.
You are recognized 5 minutes for your opening statement.

STATEMENT OF TRACEY FORFA, DIRECTOR, CENTER FOR VETERINARY
MEDICINE, FOOD AND DRUG ADMINISTRATION, DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH
AND HUMAN SERVICES

Ms. Forfa. Good morning, Chairman Guthrie. Thank you,
Ranking Member Eshoo and members of the subcommittee. I am
Tracey Forfa, the Director of the Center for Veterinary
Medicine, or CVM, of the FDA. Thank you for this opportunity to
discuss FDA's proposals for reauthorization of the Animal Drug
User Fee Act and the Animal Generic Drug User Fee Act, ADUFA V
and AGDUFA IV.
The enactment of ADUFA and AGDUFA enabled CVM to resolve a
longstanding backlog of animal drug applications and created
predictability in the review process. Both programs help FDA
maintain a stable, scientific, and technical workforce, reduce
review times, and improve communication with drug sponsors.
Since then, FDA has approved over 360 new animal drugs and over
227 generic drugs.
These medicines in our larger American health systems
impact Americans' lives every day. They make a difference for
the pets that live in over two-thirds of American households
and support food-producing animals, a critical part of the
American agricultural economy.
With this reauthorization, we have several proposals that
we believe will advance CVM's highly successful animal health
programs. I will highlight just a few. Building on the ADUFA IV
performance goals, FDA and industry have agreed to report
certain programmatic metrics and participate in an independent
third-party assessment of first-cycle reviews. We will offer a
new virtual option for presubmission meetings so industry can
receive feedback from CVM on development plans without
logistical delays or travel costs and will work with industry
to host annual public education conferences.
We have agreed to form FDA industry work groups to explore
potential program enhancements, including tools to improve
review efficiency, the drug residue analytical method trial
process, and the policies and procedures on Animal Drug
Availability Act drug combinations.
We also offered financial recommendations, including
implementing and operating reserve adjustment, modifying the
workload adjustor, and establishing an annual financial plan.
AGDUFA IV proposals include agreements on several program
enhancements, formalizing the bioequivalence meeting process,
creating a dosage-form-specific template letter, adding the
request to open a generic investigational animal drug file as a
sentinel submission, implementing U.S./U.K. and U.S./EU mutual
recognition agreements, and potentially establishing MRAs with
other countries.
Financial recommendations include modifying the workload
adjustor, updating the fee structure, and adding a shortfall
provision. The negotiations are positive and cooperative, and
the proposals put forward serve mutual goals of continuous
process improvement, transparency, and the protection of public
health.
I have been with the Center for 21 years and have seen many
dedicated public servants come and go. I truly respect and
admire the people I work with and their commitment to public
health. I did not say animal health. Human health, animal
health, environmental health, and other aspects of societal
health do not exist in a vacuum. At CVM, we take a
collaborative, multisectoral, and transdisciplinary approach
called the One Health approach.
When we review drugs for food-producing animals, for
example, we consider the safety of people consuming meat, milk,
or eggs from those animals, the safety of people handling the
drugs, and the impact on the products on the environment. Our
drug review teams house a wealth of experience, and I commend
their dedication. The international public health community
increasingly recognizes the value of One Health. CVM has led
FDA and HHS to recognize this utility.
CVM is often deeply engaged in unexpected crossdisciplinary
issues. We have seen a recent explosion of products that cut
across human, animal, and environmental health, advancement in
technologies like gene editing and cell- and tissue-based
therapies, and innovative chemical uses like the potential
cattle food ingredients to cut emissions of greenhouse gases.
Such innovations challenge us to assess whether the study data
legally required for approval are scientifically necessary or
appropriate to protect public health.
We maximize flexibility to get safe and effective products
into the market without undue burden on sponsors. In addition,
we have issued guidances on expanded conditional approval and
alternative data sources. Our Veterinary Innovation Program
established in 2019 gives sponsors of animal cellular products
and intentional genomic alterations more opportunities to
consult. Fifty-two product developers have enrolled in the
program so far.
In closing, I appreciate your consideration of our
recommendations and hope for a timely reauthorization. I also
hope to work with you to examine our animal product safety
system for opportunities and to break down barriers to
innovations that will advance human and animal health.
Thank you for your time.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Forfa follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Guthrie. Thank you. I thank for your opening statement,
and we will now move into Member questions. I will recognize
myself 5 minutes for that purpose.
Ms. Forfa, the ADUFA I eliminated a significant backlog of
680 submissions and reduced review times from 700 days to 270
for these products. And the question is, how will this
agreement further reduce these backlogs and reduce review times
and likewise ADUFA work to address significant backlogs and
long waits? So how will this agreement accelerate development
of pioneer drugs? So what is going to be the improvement? You
all have done a good job. So what is the improvement that we
are looking for?
Ms. Forfa. I thank you very much for the question, and we
thank you for your support.
So, as you said, the animal drug user fees provide
predictability. We have all set goals, and we have met and
succeeded all of those goals a hundred percent of the time. We
have moved to a hundred percent electronic submissions, which
has really sped up the process for both the sponsors providing
us with the information and for us reviewing it.
We want to continue to increase our response times and
increase the enhancements to both programs. We also want to
ensure that our reviews are timely and flexible, as I said in
my opening statements. And we are going to continue to work
with the industry to build in as many flexibilities as we can
to make sure that drugs come to the market in the most
expeditious manner possible.
Mr. Guthrie. All right. Thank you. I appreciate that. And
how has FDA worked with drug sponsors to develop new
antimicrobials in food-producing animals that are also safe for
humans?
Ms. Forfa. The antimicrobial resistance is a huge priority
for CVM and FDA and the Government overall. We are in the final
year of a 5-year plan. We have made significant progress in
implementing that plan, and we have provided a report in fiscal
year 2022 that provided the data elements and identified gaps
and places where we still need to work harder on antimicrobial
resistance. We have also engaged the Reagan-Udall Foundation,
who has spoken to 30 stakeholders from various Ag associations,
producers, researchers and academics, and consumer advocacy
groups on next steps in our next 5-year plan, which we will be
putting out shortly. We really are looking forward to
developing potential public/private partnerships, and we
continue to want to work with the agriculture sector and other
interested stakeholders to make sure our antimicrobial
resistance policy addresses this very critical issue.
Mr. Guthrie. Thank you very much. That concludes my
questions. So I will yield back the time. And I will recognize
the gentlelady from California, Ms. Eshoo, for 5 minutes for
questions.
Ms. Eshoo. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank you for your
opening statement.
Does the FDA know where most animal drugs are manufactured?
The United States? China? India?
Ms. Forfa. I don't have that information right off the top
of my head, so we would be happy to get back to you on that.
Ms. Eshoo. All right. I think it would be interesting to
know that. Are you facing similar delays and barriers to
inspecting foreign manufacturers as the human drug side of FDA
has?
Ms. Forfa. During the pandemic, we did face similar
challenges. Some of the companies are the same, and some of the
companies are the same ones to be inspected. So we leverage our
inspectional force wherever we can. We are working with our
foreign counterparts on mutual recognition agreements and other
tools to help speed up those inspections. But during the
pandemic we faced similar challenges.
Ms. Eshoo. But what is the state now?
Ms. Forfa. It is gradually improving, and we are hoping
that, you know, it will continue to improve at a faster pace.
Ms. Eshoo. I have been a critic of foreign inspections
relative to FDA, and that is why I asked the question. I think
that, you know, heightened inspections are really so very
important. So if you have anything to add to that, you can get
it to me in writing.
During the last ADUFA and AGDUFA reauthorization, this
subcommittee spent a great deal of time on the important issue
of antibiotic use in animals. Overuse of antibiotics in animals
can contribute to the emergence of antimicrobial resistance
that can then be transferred to humans through food-producing
animals, which your center regulates. In the U.S. alone, the
CDC estimates there are more than 2.8 million antimicrobial-
resistant infections each year killing more than 35,000
Americans. Those are pretty stunning numbers.
Can you describe the actions that the FDA has taken
regarding antibiotic use in animals since the last two
reauthorizations, and has the CVM measured whether antibiotic
stewardship in food-producing animals have improved, and what
steps do you plan to take in the future to encourage that
stewardship?
Ms. Forfa. Thank you for that question. As I said earlier,
antimicrobial resistance is a huge priority for CVM. It has
been. There's a number of steps that we have taken.
I will answer your second question first. We continue to
monitor antimicrobial resistance progress through a number of
different ways. One is through our national antimicrobial
resistance monitoring system, where we monitor the resistance
factors.
We put out annual reports on whether we are making progress
in the number of antimicrobial-resistant bacteria reported. We
continue to work with other Government agencies, including USDA
and CDC, to implement that program. Also, we are working, as I
said earlier, with the Reagan-Udall Foundation to ensure that
our antimicrobial resistance strategy is strong and robust and
is taking the right steps and measures.
We also have a reporting requirement where we report out
the number of antimicrobials sold during the course of the
year, and we monitor either the increase or the decrease in
actual sales.
So we have a number of tools at our disposal. I think that
we recognize there have been additional requests for more data.
And we certainly are looking at that, and hopefully we can
figure out the best way to continue to assure the American
public that we are indeed attacking this very, very serious
problem.
Ms. Eshoo. So in the proposals that you are presenting to
us in these reauthorizations, do you have new steps included to
address these numbers, the 2.8 million antimicrobial-resistant
infections and the deaths of Americans as a result of it?
Ms. Forfa. So not in the proposal specifically, but this
work is going on at the--this work is continuing to be going on
in the Center. It is part of our priorities and our strategies
for--our key strategies for the year each year, and we devote a
significant number of resources to that particular work.
Ms. Eshoo. Thank you. I yield back. Thank you.
Mr. Guthrie. Gentlelady yields back.
The Chair recognizes the Chair, Chair McMorris Rodgers for
5 minutes of questions.
Mrs. Rodgers. Good morning.
Ms. Forfa. Good morning.
Mrs. Rodgers. Director Forfa, I wanted to start--I had
mentioned in my opening remarks about the importance of getting
everyone back to the office and returning--the return-to-office
plans as we approach the end of the COVID pandemic, the public
health emergency ending on May 11. In January, Dr. Califf
announced that the FDA Centers for Drug and Biologics would
resume in-person, face-to-face meetings beginning February 13
of this year.
So we have had over 3 years now of virtual work across
Federal agencies, and I have heard a lot of concerns especially
from the regulated industry on how that has impacted fulfilling
critical agency duties, granting sponsor meeting requests,
conducting necessary facility inspections, and ultimately
getting new products to the market efficiently.
That being said, I just wanted to ask you: Can you share
the status of your Center's plans to resume in-person
operations and transition towards granting face-to-face
meetings?
Ms. Forfa. Sure. I would be happy to. Thank you. So we are
working right now under what we call a business hybrid model--
and so--driven by business needs. So if a sponsor requests an
in-person meeting, we are happy to grant that. My very first
in-person meeting with a large group was with the Animal Health
Institute not that long ago. And so we certainly are very, very
open to having requests. I have had a number of requests for
in-person meetings. And I am always happy to entertain those
and come in to meet.
Many of my staffs actually want to come back to the office.
They want to be together with their teams. They have felt
disconnected. So they are coming back, and we are ensuring that
the facilities are safe for their return. But we are--again,
any time that we get a request, we do it on a business-needs
basis. And again, happy to--we have had several of those
meetings, both some with our foreign counterparts, with the
regulated industry, individuals. So we with are certainly happy
to do that.
Mrs. Rodgers. Great. Can you give me an estimate, like a
percentage of how many you believe of the staff are back to in-
person, being in the office every day?
Ms. Forfa. On an everyday basis, I can't really estimate
that. It varies. But people are looking forward to coming back.
Mrs. Rodgers. Is there a reason that Dr. Califf did not
include the Center for Veterinary Medicine as one of the
Centers to resume in-person meetings starting February 13 in
his announcement earlier this year?
Ms. Forfa. I don't know. I haven't discussed that with him.
But again, we are following the rest of the agency, what the
agency is doing. We follow their guidance, and we follow the
Department's guidance. And so we don't do anything really
different than the rest of the agency is doing.
Mrs. Rodgers. Thank you.
Ms. Forfa. Thank you.
Mrs. Rodgers. It remains a concern, and so I am--you are in
front of us today. I have had this conversation with Dr. Califf
too. We need to get people back to work.
Dr. Forfa, this year's ADUFA agreement includes a million-
dollar investment, an independent third-party assessment of how
efficiently CVM is utilizing existing review processes for new
animal drug applications. What will be the scope and timeline
of this assessment, and how does CVM plan on implementing the
findings of this independent evaluation?
Ms. Forfa. Since I don't have all the granular details on
that, I would more than happy to get back to you with a more
robust answer on that.
Mrs. Rodgers. OK. OK. Well, I look forward to hearing the
outcome of that evaluation. Thank you for being here.
Ms. Forfa. Thank you.
Mr. Guthrie. The gentlelady yields back. The Chair now
recognizes the gentlelady from Washington State, Dr. Schrier.
You are recognized for 5 minutes.
Ms. Schrier. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The other lady from
Washington State.
Thank you, Director Forfa, for coming to speak to the
committee today about this important issue. I want to begin by
setting the stage for the bill that my colleague Representative
Pence and I have been working together to reauthorize ADUFA.
And I want to thank Representative Pence also for working with
me on this important issue.
It is incredibly important that this process and
relationship works for both the Government and for the industry
so that we ensure that animal health and human health are
protected, and we do it in an expedient fashion. I think it is
just a matter of good governance to ensure that we put
guardrails in place to protect animal health and safety, which
translates to our health and safety. That starts with ADUFA, an
Animal Drug User Fee Agreement.
Animal safety is incredibly important for my district. I
think in every district. So many of us have found ourselves in
situation with a sick pet at home and have turned to trusted
veterinarians who depend on the availability of safe drugs that
ADUFA ensures get to market.
In my district, we have farmers and ranchers and dairymen
who need healthy livestock and poultry and dairy production.
And having timely access to affordable, effective medicines is
a key part of their economy and our domestic food chain. I want
to note that the FDA is in the process of reviewing the use of
feed additives to reduce methane emissions from cattle, which
would go a long way to eliminating greenhouse gas emissions
from the agriculture sector. I want to thank you for that,
ensuring that the FDA has appropriate staff and resources to
review these applications and products will help, again,
animals and food remain safe and help us cut emissions.
Director Forfa, can you just take a moment to expand on why
having ADUFA pass in a timely manner is important for animal
health?
Ms. Forfa. Thank you very much for the question. So if the
agreements aren't passed in a timely manner, there may be
delays in our ability to improve the important drugs for pets
and food-producing animals that you mentioned. These agreements
ensure that there are enough staff to adequately review animal
drug submissions and applications. It supports the
infrastructure as well as increase the transparency of our
approval requirements through guidance documents and other
documents that we put out to help industry.
Ms. Schrier. And speaking of important medications, I want
to just touch on antimicrobial resistance, something that is
top of mind for us, something that I am concerned about as a
pediatrician. And I think that is a place where veterinarians
and physicians, in addition to sometimes having nonverbal
patients, where veterinarians and pediatricians know that
judicious use of antibiotics is critical to reducing the
emergence of antibiotic-resistant bacteria.
At the same time, we say that the bacteria are smarter than
we are, and eventually there will be resistance. That is why we
need to incentivize the industry to do research in this area,
which is not necessarily an area where there is economic
incentive otherwise to do it. In September of 2018, the FDA
Center for Veterinary Medicine issued a 5-year stewardship
action plan intended to combat antibiotic resistance and
preserve the future effectiveness of these medications.
I was wondering if you could describe some of the goals of
that action plan, the progress FDA has made, and maybe some of
the challenges that you have found along the way.
Ms. Forfa. Thank you for that. I will touch on that
briefly. I think the--there has been significant progress in
reducing antimicrobial resistance. I think one thing that comes
to the top of the mind is the transition from the over-the-
counter antimicrobials to vet prescription only, so that a
veterinarian--there has to be a veterinarian involved. This
promotes judicious use of these antimicrobials and helps
preserve them for both animal and human health.
So I think that was one of the significant accomplishments.
That work is continuing. We are also continuing to work with a
wide variety of stakeholders on next steps in our next 5-year
plan.
Ms. Schrier. Just to touch on--I am going to make a comment
here about One Health and the intersection of human health and
animal health some of my colleagues have referred to, and I
just wanted to kind of put an exclamation point on how
important it is FDA has the resources to do surveillance
monitoring of animals to prevent the next pandemic.
Thank you, and I yield back.
Mr. Guthrie. Gentlelady yields back.
The Chair recognizes from Mr. Latta for 5 minutes for
questions.
Mr. Latta. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thanks for holding
this very important hearing today. And Director, thanks so much
for being with us today.
Question: How is the agency prioritizing reviews of new
animal drugs for treatment of severe and/or prion diseases that
may also pose serious risk to humans, such as chronic wasting
disease?
Ms. Forfa. So when we--when we get an application in house,
we have a process set up to triage it, to look at--we meet with
sponsors early in the process even before their applications
come in. And so we can look at products across and kind of
triage them in a way so that we know which ones are amenable to
our Veterinary Innovation Program and some of the other
flexibilities that we built into the new animal drug process
over the years. And so we do--there are procedures in place so
that if a critical drug comes in, we don't have all of the same
authorities that our human colleagues do, but we have recently
gotten emergency use authorization authorities that we can use,
and it is based on public health--declaration of a public
health emergency. So there are things that we can do to help
prioritize the review and approval of those type of products.
Mr. Latta. Well, you know, I am following up on that. What
are the challenges, then, when you are conducting the necessary
research on diseases like chronic wasting disease that would an
effective treatment in an expedited manner?
Ms. Forfa. Well, we always face a number of challenges in
the animal drug space. Very often, we don't--we can't find a
sponsor who is willing to, you know, bring a product forward.
Sometimes there is limited research. Sometimes there is just
not enough data out there to be able to, you know, do a robust
review. So there are a number of factors that actually sort of
limit the ability to move things quickly through the process.
We try to do the best we can on a case-by-case basis with each
particular product. And I think over the years, we have shown
that we can actually get products on the market relatively
quickly. But, you know, it certainly depends on what comes in
the door.
Mr. Latta. When you say about getting all the necessary
data, and then also, you know, having that information and make
that and getting those products to market quickly, do you have
any kind of idea generally what timelines are on some of these
things? How long it takes to get maybe a product out there?
Ms. Forfa. It varies so widely that I would, you know, I
would hate to you give an exact number. Much depends, again, on
the data that we receive initially and how robust it is. And
that often determines how quickly we can get a product reviewed
and approved.
Mr. Latta. And you know, as we look into the future, are
there many opportunities for a bipartisan collaboration in the
ADUFA space?
Ms. Forfa. Absolutely. And lots of opportunities for us to
continue to work with industry, to work with you all in this
space, yes. Lots of good opportunities.
Mr. Latta. Thank you very much. Mr. Chairman. I am going to
yield back the balance of my time.
Mr. Guthrie. Gentleman yields back.
The Chair now recognizes Mr. Sarbanes for 5 minutes for
questions.
Mr. Sarbanes. Thanks very much, Mr. Chairman. Thank you,
Director Forfa, for being here. This is an important function
that our committee plays. We take it seriously. I just wanted
to talk a little bit more about this One Health initiative. And
you know, that is an effort that acknowledges that we are all
connected, the health of people, animals, and environment are
intertwined, interdependent. And not only can these zoonotic
diseases pose a great threat to human health, but the drugs we
give to animals to ward those off, a treated disease can also
affect our food supply, individual health, our environment, and
so forth.
And the initiative I know aims to promote total ecosystem
health by building bridges between physicians and
veterinarians, public health officials, and so forth, as well
as environmental scientists. As part of our comprehensive
efforts to restore the Chesapeake Bay, which I am very focused
on, as you can imagine, we have worked with farmers to reduce
the impacts their operations have on the Bay's health. I am
glad that promoting environmental health broadly through things
like the One Health initiative is a guiding imperative at FDA
as well.
So could you speak, again, on how reauthorizing the Animal
Drug User Fee program, providing FDA with a strong budget
through the appropriations process, all of those things can
support the One Health initiative, and what impacts in turn
will have on the health of the environment and all the people,
species that occupy it? Thank you.
Ms. Forfa. Thank you for that question. It is one of my
favorite topics, so I am happy to talk about it. So CVM has
taken a very strong lead at One Health at FDA. We are working
across the agency. I cochair the One Health steering committee
across FDA that includes all of the component Centers. I also
sit on an intergovernmental group formed by CDC as part of the
fiscal year 2023 consolidated appropriations, the One Health
coordination unit with Dr. Casey Barton Behravesh.
So we see, as you said, that it is a critical intersection
of human health, animal health, and the environment. And we try
to say and help our colleagues across the agency understand
that everything we do pretty much at FDA every day is in the
One Health space. And so, when we have an approval, we look
at--of animal drug, we look at what are both the environmental
and the human health consequences of that particular approval.
And so that is just built into our approval process. We
have a target animal safety, human user safety, and an
environmental safety review when an animal drug is presented to
us. It is the same on the food side. And so we see that One
Health is just critical to the work that we do every single day
in every single aspect of the Center.
Mr. Sarbanes. Let me ask you a question slightly related,
but I was listening to a piece the other day about, you know,
this concern of viruses jumping from animal population into
human population and whether the research that I guess up until
now has been focused on sort of trying to look at all these
millions of viruses in the animal population as opposed to
focusing on the ones that are already made to jump into human
population, where should the focus be particularly as we think
about the potential for pandemics and other kinds of public
health threats that come when you see that jump.
Do you have any perspective on that discussion or the
research on how we monitor the relationship between viruses in
animals and in humans?
Ms. Forfa. As we move forward, I think that we have to keep
the three pieces deeply connected. I think we have to keep
animal health, human health, and environmental health
connected, and I think we have to look at all three at all
times. I think that there is--we are very concerned about
zoonotic diseases and we are concerned about transmission.
There is also all of the potential that humans can transmit
viruses to their animals, to their pets, which we saw during
COVID. And so I don't think there is any way that we can do our
work on a daily basis without thinking about all three
components.
Mr. Sarbanes. Great. Thank you. Yield back.
Mr. Guthrie. The gentleman yields back. The Chair now
recognizes the gentleman from Florida, Mr. Bilirakis, for 5
minutes.
Mr. Bilirakis. Thank you. I appreciate it, Mr. Chairman.
Ms. Forfa, welcome. I want to briefly discuss the unique
instance of an animal drug approved for use in veterinarian
medicine by the FDA that has no human use, xylazine. Right now,
xylazine is at the center of a rapid shift in the drug overdose
epidemic with its use as an adulterant to fentanyl. This drug
has mirrored the geographic patterns of fentanyl when it first
infiltrated the drug market. Illicit fentanyl that is cut with
xylazine is a street drug referred to as tranq dope--I think
you probably know that--and its use has been found in all 50
States, unfortunately. It has never been approved for human
consumption, and it is sedative to induce a state of
unconsciousness. There is no doubt we need to be working
together to address this, and we need to be out in front of
this, to tell you the truth.
I am coleading a bipartisan bill with several of my
colleagues--some are on this committee, including Mr. Fulcher,
that looks to address this issue. I welcome the opportunity to
move this bill through committee as soon as possible.
Ms. Forfa, the FDA has also spoken out about this drug. We
are well aware of its legitimate and safe use within the
veterinary space and how important it is to veterinarians,
cattlemen, and ranchers. The FDA has put out guidance in an
attempt to stop illicit opioids coming into the country through
the mail. Could you please elaborate on this?
Ms. Forfa. Thank you very much. And I am equally concerned
as you are about this development. Early on in my tenure as the
Center Director, I was faced with this issue. And so we moved--
as an agency, we moved quickly to put in an import alert in
place to make sure that all xylazine coming through the borders
would be screened to make sure it was going to a legitimate
manufacturer. We have been working with the Drug Enforcement
Administration on the tools that they have to be able to
address the issue. We have also been working with our
colleagues in the Center for Drug Evaluation and Research,
which is the liaison to the Drug Enforcement Administration at
FDA. We are using every tool we have in our toolbox to be able
to try to address this. And so we are--again, at this point I
cannot speak to your legislation because I haven't had a chance
to read it.
Mr. Bilirakis. Please review it and get back to me on that.
Very important.
Ms. Forfa. I will. But we certainly--again, I think you
articulated it very well about striking the balance between the
need for the veterinary community and the stopping of the
illicit use of it because it is--I agree with you, the side
effects are horrifying.
Mr. Bilirakis. This is what I hear. Now, the FDA has put in
place similar guidance around fentanyl in the past, but it was
not found that FDA encountered very little fentanyl, so--it was
found they found very little fentanyl in this instance, but
rather the vast majority of packages seized contained
uncontrolled drugs purchased by individuals for personal use.
Does the FDA have a sense of how much illicit xylazine is
being shipped into the country? If you could give me an
estimate on that, I would appreciate it. What steps are being
taken to ensure a strategic target approach for these efforts
so that illicit drugs rather than legal ones are being seized?
If you can elaborate a little bit in the time I have left, I
would appreciate it.
Ms. Forfa. Certainly. I don't have the statistics about how
much we have actually stopped to our import alert. I would be
happy to get back to you on that. We are using every single
tool we have to be able to stop the elicit use of the product,
and we are working--there are a number of different components
of the agency, including the Office of Regulatory Affairs, who
we are working very closely with to be able to leverage their
inspectional tools and their import alert tools to be able to
stop things at the border.
Mr. Bilirakis. This is a very serious issue, as you know.
You know what is happening in our communities. Our kids are
dying.
Ms. Forfa. I agree.
Mr. Bilirakis. The combination of fentanyl and xylazine, it
is just awful. So we got to do everything we possibly can.
I do have other questions, but I ran out of time. I will
yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Guthrie. The gentleman yields back.
The Chair recognizes Dr. Ruiz for 5 minutes for questions.
Mr. Ruiz. Hi. Good morning. Thank you for being here.
Ms. Forfa. Thank you.
Mr. Ruiz. Ms. Forfa, as you discussed in your testimony,
the work of the Center for Veterinary Medicine affects human
health, animal health, and also can affect the health of our
environment. And, of course, the health of our environment is
directly linked to the health of our communities. And as a
doctor, I have seen firsthand how poor environmental conditions
lead to poor health statuses and outcomes.
As my colleagues have all heard before, one of the greatest
sources of greenhouse gas emissions comes from livestock. This
committee has been focused on innovative new ways to address
the climate crisis, and I would like to know more about how
innovative products for animals might help us combat climate
change. So is there anything we can do in the animal food or
drug space to address the emissions caused by livestock? And if
so, how would FDA be able to regulate a claim on a food
product, for example, that claimed to reduce emissions from
that animal?
Ms. Forfa. Thank you for the question. We do see a big
benefit in some of the new and innovative products that have
been coming out to address climate change and greenhouse gas
emissions. It--we call it One Health in action, as you have. So
we are working with stakeholders, including Congress, on a
pathway. There is legislative language that we have been
working with you all on. And as developers come to us, we work
with them on a case-by-case basis to build in as many
flexibilities as we can to get these products on the market as
quickly as possible. There is one approved product out there.
It was approved under the animal drug paradigm, but we
recognize that a lot of these are animal food ingredients. And
so we are looking for new authorities in that space to be able
to bring them--the products to market under the animal food
ingredient paradigm.
Mr. Ruiz. Can you give me an example of a product and how
it works? I am curious.
Ms. Forfa. So they work a number of different ways. They
work mostly on the microbiome of the animal itself, and they
change the microbiome to be able to reduce the emissions.
Mr. Ruiz. The amount of CO
2
and methane and all
that?
Ms. Forfa. Yes.
Mr. Ruiz. Great. So what tools would be helpful for FDA and
innovators to inform consumers about this products?
Ms. Forfa. The thing that would be the most helpful for us
is consistent with some of the legislative language that we
have proposed, which allows us to review this in a slightly
different paradigm than our animal drug. Because mostly these
products need our animal drug definition because they affect
the structure of function of the animal. And so this new
legislation that we--legislative language that we have put
forward allows us to review it more in the animal food
ingredient and give it a little bit of flexibility. We still
look at safety very closely, but it allows us some new tools to
be able to move these innovative products forward more quickly.
Mr. Ruiz. Look, as a forever family of a rescued husky--the
best husky ever that has ever walked this Earth, his name is
Blues, white Siberian--and a father of a young daughter who
wants to be a veterinarian, I want to say thank you for the
work you do.
Ms. Forfa. Thank you.
Mr. Ruiz. I yield back my time.
Mr. Guthrie. Thank you. The gentleman yields back.
The Chair now recognizes Mr. Carter for 5 minutes for
questions.
Mr. Carter. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And thank you, Director, for being here. This is important,
particularly to our world in pharmacy because we are obviously
very involved in a number of different ways, including and
certainly not the least of which is with compounding.
And I know that you all have been very involved in this,
and I really do want to commend you for that. I want to commend
you for the open line of communication. And I think it has been
good between your agency and between some of the organizations
that have represented pharmacists and veterinarians as your
agency has finalized and now, I assume, will begin implementing
256, the compounding animal drugs from bulk substances.
You know, the agency, in 256, has taken it upon itself to
create a Federal regulatory framework over animal drug
compounding that somewhat resembles the statutory framework
Congress gave the FDA to regulate human drugs, and I think that
is a good thing as well.
And the drug compounding--Congress gave the FDA to regulate
human drug compounding by 503A, traditional State-registered
regulated pharmacies, and by FDA register 503B, outsourcing
facilities. And that was in the Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act.
So, you know, I feel strong, very strongly that compounded
drugs, including those from bulk substances, are an integral
part of animal healthcare. And I know that this is practiced
quite often, and particularly in our rural areas, the
compounding with a lot of the farmers and a lot of the ag
community is extremely important, but--because there are times
when, you know, there is a shortage of something or when there
is a lack of access to something.
And I just wanted to ask you, first of all, will you commit
today that you will continue working with veterinarians and
with pharmacists to provide further clarification and education
to all the stakeholders, including the veterinarians,
pharmacists, and the State boards of pharmacy? That is going to
be important too. I have actually got some calls from the State
board of pharmacies about this.
Ms. Forfa. Yes, sir, I certainly can commit to that.
Mr. Carter. Good, good.
Can you tell me where you are at in the implementation? I
mean, can you just give me an update about how you intend to
enforce the components of this?
Ms. Forfa. Certainly. So we are taking a very balanced
approach as we move forward. And as you requested and we have
done, we are working with all affected entities to try to
provide as much clarity as we can. I think you mentioning of
outsourcing facilities, we recognize that we have to provide
additional clarification in that space as well.
In April--we have announced that, in April, we are shifting
some of our resources more to inspections, but those
inspections are going to be--it is a limited inspection. It is
not going to be some sort of wholesale inspectional blitz. It
is still going to be working--we would be working with State
licensing authorities. And it is not going to be--it is not
going to be a huge--as I said, there is just going to be a
limited number of those.
You know, our policy, we just--we want to make--we want to
strike that balance that you spoke. We want to give
veterinarians and their patients access. We want to make sure
that the integrity of the approval process gets preserved, and
we want to make sure that, you know, all drugs are safe and
effective, whether compounded or approved.
Mr. Carter. Good. Let me ask you this. I know you mentioned
earlier in your statement that you have approved over X number
of drugs. But still, if you look at the approvals over the last
few years, the number of animal drugs has really not kept up
with what some other countries have approved.
Why has ADUFA not stimulated an increase in product
approvals like on the human side it has?
Ms. Forfa. So it is multifactorial. You know, certainly we
work very hard to approve the products that are brought to us.
I do think that in the animal--particularly in the pioneer
animal drug industry, we have seen a consolidation of
companies, and I think that, in some ways, has decreased the
number of products that are on the market. I think it is an
economically driven situation.
And so, you know, we are working very closely with the
animal health industry and the animal generic industry to try
to address, you know, shortages where there's not enough
approved products.
Mr. Carter. Right. Well, I am out of time. But, again, I
want to compliment you and thank you for the line of
communication. I have been very impressed, and we really do
appreciate it. It is extremely important. So thank you.
And I yield back.
Mr. Guthrie. Thank you. The gentleman yields back.
And the Chair recognizes Mr. Pence from Indiana, for 5
minutes.
Mr. Pence. Thank you, again, Mr. Chairman.
And I am going to kind of go off my opening remarks, if
that is OK, Director, reread something that I said at the
beginning.
Since 2004, fees paid at the Center for Veterinary Medicine
at FDA have increased exponentially across both programs, while
the workload and number of animal drug approvals have declined.
And that is 2004.
You know, when Chair Rodgers mentioned that not everybody
is in working while, in fact, your constituents are, I found
that a little troubling.
Has that contributed to that, the delay in approvals over
the last 3 years?
Ms. Forfa. No, sir. I believe that our workforce is
continuing to work as well or maybe even slightly better than
they did before, and we have met all of our ADUFA goals.
Mr. Pence. Sure. And I understand that that is something
that you are adhering to. You made that a little bit clear. But
I always think people working together, face to face, is always
a little better than not.
So let me ask just a few questions, kind of a commitment
going forward. Let's not look back. Let's look forward.
Will you commit to executing the independent third-party
assessment of the program outlined in the goals agreement?
Ms. Forfa. Certainly, yes.
Mr. Pence. OK. Thank you.
Is there a timeline for when CVM plans to begin this
assessment and the process to keep industry stakeholders
informed?
Ms. Forfa. I will have to get back. I don't have the
details at my fingertips, so I would be happy to get back to
you on that.
Mr. Pence. OK. I would appreciate that. Thank you.
Can you share your thoughts on how the negotiated goals and
authorized fees in my legislation--our legislation--will
reverse this trend of approval delays at the FDA?
Ms. Forfa. Certainly. And we are--you know, thank you very
much for your support of the program. We think it is a very
critical program to be able to give us the tools necessary to
approve animal drugs that are brought to us in a timely manner
to ensure that they are safe and effective, that we can hire
the staff, build the infrastructure, and do everything we need
to do for the American public.
Mr. Pence. OK. Thank you, Mr. Chair. I yield back the
balance of my time.
Mr. Guthrie. The gentleman yields back.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Indiana, Dr.
Bucshon, for 5 minutes for questions.
Mr. Bucshon. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I heard one of my colleagues raise the question about CVM's
work on antimicrobial resistance. Was the topic raised by CVM
or industry during the negotiations?
Ms. Forfa. I was not at the table during the negotiations,
so I would have to get back to you.
Mr. Bucshon. OK. So, I mean, I understand CVM published or
will publish a strategic plan on this for the years 2019 to
2023. Is that publicly available yet?
Ms. Forfa. No, not yet.
Mr. Bucshon. No. And so do you have any idea when that
would be available?
Ms. Forfa. It is under development, and we would be happy
to keep you informed as it moves forward.
Mr. Bucshon. Yes. OK. That would be great. Keep the
committee and myself informed about how that is going along. I
was a doctor before. This is an important issue.
So I wonder if it is necessary to go ahead with a new
study. I guess people are mentioning a potentially new study
while we are still wrapping our heads around this one.
Ms. Forfa. You know, I think our engagement with the
Reagan-Udall Foundation and their engagement with over 30
stakeholders, I think will--we are still waiting for that
information to come in. And I think that will be dispositive
about, you know, maybe where some of the gaps are and where we
can fill in some of the--you know, the gaps moving forward.
Mr. Bucshon. OK. And maybe this had been asked. Sorry, I
had so many things going at the same time here.
I understand that these user fee agreements include many
important tactics related to performance evaluations and
closing performance gaps. One stands out as very promising to
me, the independent third-party assessment. This has been part
of the PD--you know, the PDUFAs for years.
Will you, Director Forfa, commit to the agency's full and
timely participation in this assessment?
Ms. Forfa. I can commit to that, yes.
Mr. Bucshon. Great. It is also my understanding the CVM
works with animal drug sponsors to change labels when necessary
to reflect changes or new revelations about the safety of a
product. But I am also understanding that during ADUFA
negotiations, CVM asked for additional postmarket authorities,
including requiring safety labeling changes.
Why would CVM need additional authorities if industry has a
proven record of updating their labels upon new safety data?
Ms. Forfa. So thank you for that question. Currently, CVM
does not have a broad range of authorities to be able to
address adverse events raised during postmarketing.
So, for example, CVM approved 85 pioneer animal drugs
products in a 10-year period between 2011 and 2021. We
recommended safety-related labeling changes for 35 of the 85
products. That is 40 percent. And the average time for
negotiation of a labeling change during this period was 2.4
years, with a range of 4 months to 10 years.
So we really hope that we could get additional authorities
to speed up and reduce that time.
Mr. Bucshon. OK. Great. Thank you.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Guthrie. The gentleman yields back.
The Chair now recognizes the gentlelady from Tennessee,
Mrs. Harshbarger.
Mrs. Harshbarger. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, Ms. Forfa, for being here.
And compounding has been a big part of my life, especially
vet compounding. So this is good to be able to talk to you
today.
Now, we know that the animal health drug approval process
is not the same as the human process. Instead, it is done on a
rolling basis. So my question is: How many full-time equivalent
hours does it take to review each of the technical sections?
Ms. Forfa. I can get back to you with more specificity, but
I do think it varies from product to product.
Mrs. Harshbarger. OK. Has the time spent reviewing each
technical section changed over time?
Ms. Forfa. I certainly think that we have worked very hard
to build in efficiencies and also provide additional clarity to
sponsors who are coming to us, so that when they do come to us,
it is--the data that they bring to us is more robust and that
the applications are--there isn't so many back and forth
between our reviewers and sponsors.
Mrs. Harshbarger. OK. Are there areas where more staff or
different expertise is needed when it comes to that?
Ms. Forfa. I think that we, you know, certainly are
staffing up. We have a great cadre of experts who review animal
drugs. Certainly, I think we could always use more staff, but
we make due. Since we are still the smallest center at FDA, we
have learned to make due. With the broadest portfolio, we have
learned to make due with what we have to.
Mrs. Harshbarger. Well, you know, we see a lot of drug
shortages. Things are on long-term back order. You see it on
the human side. You especially see it on the animal side.
And talking about--going a little further with Mr. Carter's
comments about that GFI 256. You know, and I have talked to
different veterinarians and compounders that, you know,
compound for animal use and, you know, I guess there are some
reservations about that nominating process for bulk, to use
bulk chemicals, basically. It is missing specifics around the
process to nominate those ingredients for review and possible
inclusion on a list of preps that could be used for office use.
And they go on to say--also concerning, he said, in human
health, the bulk ingredient list is an ingredient list;
however, the construct of the FDA's list includes the specific
dosage form, strength, species, and doesn't allow the type of
flexibility generally required to meet the variety and needs
around animal patients.
And, you know, I have done compounding for, you know, not
animal--food animals, but pets, you know, a lot of expensive
animals. But there needs to be clarity there on that bulk
ingredient list. Because you said earlier that you did not know
where the drugs were coming from or their country of origin,
where some of these bulk chemicals are coming from or final use
product?
Ms. Forfa. So that was for xylazine specifically.
Mrs. Harshbarger. OK.
Ms. Forfa. We are, you know, certainly concerned about the
flow of illicit xylazine into the country, and that is what our
import alert was very specific for, xylazine.
Mrs. Harshbarger. OK. Well, you said something a minute ago
too about you are putting funding into inspections. Is that
going to be more funding for 503B? 503A? Can you elaborate on
that?
Ms. Forfa. So if I wasn't clear, I apologize. Let me
clarify. So we are shifting our resources. Previously, we had
been doing a lot of education and outreach, and now we are
really shifting resources into more traditional inspectional
activities into the State-licensed compounding pharmacies.
Mrs. Harshbarger. So is that traditional, the 503A? Because
they do a lot of patient-specific.
Ms. Forfa. Yes. What we really want to do is just provide
that balance so veterinarians can have access, the appropriate
access while we make sure that, you know, the products that
they are getting for individual patients are safe and
effective.
Mrs. Harshbarger. What do you do with the veterinarians
that compound in their practices?
Ms. Forfa. We don't regulate the practice of veterinary
medicine.
Mrs. Harshbarger. OK. But, yes, I just would like a little
more clarity on where the funding on those inspections are
going. 503A traditional? 503B outsourcing? If you could do
that----
Ms. Forfa. Yes. Certainly.
Mrs. Harshbarger [continuing]. Get me a breakdown, that
would be--and is it allocated.
And, with that, I know my time is up, but I appreciate you
answering the questions.
And I yield back.
Mr. Guthrie. Thank you. The gentlelady yields back.
The Chair recognizes Mr. Griffith from Virginia for 5
minutes for questions.
Mr. Griffith. Thank you very much. And I apologize. I had
to step out for a few minutes to take care of another matter.
But let me associate myself with remarks of Ms. Eshoo
earlier in relationship to the active pharmaceutical
ingredients. We need to, whether it be human medicines or
animal medicines, we need to be producing those more in the
United States. And if we cannot produce them more in the United
States, we need to make sure that we have FDA inspectors
overseas, robust, on the ground, looking at these facilities.
Because in many cases, the active pharmaceutical ingredient is
going to go sometimes into medicine for humans and sometimes
into medicine for animals, and we need to make sure that we are
getting the best quality products that we can for our citizens.
All right. That being said, let me move on to another one
that was raised also by Ms. Eshoo, and that was the antibiotic-
resistant bacteria and microbes. I am hopeful that FDA on both
sides--but you are here, so I get to bring it up with you--is
working on making sure we have a proper and fast way to approve
viruses used in phase therapy, which is, outside of
antibiotics, is the best known way to deal with bacteria that
are causing problems. But you have got to find the right mix,
and you have got to move fast.
And so I would hope that you all would have some--do you
have anything on that you would like to say about how quickly
you can move? Because whether it is a herd of cattle or a human
being, we want to move quick to knock those things out.
Ms. Forfa. I appreciate that. And one of the things that I
have seen in the 6 to 7 weeks that I have been sitting in the
Director's chair is there are many, many innovative products
coming forward in the future to address many, many of the
challenges that we face--you know, antimicrobial resistance,
climate change, all of those things that we are facing. I
recognize that we have to be very flexible with the authorities
that we have to be able to get these products, to not be the
delay that stops these products from coming to market.
Mr. Griffith. All right. Now, let me switch to
telemedicine.
Ms. Forfa. OK.
Mr. Griffith. I have a district that stretches from what is
known as central Virginia, just barely outside of the city of
Lynchburg, all the way to Ewing, Virginia, which is west of
Detroit, Michigan. It is a huge district.
The 800,000, roughly, people that live in the Ninth
District are in a territory, an area that is larger than the
State of New Jersey, and we don't have enough vets, and as a
result of that, using telemedicine during COVID was extremely
helpful. Most of the time--I would say at least 98 percent of
the time--my farmers know the vet. The problem is the vet might
live on the other side of the mountain. They might live, you
know, by car, an hour, 2 hours away.
We don't have enough vets is one problem, but you can't
solve that. But FDA changed the rules on my farmers, and the
rule went into effect in February, making it much harder for
them to use telemedicine.
And, look, farmers are savvy. They want their animals to be
healthy. I mean, I am not going to say there isn't a rogue
person out there somewhere, but if you get a rogue farmer
working with a rogue vet, we already have other, bigger
problems.
They can use a telephone, use that camera on the phone they
have in their pocket. Now, they might have to go back to the
house to get a signal or drive down the road to get a signal,
but they can take a picture of something that is going on on
one of their animals, send it to their vet. The vet can call
the prescription in and they can go get it.
We are making it hard on farmers by not updating
telemedicine. We know it works. We know it works for the
farmers. We know it helps the large animal vets in particular.
And I say that and, you know, we talk about the shortage,
but I have the distinction, I think, of being the only
Congressman in the country who has two vet schools physically
located in his district. I have the Virginia Tech school and
then I mentioned Ewing earlier, and there is a vet school. It
is licensed to Harshbarger's district. I think it might be even
further west than Harshbarger, but it is licensed in Harrogate,
Tennessee, but it is physically in my district in Ewing,
Virginia. And we are putting out some great vets, but a lot of
times they are going elsewhere or they choose, for obvious
reasons, to go into small animal veterinary.
But my farmers, whether they be sheep or cattle, and mostly
cattle in my district--we don't have a lot of chickens outside
of Abingdon where we have a big egg facility--but they need the
telemedicine rules to be more flexible so that they can provide
food for us and livelihoods for their families.
What say you?
And I am over my time, but if you would give me 30 seconds,
Mr. Chairman.
Ms. Forfa. We are working really closely with the AVMA on
this. We recognize there is a shortage of veterinarians. I
think the key factor for us is the veterinary-client-patient
relationship. Once a veterinary-client-patient relationship is
established, I think, you know, we are continuing to work with
AVMA on what makes the most sense.
Mr. Griffith. All right. So here is what I want you to do.
Work with them. Get me language. Let's put a bill in. I mean,
that makes it easy. I agree there should be a relationship, but
once that relationship is established, let's stop making vets
drive 2 hours and farmers have to wait for their animal to be
seen, particularly if it is something that could be contagious
and could affect the whole herd.
I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Guthrie. Thank you. The gentleman yields back.
The Chair recognizes the gentleman from Pennsylvania, Dr.
Joyce, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Joyce. Thank you for yielding, Mr. Chairman, and thank
you for holding this hearing today.
It is very important that we complete our work on time
reauthorizing the Animal Drug User Fee Act, to ensure that we
are supporting advancements and safety in animal health.
In my district, state-of-the-art laboratories, like Lampire
Biological Laboratories, provide high-quality products and
services to the life science industry.
Dr. Forfa, thank you for appearing with us today. What are
some of the major improvements that this agreement makes from
the current goals? And how will it create new efficiencies for
the FDA CVM?
Ms. Forfa. So thank you for that. This new agreement really
does help us continue to build on the successes that we have
had, maybe fill in the gaps where we have identified gaps in
previous agreements. We want to continue our 100 percent goals,
meeting our objectives and goals. I think it allows us to do
the third-party review that has been talked about. It allows us
to build in new efficiencies where we see innovative products.
So this is critically important to continuing to, as I said,
build on the successes that we have had previously.
Mr. Joyce. Thank you. The ADUFA agreement increases user
fee funding from $156 million to $174 million over the next 5-
year cycle.
Dr. Forfa, how will CVM utilize these additional resources
across the two user fee programs?
Ms. Forfa. We have seen actually--I am going to start with
our generic--generics first.
We have seen an exponential increase in generic products
coming to the market, and so I think the additional revenue
will help support those. And when those particular products
come to the market, it provides additional choices for animal
owners. So in that space, it will help really bolster that
program.
In our pioneer space, we are hoping to be able to, as I
said, build in efficiencies, but I am also hoping that it will
help enhance the sponsors coming to work with us. We are seeing
shortage--I mean, we don't have as many products on the market
as we would like to have. And we would like to continue to work
with the industry to bring products to us to approve.
So we are committed to continuing to work with both
industries on the vital work that we all do collectively.
Mr. Joyce. And the advancement of lower-cost generics, safe
and effective generics are important to me and to my district
as well.
The ADUFA and AGDUFA agreements both contain provisions to
enhance agency engagement with sponsors throughout the drug
review process. Namely, AGDUFA V would establish a new meeting
process to provide opportunities for the aforementioned generic
drug makers to seek discussion of bioequivalent status
submissions.
Could you speak to why this new meeting process was added
to the agreements? And will these meetings occur in person or
will they occur virtually?
Ms. Forfa. So, as I said earlier, if a sponsor requests an
in-person meeting, we certainly honor--we have certainly
started honoring those requests. So sponsors--and we have
honored them, and so sponsors are more than--are free to
request coming in and meeting with us in person. We are happy
to do that.
So the bioequivalence meeting helps to determine what
requirements are going to be necessary to prove bioequivalence.
We know that there is a generic proposal that will allow
sponsors to get single species, as opposed to multiple species
in the pioneer, and we are supportive of that. And so we just--
we want to build in flexibilities in the generic space to, as
you said, you know, provide greater access in the marketplace.
Mr. Joyce. And I encourage you to continue to offer those
in-person meetings. As we put the pandemic in the rearview
mirror, it is time to resume that person-to-person contact.
Thank you for being here today.
And thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Guthrie. Thank you. The gentleman yields back.
And that concludes all Members seeking questions for the
first panel. We appreciate you for being here.
Ms. Forfa. Thank you.
Mr. Guthrie. We appreciate your answers, and I know you
will respond--I think there were some things that needed to
respond back to. I know we will get that in a timely manner. So
we appreciate your time. So thank you.
Ms. Forfa. Thank you.
Mr. Guthrie. And now we will move to the second panel and
kind of quickly because we are kind of facing votes. We are
trying to get as much of this hearing in as we can. So if the
third panel will take their seats.
Thank you all very much. We appreciate having you here
today. We appreciate all of you agreeing to testify.
I will introduce our witness. Our first witness will be Dr.
Rachel Cumberbatch, director of Regulatory Affairs for Animal
Drugs at the Animal Health Institute. We also have Stephanie
Batliner, Chair of the Generic Animal Drug Alliance. And we
also have Lori Teller, president of the Animal Veterinary
Medical Association.
And so the first witness today will be Dr. Cumberbatch. You
are recognized for 5 minutes for your opening statement.

STATEMENTS OF RACHEL CUMBERBATCH, D.V.M., DIRECTOR, REGULATORY
AFFAIRS, ANIMAL DRUGS, ANIMAL HEALTH INSTITUTE; STEPHANIE
BATLINER, CHAIR, GENERIC ANIMAL DRUG ALLIANCE; AND LORI TELLER,
D.V.M., PRESIDENT, AMERICAN VETERINARY MEDICAL ASSOCIATION

STATEMENT OF RACHEL CUMBERBATCH, D.V.M.

Dr. Cumberbatch. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you,
Ranking Member, and thank you, members of the committee. Thank
you for holding a hearing on this important piece of
legislation and for the opportunity to speak with you today.
My name is Dr. Rachel Cumberbatch. I am a veterinarian, and
I am here on behalf of the Animal Health Institute, a trade
association that represents companies who make animal
medicines.
I am here today to ask Congress to reauthorize the Animal
Drug User Fee Act, or ADUFA. This program is important to
ensure Americans have an efficient and flexible regulatory
system capable of evaluating innovative solutions to unmet
medical needs and to meet the challenges of the future.
This legislation is important for the simple reason that
keeping animals healthy provides economic and social benefits
that touch everyone. In fact, some 70 percent of U.S.
households have at least one pet, and every U.S. household
benefits from a safe and available food supply.
Animal health products protect the health and welfare of
companion animals. These animals improve the mental and
physical well-being of their human caretakers, work alongside
many of our public servants, and assist with therapy for those
in need.
The pandemic highlighted the importance of pets when stress
and isolation contributed to the prevalence of mental health
issues and the need for companionship.
Animal health products also protect food-producing animals
from diseases that affect food availability and the safety of
consumers. These important medicines give veterinarians,
producers, and the tools necessary to care for the 9 billion
food-producing animals annually.
Animal medicines also help farmers operate more sustainably
and profitably. Healthy animals are simply more productive.
Since animals struggle with disease, they require more
resources, and many of them will never produce as much as if
they remained disease free. The ADUFA program is designed to
provide supplemental funding to the FDA Center for Veterinary
Medicine and to meet agreed-upon performance goals to
accomplish the congressional mandate of expediting the review
process of drug applications.
As we prepared for this reauthorization, we spent time
examining the public data available on the program's
performance over its nearly 20-year history. It became apparent
that a gap has developed between program capacity and
performance.
Over the life of the program, fees have increased 600
percent, and staff at CVM have also increased, yet the sentinel
workload has declined by 12 percent and the number of products
approved has remained flat.
Perhaps most concerning, products are becoming available in
the European Union before they are being approved in the United
States, and that puts the U.S. animal health industry and U.S.
pet owners and farmers at a disadvantage.
The compromise agreement before you today takes some
immediate steps to close that gap and proposes further
collaboration and data collection that will help lead to an
improved ADUFA VI. Highlights of this agreement include
appropriate funding, program enhancements, a focus on metrics,
and financial sustainability. The agreement includes base
funding of $33.5 million per year as well as one-time
allowances from carryover.
ADUFA fees fund about one-third of the new animal drug
review budget, which we believe meets the congressional intent
that these fees are supplemental.
Several technical improvements are also included, such as
opportunities for earlier feedback for presubmission
conferences, updating policies and procedures, and,
importantly, an annual face-to-face meeting between the FDA and
industry, and able to provide education.
We highly value face-to-face interaction. It is necessary
when talking about these complex scientific issues and finding
solutions to important regulatory decisions.
Additionally, some new metrics will be implemented
immediately, and more will be explored for the future. For
example, we will work together to find a way to measure time in
agency and time in industry. Under the current process of
phased review, it is very difficult to measure that total time
to approval. Yet that is the key metric that is going to be a
perfect measure to the ADUFA success going forward.
Lastly, the agreement provides for a third-party
assessment. This is a tool that has been successfully used in
other fee programs to identify new efficiencies and develop new
metrics. It is going to be a first for the ADUFA program.
Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member, we believe this ADUFA
agreement sets the program on a more sustainable path. It will
continue to provide the agency with resources necessary to
maintain the program and will institute enhancements to improve
the animal drug approval process.
We support this investment because a modern and flexible
regulatory program is necessary for innovative solutions to
reach veterinarians, producers, and animal owners. Those are
the people that need them to help keep their animals healthy
and live longer and more productive lives.
We urge the committee to pass this agreement without
amendments or modifications.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Cumberbatch follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Guthrie. Thank you. I appreciate your testimony.
The Chair now recognizes Ms. Batliner for 5 minutes for
your opening statement.

STATEMENT OF STEPHANIE BATLINER

Ms. Batliner. Hello. And I appreciated your comment earlier
about alphabet soup. So bear with me as we get through this.
Chairman Guthrie, Ranking Member Eshoo, and members of the
subcommittee, on behalf of the Generic Animal Drug Alliance,
GADA, thank you for the opportunity to testify today.
I am Stephanie Batliner, currently serving as chair of
GADA. We support the reauthorization of the user fee program
and, more specifically, support the Animal Generic Drug User
Fee Act of 2023, or AGDUFA IV.
GADA is the only U.S.-based independent professional trade
organization that represents the interests of generic animal
drug sponsors and industry stakeholders.
Generic animal drugs provide significant benefits by
providing cost-effective alternatives to their pioneer drug
counterparts and by providing supply, security, and access to
pharmaceutical treatments that would otherwise be unavailable.
These treatments contribute to the safety of the Nation's food
supply, the treatment of diseases in animals that can be
transmitted to humans, and the ability of owners to provide
care to their pet family members. However, the potential cost
savings and supply advantages from the use of generic animal
drugs cannot be fully achieved without broad availability.
For the AGDUFA IV program, the key GADA objectives were to
establish a functional user fee program that supports an
efficient, predictable, and timely FDA review and approval
process while employing a cost-effective and equitable payment
structure.
While the proposed AGDUFA IV program does not include
significant review program enhancements, such as reduced review
timelines or increased metrics around efficiency of the
program, we do support the proposed fee structure revisions.
These changes will bring some relief to the application fee,
which has increased to the point that it has become prohibitive
for the development of smaller-market but medically important
generic drugs.
The proposed user fee program is not perfect, however. A
fundamental concern for GADA is the disparity between how the
generic and pioneer animal drug programs are funded. The ratio
of appropriations to user fee funding between these two review
programs is radically different.
On the generic animal drug side, industry user fees fund
roughly two-thirds of the total CVM review program cost;
whereas on the pioneer side, as my colleague Rachel pointed
out, the animal drug industry user fees fund roughly one-third
of that review program cost.
GADA appreciates that CVM proposed additional moneys for
generic animal drug review in the President's fiscal year 2023
budget; however, this does not significantly close the gap
between the two programs.
CVM reports significant growth in generic animal drug
workload, but there appears to be a disconnect, as the number
of generic animal drug approvals are not increasing
accordingly. In 2021, generic animal drug sponsors overall made
nearly twice as many submissions to CVM than they did in 2017.
However, the number of generic animal drug approvals per year
has remained relatively stable.
The program's focus should remain on ensuring the program
is cost-effective, efficient, predictable, and geared toward
expediting the availability of FDA-approved generic animal
drugs based on sound science. Additionally, the industry should
be protected from unfair competition from illegal pharmacy
compounding. And we do not support the user fee funding for
surveillance or enforcement activities but believe these funds
should come from appropriations.
While generic animal drugs are in the spotlight, we also
support and call for the passage of the Generic Animal Drug
Advancement Act, H.R. 1683, introduced by Representative Nancy
Mace. This legislation adjusts decades-old legislative language
that have left generic animal drug sponsors at a significant
disadvantage. The legislative fixes would allow generic animal
drug approval for only the targeted species as well as expand
pathways for generic animal drug products to be approved as
combination products.
We thank the committee for including H.R. 1683 in today's
discussion.
It should be noted there is a significant overlap between
ADUFA and AGDUFA programs. Many generic animal drug sponsors
pay fees into both programs. As AGDUFA fees grow, the range of
medically important generic drug targets decrease due to the
lack of profitability.
In conclusion, GADA supports the proposed legislation for
the timely reauthorization of AGDUFA IV. It remains critical
for continued viability of the veterinary generic drug industry
that the FDA CVM review process maintains predictability and
improves efficiency.
Thank you for the opportunity.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Batliner follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Guthrie. Thank you.
I just want to make the committee--or subcommittee--aware
that votes are on the floor, but we are going to finish opening
statements, and then we will recess and then come back for
questions. So to let everybody know what the plan is.
So we are going to finish your opening statement, Dr.
Teller, then we will recess, and that will give you guys some
time to get something to eat. But make sure you coordinate with
staff because we are not sure when we will finish. And we will
come straight back when we finish, but I think there are
several votes on the floor. So you should have time.
But, Dr. Teller, you are now recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF LORI TELLER, D.V.M.

Dr. Teller. Thank you.
And good morning, Chairman Guthrie, Ranking Member Eshoo,
and members of the subcommittee.
I am Dr. Lori Teller, president of the American Veterinary
Medical Association. And on behalf of the AVMA, I appreciate
the opportunity to emphasize the importance of reauthorizing
the Animal Drug User Fee Act and the Animal Generic Drug User
Fee Act for our more than 101,000 members.
The AVMA supports collection and effective utilization of
user fees to enhance the U.S. Food and Drug Administration
Center for Veterinary Medicine's review of pioneer and generic
animal drugs. Access to new FDA-approved animal drugs has the
potential to improve treatment outcomes, provide better
alternatives to existing therapies, fill unmet medical needs in
veterinary medicine, and ultimately improve patient care.
The needs of veterinarians are unique because we treat a
multitude of species across an incredible range of sizes for a
variety of diseases and conditions. Despite this vast range of
needs, veterinarians have far fewer FDA-approved animal drugs
available than our colleagues who treat human patients.
Also, for food-producing species, our veterinarians take
care to ensure food derived from these animals is safe for
human consumption.
Veterinarians need more new and innovative animal drugs
demonstrated to be safe and effective for optimal patient care
and the protection of public health. Effective utilization of
user fees under ADUFA and AGDUFA is of keen interest to
veterinarians, as we are the primary prescribers and purchasers
of FDA-approved animal drugs.
Ultimately, however, it is our clients who pay the cost of
FDA-approved animal drugs. Drug costs directly impact our
clients' ability to care for their animals. Animal owners
thereby rely on animal drugs to not only be safe and effective
but also reasonably priced.
We urge FDA CVM to ensure the review process is efficient
in bringing new animal drugs to market to safeguard the
public's access to affordable treatment for animals.
Under previous animal drug user fee agreements, FDA CVM
committed to utilizing user fees to improve efficiency of the
animal drug review and approval process. However, we believe
additional work is needed to attain the program's goals.
The AVMA suggests, where appropriate, that FDA CVM consider
adopting processes used by other similar regulatory agencies
that may streamline and shorten the time needed to approve
animal drugs for the U.S. market. Our understanding is U.S.
approvals lag behind Europe and Canada by up to a year. The
U.S. is the largest animal drug market in the world, and we
should be the leader in bringing innovative products to market.
With respect to the AGDUFA program, veterinarians need
access to more generic animal drugs that have been demonstrated
to be bioequivalent to pioneer drugs, are properly
manufactured, accurately labeled, are subject to postmarket
approval requirements, and are available at a reasonable cost.
We need more generic drugs for new areas where there is
currently no generic competition, as well as multiple generic
approvals to provide stability in the market.
We recommend FDA CVM prioritize those applications for
which a generic animal drug is not currently available. Having
more new generic drug approvals when a pioneer drug comes off
patent or an exclusivity period expires would signal to
manufacturers that their time and investment in generic drugs
is worthwhile, leading to increased competition and,
ultimately, reduced costs borne by our clients.
However, having multiple generic animal drug approvals for
the same pioneer drug can also be beneficial. The supply chain
volatility and vulnerability experienced over the past several
years has demonstrated the need for multiple sources of
important animal drugs. In such instances, access to another
FDA-approved generic animal drug with demonstrated
bioequivalence that is manufactured under FDA's good
manufacturing practices is preferred to alternatives such as
compounded drugs.
Ultimately, in order to provide the best care, we need a
robust pipeline of innovative new animal drugs and a strong
generic industry.
Thank you for the opportunity to provide testimony on these
important programs. The AVMA appreciates the attention the
subcommittee is giving to this issue to addressing unmet needs
in veterinary medicine, and we look forward to working with the
committee and the FDA CVM to increase the number of improved
animal drugs for the benefit of animals under our care, their
owners, and the public.
Thank you very much.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Teller follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Guthrie. Thank you, Dr. Teller.
The committee will now recess for the purpose of votes on
the floor. And our staff will get with you and make sure you
guys go do what you need to do, but we will be available when
we get back. We don't know exactly when that will end.
So the committee is now in recess.
[Recess.]
Mr. Griffith [presiding]. I call this meeting to order.
Chair Guthrie will be back in a couple of minutes, but we
want to respect as much of the time as we can.
That being said, I will now recognize Mr. Bucshon for 5
minutes.
Mr. Bucshon. Thank you very much.
First of all, I want to let everybody know everybody has
written statements that their staff and Members take seriously.
So I just want to--but I want to let you know that.
Dr. Cumberbatch, as I discussed with Director Forfa
previously, FDA Center for Veterinary Medicine, CVM, has
postapproval authority that protects human and animal health.
Could you speak from the drug sponsor perspective and tell
us how CVM works with drug sponsors to change labels to reflect
what is known or learned about the safety of a product?
Dr. Cumberbatch. Thank you very much for the question.
Currently, there is a lot of engagement. What happens is that
data comes from both FDA and the sponsors in the
pharmacovigilance, and when there is a need for a conversation,
they come together and able to debate the scientific data
behind those decisions. That provides greater rigor to the
process.
From AHI's perspective, this process is very important
because it allows for any label changes to make sure that what
is going on the label is scientifically sound.
And I would also like to add, one of the differences
between animal health and human health is, on this
postapproval, they are not looking for causation. It is
association. And our customers, the veterinarians, they want
causation.
Mr. Bucshon. OK, great. She testified they wanted a little
more authority on the subject because of the turnaround time on
label changes. But I wanted to get the perspective from the
other--the other perspective on that.
Has this approach been prove--you mentioned it. It has been
proven successful, though, right?
Dr. Cumberbatch. Yes, it has. It has been successful. And
you can see publicly the label changes that are in place, and,
importantly, label changes that are backed by data.
Mr. Bucshon. Yes. All right. That is what I thought.
I just have a comment, no more questions, but I agree with
Dr. Teller and your statement that the process in the U.S.
should be the best in the world.
I was a surgeon before I was in Congress. So on the human
side of the situation, and the frustration that all of us feel
sometimes about this slow process through FDA and, honestly,
all Federal agencies is real. And so, you know, I--and the same
thing is true with generics.
So I just wanted to say I think you have a lot of--a lot of
people on both sides of the aisle agree with you on that, and
we are constantly looking at ways to streamline the process,
make it better and more efficient because, you know, we do have
the largest market for what you are talking about in the world
and probably the largest human drug market in the world also,
and we need to do better.
With that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Griffith. I thank the gentleman.
And now recognize Ms. Eshoo, the ranking member of the
subcommittee, for her 5 minutes of questioning.
Ms. Eshoo. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And thank you to the witnesses for being patient, but, you
know, votes are votes. So thank you.
First an observation, and I think that--obviously, I think
it is an important one, to have three women testifying and that
we have leaders of organizations, doctors. It is a real source
of pride to me and I think to my colleagues as well because
this hasn't always been the case. So I am proud of you.
I asked Director Forfa about where animal drugs are
manufactured. I think this is a very important issue for our
country.
And so, Dr. Cumberbatch and Ms. Batliner, can you tell us
where animal drugs are manufactured?
Dr. Cumberbatch. Thank you for the question. And it really
gets to the heart of, is our supply chain resilient? That is a
space where we share your----
Ms. Eshoo. Or do we have a supply chain?
Dr. Cumberbatch. Because there's multiple components. You
bring up a good question. There's multiple components, and we
need a resilient supply chain.
In the pandemic, the animal health industry was quite
resilient. We did not see a significant number of shortages,
but in able to make sure that flexibility is there, this
flexibility is key when you are talking about finding new areas
to manufacture. That is one of the goals under ADUFA, because
that manufacturing section needs to be in place in able for the
companies to manufacture where it is best. And right now, that
manufacturing, that supply chain is global.
Ms. Eshoo. And predominantly from any foreign country?
Dr. Cumberbatch. Ranking Member, I am not able to give the
specifics right now because what we know is that it comes from
many places.
Ms. Eshoo. Do you know what the percentage of foreign
versus domestic are?
Dr. Cumberbatch. Ranking Member, I do not.
Ms. Eshoo. OK. Ms. Batliner?
Ms. Batliner. I also don't have specifics in terms of
percentages. I can speak a bit to the supply chain. And I think
for the finished dosage form, the actual, you know, FDA-
approved product that is given to the end user here, many of
them are manufactured in the United States. Many of them are
also manufactured elsewhere. But manufacturing for that
finished dosage form in the United States is much more common
than if we look at the active ingredient that goes into that
finished dosage form.
And so I think if you really want to look at where we are
not predominantly supplied by manufacturers within our own
boundaries, then the active ingredients are majority from
China, with India becoming a second source in that category.
Ms. Eshoo. Still, that is the case that remains, which I
find deeply troubling.
Is there an effort that you see that would move animal drug
manufacturing to the United States?
Ms. Batliner. Those types of discussions are not something
that our member companies really talk about within the Generic
Animal Drug Alliance.
For a company that I work for in my day job, we have two
manufacturing sites in the United States--one in Canada that
served the U.S. market--and we are not currently exploring
bringing additional manufacturing to the United States.
Ms. Eshoo. And what company is that?
Ms. Batliner. Bimeda Incorporated.
Ms. Eshoo. Well, I think, Mr. Chairman, this continues to
be not only a deep concern of mine, but I think on a bipartisan
basis this is an area that we need to really thoroughly examine
and address. I think it is a serious one.
Thank you to the witnesses.
I yield back.
Mr. Guthrie [presiding]. Thank you. The gentlelady yields
back.
And the Chair recognizes Mr. Griffith for 5 minutes for
questions.
Mr. Griffith. Ms. Batliner, the company you work for in
your day job manufacturers medicines. Do they get their active
pharmaceutical ingredients from overseas and manufacture them
here, or do they get their active pharmaceutical ingredients in
the U.S. or North America?
Ms. Batliner. Our primary source for active ingredients is
China. We also have suppliers in India, Latvia, elsewhere. But
predominantly, active ingredients are not coming from the
United States.
Mr. Griffith. What can we do--and you may not have an
answer for me today, but what can we do to bring more of the
production of the active pharmaceutical ingredients onto the
shores of the United States or at least our allies in North
America?
Ms. Batliner. I think that is an excellent question, and I
would love to help you solve it.
Mr. Griffith. All right. And I look forward to, you know,
as you all think of--any of you all think of ideas.
I think that this is a bipartisan concern in this
subcommittee, at least, if not elsewhere, and we should be
trying to solve this issue. And that is not to say that it
should all be brought back to the United States, but we need to
have a good enough supply that, in a crisis, we can ramp up
production at facilities that are located here that already
know what they are doing.
All right. Thank you.
Dr. Teller, you knew I had to be coming to you.
Dr. Teller. I did.
Mr. Griffith. You heard my questions in the previous panel
and know of my concerns with my large district and the fact
that we need telemedicine.
What say you? What are your folks saying?
Dr. Teller. I say we have telemedicine, and we are happy to
work with you more.
The scenario that you laid out for Ms. Forfa this morning
is actually currently legal under both FDA and the State of
Virginia laws.
Mr. Griffith. Then how come my farmers don't know that?
Dr. Teller. That is the problem.
Mr. Griffith. Because they think they have to have the vet
show up even if they have got something they can show them on
the phone.
Dr. Teller. So they need to have a veterinarian to
establish their veterinarian-client-patient relationship, and
once that is established, they can use telemedicine and send
them a picture, show it to them. The veterinarian can make the
appropriate treatment recommendations. If a prescription is
needed, they can authorize the prescription for the medication.
So we are happy to work with you to improve the education
of both the veterinarians in your district and the farmers.
Mr. Griffith. Yes. No, I look forward to that because this
is--I mean, if I had just gotten it from one farmer, I might
think, yes, maybe this is not a districtwide problem. But
across the board, I have gotten this question on at least three
or four different occasions in different parts of the district,
which is why I went after it.
Dr. Teller. Absolutely.
Mr. Griffith. Because I want our folks to be served because
they are part of the food chain, and we want to make sure that
we have an abundant supply and a healthy supply.
Dr. Teller. Absolutely. I eat steak. I had one last night,
and I want that steak to be healthy and tasty and be safe.
Mr. Griffith. And hopefully it was, you know, raised right
there in the foothills of the Appalachian Mountains, maybe even
on top.
Dr. Teller. I will ask that next time, yes.
Mr. Griffith. Yes. All right. I appreciate that.
Is there anything else that we should be doing in that
regard to make telemedicine easier for the farmers to access?
Dr. Teller. So the AVMA has a tremendous coalition of
several State organizations and ally groups as well as industry
partners in the pharmaceutical world, and we are working very
hard to educate our stakeholders. And whatever you can do to
help us amplify that message would be quite welcome.
Mr. Griffith. All right. And then let's talk phase therapy.
I have got about 1 minute and 15 seconds. Is this something
that--and anybody can answer it, but is this something that you
all are looking at? Is it something that you have even thought
about?
Because I think it is an area--because it hasn't been
explored heavily, even for human being usage, it is an area of
medicine that we need to be exploring because it may be the
answer to bacterial infections that do not respond to
antibiotics.
Anybody want to take it?
Dr. Teller. I will say, as the end user, we would love
anything new and innovative that is safe, that helps alleviate
the concerns around antimicrobial resistance. We are happy to
use that as long as it is safe and efficacious. I will defer to
the industry folks over here to make that happen.
Mr. Griffith. Yes. Dr. Cumberbatch?
Dr. Cumberbatch. Thank you for the question. Specifically,
we need more tools in this toolbox. And so certainly when
products, innovative products come forward, there is both the
FDA and the USDA in able to determine the best jurisdiction for
those. But the important thing is let's bring innovation
forward so that it can be approved and used appropriately by
the veterinarians.
Mr. Griffith. And, Mr. Chairman, what we need are kids
that--you know, the kids that always love to get their hands
dirty, because to find the viruses that attack the bacteria,
you usually find those. So it is treatment plan.
I yield back.
Mr. Guthrie. The gentleman yields back.
The Chair recognizes Dr. Schrier for 5 minutes for the
purpose of questions.
Ms. Schrier. Thank, you Mr. Chairman.
First, let me thank the witnesses for being here today. It
is nice to see you again, Dr. Teller. I also want to associate
myself with Mr. Griffith's remarks about the importance of
having a robust supply chain for pharmaceuticals, not putting
our food's health at risk, about--comments about innovation in
pharmaceuticals and antibiotics and treatment of infections. So
thank you.
I wanted to just start by saying that of course this
reauthorization is critical for animal and human health. And I
wanted to start with you, Dr. Cumberbatch. In your testimony,
you discussed how ADUFA, its reauthorization, has a robust
focus on metrics, new metrics, including the metric of time.
And I was wondering if you could just talk about these new
metrics, including time, and how they will make a difference
and get drugs to market?
Dr. Cumberbatch. Yes. Thank you. One of the challenges that
we saw going into this negotiation is that, while CVM was able
to respond by the ADUFA goal, we were seeing more and more
cycles. And remember in the phased approach, with more and more
cycles means longer and longer time. And so we were measuring
activities. The metric of measuring time is going to help us
measure outcomes, but it is not easy. And so there is a
commitment to work towards that. But it is when that commitment
is finally implemented that we will really be able to see a
return focused on the outcome.
Ms. Schrier. Thank you for that clarification. I want to
turn my attention, now, to Dr. Teller. Again, it is very nice
to see you again.
You mentioned in your testimony that, where appropriate,
the FDA Center for Veterinary Medicine should consider adopting
processes used by other similar regulatory agencies that may
streamline and shorten the timeline needed to approve drugs for
animals in the U.S. market. In fact, just yesterday, you
mentioned that medications were getting approved much more
rapidly in Europe, and some frustration with our system.
Could you talk a little bit more about that and why it is
so important to veterinarians?
Ms. Teller. It is really important. There are over 20,000
FDA-approved medications for humans. There are approximately
1,600 available for veterinarians to use across a wide variety
of species. And we need more drugs, and if there is a way to
streamline that process, learn from what is happening in
Europe, Canada, Australia, those places, that would benefit our
animals, our patients so much better.
Ms. Schrier. It seems like there's good opportunities for
collaboration there.
Ms. Teller. Absolutely.
Ms. Schrier. In the realm of human medicine, we came upon
some of these frustrations with the approval of rapid COVID
tests that people could use at home that were approved much
more rapidly in other countries before they were available on
our drugstore shelves.
Dr. Teller, I have another question about antimicrobial
resistance. Pediatrician, I have long worried about this. I
have seen with my own eyes the evolution of drug resistance and
the limitation on which antibiotics we can use to treat
diseases. It is getting very scary. So we try to prevent it
with very judicious use of antibiotics only where absolutely
needed. And I was wondering if you could expand a bit on
judicious use of antimicrobials, why it is so important for
veterinarians to consider treating your patients, and if you
could talk about this with respect to ADUFA.
Ms. Teller. Absolutely. Judicious being the keyword there,
and it is something the AVMA believes very strongly. And we
have a committee dedicated just to antimicrobials, experts from
across the veterinary profession, and they spend a lot of time
focused just on this. We provide guidelines to our members, the
prescribers, also across the species and for certain disease
conditions. And we work with our clients, whether these are
companion animal veterinarians, are there other ways to prevent
the problems that the antibiotics are using to treat? So
preventive care, wellness care, other treatment modalities that
are not antimicrobial. We invest a lot of time and money into
doing that, and we are starting to see the results of that. And
it is really important to the profession.
Ms. Schrier. Thank you. I have had discussions with some of
the dairymen, for example, in my district about just that.
I also just wanted to touch on the other issue that Mr.
Griffith had brought up about telemedicine and its importance,
because the issue of being able to purchase antibiotics without
a prescription, without the involvement of a veterinarian
contributes to antimicrobial resistance. So being able to use
telemedicine especially as we are trying to expand broadband is
a real win for resistance, for the animals, for veterinarians,
and for the farmers.
Thank you, and I yield back.
Mr. Guthrie. Thank you. The gentlelady yields back.
The Chair recognizes himself 5 minutes to ask questions.
And I want to follow up what Dr. Schrier was talking about with
one of my questions. I was looking at, Dr. Teller, how has the
FDA worked with drug sponsors to develop new
antimicrobiologicals in food-producing animals that are safe
for human consumption and gets to, they have guidance judicious
use of antimicrobial drugs. And the question is, how has that
guidance impacted the ability to get food from food-producing
animals into grocery stores?
Ms. Teller. I am going to have to----
Mr. Guthrie. How well have they been good to work to
together and how that impacted----
Ms. Teller. Yes. So the FDA, the AVMA, the manufacturers,
we all work together on that. A lot of it does come down to
education. Veterinarians are in the trenches working with our
food animal producers, our allied associations such as the
American Association of Bovine Practitioners, our swine
veterinarians, our poultry veterinarians, to make sure that we
can advocate for them here with Congress, as well as with the
regulatory agencies to help streamline that process so that we
do have rapid but safe turnaround to approve these medications.
Mr. Guthrie. OK. All right. And then the guidance, the
judicious use of medically important antimicrobial drugs, that
guidance?
Ms. Teller. Yes. So that guidance is very important to us.
We work to educate our veterinarians on how to apply that
guidance to what they are doing in the real world. There is
obviously--whenever there is change, there is angst
particularly on the producer side. And we are working very hard
with them and our food animal veterinarians to educate them on
how they can best implement that guidance.
Mr. Guthrie. OK. Thank you.
So for Dr. Cumberbatch and Ms. Batliner, though the
questions is about the same except for one different word: How
will the agreement accelerate, Dr. Cumberbatch, the development
of pioneer drugs, and Ms. Batliner, how will agreements, the
bills before us today, help accelerate for generic animal
drugs?
Dr. Cumberbatch, if you would like to go first?
Dr. Cumberbatch. Yes. Thank you. The agreement before you
would maintain the stability of this program. It is going to
help us get products to the market faster and make sure that
they are backed by data. Now we need to measure the progress we
are making, not just the wheels that are spinning. The activity
that is being done, that is very important. And I know that you
guys have a focus on the supply chain and manufacturing.
There's goals within this agreement to make sure that we are
specifically improving the manufacturing section within the
drug approval process. That is a big priority for us.
Mr. Guthrie. Thank you. Ms. Batliner.
Ms. Batliner. The proposed ADUFA IV program would continue
to build upon the performance that we have seen across the
previous programs in terms of the predictability and the time
by which FDA gives us their response, whether that be positive
or negative. With that said, we do have a good relationship
with CVM, and we are committed to continuing that collaboration
where they are being more clear, developing more guidance, and
so forth, which then helps us to put forth a better package for
them to approve, that subject generic animal drug.
It think it is important to note just how few pioneer
animal drugs have a generic counterpart. So we would really
like to see better penetration of generic animal drugs into the
marketplace in general. So we look forward to continuing the
progress that we have made with AGDUFA and really focus,
though, on efficiency. For me to get a rejection letter faster
doesn't really help anyone. So what we look to do as an
industry is to work with CVM to make sure we understand the
requirements, but then also have them, you know, keep those
requirements kind of in check and based on sound science.
Mr. Guthrie. Thank you.
Ms. Batliner. Requirements for the sake of more paper work,
I think maybe, you know, doesn't accomplish the goal, so a
focus on the science and what is really required to keep these
products safe and effective.
Mr. Guthrie. Thank you. I appreciate that. That concludes
my questions. So I will yield back, and I will recognize the
lady from Tennessee, the gentlelady from Tennessee, Mrs.
Harshbarger.
Mrs. Harshbarger. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you to the
witnesses for being here today. I want to start with you, Ms.
Batliner, and it was something you said in your statement. You
said, ``CVM should have the resources necessary to meet the
stated goals of AGDUFA and to protect the generic animal ...
industry from unfair competition from illegal pharmacy
compounding.''
Can you tell me what ``illegal pharmacy compounding''
means?
Ms. Batliner. Sure. Thank you for the question. And I do
want to draw a clear, bright line between legal and completely
acceptable and necessary pharmacy compounding in veterinary
health. It does serve a purpose. There are guardrails around
how that compounding happens, and we have no challenge on that.
Mrs. Harshbarger. I am very aware of how that compounding
happens. Are you talking about 503Bs versus 795-compliant
503As?
Ms. Batliner. So where our concerns lie is when compounding
pharmacies are importing bulk drugs and formulating finished
dosage forms for masses, not for one individual, you know,
client/patient relationship but rather formulating to bulk
stock, office stock.
Mrs. Harshbarger. Well, that is what the GFI addresses.
Ms. Batliner. Right. So once that becomes enforced, then we
are hopeful that that definitely improves the situation.
Mrs. Harshbarger. Because we know we have to have a
patient-specific prescription for those animals, and there's
several guidelines on that. You know, there is 503A, you know,
the traditional compounders, and they have to be 795 compliant,
or 797 if they do sterile, and, of course, 503Bs, it is a
different setup, but they can certainly do that.
Dr. Teller, in your statement, you said ``more approvals of
generic animal drugs help ensure consistent access to the drugs
veterinarians [use] to treat our patients. In such instances,
access to another FDA-approved generic animal drug with
demonstrated bioequivalence that is manufactured under FDA's
good manufacturing practices is preferred to alternatives such
as compounded drugs.''
I guess my question is, what do you do when you can't get
any alternative? You have to turn to a compounder or the animal
goes without. I have seen this in many instances, even with
human drug compounding.
Ms. Teller. We absolutely compound. We work with
compounding pharmacies, and we have to do it every day. There
is not ever going to be enough drugs approved to cover all the
species, the sizes, and the doses that we need. So certainly
being able compound from approved drugs is our first choice. We
also know that there are times that we need to be able to do
that from bulk drug substances. And we worked with the FDA when
they came out with guidance 256.
I have to say we are not super in favor of the list. So we
are cautious and working with them on that, and they have
publicly committed to being efficient in reviewing those drugs
and moving them to approved list.
Mrs. Harshbarger. I know, it is like, you know what needs
to be on the list. We are here to help them. I have offered my
assistance many times.
Dr. Teller, I have another question. In your testimony, you
mentioned the need for new and innovative medicines to fill
those unmet needs for veterinarians. Can you walk us through
some of the unmet needs your members have in their practices?
Ms. Teller. Sure. So a couple of examples on the food
animal side: ocular squamous cell carcinoma, so cancer around
the eye. That is tremendous. It impacts cattle.
Mrs. Harshbarger. Absolutely,
Ms. Teller. And on the small animal side, hemangiosarcoma,
which is a blood-based tumor. There is no great treatment for
that at this moment. Life expectancy in general is around 3
months--maybe, if you do chemo, 5, 6 months. And if we had a
medication that could take care of that, it would be amazing.
Mrs. Harshbarger. Yes. Can you explain how the animal drug
user fee agreements have improved animal health, both for pets
and for food-producing animals?
Ms. Teller. We appreciate the fees being reasonable and
going towards making the process safer and more efficient
because it does get those medications to us faster so that we
can treat our patients, whether it is on a farm or in
somebody's house.
Mrs. Harshbarger. OK. I just wanted to make sure you
understood the importance of compounding, not just for animals
in the veterinarian industry but also on the human side too.
That is just something I have done for 37 years. And you know,
there is such value in that.
I guess with that, my time is up, and I yield back, Mr.
Chairman.
Mr. Guthrie. I thank the gentlelady for yielding back.
I believe that is all Members who have been presented to
ask questions. We have concluded that part of this hearing. I
ask unanimous consent to insert in the record the documents
included on the staff hearing document list.
There is one. No objection?
Ms. Eshoo. No objection, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Guthrie. Without objection, so ordered.
I remind the Members that they have 10 business days to
submit questions for the record and ask witnesses to respond to
questions promptly. Members should submit their questions by
the close of business on April the 13th. Thank you all for
being here. I know it has been a long morning because we broke
for votes for a while, but really appreciate your attention to
this, the hard work that you do before you come to the hearing
just to get the bills ready, and to prepare for the hearing.
And it is much appreciated, and we thank you for being here.
And without objection, the subcommittee----
Ms. Eshoo. Mr. Chairman, it is not that I have an
objection, but I just want to raise, I think, a very serious
issue. This morning, a Federal judge in Texas struck down major
portions of the ACA's requirement that health insurers cover
preventative services with no cost sharing for patients. This
ruling applies nationwide, affecting everyone with private
insurance. And that is--I want to raise it.
It is not only ACA. And what this affects, at least some of
the preventative services, we know that we are way behind in
cancer screenings in our country due to the pandemic. It
effects drugs to prevent HIV infections, pregnancy care,
colonoscopies, and there is no stay while it is appealed.
So I am asking you to take under consideration as chairman
of our subcommittee that we have a hearing on this. It is not
only ACA enrollees, but all privately insured people in our
country.
Mr. Guthrie. Thanks. We just saw that this morning and
haven't had time to review----
Ms. Eshoo. I understand.
Mr. Guthrie. We are concerned. We want people to get cancer
screenings and screenings they need. We will commit to a
hearing. I am not sure what our schedule will be. We are
mindful of it, and we want to make sure that people have the
proper screenings. We think prevention saves money in the long
run, but not only does it save money, but saves life. That is
the most important.
Ms. Eshoo. Thank you for taking it under consideration.
Mr. Guthrie. Thank you. Well, the subcommittee, without
objection, is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 12:26 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]
[Material submitted for inclusion in the record follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[Ms. Forfa did not answer submitted questions for the
record by the time of publication. Replies received after
publication will be retained in committee files and made
available at https://docs.house.gov/Committee/Calendar/
ByEvent.aspx?EventID=115630.]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
