- PREPARING FOR AND RESPONDING TO FUTURE PUBLIC HEALTH SECURITY THREATS

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

PREPARING FOR AND RESPONDING TO FUTURE PUBLIC HEALTH SECURITY THREATS

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON HEALTH

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION
__________

MAY 11, 2023
__________

Serial No. 118-34

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Published for the use of the Committee on Energy and Commerce

govinfo.gov/committee/house-energy
energycommerce.house.gov
__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

55-847 PDF                 WASHINGTON : 2024

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE

CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington
Chair
MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas            FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey
ROBERT E. LATTA, Ohio                  Ranking Member
BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky              ANNA G. ESHOO, California
H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia         DIANA DeGETTE, Colorado
GUS M. BILIRAKIS, Florida            JAN SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois
BILL JOHNSON, Ohio                   DORIS O. MATSUI, California
LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana               KATHY CASTOR, Florida
RICHARD HUDSON, North Carolina       JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland
TIM WALBERG, Michigan                PAUL TONKO, New York
EARL L. ``BUDDY'' CARTER, Georgia    YVETTE D. CLARKE, New York
JEFF DUNCAN, South Carolina          TONY CARDENAS, California
GARY J. PALMER, Alabama              RAUL RUIZ, California
NEAL P. DUNN, Florida                SCOTT H. PETERS, California
JOHN R. CURTIS, Utah                 DEBBIE DINGELL, Michigan
DEBBBIE LESKO, Arizona               MARC A. VEASEY, Texas
GREG PENCE, Indiana                  ANN M. KUSTER, New Hampshire
DAN CRENSHAW, Texas                  ROBIN L. KELLY, Illinois
JOHN JOYCE, Pennsylvania             NANETTE DIAZ BARRAGAN, California
KELLY ARMSTRONG, North Dakota, Vice  LISA BLUNT ROCHESTER, Delaware
Chair                            DARREN SOTO, Florida
RANDY K. WEBER, Sr., Texas           ANGIE CRAIG, Minnesota
RICK W. ALLEN, Georgia               KIM SCHRIER, Washington
TROY BALDERSON, Ohio                 LORI TRAHAN, Massachusetts
RUSS FULCHER, Idaho                  LIZZIE FLETCHER, Texas
AUGUST PFLUGER, Texas
DIANA HARSHBARGER, Tennessee
MARIANNETTE MILLER-MEEKS, Iowa
KAT CAMMACK, Florida
JAY OBERNOLTE, California
------

Professional Staff

NATE HODSON, Staff Director
SARAH BURKE, Deputy Staff Director
TIFFANY GUARASCIO, Minority Staff Director
Subcommittee on Health

BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky
Chairman
MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas            ANNA G. ESHOO, California
ROBERT E. LATTA, Ohio                  Ranking Member
H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia         JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland
GUS M. BILIRAKIS, Florida            TONY CARDENAS, California
BILL JOHNSON, Ohio                   RAUL RUIZ, California
LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana, Vice Chair   DEBBIE DINGELL, Michigan
RICHARD HUDSON, North Carolina       ANN M. KUSTER, New Hampshire
EARL L. ``BUDDY'' CARTER, Georgia    ROBIN L. KELLY, Illinois
NEAL P. DUNN, Florida                NANETTE DIAZ BARRAGAN, California
GREG PENCE, Indiana                  LISA BLUNT ROCHESTER, Delaware
DAN CRENSHAW, Texas                  ANGIE CRAIG, Minnesota
JOHN JOYCE, Pennsylvania             KIM SCHRIER, Washington
DIANA HARSHBARGER, Tennessee         LORI TRAHAN, Massachusetts
MARIANNETTE MILLER-MEEKS, Iowa       FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey (ex
JAY OBERNOLTE, California                officio)
CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington
(ex officio)
C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hon. Brett Guthrie, a Representative in Congress from the
Commonwealth of Kentucky, opening statement....................     1
Prepared statement...........................................     4
Hon. Anna G. Eshoo, a Representative in Congress from the State
of California, opening statement...............................     8
Prepared statement...........................................    10
Hon. Cathy McMorris Rodgers, a Representative in Congress from
the State of Washington, opening statement.....................    12
Prepared statement...........................................    14
Hon. Frank Pallone, Jr., a Representative in Congress from the
State of New Jersey, opening statement.........................    19
Prepared statement...........................................    21

Witnesses

Dawn O'Connell, Assistant Secretary for Preparedness and
Response, Administration for Strategic Preparedness and
Response, U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.........    23
Prepared statement...........................................    26
Answers to submitted questions \1\
Rochelle P. Walensky, M.D., Director, Centers for Disease Control
and Prevention and Administrator, Agency for Toxic Substances
and Disease Registry, Department of Health and Human Services..    31
Prepared statement...........................................    33
Answers to submitted questions...............................   259
Robert M. Califf, M.D., Commissioner of Food and Drugs, Food and
Drug Administration, Department of Health and Human Services...    43
Prepared statement...........................................    44
Answers to submitted questions...............................   275
Tom Inglesby, M.D., Director, Johns Hopkins Center for Health
Security, Bloomberg School of Public Health....................   108
Prepared statement...........................................   110
Randall Lutter, Ph.D., Senior Fellow, Manhattan Institute for
Policy Research................................................   124
Prepared statement...........................................   126
Erik Decker, Chair, Cybersecurity Working Group, Health Sector
Coordinating Council, and Vice President and Chief Information
Security Officer, Intermountain Health.........................   139
Prepared statement...........................................   141
Mary Denigan-Macauley, Ph.D., Director, Health Care, Government
Accountability Office..........................................   158
Prepared statement...........................................   160
Answers to submitted questions...............................   292

Submitted Material

Inclusion of the following was approved by unanimous consent.
List of documents submitted for the record.......................   198
Letter of May 11, 2023, from Mark R. Grealy, President,
Healthcare Leadership Council, to Mr. Guthrie and Ms. Eshoo....   199

----------

\1\ Ms. O'Connell's answers have been retained in committee files and
are available at https://docs.house.gov/meetings/IF/IF14/20230511/
115917/HMTG-118-IF14-Wstate-OConnellD-20230511-SD001.pdf.
Report of the Duke Margolis Center for Health Policy and the
Healthcare Leadership Council,``Framework for Disaster
Preparedness and Response: Updated,'' May 3, 2023..............   201
Statement of Lori J. Pierce, President, Association for Clinical
Oncology, May 11, 2023.........................................   210
Letter of May 9, 2023, from Kimberlee Trzeciak, Associate
Commissioner for Legislative Affairs, Food and Drug
Administration, to Mrs. Rodgers................................   215
Statement of the Alzheimer's Association and the Alzheimer's
Impact Movement, May 11, 2023..................................   225
Statement of the American Society for Microbiology, May 11, 2023.   229
Statement of the Children's Hospital Association, May 11, 2023...   233
Statement of Premier, Inc., May 11, 2023.........................   237
Letter of May 9, 2023, from Randy Strozyk, President, American
Ambulance Association, to Mrs. Rodgers, et al..................   253

PREPARING FOR AND RESPONDING TO FUTURE PUBLIC HEALTH SECURITY THREATS

----------

THURSDAY, MAY 11, 2023

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Health,
Committee on Energy and Commerce,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 10:03 a.m. in
room 2322, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Brett Guthrie
(chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Members present: Representatives Guthrie, Burgess, Latta,
Bilirakis, Johnson, Bucshon, Hudson, Carter, Dunn, Crenshaw,
Joyce, Harshbarger, Miller-Meeks, Obernolte, Rodgers (ex
officio), Eshoo (subcommittee ranking member), Sarbanes,
Cardenas, Ruiz, Kuster, Kelly, Barragan, Blunt Rochester,
Schrier, and Pallone (ex officio).
Also present: Representative Castor.
Staff present: Kate Arey, Digital Director; Jolie Brochin,
Clerk, Health; Jerry Couri, Deputy Chief Counsel for
Environment; Grace Graham, Chief Counsel, Health; Tara Hupman,
Chief Counsel; Peter Kielty, General Counsel; Emily King,
Member Services Director; Chris Krepich, Press Secretary; Molly
Lolli, Counsel, Health; Emma Schultheis, Staff Assistant; Lydia
Abma, Minority Policy Analyst; Jacquelyn Bolen, Minority Health
Counsel; Waverly Gordon, Minority Deputy Staff Director and
General Counsel; Tiffany Guarascio, Minority Staff Director;
Stephen Holland, Minority Senior Health Counsel; Una Lee,
Minority Chief Health Counsel; Andrew Souvall, Minority
Director of Communications, Outreach, and Member Services; and
C.J. Young, Minority Deputy Communications Director.
Mr.  Guthrie. The subcommittee will come to order, and the
Chair recognizes myself for 5 minutes for an opening statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. BRETT GUTHRIE, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE COMMONWEALTH OF KENTUCKY

I want to note today that today marks the official end of
the COVID-19 public health emergency. The expiration of the
public health emergency comes after more than a year of
Republicans on this committee calling for the unwinding of the
COVID-19 public health emergency and months since the People's
House voted to end the COVID-19 public health emergency. While
I believe this should have happened a long time ago, I am glad
we are moving beyond this perpetual emergency declaration.
And today marks the end of Title 42 policy. I am extremely
concerned about the flow of illicit fentanyl and other drugs
into our communities from our southern border, especially
without Title 42 in place. More needs to be done to stop
illicit fentanyl from being trafficked into our communities,
which H.R. 2, the Secure Border Act, would help address.
But as for today's hearing, we are continuing our
bipartisan efforts to prepare and respond more effectively to
future public health security threats, including chemical,
biological, radiological, nuclear, cyber attacks, or other
infectious disease outbreak. This is the third hearing the
Energy and Commerce Committee has held in the 118th Congress
related to our response framework.
We now have a unique chance to look back and ask ourselves
what worked, what failed, and identify bipartisan solutions on
how we can improve. We should not use this as a chance to point
fingers or lay blame. Instead, today's focus should be on the
core elements of our preparedness and response strategy to
address all types of hazards. Several key programs and
authorities that are crucial to the U.S. preparedness and
response will expire on September 30th. These are programs we
are examining and considering today.
One area that can be improved is ensuring we are better
utilizing the expertise of our private-sector partners before a
threat or emergency strikes to be better positioned to respond
to future threats. For example, the Centers for Disease Control
and Prevention did not have contracts with testing kit
manufacturers until after the declaration of the COVID-19
public health emergency. This presented significant challenges
when attempting to standing--to stand up a nationwide testing
scheme at the beginning of the pandemic. It caused delays in
the delivery of supplies and negatively impacted patient care
and caused challenges in grasping the full extent of the spread
when time was crucial.
When it comes to utilizing private-sector partners while
responding to a pandemic or another threat, Operation Warp
Speed was a successful private-public partnership and should be
viewed as a model going forward.
Fortunately, we have already taken steps to make reforms
and restore trust in the core public health agencies. As part
of the end-of-year omnibus, we improved the Strategic National
Stockpile and put measures in place to hold our public agencies
such as the CDC and NIH more accountable. This includes
strengthening research integrity protocols at NIH and requiring
Senate confirmation of the CDC Director.
We must continue to build off this work by advancing
policies to ensure our public health agencies are focused on
their core missions. One of these agencies is Administration
for Strategic Preparedness Response, or ASPR. ASPR announced
last year it is moving from a staffing division to an operating
division. I recognize ASPR and this administration are
requesting new authorities in response to this change. However,
before this committee can consider expanding the scope of this
agency, we need to look at strategically how ASPR handled this
most recent public health emergency, the effectiveness of its
response, and determine if its already existing current
authorities were utilized appropriately.
In closing, public health security is national security.
This committee will ensure we are better prepared when the next
public health security threat--strike threats--threats strike.
I look forward to hearing to--I look forward to hearing the
testimony from administration and expert witnesses today and
working alongside my colleagues on addressing these issues in a
bipartisan manner.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Guthrie follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr.  Guthrie. I now recognize the gentlelady from
California, m Eshoo, for 5 minutes for an opening statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. ANNA G. ESHOO, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA

Ms.  Eshoo. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and good morning to
you, to colleagues, and to our star witnesses here today. Thank
you.
This hearing is an important first step to reauthorizing
the Pandemic and All-Hazards Preparedness Act, also known as
PAHPA. It is a priority for me that the PAHPA reauthorization
is a product of bipartisan negotiation and compromise, and I am
proud to work with Congressman Richard Hudson, a terrific
partner--it is a great way to start, when you have a terrific
partner--to pass this law before the September 30th deadline.
Representative Hudson and I issued a bipartisan request for
information on February 27th to seek input on PAHPA, and we
have received over 250 responses from a full range of medical
and public health stakeholders. So this is an important and--a
very important first step and start on this, and we are
grateful to all the stakeholders for responding.
My thanks to our witnesses for the valuable perspectives
you are going to share with us today and for your important
work on the front lines protecting, preparing, responding to
public health emergencies.
In 2001 our country endured the attacks of September 11th
and the anthrax attacks shortly thereafter. That may be deeply
buried in the past; it is vivid to me. And at that time,
Congress realized our country was not prepared to coordinate
responses to mass-casualty events or chemical attacks.
I authored legislation with then-Representative Richard
Burr, who was a member of this committee, that established the
Office of the Assistant Secretary for Preparedness and
Response, ASPR, to be responsible for coordinating Federal
responses, and the Biomedical Advanced Research and Development
Authority, BARDA, to be responsible--and Richard and I did that
law together, that legislation--to be responsible for
developing desperately needed medical countermeasures for
chemical, biological, radiological, and nuclear threats.
That important bipartisan legislation was signed into law
in 2006 and was most recently reauthorized in 2019, an effort I
led with really another great, great partner--I miss her to
this day--former Congresswoman Susan Brooks. She really served
with distinction on this committee.
Since its creation, BARDA has been hugely successful, and I
am enormously proud of that. Its efforts have led to 69 FDA
licensures, approvals, and clearances of medical
countermeasures. Without BARDA's important work, we would not
have been blessed with a safe and effective COVID vaccine as
quickly as we were. BARDA now needs additional investments and
authorities so that it can continue to develop technologies and
platforms that can rapidly produce vaccines, therapeutics,
diagnostics, and other tools to protect our Nation from
potential threats.
This PAHPA reauthorization has to meet the challenges we
witnessed during the COVID pandemic and anticipate the
challenges of the future. I will never, ever, ever forget the
following: turning on my TV set, and seeing our Nation's
healthcare workers wrapping themselves in black garbage bags,
plastic garbage bags. And it was because they lacked proper
personal protective equipment.
Like many Members of Congress, I spent 2020 trying to
secure ventilators, other essential supplies for the hospitals
in my district. I know that you did it in yours. We have to
make sure that our stockpiles are real and that they are
adequate to prevent the chaos that we experienced.
COVID also exposed the fragility of our supply chains,
especially for pharmaceutical and medical products. These are
critical goods that we can't live without. And our medical
supply chain is broken in three devastating ways: shortages,
especially during high demand in an emergency; subpar
manufacturing; and an overreliance on foreign production.
So today's hearing is especially meaningful. I will draw my
comments to a close because my time is up. I look forward to
everything that takes place in this all-important hearing.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Eshoo follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Ms.  Eshoo. And I yield back, Mr. Chairman, and thank you
for holding this hearing.
Mr.  Guthrie. Thank you. The gentlelady yields back. The
Chair now recognizes the Chair of the full committee, Chair
Rodgers, for 5 minutes for an opening statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, A
REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF WASHINGTON

Mrs.  Rodgers. Today's hearing is the beginning of our
legislative process to make sure the Federal Government is
prepared to handle any public health hazard threatening
Americans' safety and well-being, whether it is chemical,
biological, radiological, nuclear, a cyber attack, or another
emerging infectious disease like influenza or COVID-19.
We need to be prepared for all types of hazards, whether
the cause is deliberate, accidental, or natural. We are
evaluating existing programs and authorities originally created
under the Pandemic and All-Hazard Preparedness Act, which will
expire on September 30th, 2023. Our goal is to ensure America
is prepared for and ready to respond to any public health
security threat.
I want to join in thanking Representative Hudson and
Representative Eshoo for leading the request for information
process and the eventual legislation related to this topic
today.
Today's hearing is an opportunity to review the
Administration for Strategic Preparedness and Response, or
ASPR. ASPR was established in 2006 to serve as the lead agency
for our Nation's preparedness and response. While the agency
and its leadership have been tested over the past two decades,
no prior threat amounted to the scope or magnitude of COVID-19.
In some ways ASPR stepped up, and in other ways the response
could be improved.
ASPR's authorities expire this year, and that requires us
to review and examine ASPR's role in the preparedness and the
response framework, as well as how ASPR should be viewed and
operationalized moving forward.
During COVID-19, especially in the early days, we witnessed
Herculean efforts in so many of our communities, remarkable
stories of Americans' goodwill, resilience, and people coming
together during times of incredible stress and fear of the
unknown. And these efforts inform what ASPR should be focused
on in an emergency: facilitating, coordinating, and supporting
innovation and initiative by private-sector, local, and State
actors.
But we have heard a number of concerns about how ASPR is
going about this mission: questions around leadership and
communication; questions about use of funding and transparency;
questions about management of the Strategic National Stockpile;
and generally, questions about whether the agency created to be
our Nation's lead on preparedness and response was actually
able to lead effectively.
We all heard from hospitals and healthcare providers across
the country who struggled to find masks, test kits, and other
supplies. I heard from Americans who offered their ideas and
services to BARDA to no avail. There is a lack of transparency
and communication to medical stakeholders from this agency that
has been tasked with developing and maintaining public-private
partnerships.
Questions continue to arise around ASPR's next steps. What
is ASPR's role, moving forward? How should this agency be
defined? How will it operate, both during and outside of public
health emergencies? And that is what we are here to discuss
today.
I look forward to hearing from Ms. O'Connell on specific
gaps exposed by the response to COVID-19 and how to address
them for any type of future public health hazard. I hope better
interaction and coordination with the private sector is at the
top of the list, as ASPR's early COVID response was one crisis
after another.
In addition to the critical role of ASPR, CDC also plays a
role in our preparedness and response framework. I recognize
the administration has several requests for new authorities and
programs before us today. Before considering any of these
requests, this committee has several requests and questions of
our own regarding decisions made during the COVID-19 pandemic.
Much more has to be done to build back public trust.
Finally, as we saw demonstrated through Operation Warp
Speed, FDA plays a role of granting emergency use
authorizations to respond to emerging infectious diseases or
other threats like smallpox or anthrax. This committee has
broad jurisdiction over public health, and we are working on
multiple fronts to rebuild trust in public health, in addition
to today's work on preparedness.
For example, our Oversight Subcommittee is looking at NIH's
continued funding of risky research grant programs; Dr. Miller-
Meeks is leading an effort to look at CDC reform; there is
plenty of concern with FDA regarding baby formula shortages,
drug shortages, and the lack of therapeutics approved to treat
severe cases of COVID-19, just to name a few.
And with the Biden administration finally ending the COVID-
19 public health emergency, and with President Biden ending
critical Title 42 border protections, there remain questions
about transitioning out of the pandemic and managing the surge
of migrants coming to our country.
To start, the House should pass Rep. Lesko's bill that
would help address the illicit fentanyl crisis at our border.
All our work on these fronts is important for the health and
the American people and to hold government accountable. That
work will continue. But the focus today, in particular, is on
preparedness and response authority so that we can be better
equipped for the immediate response.
It is critical that we work together so that the American
people are prepared for the next threat that may come, and I
look forward to a productive hearing.
[The prepared statement of Mrs. Rodgers follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mrs.  Rodgers. I yield back.
Mr.  Guthrie. Thank you. The Chair yields back, and the
Chair--I now recognize the ranking member of the full
committee, the gentleman from New Jersey, Rep. Pallone, for 5
minutes for an opening statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. FRANK PALLONE, Jr., A REPRESENTATIVE
IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF NEW JERSEY

Mr.  Pallone. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I am pleased we are
holding this important hearing today to consider the
reauthorization of the Pandemic and All-Hazards Preparedness
Act.
Reauthorizing PAHPA is of utmost importance for this
committee and this Congress before it expires at the end of
September, and I am glad we are beginning bipartisan
conversations to ensure the programs within this legislation
are reauthorized on time.
Now, PAHPA was first enacted in 2006 to improve our
Nation's public health and medical preparedness and response
capabilities in the event of a public health emergency. And
since then, the reauthorization of this law has become a
critical legislative opportunity to review and consider the
Federal Government's health, security, and response
capabilities. It gives us the chance to review the current
policy so that we can ensure we are doing everything possible
to prepare for future pandemics and public health emergencies,
and this includes considering how we can strengthen our public
health workforce, enhance our healthcare supply chains, protect
against new and emerging biosecurity threats, including cyber
threats, and build a more nimble public health infrastructure
that is able to effectively respond in real time.
So today we will be hearing from the leaders of the Centers
for Disease Control and Prevention, the Administration for
Strategic Preparedness and Response, and the Food and Drug
Administration. And these agencies are central to the Federal
Government's public health response capabilities. Each serves a
unique and critical role in the event of a public health
emergency, and I look forward to hearing about each of your
agency's priorities as we prepare to reauthorize PAHPA.
This reauthorization is extremely timely. It is the first
time we are considering the reauthorization of PAHPA since the
COVID-19 pandemic. COVID-19 brought unprecedented challenges to
the Federal Government and our public health agencies. Over the
last three years we have seen our public health infrastructure
pushed to the limit from medical supply shortages, diagnostic
test limitations, communication difficulties, and workforce
constraints. We have learned a lot from these challenges during
the pandemic, and it is essential that we take this opportunity
to ensure we are improving our public health infrastructure. We
must do everything we can through this reauthorization to
protect our public health institutions and not tear them down.
And this is an important opportunity to strengthen the
authorities of our public health agencies where they are
needed. I believe one area that needs to be strengthened is the
authority to collect public health data in order to respond in
real time and provide the most up-to-date guidance to the
American people.
It is also important that we explore policies that can
better prepare our supply chains for the next public health
emergency. This morning our Oversight and Investigations
Subcommittee is holding a hearing to look into the critical
issue of drug shortages. Shortages of drugs, medical devices,
and other supplies repeatedly hampered health professionals'
ability to respond to the COVID-19 pandemic, and I am hopeful
that through these two hearings we will explore policies to
prevent these shortages in the future.
We also need to examine the implementation of the
bipartisan Prevent Pandemics Act, which we passed into law in
last year's Consolidated Appropriations Bill. It included
important policies to improve our biosecurity, enhance the
Strategic National Stockpile, and strengthen our medical
response readiness. However, it is clear that we need to do
more, and I look forward to working together with my Republican
colleagues to ensure a timely reauthorization of PAHPA.
Our Nation's public health preparedness and biosecurity
cannot and should not be a partisan issue. Effectively
protecting our country from the risk of future pandemics and
biothreats requires a comprehensive and bipartisan response
without ideological brinkmanship. And I hope we can continue to
make important progress in good faith on this goal.
So I want to thank Ranking Member Eshoo, Representative
Hudson for their leadership on PAHPA reauthorization and their
hard work on the bipartisan request for information that has
allowed interested parties and subject matter experts to weigh
in. This is an important part of the process as we work to find
common ground on proposed legislative language in the weeks to
come. We have to work together to find bipartisan solutions
that enable our public health agencies to be prepared to
respond to existing health threats as well as new risks.
So thanks again to the witnesses for being here today. We
welcome your statements and questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Pallone follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr.  Pallone. I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr.  Guthrie. Thank you. The gentleman yields back. We now
move on to opening statements--that concludes opening
statements. We will now move on to our panelists' opening
statements, and we have three witnesses from the administration
today.
We have the Honorable Dawn O'Connell, Assistant Secretary
for Preparedness and Response at the Administration for
Strategic Preparedness and Response.
Our next witness will be Dr. Rochelle Walensky, Director of
the U.S. Center for Disease Control and Prevention and
Administrator of the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease
Registry.
And our final witness on the panel is the Honorable Robert
Califf, Commissioner of the U.S. Food and Drug Administration.
So we will begin with Secretary O'Connell. You are now
recognized for 5 minutes for an opening statement.

STATEMENTS OF DAWN O'CONNELL, ASSISTANT SECRETARY FOR
PREPAREDNESS AND RESPONSE, ADMINISTRATION FOR STRATEGIC
PREPAREDNESS AND RESPONSE, DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN
SERVICES; ROCHELLE P. WALENSKY, M.D., DIRECTOR, CENTERS FOR
DISEASE CONTROL AND PREVENTION, DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN
SERVICES; AND ROBERT M. CALIFF, M.D., COMMISSIONER OF FOOD AND
DRUGS, FOOD AND DRUG ADMINISTRATION, DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND
HUMAN SERVICES

STATEMENT OF DAWN O'CONNELL

Ms.  O'Connell. Chair Guthrie, Chair Rodgers, Ranking
Member Eshoo, Ranking Member Pallone, and distinguished members
of the committee, it is an honor to testify before you today
about ASPR's ongoing work and the additional authorities we are
seeking in the upcoming PAHPA bill.
We are living in an increasingly interconnected world,
where diseases and other threats can travel quickly unnoticed
for days. We are also experiencing an increase in the frequency
and intensity of natural disasters. As a result, ASPR is
working on more high-consequence, no-fail missions than ever
before. We are proud to lead so much important work on behalf
of the country and want to be sure that we have the authorities
we need to continue to execute that work with the excellence,
efficiency, and expertise the American people deserve.
As we move out of the acute phase of the COVID-19 response,
it would be management malpractice for us to look the same and
act the same as we did at the start of the pandemic. I have
taken several important steps in the last few months to
transform our organization and to incorporate lessons learned
from the COVID-19 pandemic.
For example, ASPR is now a stand-alone agency within HHS.
This important change in our departmental status gives me the
independence to build out ASPR's human resources, acquisitions,
and finance infrastructure so it better supports our unique
mission needs.
I also just completed a structural reorganization that
institutionalized important new capabilities that we built
during COVID and need to keep using to be more prepared moving
forward, like our domestic manufacturing work.
I also made the Strategic National Stockpile an office that
reports directly to me to increase visibility into and
accountability of this critically important part of the
Nation's preparedness and response infrastructure.
With these changes, I have taken the two most
transformational steps available to me to build a better
preparedness and response organization. And now I need your
help to ensure that I have the appropriate authorities to
execute our mission faster and stronger. With the authorities I
am requesting in PAHPA, I am trying to solve three key
problems.
The first problem I am trying to solve is how ASPR can
procure more quickly the tools and supplies the country needs
when responding to a biothreat or disaster. Early in the COVID-
19 response, it became clear that HHS could not procure the
products our country needed at the speed in which our country
needed them. As a result, ASPR entered into a memorandum of
understanding with the Department of Defense in which they
agreed to provide acquisition support on our behalf. Using
their unique authorities, DoD executed more than $90 billion in
contracts for us over the 3 years of the acute response.
Our agreement with DoD comes to an end at the end of this
fiscal year, which is why I am requesting similar authorities
for ASPR. These include the ability to fund promising
prototypes and then move the successful ones through the
advanced research pipeline without having to recompete the
contracts like we do now. We are also seeking the ability to
quickly procure experimental supplies and important finished
products. Each of these new authorities would allow us to do
for ourselves moving forward what we had to rely on DoD to do
for us during COVID.
The second problem I am trying to solve is how ASPR can
continue to invest in the expansion of the domestic industrial
base for key PPE and medical supplies. To ensure we are never
again in the position we found ourselves in in March 2020, when
our doctors and nurses did not have access to the masks, gowns,
and gloves they needed, ASPR has used the funds and
construction authority given to us in the COVID supplementals
to build new factories nationwide to produce the PPE and
supplies we need in times of emergency.
These investments also provide good-paying jobs to many
hard-working Americans. But once the COVID-19 funds run out, we
lose our construction authority and our ability to continue
investing in similar projects. That is why I am requesting
permanent construction authority for ASPR. It is important that
we have funds and construction authority to sustain the work we
have started and to expand this work to other parts of the
public health supply chain.
The third problem I am trying to solve is how ASPR can hire
staff more quickly to surge critical teams during large
response efforts. In the early days of the COVID-19 response,
just as we relied on DoD for acquisition support, we also
relied on FEMA and the Coast Guard to bolster our response
staff. The ability to hire people quickly and compensate them
appropriately for their long hours and sometimes hazardous work
are important tools missing from ASPR's response toolbox, which
is why I am requesting direct hiring and flexible pay
authorities for ASPR.
Direct hiring authority will allow me to quickly scale up
our response efforts so we have enough people when we need
them, and pay flexibilities will go a long way towards
sustaining our staff through these dangerous missions and
ensuring we do not lose these seasoned first responders and
subject matter experts to the private sector, who pay much more
and often require much less of them.
To solve each of the problems I have just laid out, I have
requested important new authorities for ASPR. I look forward to
working with you to solve these important problems and many
others as you draft the new PAHPA bill.
Thank you again for inviting me to testify today. I look
forward to answering your questions.
[The prepared statement of Ms. O'Connell follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr.  Guthrie. Thank you. I appreciate your opening
statement.
The Chair now recognizes Dr. Walensky for 5 minutes for
your opening statement.

STATEMENT OF ROCHELLE P. WALENSKY, M.D.

Dr.  Walensky. Chair McMorris Rodgers, Chairman Guthrie,
Ranking Member Pallone, Ranking Member Eshoo, and distinguished
members of the subcommittee, it is an honor to be here today.
I want to take a moment to acknowledge that today marks the
expiration of the Federal COVID-19 public health emergency. The
COVID-19 pandemic, the deadliest in over a century, has been
marked by an unprecedented whole-of-government response. COVID
remains a leading cause of death in the United States, and CDC
will continue our commitment to reducing COVID's impact and
leveraging lessons learned to be better prepared for future
public health challenges.
No matter the outbreak--H1N1, Ebola, Zika, COVID-19, Mpox,
polio, or Marburg--since our founding in 1946, CDC has been
offering world-class assistance to our partners in States,
Tribes, territories, your local communities, and around the
globe. These diseases don't respect national or State borders,
and the increased frequency of outbreaks means we should not be
asking if we will face another serious public health threat,
but when and how many.
For many, life has returned to normal after 3 years of
COVID-19. Public health agencies like CDC and your State and
local health departments' mission is to continue to remain
vigilant and response-ready to protect Americans from any
resolving or emerging public threat. We do this by actively
supporting the core capabilities of public health, including
state-of-the-art laboratories, a diverse public health
workforce culturally competent to reflect the communities it
serves, world-class data and analytics, rapid response to
outbreaks at their source, and strong domestic and global
preparedness.
We are enhancing these capabilities through an all-agency
review, ``CDC Moving Forward.'' We are committed to addressing
the lessons learned from COVID-19, increasing accountability,
and continuously improving how we deliver information to
Americans.
The end of the public health emergency once again reminds
us that sustainable policy changes and funding are essential to
readiness for future biothreats. CDC will continue to monitor
COVID-19 and provide the information to which we have access.
But the end of the PHE will mean that CDC will no longer
receive certain data to share information many Americans have
actually come to expect.
For example, we announced last week that our COVID-19
community levels will cease because some of the data informing
those levels will no longer be submitted to CDC. The COVID-19
community levels are being replaced by hospital admission data
uploaded on a weekly basis, which we have been fortunate to
demonstrate serve as a reasonable surrogate in this case. At
the same time, other data used to make decisions about
targeting resources will no longer be available because it is
no longer submitted to us.
For example, we will no longer have certain data on race
and ethnicity vaccine administration, leaving policymakers with
an incomplete national picture of health disparities. We will
no longer have data on national test positivity, which is one
of the most effective early indicators of disease spread. We
will have inconsistent data on vaccine uptake, hindering our
ability to measure vaccine impact, particularly urban and rural
disparities.
We will make do. However, this should worry us all,
primarily because of what it says about the visibility we will
have into the next outbreak. We will be back to square one,
having to build and negotiate surveillance while we fight a
pathogen.
I know members of this committee are interested in
advancing policy to better prepare for what comes next. For
CDC, this means supporting the public health workforce to
recruit the best of the best through improvements to student
loan reimbursement authority. We must also be able to surge
staff when needed, with simple changes to direct hire
legislation and sufficient budget flexibility so bureaucracy
doesn't stand in the way when an emerging threat arises.
This also means maintaining the infrastructure our Nation
stood up during COVID-19 to administer vaccines quickly and
effectively. The Vaccines for Adults program not only provides
America--Americans access to 14 lifesaving vaccines but also
supports a response-ready capability that we will lose without
continued investment.
Finally, this means modernizing data policy to support
access to better quality, standardized, and timely data so
individuals and families can make informed decisions about
their health, and policymakers can target interventions and
resources to better prevent public health emergencies.
The United States should have the most advanced and capable
agency in the world when it comes to disease detection,
tracking, and forecasting. It will take a more modernized,
nimble, and collaborative CDC, and it will also take
partnership with Congress to fully turn CDC into a response-
ready agency. I am committed to working with you to better
protect Americans and our national security.
Thank you, and I look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Walensky follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr.  Guthrie. Thank you for your opening statement.
The Chair now recognizes Commissioner Califf for 5 minutes
for your opening statement.

STATEMENT OF ROBERT M. CALIFF, M.D.

Dr.  Califf. Good morning. Chairs McMorris Rodgers and
Guthrie and ranking members Pallone and Eshoo and members of
the committee, thanks for the opportunity to be here today to
discuss the importance of preparedness and how FDA can work
with Congress to ensure the country is ready for the next
public health threat.
PAHPA recognizes the key role FDA plays in public health,
emergency preparedness, and response. The FDA has effectively
used the authority provided under PAHPA to support our Nation's
preparedness and response capabilities. However, there have
been lessons learned about how these authorities could be
modernized to ensure our actions can be even more effective.
Providing greater transparency into supply chains, ensuring
operational readiness and surge capacity within the FDA
Inspectorate and its review staff, and improving laboratory
testing regulation are priorities that will enhance national
security and improve public health preparedness.
For supply chains, there is a need for greater transparency
into the supply chains of our medical products to both improve
resiliency and ensure continued access for critical medical
products. For example, under the CARES Act, FDA received new
authority to require medical device manufacturers to submit
shortage notifications during a public health emergency. FDA
used this information to help mitigate approximately 350
shortages. Unfortunately, these notifications will no longer be
required following the end of the current COVID-19 PHE.
However, we know medical device shortages occur in many
situations that are unrelated to PHEs, including natural or
human-made disasters, recalls, geopolitical conflicts,
production shutdowns, and cybersecurity incidents. We also know
that these shortages most often impact our most vulnerable and
underserved populations, like children, rural populations, and
our veterans in VA hospitals.
Additionally, most drug shortages were historically due to
manufacturing issues that disrupted supply for which
manufacturers of drugs and active pharmaceutical ingredients
are required to notify the FDA. The agency has relied on these
notifications to help prevent supply disruptions--approximately
220 over the last year--by working closely with manufacturers,
expediting review, and exercising temporary regulatory
flexibility.
However, we have recently seen an unprecedented demand for
drugs that would benefit from similar notifications. The
ability to require drug manufacturers and distributors to
report surges in demand to FDA could help the agency prevent or
mitigate shortages, including for some critical over-the-
counter drugs like we saw this fall.
Additional improvements should include reporting API
sources and the extent of manufacturer reliance on certain
suppliers in the drug supply chain, and ensuring FDA has an
opportunity to inspect certain over-the-counter drug facilities
before such products are distributed.
Preventing food shortages is also critical to public
health, and we are grateful that Congress included a provision
in the fiscal year 2023 omnibus to require manufacturers of
infant formulas and medical foods to notify FDA of potential
shortages. Looking forward, extending this authority to
additional categories of foods during a declared PHE could help
prevent future shortages in the food supply.
Second, ensuring operational readiness and surge capacity
is critical in emergencies. For example, FDA could achieve more
effective and efficient oversight if it had the authority to
require internationally harmonized master files for drug
manufacturing sites and improved authorities for conducting
remote regulatory assessments. Congress expanded FDA's
authority to request records in advance of or in lieu of an
inspection to devices and bioresearch monitoring sites in the
fiscal year 2023 omnibus. However, the agency could better
assure the safety of products, even in times of crisis, if this
records request authority were expressly extended to all FDA
regulated products.
Additionally, during COVID-19 we saw that FDA staff had to
be pulled off other work, and I have been working relentlessly
on pandemic issues for the past 3 years, leading to a
significant backlog in certain areas and quite a bit of
fatigue. Through the creation of the specialized program to
defend against emerging pathogens and other threats, the agency
would be well positioned to respond in emerging and identified
threats of concern.
Third, and finally, the COVID-19 pandemic underscored the
importance of both diagnostic test access and test accuracy and
the critical need for modernized regulatory framework that
applies to all in vitro diagnostics. This will be integral to
ensuring the U.S. is better prepared for the next threat and to
realizing the full potential of diagnostic innovation.
When I look at the list of requirements, a striking
observation is that these measures would not only help the FDA
serve the public well in times of crisis, but they would also
enable us to help prevent catastrophic outcomes and conduct our
everyday work more effectively and efficiently.
Thanks, and I look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Califf follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr.  Guthrie. Thank you. Thank you for your opening
statement.
We will now move in--the period of the subcommittee on--for
Member questions. Each Member will be recognized for 5 minutes,
and I will begin by recognizing myself for 5 minutes for the
purpose of questions.
Secretary O'Connell, the GAO placed HHS's leadership in
coordination of public health emergencies at its high-risk
list--on its high-risk list in January of 2022, in part due to
the deficiencies in HHS's management of countermeasures. GAO's
analysis of the Strategic National Stockpile Reviews shows the
Strategic National Stockpile contained most medical
countermeasure types recommended, but often not in the
recommended quantities. I know you are familiar with that.
So my questions are, how does ASPR make decisions on which
countermeasures are procured and deployed in the stockpile,
including how State and local officials engage in the process?
And how does ASPR and the public health emergency
countermeasure enterprise ensure products that are not
commercially available are involved in stockpiling
determinations?
Ms.  O'Connell. Chair Guthrie, thank you so much for this
question.
So focusing on the Strategic National Stockpile has been
one of my chief priorities during my tenure at ASPR. It was
really, you know, instructive to see what happened in March
2020, when it didn't have those things that we thought it
should need. So I have placed an important emphasis on making
sure that it is restocked and ready to go against whatever
comes next.
And I have been grateful for the funding Congress has given
us in order to do that for PPE. That was one of the
capabilities that was missing in the Strategic National
Stockpile. They had not purchased PPE since the H1N1 outbreak
in the--you know, 2009. So it had been years, and much of that
has expired. So we focused on building that capability and
spending the money well that Congress has appropriated for us
to be able to do that in the supplementals.
But in the regular order, in the regular annual budget for
the Strategic National Stockpile, we are well underfunded, and
it is a worry of mine. We just released the multiyear budget,
which is a 5-year budget looking at the entire countermeasure
enterprise, and in that the Strategic National Stockpile should
receive $2 billion a year in order to keep up with
countermeasures against the threats that have been identified
by the Department of Homeland Security. We currently receive
$934 million a year, so we have less than half of what the
experts have identified we need in order for us to be prepared.
So my job in this role is to make sure that we all
understand that, that given the funding we have, we are doing
what we can against the threats that we see. But we need
additional funding in order to be fully prepared in the way
that you expect us to be and I expect us to be. So I have been
carrying that message forward. I think it is really important.
Mr.  Guthrie. OK, thank you.
Dr. Walensky, the CDC's data modernization initiative was
launched in 2020. And over the course of the pandemic Congress
has appropriated at least a billion for this program. Yet State
and local governments have received very little financial or
technical support from CDC as part of this data modernization
initiative.
In addition to this, Congress--this spending, Congress more
recently appropriated more money in the CDC consolidated
appropriation--to you in the Consolidated Appropriations Act.
Can you detail how the money has been spent by CDC, including
how much has been allocated, and what remains unallocated and
unobligated?
Dr.  Walensky. Sure, I would be happy to. And we can
provide you State information on the moneys that have been put
forward.
As you note, it has been about $1 billion. But I will also
note that major health systems, including the one that I came
from, cost over $1 billion themselves individually in order to
upgrade to Epic. So we are talking about $1 billion for the
whole country, when a single health system would need that much
money in and of itself in order to upgrade their entire system.
What we have been working with--and in fact, I spoke to our
State and local health departments just on Tuesday--is a North
Star architecture, a common architecture where all of our State
and local health departments are using similar data highways
such that all of the data can be easily transferred, even if
they are not exactly the same, that the highways meet and match
so that they are all similarly transferred. The data come in
and can be brought out such that when data come in to CDC, we
can bring it back and send it back to the local health
departments to not only tell them what is happening in their
health department but in all of the areas and regions around
them.
And so that is the work of our data modernization
initiative. Again, there is not enough money, and I have single
health departments that have told me they could use the entire
CDC budget.
Mr.  Guthrie. OK, thank you. In addition, Congress gave you
more data authorities--or the CDC more data authorities in the
December Consolidated Appropriations Act. Can you provide us an
update, a status update on the implementation of the newly
granted authorities that was established just recently?
Dr.  Walensky. I would be happy to chat with you about
that. What I will say is we had more responsibility but not a
lot of more authority. So there was an expectation in that
appropriations that we would be able to receive all of those
data. But in fact we didn't receive the authorities in order to
be able to do so.
So--and in fact, with the end of the public health
emergency, as I know it, we will lose some of those
authorities.
We did, in the--it took 6 months during the COVID-19
pandemic in order to receive hospitalization data, for example.
And it took us about 3 months in monkeypox in order to receive
vaccination data, for example.
For us to be ahead of a pathogen, for us to be ahead of an
outbreak, it can't take months for those data to come in. What
we would like to see is--there is a rare thing that is
happening in California, and a rare thing is happening in
Maryland--when those both come in to us, we say trigger. That
is a--that is something that we have to act on, these things
are happening at the same time. They would otherwise not know.
If we don't have those data authorities to see what is
happening, we will be behind before we ever get started.
Mr.  Guthrie. OK. Thank you. Thank you for your comments.
The clock didn't start exactly when I started, so I used my
full 5 minutes. So I will yield back, and I will recognize
Ranking Member Eshoo for 5 minutes for questions.
Ms.  Eshoo. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you to each
one of you, the witnesses. Excellent testimony.
Secretary O'Connell, you are in charge of the National
Stockpile, BARDA. You are the lead agency for preparedness. So
I want to start with you.
The United States and--has and remains dangerously
dependent on foreign countries for our supply of critical,
lifesaving drugs, lifesaving equipment. So as a result, during
the pandemic we couldn't outfit our first responders --I raised
that in my opening comments--without relying on China and
others to supply us. You have said that ASPR has invested 16
billion in 87 different contracts for the domestic
manufacturing of PPE. What have those contracts bought you?
Ms.  O'Connell. Ranking Member, thank you so much for that
question----
Ms.  Eshoo. Because if another health threat happened where
there is a high demand for PPE and other essential supplies, do
you have the authority to ramp up production of U.S. masks,
respirators, syringes, diagnostics?
I mean, I practically became an overnight so-called expert
in this, trying to find it and what time--what some ship was
coming in to get something to a major--you know, major
institutions.
Ms.  O'Connell. Ranking Member, thank you so much for that
question. This has been an important focus of ours, as you have
mentioned, and we are grateful for the support from Congress
for the funding and the construction authority we received in
order to be able to invest in domestic manufacturing of some of
these critical PPE and medical supplies.
Ms.  Eshoo. So where do we stand now, though? What capacity
do we have? I mean, do--would our country have the capacity now
to meet that demand for production?
Ms.  O'Connell. So we are continuing to build that
capacity, and we are doing it in two ways. We have the
investments in the construction and the manufacturing supply
lines, bringing those foreign--you know, the things that were
manufactured in other countries, bringing them here,
manufacturing them here, we are doing that with raw----
Ms.  Eshoo. But, I mean, how would you grade the system
now? Where are we? Are we in the middle of building this
capacity? Are we 10 percent there? Are we 72 percent there?
You know, one of my biggest regrets--not in working with
Congresswoman Brooks, but--we worked so hard on the stockpile,
but I am kicking myself that I didn't ask witnesses, ``What is
in the cupboard? What is in the cupboard?'' Jesus, we got this
thing hit, and all hell broke loose. And that is why I am
asking this. You know, we need the answer to that to chart
what--where we need to go in the future, so that we do not
experience this again.
This is a great nation, and we were on our knees. So tell
me where you think we are now.
Ms.  O'Connell. So we have 87 contracts invested in things
from raw materials to the consumables to the finished product.
But I would agree with you, we are not far enough, and that is
the reason why I am requesting construction authority in the
new PAHPA bill. We have gotten a head start, and we are farther
than we were.
And we are doing something else too. The Strategic National
Stockpile, as we are restocking it, we are restocking it with
the domestically manufactured goods. So we actually have a
market, and we are, you know, buying those things. That is
where we are going to be able to incentivize----
Ms.  Eshoo. OK.
Ms.  O'Connell [continuing]. These private companies to
ramp up manufacturing.
Ms.  Eshoo. I have 1 minute and 20 seconds left.
Have you submitted to Congress the required report on the
contents of the Stockpile for 2022?
Ms.  O'Connell. I just reviewed it, and it is on your way--
on the way to you all.
Ms.  Eshoo. Yes, yes.
Ms.  O'Connell. Thank you.
Ms.  Eshoo. Yes, because it is past due.
Ms.  O'Connell. Yes, thank you.
Ms.  Eshoo. It is past due. OK.
Dr. Califf, it is great to see you. Can the FDA get the
information it needs from manufacturers to identify sources and
suppliers of API?
I have been on this API for a long time, and I don't think
that the needle has moved. That is my overall take on this.
Dr.  Califf. I know you have limited time, so I will be
brief. We can talk at long length.
I have personally worked in the private and university
sector in both India and China. The problem we have right now
with regard to what you spoke about is we don't have the
designation of the source of the API when it gets moved and put
into a pill. And we are asking for the authority to require
that of the industry, that essentially the chain of custody of
the supply chain from the API to the finished pill to the
retail store, or however it is distributed----
Ms.  Eshoo. So that is the only way for you to actually
know----
Dr.  Califf. Otherwise, we have no way of----
Ms.  Eshoo. You have no way of knowing.
Dr.  Califf. Other than phone calls, which is not a very
efficient way in a crisis.
Ms.  Eshoo. No, or maybe one day API in the United States
of America. Do you see that in our future?
Dr.  Califf. It has to be in our future.
Ms.  Eshoo. I mean, we are dependent----
Dr.  Califf. There is a hearing going on about drug
shortages----
Ms.  Eshoo [continuing]. Totally dependent on China, China
and India, and India is dependent on China. I mean, what a----
Dr.  Califf. Well----
Ms.  Eshoo. What a Rube Goldberg plan that is.
Dr.  Califf. We need to work on it. But the hearing also
occurring at the same time is going to go through some of the
issues.
The economics of this are not favorable for fixing the
problem the way it is currently working. So we have some real
work to do there.
Ms.  Eshoo. Well, I have been working on it.
Dr.  Califf. Not just tracking things, but the basic
fundamentals of the economics.
Ms.  Eshoo. Thank you.
Dr.  Califf. Thanks.
Ms.  Eshoo. I am going to submit, obviously, Dr. Walensky
and to each one of you, written questions for the record. Thank
you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr.  Guthrie. Thank you. The gentlelady yields back. The
Chair now recognizes Chair Rodgers for 5 minutes for questions.
Mrs.  Rodgers. Director O'Connell, I want to start with
you.
Like every State, Washington State currently has a set of
crisis standards of care that they can rely on, given serious
surges and demands for care. And the COVID-19 pandemic brought
to light that many States like Washington State have incredibly
discriminatory crisis-of-care standards that discount the lives
of people with disabilities and other marginalized populations.
These concerns have been repeatedly reiterated by the Office of
Civil Rights and advocates in the disability community who have
helped push States to consider alternative measures for their
crisis standards.
To this point, I would like to discuss ASPR's request to
Congress to extend the National Advisory Committee on
Individuals with Disabilities and Disasters until at least
September 30th, 2025. Is NAC involved in or working with other
partners, including State and local governments, to ensure that
we don't have something like this happen again?
Ms.  O'Connell. We have really benefited from the view of
our outside experts that have served on this committee. And it
is very important to me, and I have made that clear in my 5-
year strategic plan that we are not prepared if everybody is
not prepared, if we aren't thinking about those communities and
special populations that you mentioned.
So we are continuing to work with--and are leading experts
in this space to make sure that we are accounting for all of
their views and incorporating those in the work that we do
ahead.
Mrs.  Rodgers. OK. Do you support furthering Federal
standards that would ensure that these crisis standards of care
do not discriminate against people with disabilities?
Ms.  O'Connell. It is really important that we incorporate
all of the needs of these special populations as we move
forward in preparing for and responding to disasters and
emergencies.
Mrs.  Rodgers. OK, thank you.
On cybersecurity, when this committee last considered
ASPR's authorities in 2018, cyber was a known threat but not
really top of mind when it came to preparedness. In the last
couple of years, we have seen an increasing number of cyber
attacks on the healthcare sector corresponding to an increase
in response efforts.
Just earlier this year, ASPR, working in coordination with
the Health Sector Coordinating Council Cybersecurity Working
Group, released their Cybersecurity Framework Implementation
Guide to help public and private sector prevent cybersecurity
incidences. Do you view cybersecurity preparedness and response
as a primary function and responsibility of ASPR?
And if not ASPR, who at HHS is responsible for cyber
threats?
Ms.  O'Connell. Thank you, Chair. So there are other
players within our department that have various
responsibilities in the cybersecurity space, but we are the
sector risk management agency for the healthcare sector when it
comes to cybersecurity. So we do have an important function in
coordinating with the health systems and hospitals to make sure
that they know best practices and that we work them through if
they have had vulnerabilities, how we identify those gaps and
moving forward.
I don't know that we are doing enough, and I have requested
a doubling of my budget in fiscal year 2024 so I can add
additional staff to work against this highly complex and
evolving problem. So I would welcome the support of this
committee in moving that forward.
Mrs.  Rodgers. Well, I would like to work with you on how
we make sure that we are addressing this growing and evolving
threat.
Dr. Walensky, in 1997 Congress directed the FDA to develop
and adopt good guidance practices to provide more transparency
and public input. And since the early 2000s FDA has abided by
such good guidance practices, and it requires FDA to solicit
public comments and responses, including standardized
statements regarding the nonbinding nature of the guidance, and
be publicly posted in a standardized, searchable, and
comprehensive database.
In addition, FDA's practices provide exceptions for
emergency situations where interim guidance may be appropriate
and a process for revisions in situations where the guidance
may need to be changed.
Throughout COVID-19 and even now, I continue to hear
concerns and questions on CDC recommendations and the guidance,
whether it is parents, scientists, doctors, others in the
community. Does CDC have or has CDC considered adopting
something similar to good guidance practices that would dictate
how recommendations across CDC are made available, allow for
comment, and allow for responses to comments?
Dr.  Walensky. Yes, thank you so much for that question. So
much of what we learned in ``CDC Moving Forward'' is the
importance of accountability and transparency and partnership,
and working with people who are going to be the implementers of
this guidance.
In terms of public comment, as we are putting out guidance
in the context, for example, of a public health emergency, one
of the other things that we learned in ``CDC Moving Forward''
is that we have to be nimble and we have to be fast, that we
were operating too slowly. Of course, a period of public
comment would take months, a couple of months to potentially--
--
Mrs.  Rodgers. OK, thank you. I am going to run out of
time. I am just going to highlight FDA indicates it finalized
114 documents in 2019; 163 in 2020; 91 in 2021. So there is a
way that you can do it quickly but keep it public and available
for comment.
I will yield back. My time has expired.
Mr.  Guthrie. The----
Dr.  Walensky. May I just comment that part of what we are
doing is standardizing and being more transparent about how we
are getting that feedback as part of ``CDC Moving Forward.'' So
thank you for that question.
Mr.  Guthrie. Thank you. The gentlelady yields back. The
Chair recognizes the ranking member of the full committee for 5
minutes for opening--for questions.
Mr.  Pallone. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
As the COVID-19 public health emergency ends today, we
should be applying the lessons we have learned over the last 3
years when determining how we can build up our public health
infrastructure rather than look for ways to tear it down.
So I wanted to ask each of our three witnesses in terms of
each of your respective agencies: As the public health
emergency comes to an end, what is the ongoing vulnerability in
our preparedness and response capabilities that you are most
concerned about, and how can we address that concern?
And I know each of you could probably talk an hour about
it, but we only got 5 minutes, so I will start from the left, I
guess, my left.
Ms.  O'Connell. Well, thank you so much, Ranking Member.
It was very clear to us that we had to rely on other
departments for support. Just as I laid out in my opening
statement, DoD gave us assisted acquisition support. We
couldn't move out fast enough against the needs that we were
seeing the country had--really important that we, as HHS, are
able to move out on our own next time. We will--may not always
have the benefit of other departments being able to come in and
help. So with our acquisitions authority, DoD came in. We would
like similar authority so we can stand on our own.
FEMA and U.S. Coast Guard came in and helped us surge our
staff so quickly. There are direct hiring and flexible pay
authorities that I am going to need moving forward because I
might not always have FEMA and U.S. Coast Guard available to
come in and help--really important HHS has what it needs,
moving forward.
And then construction authority. We have talked about how
weak the supply chain was, and how important it is to have
domestic manufacturing of these critical medical supplies. But
that construction authority that I have right now goes away
with the supplemental dollars. As soon as those are spent, I
can no longer continue these investments. I would like to have
permanent construction authority so I can keep that going, so
we no longer have those doctors and nurses wearing the plastic
bags Ranking Member Eshoo mentioned.
Mr.  Pallone. Thank you. Dr. Walensky?
Dr.  Walensky. Thank you for that question. So we tackled
COVID-19 with a frail and underinvested public health
infrastructure, to start. There were some that estimated before
the pandemic we had--we were 60,000 public health workforce in
deficit. So our workforce is a big challenge.
The second big challenge in our infrastructure has been our
data systems. You have heard me talk about data modernization.
We have been getting data through faxes. I know in your State
of New Jersey, electronic case reporting increased 66 percent
during the pandemic because of the rapid need for data. But in
our electronic case reporting we are now up to about 25,000
health systems can do so. That is about 25 percent of our
healthcare systems. So we have a lot of work to do in our data
modernization initiative and resources for that.
And then finally, laboratory infrastructure. Lots of
interest now in genomic sequencing and wastewater surveillance
and all of these things. We do not have a laboratory
infrastructure in this country that can support all of those
efforts. And I would urge all of you, if you haven't visited
your State lab, to visit your State lab and ask if they can do
genomic sequencing. Thank you.
Mr.  Pallone. Thank you, Doctor.
Mr. Califf?
Dr.  Califf. Sure. I am going to mostly echo what has
already been said, so I will be very quick.
We got holes in our data that I have highlighted that we
need in order to deal with crises when they come up.
We very much need the surge capacity capability,
particularly as it relates to pandemic issues that may arise
where we need our staff and biologics, for example, to be ready
to go with excess capacity to deal with it.
And I am very concerned about laboratory testing. If you
don't have good laboratory testing at the front end, you are
really in trouble when it comes to figuring out what to do with
treatment.
And then finally, as we have already discussed a little bit
here, we need to fix our peacetime economics, things like the
generic drug industry and the commodities. The less we are able
to economically afford to produce the products in the United
States, the more we are going to depend on an enormous
investment in stockpiling. Stockpiling is time-limited. And so,
if we don't fix those fundamental economics, we are going to
have--we are very concerned about it right now.
Mr.  Pallone. Well, thank you. I think I can fit in another
question to you, Dr. Califf.
The problem that our Members have seen in just the last few
months is the shortage of drugs that seem to be related to
increases in demand. And currently, drug manufacturers are
required to report to FDA when there is a discontinuance or
interruption in the supply. However, when the shortage is
driven by demand rather than supply, manufacturers are not
required to report to FDA.
So can you explain how FDA can help address drug shortages
when they have more information from drug manufacturers?
Can FDA apply those tools if they know of an unanticipated
spike in demand?
You have got, like, 20 seconds.
[Laughter.]
Dr.  Califf. All right, very quickly, every company keeps
projections on what it needs to produce to meet the demand that
it expects. When the demand goes up beyond what they can
produce, they need to let us know so that we can look across
companies and see how we can make up for that problem. That is,
essentially, the basic issue.
Each company doesn't know what the other company is doing,
because they are competing. When there is a shortage in one
company, we need to be able to coordinate across these people.
Government should not be involved in private enterprise when
things are working fine, but when there is a problem we have to
have a mechanism for government to help out, as we have seen in
many cases over the pandemic.
Mr.  Pallone. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr.  Guthrie. Thank you. The gentleman yields back. The
Chair now recognizes Dr. Burgess for 5 minutes for questions.
Mr.  Burgess. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I have had this discussion with most of you individually. I
may not have had it with you, Ms. O'Connell. You are asking for
a lot of things, and we should consider those things, the
regulatory authorities, the budgetary authorities. But as I
have stressed before, you have a credibility deficit with the
public, and we have to remedy that. Mostly, that will come
through transparency, I believe.
But at the same time--and Chair Rodgers mentioned this--
when you come forward with guidances and proclamations, think
about what the impact this is going to have on everyday
Americans, because there is a certain amount of pandemic
fatigue out there in the country right now, and they tune you
out. I am just telling you that. They do not believe you
anymore. And that is a serious, serious problem. And so no
amount of budgetary authority, no amount of regulatory
authority can reestablish that credibility. We need you all to
reestablish that credibility through becoming your own centers
of excellence and transparency, and just day to day, every
member of your agencies must recognize that job one is
reestablishing credibility.
Ms. O'Connell, let me ask you, during the run-up to the
last reauthorization of the preparedness bill, it seems like we
had a lot of internal discussions. In fact, some we even had in
a classified setting. And--but placing ASPR at the center of
the eye of the storm, if you will, when trouble hit, and that
seemed--if I recall correctly, that seemed to be the consensus
that those of us who were on the committee back then--that is
where we arrived. It didn't fare exactly as I would have
anticipated then, when real trouble hit.
So are we doing some sort of ongoing reevaluation? Should
you be the center? Should the ASPR be the center? I believe it
should. But are there ways to ensure that you stay at the
center of that authority during the time of crisis?
Ms.  O'Connell. Congressman, thank you so much for that
question. You know, of course, I wasn't here at the last PAHPA
reauthorization, or in this role, and came into this role in
June 2021, when the response was already in full swing and
structures were already in place.
The Department has been very clear that I am responsible
for coordinating our department and making sure that I am the
principal interlocutor with the Secretary on issues around
public health emergency and response. And I have played that
role since I have been in this seat and have had the pleasure
of coordinating with my fellow panelists today on any number of
very complex issues.
I also coordinate very closely with the White House. And,
you know, through the various responses I have led and other
roles I have played within the Department over previous
administrations, I have interacted with either NSC, DPC, now a
White House COVID team, and I am pleased to coordinate with
however--whichever President it is chooses to organize the
White House, I will be that conduit from the Department to the
White House on these issues, and look forward to continuing to
play that role.
But again, I have only been in this seat since June 2021,
and have been able to do that since that point on.
Mr.  Burgess. And in fact, I think this is your first
appearance in our subcommittee. So we welcome you and are
grateful for that, and look forward to many more--many, many
more such sessions.
So during the height of the pandemic, HHS and Department of
Defense developed a fairly successful partnership. This success
relied partially on ASPR's use of existing DoD authorities. Is
there a way to look to continuing those authorities so that it
doesn't have to be something that is stood up anew at the time
of another crisis?
Ms.  O'Connell. Well, that is one of the reasons why I am
asking for some of the acquisitions authorities that DoD has
for ASPR, because DoD--we live in a very complex threat
landscape right now, and I think the country is going to need
DoD to be able to do DoD things.
Mr.  Burgess. Sure.
Ms.  O'Connell. HHS should do HHS things. So we need
similar authorities so I can stand up and get going and not
have to negotiate an agreement with DoD.
Mr.  Burgess. Easier to get you those things if you have
credibility. It does go back to that.
Dr. Califf, before I run out of time, we came through this
pandemic, we are all glad that the public health emergency is
over, but there were a number of flexibilities that were
required--us to give the FDA so we all didn't die. What have
you done to sort of codify those flexibilities? And is there a
way to make you a more nimble agency, going forward?
Dr.  Califf. Well, of course, as you may have heard me say,
we are number one in innovation in the U.S. No one disputes
that. And we still are. We intend to keep it that way.
And one of the most important ways is through the constant
communications that we have with the industries that actually
invent and produce the products. We don't make them, we just
regulate them. So a lot of the methods that have been used,
like remote assessments, of some note we have talked about in-
person versus virtual meetings. It turns out two-thirds of the
time now that we are offering in-person meetings, the industry
is choosing virtual because it is easier for them to not have
to assemble all those--their people and have them fly to Silver
Spring to meet with us.
So things like that that just make it easier to
communicate--we will still have a role when things are not
right to exert our authority to do that. But communication is
really the key, and we have learned a lot of lessons in the
process.
Mr.  Burgess. Well, I have requested a meeting with you,
and I look forward to following up with that. We can speak at
the--to some degree of--we can get into deeper detail. So thank
you.
And I will yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr.  Guthrie. Thank you. The gentleman yields back, the
Chair recognizes Mr. Cardenas for 5 minutes for questions.
Mr.  Cardenas. Thank you very much, Chair Guthrie, and also
Ranking Member Eshoo, for holding this hearing to discuss ways
to improve our health system preparedness through PAHPA. We
call it PAHPA here, but what that means is Pandemic and All-
Hazards Preparedness Act reauthorization process.
I also want to thank our witnesses for joining us today and
providing testimony on the needs of the Federal Government to
best respond to crises.
We have seen the most--excuse me, we have seen the cost of
being flat-footed in the face of a public health emergency in
real time. While I think we have learned many lessons from
COVID-19, I am still concerned that we have real weak spots in
our preparedness, especially when it comes to kids.
This past winter we experienced what public health
officials called tripledemic, when cases of RSV, flu, and
COVID-19 overlapped, making many of our kids sick and
overwhelming our hospital systems. This tripledemic prompted
greater scrutiny of our pediatric care system and highlighted
severe pediatric facility and workforce shortages which must be
addressed.
This is especially problematic because children have a
unique set of mental and physical health needs that are
separate from adults. We cannot leave our kids behind, and I am
worried that if we approach PAHPA reauthorization too narrowly,
without expanding pediatric healthcare capacity, we will repeat
mistakes and remain unprepared to protect children in the event
of a future emergency.
I have a question for Dr. Walensky.
Doctor, how do pediatric workforce and facility shortages
leave us vulnerable in the event of a future pandemic or other
public health threat?
Dr.  Walensky. Thank you so much for that question. I am
going to sort of speak to it from a public health standpoint
and the workforce that we need in public health, as well as
in--at CDC specifically, and just speak to some of the
challenges that we have.
We train some of the best people in the world. It is really
competitive to get a fellowship at CDC, but we don't have
noncompetitive fellow conversion. They have to apply for jobs
after we have trained them. We don't have tax-exempt student
loan repayment. And I will tell you, pediatricians, if you look
at the salary scale, are not the highest-paid clinicians out
there. We could use direct hire authority. We have
pediatricians that go out in the field to care for people or
to--not to care, actually, to do infection control and
surveillance in Ebola outbreaks, and yet they don't get danger
pay.
So there are a lot of things in our direct--in our hiring
authorities that would really help us sustain a pediatric
workforce, especially a workforce that has--you know, may leave
medical school with $200,000 of debt, on average.
Mr.  Cardenas. And--well, that sets up my next question.
What can Congress do to better prioritize the unique needs of
children through the PAHPA reauthorization?
Dr.  Walensky. So from a public health standpoint, I would
say those hiring authorities and workforce authorities that I
just mentioned would go a very long way. And I think, from the
clinical standpoint, I would defer to my colleague.
Mr.  Cardenas. Please.
Ms.  O'Connell. Thank you so much, Congressman. So we have
created something called the Regional Pediatric Disaster Care
Centers of Excellence, where we bring various experts across
the regions to leading children's hospitals and create a
consortium where we are able to share best practices for
children in trauma, children in disasters, how to care for
them. And it has also become a place where our pediatric care
providers can get support, share lessons learned with each
other. But it is really critical that we educate all of our
providers on how to take care of children in this very unique
emergency situation.
We also have the National Advisory Committee on Children
and Disasters, and leading experts have been advising us on how
to make sure we incorporate their special needs as we move
forward and prepare the country to respond to what comes next.
Mr.  Cardenas. Speaking of educating, can you please share
with us what you would recommend to Congress what we can do to
strengthen the efforts of the National Advisory Committee on
Children and Disasters as we work to prepare for future
emergencies?
Ms.  O'Connell. The authorization of that committee will
end with this PAHPA bill. And so, as you reauthorize, it would
be important to include that.
I have also requested $7 million for the Pediatric Centers
of Excellence, and that would be another important thing to
fund to make sure those providers that are in our communities
have that support in place where they can share best practices.
Mr.  Cardenas. You said 7 million, not 70 million, not 700
million, not 7 billion. Again, how much?
Ms.  O'Connell. Seven million.
Mr.  Cardenas. Seven million.
Ms.  O'Connell. It is part of our National Disaster Medical
Services System budget.
Mr.  Cardenas. I love that number.
[Laughter.]
Mr.  Cardenas. I would hope and pray that we can meet that.
Thank you so much, and I appreciate all of you very much.
And I yield back the balance of my time.
Mr.  Guthrie. Thank you. The gentleman yields back. The
Chair recognizes Mr. Latta for 5 minutes for questions.
Mr.  Latta. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thanks to
our witnesses for appearing today.
Secretary O'Connell, your office is looking to end the
Centers for Innovation in Advanced Development and
Manufacturing Program and replace it with new programs called
BioMaP and IBx. Will you explain to the committee the
background and rationale for establishing these programs, and
ASPR's plan for implementation?
Ms.  O'Connell. Congressman, thank you so much for that
question. It is a really important question.
So the CIADM program that you referenced was established
several years ago, and it was to reserve capacity across the
country in case we needed to ramp up vaccine or therapeutic
manufacturing. It was a way that we had manufacturing lines
that were essentially mothballed but could be turned on when
needed.
What we found in the COVID response was capacity is one
thing, capability to run those lines is something else. And so
what we are looking to do moving forward is not just reserve a
manufacturing line--mothball it, you know, keep it warm until
we need it--but make sure that we, in addition to having the
manufacturing lines, also have the workforce, the capability to
run those lines so mistakes are not being made when vaccines
are manufactured. And that is where we are looking to go and
the reason why we are making that change.
Mr.  Latta. OK, let me just follow up real quick, because I
tell you, when I am out in my district--and I am sure everyone
else--you just mentioned workforce. Every place you go, the
same thing. Everybody needs, you know, workers out there. So
how are we going to maintain that workforce out there?
Because, I mean, I go to places right now, they could
double what they are manufacturing and doing right now. They
can't because there is no workforce. So how are we going to do
that with what you are advocating?
Ms.  O'Connell. So one of the first things that we are
going to do is ensure that the organizations in which we have a
relationship with moving forward have a workforce and are able
to turn the capability on, as well as the capacity on when
moving forward. But you are absolutely right. The skilled
workforce is something that we need to invest in.
I know Dr. Walensky has been thinking about that in the
public health space, is how we make sure that we have the
experts that we need who can run these lines when we need them.
And we are--part of our investments will be in making sure that
workforce and capability are there.
Mr.  Latta. OK, thank you. You know, moving forward we need
to preserve domestic drug manufacturing and stockpiling and
mitigate supply chain vulnerabilities to enable continuous
manufacturing capabilities and active pharmaceutical
ingredients.
Dr. Califf, what steps should Congress take to further
protect access to and further safety of pharmaceuticals while
preventing supply chain shortages?
Dr.  Califf. Well, as we have already discussed, better
information for FDA to coordinate when there is an impending
shortage, and basically using talk therapy with the industry to
get cooperation and collaboration where it is needed--because
normally, they are competitors.
But in the long run, we have got to deal with the fact that
many of these commodities and generic products are very low
cost. There is a--there is intense competition. And when the
price gets below what can support--you mentioned a highly
qualified workforce, investment in facilities--then the
pressure to offshore comes in, which we have also talked about.
So we have got to deal with these adverse economics that are
occurring.
That is well beyond the FDA's remit, but it is a very
important part of it. But we specify in our documents what--in
our requests what we need to fill in, those data parts where we
can deal with it with the situation that we are currently in.
Mr.  Latta. Well--and again, because I know when--we were
all getting calls.
And are there any particular category of drugs we should
prioritize first before targeting others? Because again, you
are talking about offshore, because I know that when we had
committee hearings, we heard about all the different drugs that
all of a sudden we didn't have, that we had to have, you know,
coming from someplace else.
But what drugs do we absolutely have to essentially have?
Do you think that--we prioritize at the top of the list that we
start with, and then we start backfilling everything else and--
from there?
Dr.  Califf. Sure, there have been several essential
medications lists, and there is a global list. We are just
finalizing a synthesis of all those. It is pretty much all the
same, the things that hospitals and healthcare facilities would
depend on at a time of crisis.
But I should also point out, you know, if you had told me
that Tylenol or ibuprofen would be a major issue, you know--I
am a cardiologist. I am used to dealing with life or death. But
it turns out, when the surge went up, there was no way our
American manufacturing could meet the demand in the U.S., and
it was a global thing.
So we do need to start with the highest priority, and that
is what we are doing. But I think we shouldn't fool ourselves
to think we can only deal with life-or-death drugs and devices.
We are going to have to deal with the whole picture.
Mr.  Latta. OK, thank you. You know, I look forward to
working with my colleagues to reauthorize PAHPA and build off
these lessons we have learned from COVID-19.
And lastly, I will be submitting the following QFRs, Mr.
Chairman, regarding clinical laboratory capacity and diagnostic
testing for our Strategic National Stockpile.
And I yield back the balance of my time.
Mr.  Guthrie. Thank you. The gentleman yields back. The
Chair recognizes Mr. Sarbanes for 5 minutes for questions.
Mr.  Sarbanes. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Thanks to
all of you for your great work and being here today to share
your perspective on how we can be prepared for what comes next.
At the subcommittee's February hearing on the pandemic
response, we talked about some of the work CDC is doing to
improve data collection and communication channels with State
and local public health officials, other partners out there,
just to kind of build that picture, that ongoing surveillance
of what is happening with disease. And I kind of wanted to
build on that a little bit more, maybe broaden it out to talk
about all the dimensions of information sharing that needs to
happen, and so forth, because we know one of the big lessons we
learned from the pandemic was how indispensable it is to get
this information and to have it at our fingertips real-time,
interoperable, all the rest of it.
We pointed to some efforts that were stood up. Hopkins did
a good job with their dashboard that they created. That is
being closed down now, as you know. So it makes us think about
where does that capacity reside on an ongoing basis. CDC is a
natural place for that kind of function.
But even as we are celebrating the--celebrating is the
wrong word--even as we are exhaling when we see some of the
pandemic behind us, I have a sinking feeling in the pit of my
stomach that we are closing up shop. We are seeing across the
country that the public health officials are sort of closing up
shop on what was a pretty impressive, in many instances,
ability to respond to pandemic. And going beyond the baseline,
we need to maintain. Going below the baseline, we need to
maintain in order to be ready for the next thing so we are not
just starting from scratch.
So I think, Dr. Walensky, maybe you are the best one on the
panel because you have that perspective, that overview to talk
about that, and maybe address some of that anxiety. But, you
know, I am reading articles every day about local health
operations, public health operations, where they are saying,
``OK, pandemic is over, we don't need X, we don't need Y, we
don't need Z.'' Well, we might still need X and Y on an ongoing
basis to be ready for the next thing. And frankly, we need X
and Y just to do public health well. Forget about a pandemic
coming.
But I think we are going to lean--the pendulum is going to
go too far in the other direction. So talk about how, both in
terms of the data collection, the communication, the workforce
that you have talked about, how do we--like, do we blow a
whistle to the local health officials and say, ``Stop, look,
and listen,'' like, ``before you take everything apart again,''
or like, ``Put this in a closet somewhere, or out back by the
dumpster.'' Like, ``Think about whether it could help you in
the next round, and think about, frankly, whether it is a
critical part of the infrastructure you should have every
single day just to have a good public health system across the
country''?
So if you could talk to that, I would appreciate it.
Dr.  Walensky. Sure. There is a lot to be said there. Thank
you so much for that question.
First, let me say that we have been hard at work on the
data issues. I think COVID-19 unroofed a lot of the challenges
that we have in data, data management, data collection across
our public health, and integrating within CDC and around the
country. We did release a public health data strategy that
really looks at bolstering public health data at the local
source: visualization, interoperable data. And all of that is
part of a 2-year public health data strategy.
Your point is really well taken, though, with regard to
COVID data. As I mentioned, it took us 6 months to get to the
point that we were getting COVID-related hospitalizations. We
will continue to get those. But to this day I can't tell you
who is vaccinated in the hospital. We still don't have the
capacity to this day. There is an important balance that I
think we have to recognize, and that is all of the data that is
being collected for COVID and has been collected for COVID is
only for COVID. There are many other public health threats out
there that we really need to have similar data for. And so the
balance is going to be what is enough for COVID, and how do we
bolster everything else such that we have that capacity?
I will give you the example of Mpox. We had a public health
emergency that was declared for Mpox on August 4th. If you now,
in hindsight, look at our epidemiologic curves, we had our
maximum number of cases of Mpox in this country 3 days before
the public health emergency was declared. If we wait for that
public health emergency in order to get the data authorities
that we need, we are already on the down curve, or we are
already on the down curve of Mpox.
So we need it, not only for COVID and for preparing for
pandemic flu, but we need it for all infectious and non-
infectious risks across public health. And that is what we are
advocating for here to--for our data authorities, to be able to
have line of sight of that. Thank you.
Mr.  Sarbanes. Thanks very much, and thanks for your
service.
And I yield back.
Mr.  Guthrie. Thank you. The gentleman yields back. The
Chair recognizes Mr. Bilirakis for 5 minutes for questions.
Mr.  Bilirakis. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate it
very much.
Our Nation's preparedness efforts remain vital. From COVID-
19 to Hurricane Ian, over the last 5 years we have seen our
healthcare system's strengths as well as some of the biggest
challenges. I am sure you all agree.
Unfortunately, this administration's lack of appropriate
communication between the Government agencies, siloed work
product, duplicative and conflicting agency recommendations,
and arduous bureaucracy has been all, in my opinion, on full
display.
Dr. Walensky, throughout the course of the COVID-19
pandemic, wastewater-based epidemiology has been used
effectively by State and local governments, Federal agencies,
universities, private businesses to monitor, spread, inform
public health responses and help predict case levels in a
community several days in advance. WBE produces cost-effective,
aggregated, and anonymized--I am sorry--data from the community
wastewater samples, avoiding difficult personal data and
privacy issues.
It is my understanding that CDC established a national
wastewater surveillance system, or NWSS, in late 2021, which
has been much--very successful and a positive. It has gotten a
positive reception. However, it is also my understanding that
NWSS has become siloed within CDC's National Center for
Emerging and Zoonotic Infectious Diseases and is restricted to
known infectious diseases. This is unfortunate, considering
NWSS could possibly be utilized to track high-risk substances
such as fentanyl.
We are in the middle of a fentanyl overdose crisis, as you
know. Under the Prevent Pandemics Act passed as part of the
fiscal year 2023 omnibus, Congress authorized the CDC
directly--Director to continue leveraging public-private
partnerships for activities that would include wastewater-based
epidemiology.
As we think about CDC being more nimble and evolving to
keep pace, can you tell me why CDC is not currently utilizing
wastewater epidemiology to its fullest extent?
Why has CDC not engaged with private-sector partners to
utilize wastewater epidemiology beyond just the Center for
Emerging and Zoonotic Infectious Diseases?
If you could, answer that question.
Dr.  Walensky. Yes, I very much appreciate that question,
because wastewater has been such an interesting and informative
way that we have been able to track COVID-19 novel, new way,
and has a lot of promise for things like antimicrobial
resistance and many other things.
As you mentioned, this is a young field. We have, over the
last 2 years, been able to develop now up to 1,400 wastewater
sites that cover about 140 million Americans. And through that,
not only have we been able to track COVID-19, but we have been
using it for polio in our paralytic polio case in New York as
well as for other pathogens like Mpox, which we have been using
and tracking with Mpox, as well.
You actually ask a really important question. First, we are
engaging in industry partnerships through our wastewater
surveillance. It has been important, as we have learned--been
learning and studying. But one of the key questions that you
asked is, how can we use wastewater in a key area of research
for other things?
Importantly, what we really want to know from wastewater
is, are there metabolites of fentanyl or opioids that we can
detect in the wastewater before we might detect them in
emergency room surveillance that we could act on?
And so that is actually the research question that we are
asking right now to say would we detect it in the wastewater in
a sensitive and specific way that would lead to acute public
health action in a way that would be better and faster than the
surveillance that we are already doing through our State
unintentional drug overdose reporting or our other emergency
department surveillance systems. With that question, which we
are actively addressing, we intend to sort of expand it in
other ways.
The other thing I might say is it is a real important time
to comment on laboratory infrastructure. And I would again
invite you to go to your State lab and say, ``Do we have the
capacity in our State lab to do wastewater surveillance here?''
Many of our State labs do not. Really, as we think about these
new and novel ways to address infectious and noninfectious
threats, do we have the resources across the country in the
machinery and the laboratory infrastructure and the analysts in
order to scale it up? Thank you.
Mr.  Bilirakis. Thank you. Well, my time has expired, but I
will submit the questions for the record.
Please keep us informed on that issue.
Mr.  Guthrie. The gentleman yields back. The Chair
recognizes Dr. Ruiz for 5 minutes for questions.
Mr.  Ruiz. Thank you. Thank you for holding this important
hearing today.
As we have said many times over the past 2 years, there is
a lot that we learned from the COVID pandemic. It is our
responsibility to take those lessons and make the necessary
changes so that history doesn't repeat itself.
Before I get to my questions, I would be remiss if I didn't
mention a bill that I have worked on for several years with my
friend, Dr. Bucshon: the Good Samaritan Health Professionals
Act of 2023. The bill would simply expand liability protections
for doctors who volunteer during national or public health
emergencies by allowing them to help in places of need,
regardless of State boundaries. This was passed as part of the
CARES Act for doctors to be able to respond to COVID needs, but
I urge its full inclusion in the reauthorization of the
Pandemic All-Hazards Preparedness Act as the legislation moves
forward. I look forward to working with the committee on this
in the coming months.
Dr. Walensky, thank you for being here today. It is good to
see you again. We have had several conversations over the past
couple of years regarding the need for a more robust public
health workforce. While healthcare worker shortages are common
across many specialties, there is an acute need when it comes
to the public health workforce.
Why do we need and what should we be doing to bolster our
public health workforce on the local, State, and national level
in the context of preparation for future public health
emergencies?
Dr.  Walensky. Thank you so much, Dr. Ruiz, for that
question.
So much of what we need in our public health workforce is a
workforce that is diverse as the communities we serve. It is
those trusted people on the ground that can reach and know
where to reach communities and know the culturally competent
messages that they need to hear in order to actually get
implemented guidances to better public health.
As part of those authorities that we need at CDC, and I
would say across public health in general, are things like
student loan repayment, noncompetitive fellow conversion,
direct hire authority, overtime and danger pay. These are all
things that, if we are going to be a response-based agency,
that we have to have the same authorities that--like FEMA has,
in terms of being response-based.
Mr.  Ruiz. Thank you. A robust workforce is key to creating
and implementing adult vaccine programs, which are a critical
component to preparedness. The COVID-19 pandemic highlighted
gaps in access to vaccines and treatments for the most
vulnerable in our communities. As we think about future
outbreaks, it is critical that we make sure everyone has access
to these lifesaving therapeutics.
Dr. Walensky, can you say more about how the proposed
Vaccine for Adults Program would address these gaps so that, in
the case of another pandemic, we are not starting from square
one?
Dr.  Walensky. We absolutely--thank you so much for that
question, because we have a really robust Vaccines for Children
Program, which has saved trillions of dollars and millions of
lives. We do not have a similar vaccine program for adults.
That is, there are 14 actively approved and recommended
vaccines for adults that uninsured adults do not have access to
in the absence of a Vaccines for Adults program, and we don't
have one.
That is why we need for COVID-19--a bridge plan for COVID-
19 vaccines over the next 2 years to be able to deliver those
vaccines to uninsured adults. But that leaves out influenza
vaccines and shingles vaccines and pneumococcal vaccines and
hepatitis vaccines. All of those vaccines are uncovered, and we
don't--we are not positioned to be able to sustain this for
another public health emergency for flu vaccines, for example.
Thank you.
Mr.  Ruiz. Thank you. Pivoting to another important issue
that we need to address moving forward, and that is one of data
sharing, we have talked about the need for CDC to have better
access to data. But as we have heard today, the FDA would also
benefit from additional data-sharing authorities.
Dr. Califf, what does FDA need in terms of data authorities
from States, and why is the current process of working with
each State individually ineffective during a public health
emergency?
Dr.  Califf. Thanks very much. And, you know, while CDC is
focused on the public health needs, we are focused largely on
the biomedical needs for things like vaccines and treatments,
how they are doing in the real world. And as I have been
listening to this, I have thought of an analogy that may make
it easy to understand what the issue is.
We largely do share data sources with CDC, and analyses. We
talk about them all the time when we have them. CDC inherited,
when Dr. Walensky came in, a system where their pipes were
corroded. So if you imagine a system where there is a spigot,
the data flows into a common receptacle, it gets processed and
sent back to people to figure out what to do with. The people
controlling the spigot are the States and the counties. And if
every time we want to do something we have to go ask every one
of those people with every one of those spigots, a huge amount
of time goes by, up to months.
And in the meanwhile, we are going down the road,
particularly in an emergency, having to make decisions without
the data, so much so that I have had to call Israel several
times to figure out what is going on, because they have a
system with electronic health records where the data is ready
instantaneously. We need that in the United States. It is not
for us. It is not for the public health agencies. It is for the
person who gets sick or has a problem that needs their
physician or healthcare provider to know what happened to other
people like them in real time.
Mr.  Ruiz. Hey, thanks for what you do. Thanks for keeping
our Nation safe despite the attacks and the personal attacks.
It takes courage to be a good, honest, truthful public health
expert these days in this country. So thank you for doing it.
Mr.  Guthrie. Thank you. The gentleman yields back, and the
Chair now recognizes the leader on our side of the dais on this
issue, and working well with the Ranking Member Eshoo--and I
just appreciate you all's efforts--I recognize Mr. Hudson for 5
minutes for questions.
Mr.  Hudson. Thank you, Chairman Guthrie, and thank you for
making this a real priority for our subcommittee. And I want to
thank Ranking Member Eshoo for your partnership and leadership.
I have learned a lot from you, and I have enjoyed working
together and look forward to all we are going to accomplish
working together.
Thank you to our witnesses for your time here today and
your important testimony. I am going to try to cover a lot of
ground here, so I am going to dive right in.
My focus on this reauthorization has been a thorough
process. And last year, I led the Healthy Futures Task Force
Subcommittee on our side of the aisle. We solicited extensive
feedback from the private sector, we hosted roundtables with
Members, and most recently, working with Representative Eshoo,
we put out an RFI to engage stakeholders in ways that our
Nation can improve and avoid similar mistakes we have made in
the past and capitalize on a lot of the successes that we have
had.
But I want to be clear to everyone listening: This is not a
COVID response bill. This reauthorization will ensure that our
Nation is prepared for all public health security threats,
including natural disasters, cyber attacks, and biothreats
alike, and in that light will focus on overall solutions.
Ms. O'Connell, great to see you again today. Under PREVENT,
and as part of the end-of-year omnibus, Congress directed the
creation of the White House Office of Pandemic Preparedness and
Response Policy. This position is to be appointed by the
President and serve as the principal advisor to the President
on all issues related to pandemic and preparedness policy,
including making recommendations and coordinating Federal
activities. The Director will have limited staff and serve as a
cochair of PHEMCE, the Public Health Emergency Countermeasures
Enterprise, along with you, the person in your position.
The President has yet to appoint a Director, nor has there
been any word on a possible appointment or plans for an
appointment. Can you speak to the status of this appointment
process? Are you aware of any timeline for an appointment to
this position?
Ms.  O'Connell. Thank you, Congressman. I cannot speak to
the status, of course. That is a discussion that the President
is having at the White House.
Mr.  Hudson. Well, thank you. Well, how do you see your
role as ASPR interfacing and coordinating with this Director,
both as leads in our Nation's pandemic preparedness and
response efforts as cochairs of PHEMCE?
Ms.  O'Connell. Well, I will look forward to the
collaboration and the partnership with whoever the President
picks to run that office.
It is important to me that ASPR leads where ASPR can lead
and that we are role players and strong role players where we
need to be. And when we are a partner with someone at the White
House, that will be just fine, and we will look forward to
having a very collaborative relationship with the PHEMCE in
this cochair role.
Mr.  Hudson. Well, currently, in the case of disagreements
among PHEMCE members or recommendations, the HHS Secretary has
the final decision-making authority. Will this chain of command
remain, even as it appears the intent of the new position will
be to create a direct line of communication between the
Director and the President on these issues? Do you--how do you
see this playing out in real time, a real-case scenario?
Ms.  O'Connell. Well, as I understand it from the
legislation currently, the PHEMCE reports to the Secretary, and
that will continue to be--unless that is changed in the new
bill, that will continue to be the way that we do this.
Mr.  Hudson. Well, and I appreciate that, and I think one
of the things that this committee has got to kind of resolve
and work through with this reauthorization is what is that
really going to look like. And, you know, I would appreciate
your feedback through this process, including any concerns you
might have about structural problems, or any ideas you have of
how we can make the chain of command more clear.
You know, I think, in practice, when we have had
emergencies, when we have had outbreaks, the White House always
takes control of the communications piece, regardless of
whether it is Republicans or Democrats. This--but in practical
terms, they are the ones that the public sees, yet your office
is the one that has got the authority to direct, within HHS,
the response.
And so, you know, there is--I think there is a lot of work
we need to do and could do to make that work better. And so I
would appreciate your feedback as we go through this process.
And any thoughts you have that you would like to submit to us,
we would welcome those.
Now, I have heard from many stakeholders requesting a
mechanism by which industry partners could play a role in
PHEMCE, and the feedback we have gotten from private sector--
there have been some problems. We have heard stakeholders that
have faced issues with lack of communication and transparency.
I know you have said it is a priority under the 2019
reauthorization. It is--was codified that there should be this
interaction.
Do you--is there any current formal process by which
private industry can interface with PHEMCE?
Do you think having an advisory council formally created
for private industry would help any--I am out of time, but any
thoughts you might have?
Ms.  O'Connell. Just real quickly to say we can't do the
work of developing these countermeasures without private
industry. It is a public-private partnership, and so their role
is critically important. I say that every opportunity I can.
I am happy to talk with you as you are thinking this
through about what, you know, a mechanism might be, but we
bring this to our stakeholders and our private-sector partners
all the time. It is really important to me that they are
engaged.
Mr.  Hudson. Well, I think we have got to figure out how to
do it a little bit better.
But with that, Mr. Chairman, I am way over my time, so I
will yield back. Thank you.
Mr.  Guthrie. We appreciate it, and appreciate your efforts
on this.
The gentleman yields back, and the Chair recognizes Ms.
Kuster for 5 minutes for questions.
[Pause.]
Ms.  Kuster. Sorry, there we go, there we go.
Opportunities where we can do more--ensuring everyone has
access to lifesaving vaccines is a key opportunity for
improvement. For centuries we have relied on vaccines to
protect and defend against severe illness, and the COVID-19
pandemic demonstrated the importance of effective vaccine
information. Sadly, the COVID-19 pandemic also showed that
Americans who don't have insurance struggled to get the
vaccine. All Americans should have access to vaccines,
regardless of their insurance status, and I appreciate that HHS
is working to make vaccines available to all Americans through
the Bridge Access Program.
However, more must need to be done. As we prepare for the
future, I am working on a proposal to establish an uninsured
adults program that would close the gaps in coverage for
necessary vaccines. Dr. Walensky, you have previously spoken
before E&C about the importance of a robust infrastructure for
adult vaccination, including an idea for a Vaccines for Adults
program. Can you describe how such a program would help provide
greater coverage through expanded access during public health
emergencies?
Dr.  Walensky. Thank you so much, Congresswoman. We have
had conversations about the critical importance of this. We
have a robust Vaccines for Children program that covers
uninsured children and has demonstrated its value in saving
millions of lives and trillions of dollars.
We do not have a similar program for adults, for the over
20 million adults who are uninsured. They do not have access to
a flu vaccine or a shingles vaccine or a COVID vaccine. It is
because of that that we have needed to build this Bridge
program. But this is a short-term fix, and it is only for one
vaccine. And there is so much that we could do to prevent
disease and infectious disease if we had this coverage in a
Vaccines for Adults program.
Additionally, it would provide consistent statutory funding
for vaccines and an infrastructure such that when we have a new
public health threat we have that infrastructure ready to go
for the next vaccine that we need to deploy acutely. Thank you.
Ms.  Kuster. Great. Thank you so much. Thank you for your
years of leadership at the CDC. We are very grateful.
Dr. Califf, I would like to ask you about how FDA regulates
medical devices and how this changed during public--changes
during public health emergencies.
As we all know, medical device labeling plays a critical
role in the use and ongoing safety of medical devices,
everything from MRI machines to glucose monitors. As we saw
during COVID-19, the FDA was able to use its authority to make
changes to medical device labeling electronically. This allowed
them to respond to public health needs in real time, and keep
patients and providers in touch with the most up-to-date safety
information without waiting for an updated paper manual.
However, outside of a public health emergency, existing
laws continue to require that device manufacturers distribute
physical paper versions of the updated labeling.
Asking Dr. Califf: How would electronic labeling for
devices and diagnostics help ensure providers and patients have
more timely access to accurate and up-to-date information?
Dr.  Califf. Thanks for raising that. As a graduate of
Silicon Valley in my private life, of course, if you can make
an instantaneous change for the entire country in a label, that
is a good thing. And so we are very much in favor of moving in
that direction.
But we also caution that there are parts of America and
people who are not facile with the technology, particularly for
devices that are used at home by people who still need the
paper copy, because that is what they depend on. And so, as we
move in this direction, I think we all anticipate over the next
decade or so more and more electronic labeling is going to be
good, but we have got to nestle that in also with maintaining
the paper system where appropriate.
Ms.  Kuster. Great. Thank you very much.
And with that, let it reflect that I am yielding back with
the 31 seconds that my colleague went over.
[Laughter.]
Mr.  Guthrie. The gentlelady yields back. The Chair now
recognize Mr. Johnson for 5 minutes for questions.
Mr.  Johnson. Thank you, Chairman Guthrie, and thank you to
our witnesses for being with us here today.
You know, here we are, more than 3 years removed from the
outset of the COVID-19 pandemic. Gone are the days of the 15
days to slow the spread and disjointed, ever-changing
recommendations from the CDC about how to go about living our
daily lives. Schools were shut down, loved ones isolated, and
everyday American life was brought to a standstill.
From the outset of this virus, birthed and then covered up
by China, to now, we have learned a lot. And it is with the
benefit of hindsight that we must look at lessons learned to
better ensure we are prepared for the next pandemic or natural
disaster.
But there were some silver linings. Telehealth, for
example, has become a widely used and accepted form of care,
reducing barriers to access and ensuring that rural communities
like the one I live in and represent are better able to manage
their healthcare.
Another outcome of the COVID-19 pandemic was the Strategic
National Stockpile, or SNS. It has largely become a household
name. The pandemic highlighted the importance of an
appropriately stocked SNS filled with a variety of
countermeasures to address a host of health threats that face
our country.
This past October the Government Accountability Office
released a report titled ``HHS Should Address Strategic
National Stockpile Requirements and Inventory Risks.'' In this
report GAO found that SNS contained most medical
countermeasures types recommended, but often not in the
recommended quantities.
American families must live within their budgets, and I
believe that the Federal Government must do that, as well. But
sadly, this administration doesn't seem to feel that way. If
they did, we wouldn't be in this position with regards to the
debt ceiling.
So the answer is not always to just throw more money at the
problem. Instead, I think we need to look at how we can better
allocate resources to ensure the SNS is adequately stocked with
the medical supplies necessary to ensure the health and safety
of the American people.
So my first question is for Ms. O'Connell, and it is a
really simple question: Are you meeting all stated
requirements, as outlined by the Strategic National Stockpile
Material Threat Determinations?
Ms.  O'Connell. We currently do not have funding in order
to have all of the requirements filled----
Mr.  Johnson. So you are not.
Ms.  O'Connell. We do not have----
Mr.  Johnson. So you are not meeting those.
Ms.  O'Connell [continuing]. The funding to fill all the
requirements.
Mr.  Johnson. OK. Outside of increased budget requests, how
can ASPR ensure it has the appropriate processes in place to
ensure the SNS is appropriately supplied?
Ms.  O'Connell. So we have talked a lot about the PHEMCE
already, and the PHEMCE is the interagency group of subject
matter experts that advises the Strategic National Stockpile
and BARDA on what the material threat determinations are that
DHS has given us and what countermeasures we need in order to
prepare the country against those threats.
Now, one of the things I am doing right now is I am
reviewing all of the requirements. When I came into this seat
in June 2021, some requirements had not been reviewed in 10
years. It is important to me that the stockpile is meeting
requirements against current threats. What do we need now? Do
we have the right countermeasures for the current threats? Do
we need to reprioritize across the current threat landscape?
That conversation is happening with our subject matter experts.
Mr.  Johnson. Yes, I--you just took my question in a
different direction. I agree with you that we have to be
looking at current threats. But I can tell you from my 27 years
in the United States Air Force, it is the threats down the road
that we also have to be concerned about. We have got to be able
to anticipate threats. I mean, we never anticipated the
pandemic, but look where we ended up.
Let me ask you one final question, because I want to be
able to yield back some time like my colleague did. How
specifically does Administration for Strategic--how does ASPR
aim to bridge the gaps faced between the required amounts and
the current stockpile?
Ms.  O'Connell. So again, we are looking at the
requirements to make sure that we have got the right things
against the right threats.
We are also asking for additional funding, funding that
meets the need, so people understand that as we add more
threats, we add more countermeasures, that requires us to pay
more for what we have.
But what we are also doing is BARDA is investing in threat-
agnostic countermeasures. We are no longer one bug, one drug.
We are looking for countermeasures that work against many of
the threats we face. And that is one of the things down the
line as we continue to innovate that will benefit all of us
moving forward, including making sure the stockpile is stocked
with those things that we need against the threats we face.
Mr.  Johnson. OK, thank you. And I will yield back an
entire eight seconds, Mr. Chairman.
Mr.  Guthrie. The gentleman yields back. The Chair now
recognizes Ms. Kelly for 5 minutes for questions.
Ms.  Kelly. Thank you, Mr. Chair, and thank you to Chair
Guthrie and Ranking Member Eshoo for holding today's hearing,
and thank you to all the witnesses for being here today.
Technology has become a significant part of our healthcare
delivery system. In the last few years, we have witnessed the
increased adoption of telehealth services to the increased
usage of remote technologies to monitor vital signs or blood
glucose levels. We are no longer in a world where health
information is shared with the confines of a building. While
our ability to share data is important, our ability to
safeguard health information is vital. Cybersecurity breaches
compromise our response to coordinate and deliver care.
Dr. Califf, the 2023 omnibus bill that was enacted last
December included important provisions regarding cybersecurity,
specifically on medical device cybersecurity. The law requires
the Secretary of HHS to update public information provided by
the FDA regarding improving the cybersecurity of devices within
180 days of enactment. Would you provide an update on how that
process is coming along, and any examples of what FDA is
planning to share with the public?
Dr.  Califf. Sure. I appreciate the interest in this, and
we have been hard at work, particularly CDRH within the FDA,
holding a variety of public sessions, the websites have been
updated, videos that are available to the public, and many
discussions with the industries that are involved.
So requirements to provide information and guidance to the
industry and to the public, I think, is being met as specified
in the law. But I do want to emphasize this is a race where the
threat continues to increase at a very high level, and we are
going to need to add more on our side of the equation to make
sure, for example, laboratory-developed tests could be an entry
for cyber--entry into healthcare systems. And it is all part of
a composite picture that we are working on.
Ms.  Kelly. Thank you for your response.
Dr. Walensky, good to see you. Thank you for your service.
As today marks the end of the Federal public health emergency
for COVID-19, we must ensure that we are prepared, as you know,
for any future pandemics. In your testimony you speak about the
need to build a more robust, interoperable data and analytics
public health system.
How can the Federal Government support your efforts to
build out a national data infrastructure for all hazards,
whether it is hurricanes, wildfires, tornadoes--not just
pandemics--that is capable of efficiently sharing important
public health information amongst [audio malfunction] bad
actors do not have unintended access to data?
Dr.  Walensky. Yes, thank you so much for that question.
So we are hard at work in our data modernization efforts to
ensure that our data systems are interoperable, that the data
highways can flow. And that has been a lot of work that is
happening at CDC.
What we need to make sure of after that--and we need your
help with--is to make sure that there's actually cars on the
highway once we build those highways. We don't currently have
the authorities for those cars to be on the highways.
If there is an acute rare event that is happening in one
State and an acute rare event that is happening in another, if
they are not reported to CDC they will not be connected. And
what we would like to have the authorities to do is to see
those rare events that are occurring or not-so-rare events that
are occurring, so that we can actually send the data back to
the States, they can recognize maybe we are not alone in this.
I gave the example of Mpox, and I will give it again. We
had a public health emergency that allowed us more data
authorities on August 4th. We had our peak number of cases of
Mpox in this country on August 1st. Things were already
trending down before we had line of sight of all the data that
we needed. And after we had it, it took us 2 months to get data
use agreements in place so that we could see where vaccine was
being utilized.
We also need, from a public health emergency preparedness
standpoint and our public health emergency grants, to make sure
that we are not simply focused on pandemic flu, that we are
focused beyond pandemic flu. Because we have seen, certainly in
my last 2\1/2\ years, that there are many more infectious
threats, including Mpox, paralytic polio, measles, Ebola that
potentially could come our way. So we do need to expand that
beyond pandemic flu alone. Thank you.
Ms.  Kelly. Thank you so much for your response and, again,
thank all of you for your service.
And I am yielding back 22 seconds.
[Laughter.]
Mr.  Bucshon [presiding]. The gentlelady yields back. I now
recognize myself for 5 minutes.
I first want to say, Dr. Walensky, thank you for your
service to your country. I appreciate it. I appreciate the
opportunity to learn more today about many important things our
Government agencies do to try to prepare for potential hazards.
I mean, this is really a critical hearing.
Be it chemical threat, biological threat, cyber attack, or
infectious disease, this bill, PAHPA, is about much more than
COVID-19. Of course, with the recent COVID-19 pandemic, all of
us now have more real-life experience with some of these
programs than we probably ever wanted or knew that we needed.
I do think it is important that we assess what happened and
learn from those experiences, so I will start with a question
related to that. During the course of the COVID-19 pandemic we
have heard a lot about testing, diagnostic capabilities, and
the challenges that arose when some of these capacities were
strained and outright inaccurate.
As my colleagues and Dr. Califf know, I have had some
thoughts in the past about how the FDA should restructure to
approach diagnostic testing, and I have legislation called the
VALID Act, which has specific provisions that would help
accelerate FDA review of diagnostic tests in a pandemic
situation.
But on a broader level, Assistant Secretary O'Connell, HHS
and ASPR does not have a testing and diagnostics preparedness
plan in place. Is that correct?
Ms.  O'Connell. We do have a testing and diagnostics
working group that sits within our industrial base management
and supply chain work that is currently working against the
testing challenges that we face.
Mr.  Bucshon. Yes, so that is the one that you are in the
process of developing a more definitive plan.
Do you think something explicit along these lines would be
helpful to better facilitate future efforts to develop, scale,
procure, and distribute diagnostics during a public health
emergency, a really specific ASPR plan as it relates to that?
Ms.  O'Connell. We have seen how important it is to have
tests and diagnostics available at the beginning of any
outbreak or pandemic, and so we continue to work against those
challenges to make sure that we are able to provide the tests
that are needed.
Mr.  Bucshon. Great. I would also like to ask about the
sterilization process.
As you all likely know, EPA has recently issued a proposal
on ethylene dioxide, or--I will call it EtO. I am concerned
about these regulations and the potential impact of EtO
facility closures, and the subsequent impact on patient safety
and device supply.
Dr. Califf, the FDA is on record as having serious concerns
about the potential impact of EtO limitations. In 2020 the FDA
published a list of critical devices to respond to a pandemic,
60 percent of which were sterilized by ethylene dioxide. As we
examine domestic capability to respond to future health
security threats, do you consider domestic medical product
sterilization capacity critical to ensuring the U.S. can
protect the American people?
Dr.  Califf. The short answer to that is yes.
Mr.  Bucshon. Yes. And so, on this situation with ethylene
dioxide, if that--if the EPA does, for example, restrict that
substantially, what do you see as our viable alternatives to
maintain our preparedness?
Dr.  Califf. Well, as you know, we do have concerns. And
just a sudden restriction would create substantial difficulty
with critical medical devices. So EPA is in the lead in this.
We are working on it. There is an interagency process.
We are also working with the industry to come up with
alternatives. I wish I could say there is a ready alternative
in a short period of time.
Mr.  Bucshon. Yes.
Dr.  Califf. There is not, but we need a national
investment in those alternatives.
Mr.  Bucshon. Thank you.
Assistant Secretary, do you have any comments on that?
Ms.  O'Connell. We will continue to support our FDA
colleagues in this process.
Mr.  Bucshon. Thank you. Good answer. Pretty definitive.
Doesn't tell me a lot, but it is still definitive.
[Laughter.]
Mr.  Bucshon. There has been a lot of talk about data
today. Unfortunately, the public--and Dr. Walensky, we have
talked about this--there is a lot of public mistrust, you know,
at--with CDC, which I think is just horribly unfortunate.
I mean--and so, as it relates to the data and authorities
provided during the public health emergency, you know, how are
we going to be able to give you more authority, especially
when, you know, the situation is--you still haven't been able
to--what extent those authorities will be used, and how they
will be used, I mean, when we have a lack of public confidence?
I had legislation on--somewhat related to this, and we--and
it really kind of blew up, politically and otherwise.
Dr.  Walensky. Yes, I am really grateful for the question
and for your efforts here.
So much of what you commented on early in terms of
accountability and transparency has been our efforts in ``CDC
Moving Forward,'' and we have had discussions about that,
increasing our communication towards the American people,
moving our data faster, having guidelines that's implementable
and on the ground.
In terms of the data authorities, I also want to just
highlight that it is the local health departments that need
individualized data. It is not the CDC. The CDC is really
looking for population-based data. When there is contact
tracing that is happening, that is happening at the local
level. The data that we are looking for is really population-
based data, so that we can actually feed it back to
populations.
And so I do really want to be clear. We are not looking for
identifiable information----
Mr.  Bucshon. Great.
Dr.  Walensky. That happens at the local level. It is the
population-based data we are looking----
Mr.  Bucshon. Right, and I understand that. How do we get
that message out is difficult. It is de-identified, population-
based data. I understand.
I yield. Now I recognize Ms. Blunt Rochester for 5 minutes
for questions.
Ms.  Blunt Rochester. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Ranking
Member Eshoo, and to our witnesses for your presence, and also
for your service.
This hearing focuses us on preparing for and responding to
future public health security threats. Although the pandemic
highlighted the fragility of our drug supply chains, the United
States was dealing with persistent drug shortages prior to the
pandemic. We continue to experience drug shortages to this day.
Every month, my constituents write to me describing their
struggles and frustrations with drug shortages, ranging from
Adderall to children's Tylenol to medications for diabetes.
They are imploring us to take action.
So I thank you. I thank you all for being here today to
explain how the administration plans to keep Americans safe
from existing and future supply chain and public health
disruptions.
Dr. Califf, the FDA is requesting additional transparency
authority to require manufacturers to tell you which suppliers
provide them with the ingredients they use to manufacture their
drugs. Can you describe the gaps FDA still has in its
understanding of the drug supply chain and how what you are
requesting will benefit the American people?
Dr.  Califf. Sure, thanks. This is a difficult problem that
we are all struggling with, and very noticeable, as you point
out.
The primary gap we have is that what we need is the API,
active pharmaceutical ingredient. Essentially, the raw material
gets processed in one place, sent to another place, where the
pill is made, and then sent through a distribution chain to
where it eventually lands. We have in sight--line of sight into
parts of that chain but not all of it. And in particular, the
API which often is coming from India or China right now, we
have very little insight into how that is working.
How would we use the information if we had it? As long as
things are fine, we have no interest in interfering with the
private business of medical product distribution. But when
there is a problem or an impending problem, we need to work
across the manufacturers who otherwise don't share data--it is
confidential commercial information--and we need to get them to
coordinate to make up for if there is a deficit one place, to
make up for it in another place. And there are four or five
ways we do this that we can go into in detail.
Ms.  Blunt Rochester. So why is the data already required
to be submitted under current law insufficient to help FDA
understand which suppliers the manufacturers rely on?
Dr.  Califf. Because the requirement right now is only for
part of the information that we need in particular aspects of
the distribution system. We do get--and when it is required, we
get good data, and we have beautiful graphics now to show it.
But we are missing these key elements. It is like holes in the
system that we can't see that turn out to be critical elements
of the system.
Ms.  Blunt Rochester. Yes, I would agree with you. I
actually, as part of my comments, mentioned the fact that the
lack of data and the supply chain transparency make it
difficult to estimate the precise share of the key U.S. drugs
and APIs imported from abroad. But we can guess that a lot of
them, as you just suggested, come from China and India.
My legislation, the Supply Chains Act, would support the
creation of manufacturing jobs in the United States and the
relocation of critical supply chains to the U.S. or U.S. allies
and key international partners. So I believe we have the same
goals in mind.
In June of 2021 the President released a report that
assessed supply chain vulnerabilities across four key products.
Pharmaceuticals and APIs were one of them. To reverse the
decades-long decline in U.S. manufacturing and economic
leadership, Congress has invested heavily in onshoring critical
manufacturing.
Dr. Califf, as we ramp up domestic API and pharmaceutical
manufacturing, what are the top three things we can do in the
short term to address and mitigate drug shortages?
Dr.  Califf. Well, I would put at the top of the list the
better information that we talked about. The authority to make
that happen is very important.
And then there is the communication that needs to occur
across the companies that I described, very important for us to
be able to do.
And then there is coordination within the Government.
Also, because Ms. O'Connell and I spend a lot of time
talking about this right now, about how to put the pieces
together--because, again, very often with medical supplies you
can make up for a shortage by doing something else and
compensate for it. But I want to stress again this doesn't
solve the fundamental economic problem that----
Ms.  Blunt Rochester. Right.
Dr.  Califf [continuing]. Onshoring is going to require
that we have a viable system whereby American companies can
actually make a profit if they are in the business in
peacetime.
Ms.  Blunt Rochester. Yes. Thank you so much.
I just want to end by saying Congressman Buddy Carter and I
have introduced the Essential Medicines Strategic Stockpile Act
to provide that short-term solution, and I look forward to
working with my colleagues across the aisle to make sure we
address these issues that affect our health, our wealth, and
our national security.
Thank you, and I yield back.
Mr.  Bucshon. The gentlelady yields back. I now recognize
Mr. Carter for 5 minutes for his line of questions.
Mr.  Carter. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you all for
being here.
Dr. Walensky, I want to thank you for hosting us at the CDC
a few weeks back, a delegation of--the Georgia delegation, as
well as members of the Doctors Caucus that I led down there.
Thank you very much, and thank you for your service, and good
luck in your future endeavors.
Folks, you know, I have always said there is a difference
in knowing something and realizing it. And I think that we knew
we were too dependent on foreign countries for our
pharmaceuticals, for our PPE. But we realized it during the
pandemic, when all of a sudden we couldn't get it, and it was a
big problem.
One thing that concerned me was that in the Doctors Caucus
we were told by, I think, a very reliable source that although
we didn't know about the pandemic until about February of 2020,
there was actually a downtick in the amount of PPE that was
coming from China that could be traced all the way back to the
fall of 2019. They knew that there was a problem. They knew
that they had a problem over there, and they were hoarding PPE.
That was told to us. So that tells us and it gives us an
important lesson to be learned there, and that is that we need
to be prepared. And that is essentially what we have been
talking about all day and essentially what we are trying to do.
One of the things that I wanted to mention--and I
appreciate Representative Blunt Rochester mentioning this--is
that I have legislation--she and I together have legislation
called the Essential Medicines Strategic Stockpile Act, and
this will allow private and public sectors to partner with--or
the private sector to partner with the Federal Government, so
that we can stockpile generic drugs that are at a risk of
shortage.
We know what this causes. As a pharmacist, I have
experienced this. I have seen the horrible situation that we
can get into when we have a shortage, particularly now as we
are experiencing with amoxicillin, essential antibiotics, and
that.
I wanted to ask you, Ms. O'Connell, I wanted to get your
thoughts on this approach of the Essential Medicines Strategic
Stockpile Act that, as I say, would give the private sector the
opportunity to work with the Federal Government so that we can
stockpile generic drugs that we know could be at a risk of
shortage.
Ms.  O'Connell. So as the facilitator, of course, of the
Strategic National Stockpile, we would be pleased to engage in
a technical assistance process as you are thinking about this
legislation, some things that have worked, some things that
haven't worked, if there is any benefit to--you know, to doing
it as you propose.
You know, one of the things that we are approaching, just
so you know, is making sure the supply chain is strong but that
the stockpile is the backstop for that. So we are looking at a
continuum across both and would be really happy to engage with
you on that.
Mr.  Carter. Well, and I hope that we will be able to work
with you, and I hope that we can have your commitment that you
will work with us, and--because it is something we need to
address and something--we certainly feel like this is a good
approach to it.
We also have another piece of legislation that deals with
State stockpiles. And please understand that this is not to
replace the national stockpiles. But instead, it is to
complement it. And this is--this would be a pilot program. And
in fact, there were some--some of the provisions of this were
actually passed in the recent legislation and the recent
omnibus. And I wanted to ask you, do you know, Ms. O'Connell,
if any of this is working or not?
Ms.  O'Connell. So thank you for that provision in the
PREVENT bill, and we are aware of that. No additional funding
came with that, but we continue to provide that technical
assistance to States.
And it is interesting, you know, as States undertake this,
there is a challenge on what you keep in, what you move out,
how often you replace, how much you need. And we are very happy
to work with them to give advice on how we face these complex
problems, as well.
Mr.  Carter. Good, thank you.
Dr. Califf, I wanted to ask you, because I am reading a
book now, ``China Rx,'' and it talks about the API and how we
really--the labeling process by which the FDA requires the
manufacturers to label this, can you explain that to me?
Because in the way the book describes it, it is kind of
haphazard.
Dr.  Califf. Well, that--I would hate to describe it as
totally haphazard; maybe kind of haphazard in Southern talk.
Mr.  Carter. Kind of. Yes, well----
[Laughter.]
Dr.  Califf. It would be a good description.
Mr.  Carter. We do like Southern talk around here.
[Laughter.]
Dr.  Califf. So you talk of it--you think of it as a bulk
substance, which then is made into a pill. There is no tracking
mechanism right now required that we know where that bulk
substance comes from and where it goes as it gets into the
final pill which is then distributed in the U.S. and to the
public.
So as your colleague pointed out on the other side--and
thank you for working on this together, I think it is really a
good thing--that means that we can't keep track of how
dependent we actually are. We know we are very dependent right
now. And I would point out there is a report from FDA in 2019
that lays this out in great detail. And I think, because the
pandemic hit shortly after, it sort of--everyone was swept up
in dealing with it.
But having--just think of it as chain of custody. Like many
other things we do in life, we start with the bulk substance.
There should be line of sight into the entire chain of custody.
And I would stress again it is commercial confidential
information. We do a pretty good job at FDA at keeping
commercial confidential information. But if we have to
reconstruct it, much like Dr. Walensky was saying, for public
health when there is a crisis, it takes forever. We need to be
able to look when it is needed to preempt these problems.
Mr.  Carter. Great. Well, I am out of time, but I do want
to talk further about this and see how we can assist you in
getting to that common goal.
Dr.  Califf. I look forward to it. I can't resist saying we
are almost in seersucker time here again.
Mr.  Carter. We are, almost, and I got mine ready.
Dr.  Califf. I look forward to meeting with you then.
Mr.  Carter. Thank you.
Ms.  Eshoo. OK.
Mr.  Guthrie. The gentleman yields back.
Ms.  Eshoo. That is enough of Southern talk.
Mr.  Guthrie. I recognize Dr. Schrier for her 5 minutes.
Ms.  Schrier. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you for all
being here today. I just want to start first by saying we
worked a lot, all of us, during the pandemic. And there were
frustrations along the way, and lots of challenges. I want to
thank you for working with me. And, you know, in retrospect, we
really did do, and thanks to you, a pretty remarkable job in
dealing with a crisis amid a lot of public pushback and
misinformation that made whatever we provided, whether that was
masks or tests, a challenge in the real world.
I would love to talk with you today about lessons learned,
and I would like to start with Assistant Secretary O'Connell.
We have talked many times before, and, you know I am a
pediatrician, so I am focused on children. And I appreciated
your answer to Mr. Cardenas. I also wanted to make sure that in
future disasters children are a first thought and not an
afterthought. They are not just little adults. And part of that
is making sure that we have healthcare providers who are
available and ready to surge.
We already have a threatened shortage of pediatricians, and
I am not going to ask you a question about how to increase the
pipeline for pediatricians. That is a bigger scope. But I am
going to ask you, you know, how can we ensure that there is
surge capacity to make sure that in an emergency we have the
workforce needed to address children's needs?
Ms.  O'Connell. Congresswoman, thank you so much for that
question. That is a concern of ours, you know, making sure that
the special populations--the children, the seniors, those with
disabilities--are accounted for in all of our plans moving
forward, that their care is taken care of and provided in an
appropriate way.
So we have the National Disaster Medical System, which are,
you know, teams of clinicians that go out and decompress
hospitals when they are overwhelmed. And we keep pediatricians
and pediatric nurses on those teams. And when we need to, we
will go into a NICU or a PICU to make sure that, if those
hospitals are overwhelmed like we saw with RSV and flu this
winter, that there is a team that can come in and help those
care providers on the scenes by adding additional surge
capacity, as you suggest--really important that we don't lose
sight of how important that care is in these times.
Ms.  Schrier. And I would even suggest, as a community
pediatrician, like, really even more assertive outreach so that
people understand that this system exists. And, you know, all
pediatric hospitals were strained at the same time, so it is
very hard to do without pulling people from outside the
hospitals to get them to work in the hospitals. And I am happy
to work with you on that.
I had another question. This one is about the Strategic
National Stockpile and making sure that we have enough in order
to meet children's needs. This came up when we were even facing
a formula shortage and thinking, ``Oh, gosh, you know, this is
kind of like a medicine, kind of like food. We should have this
in the stockpile.'' And so I was just wondering if, you know,
what are you doing to make sure that there's appropriately
sized masks and appropriately sized intubation kits, formula,
other needs, dosing guides for children?
Ms.  O'Connell. So, whenever possible, the stockpile
procures the things that children can use in times of
emergency. So that is really important. And when that is not
possible, they work very closely with subject matter experts
and specialists to figure out how to repurpose what they do
have in ways that children will be taken care of. But whenever
possible, they look to procure things that the children can
use.
Ms.  Schrier. Thank you. It is--this was a disease that
mostly hit adults, and we were lucky this time, but we don't
know what the next one will bring.
I am not sure where my time is because I think that clock
is wrong. But Dr. Califf, I am going to just go to you until
you cut me off. I wanted to ask you about--well, first, thank
you for your work with me on tests.
I read in your in your statement, your testimony, about
drug shortages, what we are doing to prevent them, how to have
an early warning system. So I just perused this morning the
list of shortages of medications. And with the eye of a
pediatrician, I noticed albuterol solutions on there,
lidocaine, epinephrine, amoxicillin, these--saline.
These are a really big deal for kids. And so I am wondering
if you have started to make any of the changes to address these
shortages. Like, how is it working in this transition period to
make sure we don't get in and stay in this situation?
Dr.  Califf. I have described it as plugging the holes in
the dike. And we have gotten better and better at that, because
if you look at the number of impending shortages, it is going
like that. We are up in the multiple hundreds, whereas the
number of actual shortages is staying at around 40 or so per
year. But that is too many. And these impending shortages do
create stresses, as you know, in practices and the hospitals.
So we have got to fix the fundamental underlying issues,
which I know is the subject of another hearing that was going
on this morning. Most of that, we believe, is not in the
purview of the FDA. It has to do with the economics,
particularly of sterile, injectable medications and issues like
antibiotics, where--I don't know about you, even in a not-for-
profit pediatric practice, if I said I have got a great deal
for you, you can see all the patients in the world and you are
going to lose money on every patient you see, I just don't
think that that is something that people are going to sign up
for very easily.
Ms.  Schrier. Yes, we do need to address----
Dr.  Califf. So we have got to----
Ms.  Schrier [continuing]. The economics, for sure.
Dr.  Califf. Yes.
Ms.  Schrier. Although the economics are pretty darn good
for ADHD medications, and we are even in shortages of those.
Dr.  Califf. Well, if I may, I think that is a different
issue that is very complicated because of the role of the DEA.
And as much as I am in favor of telehealth and very excited
about continuing it, there has been a misuse of telehealth by
companies giving bonuses for the number of prescriptions
written. So I think the Adderall situation is a very different,
complex set of issues. I am happy to discuss----
Mr.  Bucshon. The gentlelady's time has expired.
Ms.  Schrier. I agree, thank you.
Mr.  Bucshon. The gentlelady yields back. I yield to Dr.
Dunn for his 5 minutes.
Mr.  Dunn. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate
the opportunity to begin the discussion surrounding the
reauthorization of the Pandemic Preparedness Act.
When I came to Congress, I had no idea how many disasters
we would be dealing with: hurricanes, war in Europe, and a
global pandemic. You know, I appreciate the opportunity to make
improvements in this preparedness.
We got many things right with the COVID-19 pandemic, but we
got some things wrong too. Operation Warp Speed was a success.
Failures included the unnecessary shutdown of society, much to
the detriment of our children, and inconsistent messaging from
our public health agencies who thereby lost the trust of the
American people.
In Florida our Governor questioned the Federal authorities
when appropriate. He followed the science and did what he
thought was best for the health and well-being of Florida.
One of the biggest failures of the pandemic was the general
lack of attention paid to possible therapeutics, both new and
old, off the shelf.
Throughout the course of the COVID-19 pandemic, my staff
and I were inundated with offers to help the Nation's response,
and it was actually inspiring to see the innovation of the
American people. It included everything from PPE manufactures,
new drugs, old drugs, well known, anything could be repurposed.
I was encouraged when we set up BARDA's Tech Watch, which I
understood was supposed to field and vet all these offers.
Unfortunately, it seemed the Government was only interested
in a certain narrow range of vaccines, monoclonals, and new
pharmaceuticals. So I--we often heard from stakeholders that
BARDA had told them after meetings that some product didn't
meet what they were looking for, although it seemed very
successful and useful. You know, the COVID-19 pandemic was
evolving and different needs at different times.
Secretary O'Connell, can you speak to how BARDA Tech
prioritizes the research and development of medical
countermeasures, including vaccines? Whatever you got on your
fingertips: vaccines, therapeutics, diagnostics, or devices.
Ms.  O'Connell. Thank you, Congressman, and thank you for
that question and for your interest in BARDA's Tech Watch
program.
They open up their doors to those that are looking at
innovative solutions to any number of problems that we have,
and offer these meetings that can be 30 minutes to an hour to
go through the technology that the meeting holder is seeking to
put forward. And--but it is market research that is done. You
know, it is understanding what is out there, figuring out what
the needs are.
And then there is another system that BARDA has for
actually applying for funding. So there's two different ones
that is in their BARDA broad agency announcements.
But regardless, if your constituents are having trouble
accessing BARDA, please let me know. Please work with my--have
my staff work with your staff, and I would like to make sure
that you don't have that problem moving forward, or anybody
doesn't have that problem moving forward.
Mr.  Dunn. I appreciate that. We certainly spoke to then-
Secretary--or Assistant Secretary at the time.
In thinking about this, Secretary O'Connell, if you think
about future pandemics--you mentioned the importance of the
seven viral families that are most likely to cause a pandemic,
and the need to develop medical countermeasures to defend
against these threats.
What is being done, you know, to help BARDA sort of think
outside the box when it comes to advanced R&D on these threats?
And specifically, you know, what responsibilities, not
just--in general, not just specific treatments.
Ms.  O'Connell. So it does worry me, the seven viral
families, you know, we had this head start with COVID because
we had done the work on coronaviruses because of MERS and SARS.
And now we know the seven viral families most likely to cause
the next pandemic, and we have asked for funding both in fiscal
year 2023 and now fiscal year 2024 to be able to jump start the
development of the prototype vaccines, therapeutics, and
diagnostics so we can put them on the shelf and pull them down
when that viral family hits, should it hit, and be able to ramp
up manufacturing very quickly.
So it is part of that preparedness, making sure we have got
a library of prototypes available. And in that process we are
looking at a lot of different innovations, and appreciate that
question. Among them, you know, right now we do vaccines
through a needle in a syringe. We are also looking at what it
would mean to do a patch with a microneedle, so it is easier
to----
Mr.  Dunn. So, if I may, I am concerned there is--of
course, the public is all fascinated with vaccines. But, you
know, traditionally the response to an epidemic or pandemic is
therapeutics, not vaccines. I mean, medicines, if you will.
And, you know, we seem to have fastened on the vaccines almost
to the exclusion of other options.
I know we did--Remdesivir didn't work. I know we did--
monoclonals are always going to be very, very, very specific
and expensive, you know, so, I mean, we could think of, you
know, therapeutics in terms of small molecules, like we do
antibiotics.
With that, Mr. Chairman, my time has expired. I yield back.
Mr.  Bucshon. The gentleman yields back. I now recognize
Mrs. Trahan for her 5 minutes.
Mrs.  Trahan. Well, thank you to the witnesses today, and
thank you to the Chairs and ranking members for holding this
important hearing.
We have a unique opportunity to take the lessons learned
over the past few years in the course of the COVID-19 pandemic
to use them to legislate in a way that better prepares our
health system to respond to future unknown public health
threats.
Two years ago my colleague across the aisle on the full
committee, Mr. Balderson, and I cofounded the bipartisan
Pandemic Preparedness Caucus. Now, alongside our cochairs,
including another member of this subcommittee, Mrs. Miller-
Meeks, we are coordinating closely with committee members to
reauthorize PAHPA. I encourage all the members of the
subcommittee to join the caucus and help support policies we
want to see in the reauthorization of this critical law.
It is no secret that a major issue during the pandemic was
the lack of visibility into the exact quantities of critical
medical equipment, supplies, and drugs that were on U.S. soil
at any given time. As a result, there was a surplus of products
in many parts of the Nation while hard-hit communities were
operating in crisis mode.
As we relied on community organizations like Community
Health Centers to respond to the pandemic, the lack of clarity
into PPE and other supplies was an extreme challenge that
hindered provider ability to deliver and inform care. So,
Assistant Secretary O'Connell, what were some of the challenges
the Nation faced due to the lack of clarity into the supply
chain?
And how would our future response efforts improve if we
established an automated data collection infrastructure that
enables real-time, accessible data that expands the visibility
into the entire supply chain?
Ms.  O'Connell. Congresswoman, thank you so much for that
question. It is exactly one of the problems that we witnessed
in March 2020, when everybody needed the exact same thing at
the exact same time, and it was manufactured somewhere else.
So improving on that has been one of the priorities that we
have had, and using the COVID dollars that you all have given
us over the course of the supplementals, we have continued to
invest in domestic manufacturing to bring some of that
manufacturing home. That gives us line of sight into what we
have. When it is manufactured here it is easier for us to tell
what we have and what we don't have.
We also know it was a problem that States and local
governments didn't know how to access the Strategic National
Stockpile. Now, the Strategic National Stockpile didn't have
all the things we needed at that time, but that was--would have
been an important thing for States to understand and to know.
And so we have done a lot of education and a lot of outreach to
States and local governments to make sure they understand what
is in it, and how often they can access it, and under what
circumstances.
We--as part of the PREVENT bill that came through, the
omnibus, we released a 60-day guidance for States and locals on
how they would access the Strategic National Stockpile.
The SNS is also doing Tribal consults to make sure that
those governments understand how to access what they need in
the stockpile. So we are trying to do an education in places
where we know people didn't have clear visibility.
Mrs.  Trahan. That is helpful. You know, I had a Lessons
Learned Pandemic Preparedness roundtable recently in my
district, and one thing I heard from those participants is
their, you know, frustration with the lack of coordination
between, you know, Federal, State, and local governments.
And you brought up what we were doing in the way of
awareness and education. And certainly, we want to figure out
what that means to us as we legislate. So are there ways that
we can leverage, you know, State response capacity to improve
our initial emergency response?
And has ASPR--you know, I think you are thinking through
forward-deploying with guardrails some SNS supplies to States
during nonemergency times so that they are in a better position
to quickly respond to future emergencies. And is there--and I
am just wondering, beyond what you are doing at ASPR, how
should we be thinking about legislating that?
Ms.  O'Connell. Well, I think one of the most important
things that we are very aware of--and I know you are, as well--
is that that--you know, these outbreaks start locally. And so
to have real clear communication between the local governments,
the State governments, and the Federal Government is really
important for them to know what we are doing, for us to know
what they are doing, for them to know what we are not able to
do, and what they should be doing. All of that is critical in
those early days.
And one of the things that we continue to do where we do
our outreach calls, make sure that we are coordinated with our
State health officials and others. I know CDC is actively
engaged in those communications, as well. We can't have
daylight between us. We are in this together.
Mrs.  Trahan. Yes. Well, I appreciate that. I just glanced
up at the clock, and I am sorry you saw my eyes move.
I don't have any more time to ask, Dr. Walensky, my
question that I had for you, but I will say that you will be
missed, although we won't miss you up in Boston. We look
forward to having you back. Thanks.
Mr.  Bucshon. The gentlelady yields back. I now recognize
Dr. Joyce for his 5 minutes.
Mr.  Joyce. Thank you for yielding, Mr. Chairman, and thank
you for the panel for appearing today.
Dr. Califf, just a few moments ago you mentioned about
shortages, and shortages that occurred during the pandemic. I
know that you and your colleagues are aware of another
potential shortage, because the FDA has raised concerns with
the EPA about the risks of sterile medical device shortages
from their proposals to limit the use of ethylene oxide.
I am concerned that the EPA's rules would limit our
domestic sterilization capacity for critical medical and
surgical products. I raised these issues with EPA Administrator
Regan at yesterday's hearing, and he committed to brief the
Energy and Commerce Committee and our staff alongside the FDA
to discuss these issues and take steps to ensure that any final
rules don't adversely impact physicians' and patients' access
to sterile equipment and treatments.
Dr. Califf, would you commit to appearing at a joint
briefing for the committee alongside with the EPA Administrator
before May 24th to address this important issue?
Dr.  Califf. As we discussed earlier with Dr. Bucshon, this
is a great concern to us. EPA is in the lead, and there is an
interagency process. So we will certainly work with EPA and you
to get these issues resolved.
Mr.  Joyce. Thank you. I appreciate that commitment.
Assistant Secretary O'Connell, the administration has
requested another 5 billion for their project, NextGen, for
COVID-19 vaccines and therapeutics. As a physician myself, this
cost and the administration's COVID-19 vaccine and drug
development track record is not that good.
At the time President Biden chose to dismantle Operation
Warp Speed, the country had three approved vaccines across two
different vaccine platforms, with a fourth vaccine using a
third platform going through approval. And despite
unprecedented levels of funding because of decisions by the
Biden administration, unfortunately we only have two vaccines,
and both of them using the new mRNA platform.
Therapeutics tell a similar and similarly disappointing
story. The Biden administration's major therapeutic development
programs, the NIAID-led Antiviral Program for Pandemics and the
joint NIAID-BARDA Antiviral Drug Discovery Centers for
Pathogens have yet to produce a single therapeutic, despite
spending 3 billion of taxpayer money and promises in June of
2021 of new treatments by year's end. Paxlovid and Lagevrio are
both developmental programs, but they are the only two that
remain for COVID-19 therapeutics. We currently have no
effective monoclonal antibodies.
Secretary O'Connell, can you provide us with an update of
what promising COVID treatments we can expect to have coming
out in the programs in the next 6 months?
Ms.  O'Connell. Congressman, thank you so much. So the next
generation of COVID vaccines and therapeutics are critical to
keeping the American public safe. You know, we know that we are
one or two mutations away from what have been effective
vaccines and antivirals from no longer being effective. So it
is really important that we continue to seek out this research
and development and--against a virus that has been nothing, if
not unpredictable.
One of the things that this program is going to focus on is
trying to find a monoclonal that is not--that is resistant to
any of the variants, that--one of the things that has impacted
the monoclonals that we have had are the various variants and
subvariants that have come out and rendered them ineffective.
So finding one that does not--that is not impacted by the
variants is going to be critical. So that is one of the places
where this program is going to focus.
We do need to have a range of therapeutics available. We
are lucky that we have the antivirals right now. But again, we
know that this virus has been nothing if not unpredictable, and
really important that we stay ahead of it.
Mr.  Joyce. The first awards were made a year ago, and as
best as I can tell the program hasn't generated a single
additional approved therapeutic. Can you please keep us
apprised as these developments occur? Because it is necessary
that we have all applicable, approved therapeutics available,
and I think that you have the resources to provide us with that
information. So I would appreciate being informed as this
continues to evolve.
Director Walensky, communication with public about
infectious disease events, particularly during public health
emergencies such as COVID-19, is crucial to a successful
response. You have publicly stated this, and I agree with you
on that. For many of my constituents, public trust in the CDC
has been decimated due to the guidance and public statements
that have been made by the administration. They don't match the
facts. And public data specifically regarding acquired immunity
seems to be something that has not been adequately addressed.
Can you please outline specifically efforts that the CDC
has in the timeliness and accuracy of guidance and
communications to the public, and how we can restore that faith
in the CDC?
Mr.  Bucshon. Can----
Dr.  Walensky. Thank----
Mr.  Bucshon. Dr. Walensky, his time is expired. Could you
answer that in maybe a written form, or----
Dr.  Walensky. I am happy to.
Mr.  Bucshon [continuing]. Maybe as a followup on another
Member's----
Mr.  Joyce. Thank you. I would appreciate that.
And again, thank you for presenting yourself to us here
today.
Mr.  Bucshon. The gentleman yields. I recognize Mrs.
Harshbarger for her 5 minutes.
Mrs.  Harshbarger. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Can you hear me
OK? These allergies, it is bad.
Thank you for being here. Thank you for your service, Dr.
Walensky. I enjoyed meeting you and talking with you down at
the CDC when we came in April.
My first question is, Dr. Califf, you know I have been a
compounding pharmacist for 36 years, and compounded medications
played an important role during the pandemic in meeting--
helping to meet these drug shortages, especially in
distribution to hospitals and COVID patients, items like hand
sanitizers, fentanyl for the ventilators, and I could go on and
on where we had to step in and do that due to shortages.
You know, I can look at the FDA website any given day and
see hundreds of drug shortages like you talked about, and I
have done that over the course of all those years I have been a
pharmacist. Shouldn't the FDA have a regulatory framework in
place for compounding pharmacies to help mitigate shortages,
including shortages of drugs urgently needed by providers to
administer in clinical settings?
Dr.  Califf. Well, thanks for bringing that up. I actually
was a compounding physician earlier in my career, when IV
nitroglycerin on coronary care units was needed, so we ran a
little compounding facility.
Mrs.  Harshbarger. Well, we have that----
Dr.  Califf. So I understand the issues very much.
I think we feel like right now we have a lot of flexibility
when there are--emergencies do occur, as happened here. But
your idea of thinking about a permanent solution or guidance on
that flexibility, I think, is a good thing to work on.
Mrs.  Harshbarger. Well, I am here to help you, trust me,
you know, because right now we have these policy guidances, and
they are issued, basically, when you have a drug shortage.
So does the FDA shortage list adequately capture regional
shortages and shortages at the wholesale level?
Dr.  Califf. Well, the term ``adequate'' is a bit
subjective, but I would say it could be better because, I mean,
particularly for rural areas----
Mrs.  Harshbarger. Yes.
Dr.  Califf [continuing]. What we have learned with infant
formula, for example, is we are above where we were before the
recall, but there's still some rural areas that have shortages.
Mrs.  Harshbarger. Oh, yes.
Dr.  Califf. So understanding the total distribution system
is difficult.
Mrs.  Harshbarger. I have--exactly. And we are here to help
you with that, believe me.
Would you consider recognizing the American Society of
Health-System Pharmacists' shortage listing? It is even a more
complete listing.
Dr.  Califf. Well, I guess--what is the right political
word? Everything is on the table.
Mrs.  Harshbarger. Great, thank you.
Dr.  Califf. We will consider----
Mrs.  Harshbarger. I appreciate that.
Dr.  Califf. I can't commit to anything, of course, but----
Mrs.  Harshbarger. OK, no worries.
Dr.  Califf [continuing]. We will talk.
Mrs.  Harshbarger. We will follow up.
Why does the FDA issue guidance related to compounding of
certain things like your ibuprofen products, but you haven't
taken similar steps to increase the supply of other medications
like acetaminophen?
And you mentioned that you are compiling a list of critical
medications, a global list. And I hope to goodness you have
antibiotic therapies on there as well as chemotherapy drugs.
And, I mean, I could probably make the list myself, but----
Dr.  Califf. You know, I once--I was involved in trying to
recruit Dr. Walensky to come to Duke to head up our infectious
disease division.
Mrs.  Harshbarger. Well----
Dr.  Califf. Ever since then----
Mrs.  Harshbarger. She is going to be available, she says.
[Laughter.]
Dr.  Califf. It seems like every time she talks, she
reminds me of the antibiotic issue. And we are well aware it
is----
Mrs.  Harshbarger. There you go. It is a huge----
Dr.  Califf. It is a very special problem. We--I mean, on a
serious note, antibiotic resistance and the need to have
antibiotics in reserve----
Mrs.  Harshbarger. Oh, totally.
Dr.  Califf [continuing]. Is a really serious issue.
Mrs.  Harshbarger. Well, that brings me to this: What about
a priority on friendshoring with allied nations?
You mentioned that the database in Israel--how complete the
healthcare database was, and we know that--for its citizens.
Why not create a new staging ground for manufacturing with
Israel and the Abraham Accord countries, are you open to that?
Dr.  Califf. I am open to----
Mrs.  Harshbarger. You are open.
Dr.  Califf. Like I say, everything on the table----
Mrs.  Harshbarger. Everything is on the table.
Dr.  Califf. Remember, my career was largely spent doing
international global clinical trials.
Mrs.  Harshbarger. Yes.
Dr.  Califf. And I feel like I have a deep knowledge of
what happens in multiple countries. There is a lot to trust.
Mrs.  Harshbarger. Yes.
Dr.  Califf. There is a real opportunity in working----
Mrs.  Harshbarger. A lot of innovation.
Dr.  Califf [continuing]. With people. But, just like with
compounding pharmacies, there are things that can go wrong.
Mrs.  Harshbarger. Well----
Dr.  Califf. So we do need----
Mrs.  Harshbarger [continuing]. That is just the world----
Dr.  Califf. We do need regulations and----
Mrs.  Harshbarger [continuing]. That we live in.
Dr.  Califf [continuing]. And checks in the system.
Mrs.  Harshbarger. Yes. Thank you, sir. Yes.
Ms. O'Connell, you know we are looking at things to ensure
American taxpayer dollars are not--are spent not only to
prepare for potential disasters but also prioritize and support
domestic production. And, you know, we need to look at tax and
trade policies to promote that. It is kind of like--what did we
just have? We had an amoxicillin shortage. I have the only
plant in the country that makes amoxicillin, and it is in my
district. But do you know what? They don't have a Government
contract, and they ship their--their first line was shipped to
another country.
So there's things that we need to look at, and things that
I may be able to help you with that--where we could--even
repurposing drugs, Dr. Neal and I talked to a geneticist. We
have 7,500 drugs we can repurpose with the DoD just for such an
emergency as the next pandemic. There's a lot--I have got a lot
of ideas, just ask me.
And I know I am out of time.
Mr.  Bucshon. Yes, the gentlelady is out, time has expired.
Mrs.  Harshbarger. OK. I will get with you later. Thank
you.
I yield back----
Dr.  Califf. Could I give one quick anecdote?
Mr.  Bucshon. Yes.
Dr.  Califf. I worked in that plant that you are talking
about 30 years ago, when it was SmithKline. So----
Mrs.  Harshbarger. Yes.
Dr.  Califf. And I talked with the CEO multiple times this
year, so we will talk.
Mr.  Bucshon. The gentlelady yields back.
[Laughter.]
Ms.  Eshoo. You got a lot of talking to do.
Mr.  Bucshon. I recommend--I now recognize Dr. Miller-Meeks
for her 5 minutes.
Mrs.  Miller-Meeks. OK. I don't know how to follow that,
but thank you, Mr. Chair, thank you to our panelists for being
here.
Dr. Walensky, let me just echo my colleagues in thanking
you for your service. Having been the former director of a--
just a mere State department of public health, I think the
challenge in coming in to an agency such as the CDC at the
height of a pandemic is extraordinarily difficult, and I
appreciate your service. That doesn't mean I am going to be
easy or not going to have some concerns and questions.
And first and foremost, since I heard the mention of
infection-acquired immunity, I just wanted to have entered into
the record a letter from the Doctors Caucus to the CDC
September 28th, 2021, asking for clarification on infection-
acquired immunity.
And the reason the issue is important is that we are
talking about capacity, surge capacity, allocation of
resources. And when our agencies are not nimble enough to look
at the science and the research, dissect through that research,
and put forward reasonable proposals and recommendations, then
we misallocate resources, both personnel, workforce, as well as
vaccines or other supplies, especially when they are things
that are extraordinarily expensive.
And we have talked about having a surge capacity, and that
is not only a workforce surge capacity, that is a testing
capacity, as well. And that goes into reagents, swabs, all of
the things which we found that we were lacking at the top of
this pandemic. And it also is how you allocate the people at
your disposal and those who are not under your agencies, which
means how do we utilize our research laboratories? How do we
utilize our public-private partnerships to have them as part of
our surge mechanism? And if those are not in part of our
pandemic plan, then Congress will direct you, because there's
plenty of us here that have ideas on both Strategic National
Stockpile and workforce issues.
One of the things that I think Dr. Bucshon had mentioned
earlier was talking about H.R. 550 and data, and data
collection. And so, Dr. Walensky, the CDC continues to engage
Congress and push for increased data authority, which has--it
has been a key part of your testimony today. And you also say
that the data authority will enable information to travel more
seamlessly to those who need it, eliminating duplication,
making data sharing less complex.
The duplicative comment is interesting, because the CDC
currently operates over 100 public health surveillance--and you
might have addressed this earlier--surveillance systems that
collect ongoing data from more than 3,000 State, local,
territorial, and Tribal partners. And this would appear to
cause some major reporting burdens, duplication of efforts,
discrepancies among the data elements, and the need to use
multiple IT systems, which may also lead to increased costs as
well as some difficulty in communication.
It would seem to me that the CDC needs to address its data
systems in house before requesting even more mandated data
authority. Do you agree with this or not agree with this?
Dr.  Walensky. Maybe two points. First I just want to
address the letter that you had sent to us in September of 2021
on infection-induced immunity and note that we had our first
scientific brief that was posted in October 2021 outlining the
totality of the science as we were aware of just a month later.
So that was something that has been key on our mind.
Mrs.  Miller-Meeks. Change recommendations.
Dr.  Walensky. That was--we can have another--I mean, I am
happy to chat about that. And we have, actually.
You know, I do want to talk about the data, because one of
the things that we are--and we are working to actually
streamline the data that comes into us to make it easier. I can
give you an example out of Oregon Health Information Systems,
where their streamlining in their data modernization saved them
145,000 person-hours over just 11 months because they were not
doing manual data entry. That is the goal that we are actually
working towards, not only distributed across the States, but
within the CDC.
While we are doing that, as we are building those highways
and streamlining those, decreasing those person-hours so
everything is more automated, we will have those highways, but
they will be free of data if we don't also have the authorities
to get that collection in.
Mrs.  Miller-Meeks. And then I only have a little bit more
time. So when we went into our legislative pause as I was a
State senator, one of the things I had suggested was, having
been in the military, to set up a reserve force. And so I think
that we are trying to have that same concept within the CDC.
And I am wondering if you can address the U.S. Public Health
Service Commissioned Corps and how were they utilized.
So my understanding is that, at the height of the COVID-19
pandemic, that only half of the officers were actually
deployed. So were these officers at the CDC? Were they at
regional offices? And why were so few deployed in the actual
surveillance mechanisms and vaccination efforts? If you could,
address that quickly. Thank you.
Dr.  Walensky. Thank you for that question. I would be--
first I would love to thank you all in Congress and--for our
ability to actually execute on the Public Health Service
AmeriCorps, because that is among the things that we are
looking to hire 3,000 reserve public health workers for exactly
that reason.
You talk about the Commissioned Corps, and I am happy to
come back to you with some definitive data on that, except to
say that many of those Commissioned Corps within CDC and were
deployed within CDC. So I don't know that they would have
actually counted as deployment. They were deployed to a
response, but they were--might have been working in our center
on, I don't know, meningitis, but they were, you know, deployed
to the COVID-19 response, and that might not have been tallied
in your numbers. Thank you.
Mrs.  Miller-Meeks. If you could give us in writing some
more clarification on that, that would be appreciated.
Dr.  Walensky. I am happy to.
Mrs.  Miller-Meeks. Thank you, Mr. Chair. I yield back my--
--
Mr.  Bucshon. The gentlelady yields back. I now recognize
Mr. Griffith for 5 minutes.
Mr.  Griffith. I thank the gentleman.
Dr. Califf, in 2020 the CARES Act gave FDA enhanced data
collection to help mitigate drug shortages. In your response to
our March 27th, 2023, letter on drug shortages, you claimed
only 44 percent of registered facilities have complied. Is that
correct?
Dr.  Califf. That was true at the time, but it is gradually
getting better.
Mr.  Griffith. Have you--has the FDA enforced any actions
against the noncompliant facilities?
Dr.  Califf. I will have to get back with you on that. I am
not aware of any particular actions or exactly what the actions
would need to be, other than reminding them of their
responsibilities.
Mr.  Griffith. Yes, we--and I would love for you to get
back with me on that and send me a written response. I would
appreciate that.
We heard in the drug shortage hearing that was happening
downstairs earlier today that the economic pressures are a big
factor in causing shortages, particularly in the generic field.
This has led to one in four generic medications being filled in
the U.S. The companies--one in four--have received FDA warning
letters.
Do you agree that there are economic factors at play that
we must address, such as group purchasing organizations, if we
are going to be able to have a better supply chain for our
generic medications?
Dr.  Califf. It sounds like the hearing downstairs is
getting to the core of the issue. There are economic--like I
was saying before, if I offered you the chance to produce a
drug and guaranteed you would lose money on every pill you
made, it is unlikely you would go into that business. And you
might also skimp on your quality systems and manufacturing,
which then leads, when we do inspections, to find problems.
So we have got to fix the core economics if we are going to
get the situation fixed. We can plug the holes with the things
that we have talked about, with better data and talking to the
companies to make up for problems when they occur, but we need
to prevent them.
Mr.  Griffith. Well, one of the things that we got into
downstairs--and you never have enough time to get into
everything when you only get 5 minutes of questions, but one of
the things we got into was the fact that we are heavily reliant
on China and heavily reliant on India for the API to make the
medications in the United States. Most of it is coming from
Asia.
And part of the concern was that we do such a job on
inspecting American manufacturers and holding them to a high
level, but then we don't do inspections overseas. And so not
only is it cheaper from a labor standpoint, but it is also--you
are not likely to have as many inspections from the FDA at your
overseas locations. Doesn't that force our manufacturing
offshore and make it more difficult for us to supply medicines
for Americans?
Dr.  Califf. I have had the privilege and experience of
working in both China and India in my private and academic
life. We inspect in India and hold India to the same standards
as we do the U.S. We have had a problem in China the last
several years, as you well know. And during the pandemic it was
also difficult to get to India during times of surges.
But in general, we are holding India to the same standard.
And as we are allowed back into China, we will do the same
thing there.
Mr.  Griffith. Well, but should we be allowed back into
China, and will they let us back into China? I mean, one, I
don't know that we want to be dependent on China. Two, under
their interpretation of their laws, your inspections may now be
a crime in China. So why do we continue to think that that is
our answer?
Dr.  Califf. I certainly don't think that is our answer. I
have started--helped start a university in China. I know a lot
about Chinese laws and customs.
I will point out two-thirds of the world's population lives
between India and China and the ASEAN nations in between. So
they need to have their own API manufacturing, all that.
Mr.  Griffith. I am not against them having their own, I--
--
Dr.  Califf [continuing]. But we need----
Mr.  Griffith [continuing]. Just don't want them strangling
ours.
Dr.  Califf. We need a balanced system where we do our part
in the U.S.
But again, I will just say no American businessman is going
to go into a business where the economics say you are going to
lose money. And so we have got to fix the fundamental
economics.
And if you tell me we shouldn't inspect to make sure of the
quality----
Mr.  Griffith. No, no, no, no----
Dr.  Califf [continuing]. I would say no, please, let's
don't do that.
Mr.  Griffith. No. And in fact, one of the concerns that I
raised downstairs--and that I think you would agree with--is
that this race to the bottom on pricing has affected the
quality and the assurance that we will actually have the
medicine available for the American consumer when they get
sick.
We had a mom down there testifying that her daughter was
going through some leukemia treatment, and on three different
occasions during her treatment they did not have the medicine.
They did not have the medicine. And while her daughter has
survived, she mentioned cases that she knows of--because she
started a nonprofit group to help people find the medicine--
where doctors have told her that it impacted the health of the
patient or even led to death. This is unacceptable. Don't you
agree?
Dr.  Califf. This tears us up at the FDA, and we are
frequently caught with these manufacturing issues, but it is an
essential medicine.
And you are referring to cis-platinum, which is a drug that
we gave as interns decades ago. I won't say how many decades
for you, but it was four decades for me. It should be
available. But for all the reasons that you gave, we are seeing
lapses due to the economics.
Mr.  Griffith. All right. I yield back. We will work
together to fix it.
Mr.  Bucshon. The gentleman yields back. I now recognize
Mr. Crenshaw for 5 minutes.
Mr.  Crenshaw. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you all for
being here. I really want to focus on our ability to detect
diseases, to do surveillance on diseases domestically and
globally. You know, it is concerning.
And I will submit this GAO report for the record that, you
know, 15 years after we have passed a law that instructs HHS to
have these surveillance systems in place, they are really not
implemented, not even close.
This comes on the heels of the end of Title 42 this week.
You know, recently, New York City health commissioner issued a
public letter to New York healthcare providers urging them to
take precautions and conduct additional tests to prevent an
alarming trend of diseases spreading among illegal foreign
nationals arriving from the southern border. I am submitting
that for the record, as well. This letter warns against polio,
chickenpox, tuberculosis, et cetera. How are we addressing
this?
You know, one of the problems is I am not even sure who I
should ask, because this is the problem that is brought up in
the GAO report. Is it CDC, or is it Ms. O'Connell?
Like, I--this is a problem here, where no one seems to be
in charge of the detection and surveillance of diseases coming
into our country. So whoever answers is fine, but what are we
doing specifically about Title 42 being ended, where is the CDC
on this?
Dr.  Walensky. Maybe I will start and say we have a--
numerous platforms of surveillance systems through our
emergency departments, through our public health departments.
One of the real challenges, as we have talked about this
morning, has been that not all of those surveillance systems
have required reporting to the CDC. So even if there is
something detected locally that--we may not know it at the CDC,
and we might not be able to actually then give that information
back to the neighboring local health departments or across the
country to say, ``Red flag, we see something out there, you all
should be on the lookout for it.''
With regard to Title 42, among the things that we have done
and put out as we have seen infectious threats come in is our
health alert networks. We have done so when there is a measles
outbreak and other things. And likely what happened in New York
is similar health alert networks to recognize we may have
undervaccinated people who are settling in communities, and we
need to watch out for infectious threats----
Mr.  Crenshaw. I mean, are there----
Dr.  Walensky [continuing]. Most clinicians haven't seen
yet.
Mr.  Crenshaw. I guess what I am getting at, you got tens
of thousands of people, tens of thousands of people coming
across the border. Do we have CDC personnel doing what I think
any American would expect the Center for Disease Control to be
doing, which is, I don't know, randomized testing, right?
Randomized testing of wastewater, fecal matter, whatever it is.
Do we have teams on the ground that do that kind of thing in
order to detect--or are we completely reliant on the reporting
that you get?
Dr.  Walensky. I would--I am not sure I understand the
question, partially because randomized testing of what, who,
and where? There are a lot of----
Mr.  Crenshaw. Well, in this case on the southern border,
but----
Dr.  Walensky [continuing]. Infectious and noninfectious
threats, and wastewater, as you know--and we are really--I
think is an incredibly promising new diagnostic capacity, but
it is not for every infectious threat. And we don't know for
every infectious threat whether, if, and how it is sensitive or
specific in detecting it. If you don't see and--a pathogen in
the wastewater, does that mean it is not there? Maybe not for
many of these.
Mr.  Crenshaw. But we definitely don't know----
Dr.  Walensky. If you do detect it----
Mr.  Crenshaw [continuing]. If we are not testing it. We
definitely don't know.
Dr.  Walensky. We don't necessarily even know what to test
for, what fragments to test for. It doesn't come out in whole
genome sequences.
Mr.  Crenshaw. Maybe it is not--maybe that is not the
answer, but it seems to me there is no plan.
And again, I want to submit this for the record. So 15
years later, the only thing that has been implemented by HHS is
to adopt technical and reporting standards, and that is a theme
that I always hear back from you all, is, well, you know, ``We
have reporting standards, we have our partners on the ground,
whether it is the local public health authorities, whatever it
is, they report back. Sometimes they do, sometimes they
don't.''
Is the CDC just some academic institution, or is it an
operational institution?
Here is the one glaring issue that I see in this GAO
report. Well, here is the problem: ``There is no lead
operational division with defined roles and responsibilities
for implementing these statutory requirements.''
Who is in charge of this? Who is putting people on the
ground, whether it is globally or whether it is at the southern
border, where we actually have some kind of legitimate
surveillance system on global pandemics or diseases?
Dr.  Walensky. So we at CDC work in 60 countries to prevent
and work towards global health security, both in surveillance
and disease detection, as well as working towards medical
countermeasures in those countries. We are working closely with
DHS and, at their request, when they need help on public health
in their--public health support in their entry--ports of entry.
Mr.  Crenshaw. OK, but the--OK. So--but for Title 42
ending, I didn't see anything in the administration's plan for
CDC at all on the southern border. Is that correct, or is it--
--
Dr.  Walensky. Well, we are working with DHS, per their
request, for their public health requests.
Mr.  Crenshaw. Doing what?
Dr.  Walensky. You know, I think it depends on the request,
and it depends on----
Mr.  Crenshaw. They haven't requested anything yet.
Dr.  Walensky. I would have to get back with you as to the
nature of their request.
Mr.  Crenshaw. I am sure----
Dr.  Walensky. We have been working closely with them for
the last 3 years.
Mr.  Crenshaw. OK. I am out of time, I yield back.
Mr.  Bucshon. Mr. Crenshaw, you have two documents you want
to submit for the record?
Mr.  Crenshaw. Correct.
Mr.  Bucshon. Without objection, the documents Mr.
Crenshaw--is being submitted to the record.
[The information appears at the conclusion of the hearing.]
Mr.  Bucshon. The gentleman yields back. I now recognize
Ms. Castor for her 5 minutes.
Ms.  Castor. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you all
for being here to help the Energy and Commerce Committee update
PAHPA. But mostly, thank you for all of your hard work during
the public health emergency. All of your professional teams, we
are grateful for all that you do to help keep Americans safe
and healthy.
We need to apply some of the lessons learned to the update
of PAHPA, and I am sorry that my colleague from Florida already
left, and--because he had said something like Florida was a
shining example during the pandemic. And I wanted to remind him
that our current surgeon general has been rebuked by medical
professionals across the country for spreading COVID-19
misinformation, implying that there were particular health
impacts from taking the COVID-19 vaccine that were really
debunked across the board.
Plus, in Florida, unfortunately, out of the five largest
States, we had the second-highest case rate. We had the second-
highest death rate.
One of the problems over time, too, was the--at the State
level, when some of the data became--when some of the cases,
infection rates, became--they became--politicians became very
sensitive to it, they started to hide the data. And the only
places we could go would be to the hospital reporting and,
unfortunately, to medical examiners. And that is, of course, a
very late lagging indicator. So it has been apparent even
before the COVID-19 pandemic that we have got to modernize data
collection across the country. And I know that we have provided
significant resources to do it.
But it seems like what I am hearing at home is they are
still frustrated with the outdated nature of reporting
standardization. They want to be able to compare rural
communities and urban communities. They want to be able to get
into disparities.
So, Dr. Walensky, you have probably been asked about this
already today here, but what else did--does Congress need to do
to provide CDC and our public health officials at home with
modern reporting systems?
Dr.  Walensky. I appreciate that question, and I appreciate
your recognizing some of the challenges when there is
motivation to not report. We don't get those data, and we can't
have full line of sight.
One of the things that we are actively working as part of
our ``CDC Moving Forward''--and really, through this pandemic--
on data modernization across the United States, we have gotten,
you know, over $750 million in order to do that. But that means
local health departments may only get $10 million in order to
modernize their data systems. I can tell you, in the hospitals
that I used to work with to upgrade their healthcare systems to
Epic, they required over $1 billion themselves.
So as we think about $1 billion for the country and
recognize that that is not going to go as far as we need to go
in our data modernization efforts nationally, we are working
really closely--just Tuesday I had a conversation with our
State health officials. We have been working with our State and
local epidemiologists, State and territorial epidemiologists to
really understand what is the North Star architecture that we
are putting together so that all of those data highways
connect.
The challenge is--and that work is ongoing, and we have
made huge progress, and we have a public health data strategy
that was just updated for the next 2 years for that
interoperability--if we don't have authorities, those highways
will be empty. Those data highways will be empty, and we will
have challenges again. If there is a motivation to not report
public health data to CDC, you will continue to be blind
because we----
Ms.  Castor. And it is so costly. I mean, this can be a way
for taxpayers to save money down the road. I know there is an
upfront investment, but there is a significant societal cost if
we cannot detect disease and then stamp out pandemics before
they spread.
Dr.  Walensky. I will say it is costly both in terms of
dollars, and in terms of sickness and morbidity and mortality.
And the example that I previously gave was in the Mpox
outbreak. The Mpox outbreak, we started to be able to get data
authorities because of the public health emergency that was
declared on August 4th. We had our peak number of cases in Mpox
on August 1st. So we were already seeing downward trends in the
number of cases before we could even start negotiating with a
public health emergency to have data authorizations.
Ms.  Castor. Well, thank you very much for your service,
and you are going to be missed.
Dr. Califf, we had a very good bipartisan hearing on drug
shortages, and the witnesses all said that FDA is doing a
decent job, but we still have these shortages. They highlighted
the importance of building public-private partnerships, giving
FDA additional ways to incentivize that behavior and the
transparency of being able--in real time--again, this is a data
modernization issue to be able to see what is really happening
in real time and be able to respond.
Dr.  Califf. It is nice to get a compliment. Sometimes we
go days without that.
[Laughter.]
Dr.  Califf. So I really, really appreciate that.
Mr.  Bucshon. The last witness--the last Member.
Dr.  Califf. Well----
Mr.  Bucshon [continuing]. Finally, right?
[Laughter.]
Dr.  Califf. Working on it. But I do want to make one point
related to Dr. Walensky, because we share this, and it has come
up earlier. She uses highways, I use spigots and faucets.
She inherited a CDC system that I think everyone agrees had
corrosive pipes and obstructions, and it just was not a modern
system. I got an independent assessment from Micky Tripathi,
who is the head of the Office of the National Coordinator for
Health IT. They now have shiny pipes, but the spigots are not
turned on because of this issue we have between States and
counties and the Federal component. And we won't know how good
the pipes are, really, until the data starts flowing through.
I grew--I had a world where I was used to looking at
geospatial--that is, you know, rural, urban, specific areas,
and time. And if you want to run a public health system, there
is nothing technically holding us back. It is all human
interactions now. But Dr. Walensky's counterpart who comes in
next, she will be able to say, ``Here is exactly where the
problem is, and here is where it is going. We are going to
deploy forces to that area in real time, not 3 months later,
not 6 months later.''
Ms.  Castor. Thank you.
Mr.  Bucshon. The gentlelady yields back. This concludes
the Member questioning, or panel one. I would like to thank all
the witnesses for your testimony and for your time, and we will
now proceed to the second panel. And so thank you very much.
[Pause.]
Ms.  Eshoo. May the force be with you, Dr. Walensky.
[Laughter.]
Ms.  Eshoo. Thank you.
[Pause.]
Mr.  Guthrie [presiding]. The subcommittee will come back
to order, and I thank all of you for agreeing to testify.
I will introduce our witnesses and call on each one for a
5-minutes opening statement.
The first witness will be Tom Inglesby, director of Johns
Hopkins Cancer Center--or Hopkins Center for Health Security
and the Bloomberg School of Public Health.
Also we have Randall Lutter, senior fellow at the Manhattan
Institute.
Our next witness after that will be Erik Decker, chairman
of the Cybersecurity Working Group at the Health Sector
Coordinating Council.
Our final witness this morning--this afternoon now--is Mary
Denigan-Macauley, a director of healthcare and public health--
and private health markets at the U.S. Government
Accountability Office.
So we will begin with opening statements, and I think most
of you testified before.
You have 5 minutes. You will get a yellow light. As you
approach--as you see the yellow light, begin to start wrapping
up. And the red light will mean your time has expired, and we
will try to stick close to that, but we are getting a lot of
good information today, so we have been a little lenient with
it, but we are going to try to stick close. We have another
hearing starting this afternoon.
So I will now--Dr. Inglesby, I will recognize you for 5
minutes for your opening statement.

STATEMENTS OF TOM INGLESBY, M.D., DIRECTOR, JOHNS HOPKINS
CENTER FOR HEALTH SECURITY, BLOOMBERG SCHOOL OF PUBLIC HEALTH;
RANDALL LUTTER, Ph.D., SENIOR FELLOW, MANHATTAN INSTITUTE FOR
POLICY RESEARCH; ERIK DECKER, CHAIRMAN, CYBERSECURITY WORKING
GROUP, HEALTH SECTOR COORDINATING COUNCIL, AND VICE PRESIDENT
AND CHIEF INFORMATION SECURITY OFFICER, INTERMOUNTAIN HEALTH;
AND MARY DENIGAN-MACAULEY, Ph.D., DIRECTOR, HEALTH CARE,
GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTABILITY OFFICE

STATEMENT OF TOM INGLESBY, M.D.

Dr.  Inglesby. Chairman Guthrie, Ranking Member Eshoo, and
distinguished members of the committee, it is my pleasure to
appear before you today to discuss this year's reauthorization
of PAHPA. My name is Tom Inglesby. I am the director of the
Johns Hopkins Center for Health Security and professor in the
Department of Environmental Health and Engineering in the Johns
Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health. And the opinions
expressed herein are my own, and do not necessarily reflect the
views of Johns Hopkins.
Today I was asked to provide comments on the history of
PAHPA, its original intent, how it has changed during prior
reauthorization, and how the COVID-19 pandemic may inform its
2023 reauthorization. I have had the opportunity to testify
several times during the original PAHPA and for its
reauthorizations, and I am grateful for the chance to testify
before you again today, and continue to serve in this trusted
capacity for Congress and this committee.
PAHPA has a strong bipartisan history of Congress working
together to address our Nation's changing health security
landscape and protect the American people. The last three PAHPA
bills all showed major recurring themes: they adjusted to the
changing threat landscape, focused on challenges identified
since the prior bill, and considerably strengthened our
Nation's health security with each reauthorization.
The threat landscape clearly has changed since the last
reauthorization. This reauthorization, too, should focus on the
challenges identified since the prior bill and learned from
COVID-19. I will now summarize the last three PAHPA bills and
then turn to lessons from the COVID-19 pandemic that could be
used to inform this year's reauthorization.
The first bill laid the groundwork for national pandemic
and emergency preparedness and response to accidental and
deliberate threats. The second bill provided agencies with more
flexibility to achieve their missions, and the third
implemented a recommendation that I supported, which required
assessments of national security threats to guide our health
security. It also highlighted the importance of innovation for
medical countermeasures and working with local authorities.
Since the last reauthorization, we have learned many new
lessons from the COVID-19 pandemic, and I will highlight four.
Number one, we need to make, produce, and distribute
medicines, vaccines, and diagnostics more rapidly. That should
include investment in platform technologies, placing high
priority on medical countermeasures that can protect against
the viral families we are most concerned about, and contracting
processes that allow the Government to rapidly partner with
private-sector developers and manufacturers.
Number two, we need to better prepare the healthcare and
public health systems to respond rapidly to public health
emergencies, and that should include the right protective
equipment for our healthcare workers in a system that is
resilient to supply chain disruptions, ensuring medical care is
fully covered for all people in that kind of crisis, and
stronger local and public health departments.
Number three, we need to strengthen Federal agencies
responsible for preparing for and responding to pandemics.
There is really no alternative to a strong ASPR and CDC, for
example, which need to be fast-moving, operationally skilled,
have the right technology, and the ability to rapidly hire the
workforce for the job.
And finally, number four, we need to recognize the great
significance of the work being done to prevent future
pandemics. To name only some of it, that would include strong
early warning systems, a commitment to international data
sharing in the earliest hours of a new pandemic, good animal
husbandry practices to lower the risk of spillover, prevention
of the synthesis of dangerous viruses, strong codes of
scientific conduct, and stronger attribution science and
planning to make sure we are better prepared to identify the
source of future pandemics.
Finally, PAHPA legislation has evolved as our understanding
of different biological and other threats have evolved. It has
reflected lessons learned over 15 years of policymaking and on-
the-ground experiences on these issues. Its evolution has been
a remarkable congressional achievement and a truly bipartisan
effort.
Preparedness for biological threats and for responding to
national health emergencies is something that can continue to
be a priority for all of us. Thank you again for the
opportunity to testify, and I look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Inglesby follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr.  Guthrie. Thank you. Thank you for your testimony.
The Chair now recognizes Dr. Lutter for 5 minutes for your
opening statement.

STATEMENT OF RANDALL LUTTER, Ph.D.

Dr.  Lutter. To Chair Guthrie and Ranking Member Eshoo,
distinguished members of the subcommittee, I am honored and
grateful to have the opportunity to testify about how best to
prepare for and respond to future public health security
threats. My key points are--all relate to enhancing private-
sector biodefense and may be useful for PAHPA reauthorization.
First, there needs to be more actionable information and
financial incentives for effective emergency preparedness and
response by the private sector.
Second, there should be more public involvement in CDC's
risk communications.
And third, we need greater transparency in federally
supported research about public health and communicable
diseases.
Pre-COVID pandemic warnings lacked actionable information.
Information on probability and severity of--was missing but
necessary to calculate the merit of costly additional
preventive and mitigation measures. Private executives could
not have justified costly investments in, say, improved indoor
ventilation without evaluating their cost effectiveness in
protecting building occupants. Such evaluations require
information about the probability of a new infectious
respiratory disease of given infectivity occurring by a
specific date--information that was and still is lacking.
Three complementary approaches to actionable quantitative
estimates of pandemic risk are worth pursuing.
First, Bruin and all in 2006 applied structured expert
judgment to address pandemic influenza risks from the bird flu
known as H5N1. They concluded there was a 15 percent chance of
efficient human-to-human transmission within 3 years. Such
explicit and easy-to-interpret estimates are not found in
Federal reports on pandemic preparedness, but they could offer
useful insights about pandemic risk, especially if issued
periodically.
Second, Nobel Prize-winning economists have long argued for
prediction markets to aggregate information from large numbers
of people about the likelihood of uncertain events. A 2016
study of prediction markets in Taiwan considered 5 disease
indicators such as severe and complicated influenza and flu-
like illnesses. For three out of five disease indicators,
market predictions outperformed conventional surveillance. The
longer-lasting markets with more participants might perform
even better.
Three, big data solutions would estimate the risk of a
pandemic by collecting, organizing, and synthesizing big data
through early warning systems. This approach would require
upgrading and updating USAID's now-defunct PREDICT program,
including surveillance and testing of livestock, poultry,
wildlife of special concern for viruses, either novel or of
special interest. It would be time consuming and require more
investment and international cooperation and new data
integration systems, and it would go beyond the 2022 National
Biodefense Strategy by explicitly seeking a quantitative risk
assessment for new pandemics.
Congress should support all three approaches to improve
pandemic risk assessment: the periodic structured expert
judgment, prediction markets, and big data solutions.
Catastrophe bonds could offer firms a better way to manage
pandemic risks. Such bonds could be modeled in part on the
pandemic catastrophe bonds developed and marketed through the
World Bank and benefiting from bank-related subsidies. Medder
and Schwarcz recently suggested that unsubsidized pandemic
catastrophe bonds for unintentional pandemics could be
feasible.
Congress should ensure that there's no legislative or
regulatory obstacles inappropriately hindering the development
of prediction markets or pandemic catastrophe bonds.
Last year the CDC Director acknowledged substantial public
dissatisfaction with COVID-19 risk communications in justifying
her proposals for reform. FDA's 2000 Good Guidance Practice
regulations is a good model for the CDC to use. That regulation
establishes a standardized process for nearly all formal use of
statements about what non-Federal entities should or ought to
do.
The FDA guidance documents explicitly state that entities
need not follow FDA recommendations if they meet existing
statutory regulatory requirements. FDA's process requires it to
open a public docket to get public comment on all guidance it
issues. FDA solicits public comment both on draft guidance and
on final guidance that it determines it must issue without
prior public comment, as happened during the pandemic. Congress
should direct CDC to adopt good guidance practices rules like
those of FDA.
The pandemic undermined confidence in public health
policies and in the role of science in informing health policy.
Scientific journals controlled by HHS are exceptions to the
widespread practice of top scientific journals, including
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, and Science,
to make public access to computer code and data a condition of
publication. Emerging Infectious Disease, Environmental Health
Perspectives, and Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report--all
three Federal journals controlled by HHS--have no comparable
transparency policies.
Congress could and should require federally controlled and
supported peer-reviewed health journals to adopt transparency
measures comparable to that of the PNAS.
I am happy to take questions. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Lutter follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr.  Guthrie. Thank you. Thank you for your testimony. The
Chair now recognizes Mr. Decker for 5 minutes for your opening
statement.

STATEMENT OF ERIK DECKER

Mr.  Decker. Thank you, Chairman Guthrie, Ranking Member
Eshoo, and members of the subcommittee. I am Erik Decker,
chairman of the Health Sector Coordinating Council
Cybersecurity Working Group and vice president and chief
information security officer, Intermountain Health. Thank you
for the opportunity to speak on public health security threats
and how this interrelates with the reauthorization of PAHPA.
I believe we are at an inflection point. Our adversaries
are becoming increasingly sophisticated at penetrating our
cyber defenses just as we are becoming increasingly reliant on
digital data and technology. The ability of our adversaries to
monetize and capitalize on our business operations, data,
intellectual property, and vulnerabilities is a significant
part of the reason why our sector continues to be a top focus
for cyber attack.
The study just released this week titled ``The Ransomware
Attack Associated with Disruptions at Adjacent Emergency
Departments in the U.S.'' suggests secondary effects occur on
hospitals adjacent to those disrupted by cyber attacks,
resulting in long wait times, increased census, and increases
in high-acuity cases such as strokes. This demonstrates that
the need to treat cyber attacks as disasters requiring
coordinated planning and response is necessary.
Without proper cyber foundations in place, this velocity of
digital transformation could become the equivalent of driving a
race car at maximum velocity without brakes. Thus, the mission
of the Cyber Working Group is to develop and disseminate, free
of charge, sectorwide recommendations and guidance to help
facilitate resilience to cybersecurity threats.
Thankfully, the public-private partnership between the
health sector and the U.S. Government has matured significantly
over the last several years. Despite the partnership's growing
strength, certain parts of the health sector, primarily smaller
and less resourced entities, lag in their cyber capabilities
and must be buttressed. As we like to remember--remind
everyone, cyber safety is patient safety.
Since 2018 the Cyber Working Group has produced 21 best
practice publications to aid all 7 subsectors of health and
public health. I want to highlight two recent publications
jointly branded with HHS. One is called ``The Health Industry
Cybersecurity Practices,'' otherwise known as HICP. First
published in 2018, HICP provides cyber hygiene recommendations
for small, medium, and large-sized organizations. It was built
in partnership with the HHS 405(d) program and 150 experts
across the industry. Last month we released HICP 2023.
Also in April we released the ``Hospital Cybersecurity
Landscape Analysis,'' another publication. This first-of-a-kind
study took on the daunting challenge of determining the current
state of the U.S. hospitals' cybersecurity resiliency to thwart
cyber attacks. The study found that progress has been made at
improving our cyber posture, but significant improvements are
needed in core cyber hygiene capabilities. This study would not
have been feasible without the direct support of the HHS Deputy
Secretary, the support of the HHS 405(d) program, and the
countless hours donated by the Cyber Working Group.
In June of last year, former National Cybersecurity
Director Chris Inglis invited the CEOs of the Cyber Working
Group to the White House for a Cabinet-level cybersecurity
summit to discuss how best to secure healthcare from cyber
attacks in the future. Mr. Inglis charged us to set up our
critical infrastructure in such a way that we would need to
``beat all of us to beat one of us.''
Securing the health sector from cyber attack might seem
daunting, but I am confident that we can meet this challenge if
we begin with the following three steps.
One, the continuation of the joint 5-year strategic
planning exercise, which is contemplating what stable condition
looks like for cybersecurity in the health sector by 2029.
Two, the continued expansion and improvement of the HHS
405(d) program, which is a core vehicle of partnership with the
health sector and HHS. It is a shining example of joint
partnership, cobranding, and joint release.
And three, we must continue to build partnership and
cohesion between CISA, HHS, and the health sector. CISA, as
experts in cybersecurity, produces many useful tools and
services.
With mandated reporting of significant cyber incidents on
the horizon, we are excited to work through the specifics of
how we will incorporate this threat intelligence consumed and
received from all 16 critical infrastructure and provide them
into our proactive defenses. However, since HHS is our sector
risk managed agency, we need to leverage HHS as the front door
to all Federal agencies.
Thank you for the opportunity to provide my perspective.
Several other recommendations are in my written testimony, and
I encourage any questions you might have.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Decker follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr.  Guthrie. Thank you for your testimony.
The Chair now recognizes Dr. Denigan-Macauley for 5 minutes
for your opening statement.

STATEMENT OF MARY DENIGAN-MACAULEY, Ph.D.

Dr.  Denigan-Macauley. Great, thank you.
Chair Guthrie, Ranking Member Eshoo, and distinguished
members of the subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to
discuss GAO's work related to preparedness and response.
Strengthening our Nation's capability to prepare for,
respond to, and recover from disasters and other emergencies is
no small task, particularly with ever-changing threats. This is
not something the Federal Government can do alone. It requires
a whole-of-nation effort with Federal, State, Tribal,
territorial, and local authorities, the private sector,
nongovernmental organizations, and communities all working
together from the same playbook. As the past 3 years have so
acutely shown, preparedness and response cannot happen in
silos. Instead, we must work together to anticipate, prevent,
and prepare for future events, all while responding to ongoing
emergencies and other threats as they arise.
GAO's work on the Federal efforts go back decades and
embrace the One Health approach by considering human, animal,
plant, and environmental threats. While many plans, some
successes, and good intentions underlie these efforts, our work
has shown that the Department of Health and Human Services must
do better in order to save lives, mitigate severe economic
impacts, and prepare the Nation to respond to multiple
simultaneous threats. In 2020 alone, HHS responded to
hurricanes, floods, wildfires, and infectious diseases, and
including the pandemic.
The systemic and persistent deficiencies we identified have
hindered our Nation's response to the COVID-19 pandemic and
past emergencies precisely when Americans rely on seamless and
swift action. For example, undefined roles and responsibilities
for the myriad of partners involved have created confusion,
placing responders and communities at risk.
Delays in testing and incomplete data have prevented HHS
from understanding the nationwide spread of disease and
targeting response efforts, including those disproportionately
affected.
Poor communication and a lack of transparency have eroded
trust in the Federal Government.
Not knowing the resources response partners will bring to
an emergency have resulted not only in inefficiencies but the
deployment of the wrong resources for critical care.
All of these problems placed lives at risk and slowed
response exactly when our Nation should have united to move as
quickly as possible.
A crisis is not the time to be figuring out what to do.
Preparedness needs to happen before the crisis hits. Likewise,
a full and timely recovery can only be achieved through
sufficient preparedness.
While fundamental in appearance, these deficiencies are
complex in nature and complicated by competing priorities.
Overcoming them will require many things, including significant
coordination within HHS and across all of the response partners
identifying the needed resources to get the job done right,
including a workforce with the skills and competencies to
address the risks raised.
Additionally, it will require strong and sustained
leadership. This is concerning, as we have already seen high
turnover at FDA: 10 Commissioners in 10 years, NIH without a
Director, and now the CDC Director stepping down in the midst
of reform.
Since 2007 we have made over 150 recommendations to HHS,
with more than half of them not addressed. Fixing the systemic
deficiencies we have raised will take time. Not knowing when
the next threat will arrive can dull our resolve. But inaction
is not an option, as a new public health emergency will
certainly arrive.
Reform efforts recently announced by HHS agencies have the
potential to help address concerns we have raised, if
implemented successfully. We have met with HHS to provide
guidance based on key practices GAO has identified for
successful agency reform. However, given the critical nature of
this issue, we placed HHS leadership and coordination of public
health emergency on GAO's High Risk List. This risk --this list
includes Government operations in need of transformation. In
this case, transformation is needed to protect the security of
our homeland and to save lives.
Mr. Chair, Ranking Member, distinguished subcommittee
members, this concludes my prepared statement. I look forward
to our discussion today, and welcome any questions.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Denigan-Macauley follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr.  Guthrie. Thank you. That concludes our opening
statements. We will move to Members' questions, and the Chair
will recognize Mr. Hudson for--the leader of this effort on our
side of the aisle, along with our Chair Eshoo and--or Ranking
Member Eshoo in a bipartisan way. So thanks.
So, Mr. Hudson.
Mr.  Hudson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you for--
again, thank you for making this a priority for our
subcommittee.
And thank you to Ranking Member Eshoo for your leadership
on this for many years and for allowing me to work with you.
Thank you to our panel. This is your--all of your
testimonies have been extremely helpful to us. And thank you
for making time to be here today. I will start with Dr.
Inglesby.
Thank you. Your testimony touching on the history of the
legislation, I think, was very helpful. It is also helpful in
understanding congressional intent through these authorization
processes, as well as kind of the overarching all-hazard
preparedness framework. If--very briefly, if we were to rerun
the clock and we are now having to respond to COVID-19 without
PAHPA, without ASPR, BARDA, SNS, what would that world look
like?
Dr.  Inglesby. You know, if you kind of--if you roll back
the clock before ASPR and BARDA, we didn't really have a
procurement mechanism in place for new medical countermeasures.
We didn't have a system of requirement setting for all of these
products that we need. We had no diagnostic strategy. We had a
small SNS, but it really was focused on very, very specific
threats, and it really didn't connect up with the rest of the
Government.
So all of the structures that have been built over these
previous--the original bill and the reauthorizations have been
absolutely fundamental to getting us where we are, even though
we have now seen shortcomings. But it is an infinitely stronger
base upon which to build the next reauthorization. So----
Mr.  Hudson. Yes, I appreciate that. And as we talk about
sort of the architecture of the structure of this, you know,
with PREVENT Act last year, we have created this new White
House Office of Pandemic Preparedness and Response Policy. How
do you see that structure now working where you have got that
office that, unfortunately, hasn't been set up yet, but advisor
to the President, you have got ASPR, with their role in
advising the Secretary but also administering these other
programs.
How do you see that working? Do you have any concerns about
that? Do you have any suggestions for us as we prepare this
reauthorization of how we could improve that structure?
Dr.  Inglesby. Yes, I do think that biosecurity and
pandemic response is inherently interagency, because it draws
on many elements of HHS but also intelligence on the delivered
side, State, DoD. So it is really important to have a White
House presence, a coordinating presence.
And I think we have seen both in the Ebola response some
years ago and then in the COVID response the very high value of
having White House dedicated, strong leadership helping to
coordinate the agencies. I don't think it is a requirement to
be day-to-day managing all programs, but certainly in crisis it
is very valuable to have White House engaged with leadership at
CDC, ASPR, NIH, FDA, other agencies. I do think it worked
fairly well, having been part of that process during COVID and
watching, for example, ASPR O'Connell coordinate with the White
House and with her colleagues across HHS, I thought, was a
really good model.
So instituting this new office and kind of making sure it
stays in place even though COVID is going away, I think, is a
very good development. I think it is--I know the White House is
actively searching for leadership and putting its structure in
place, but I think it is going to be very valuable.
Mr.  Hudson. Great, I appreciate that.
Dr. Lutter, over the pandemic there were dozens of
authorities used across agencies. DoD played a significant role
in the development and manufacturing, hiring capabilities that
they could bring to the table for procurement. You know, and as
we are looking forward now, we have been asked by HHS, by ASPR
to give them the authorities that DoD has when it comes to
acquisitions.
What I am trying to grapple with personally is what makes
the most sense as far as effectiveness, return on investment
for the American taxpayer. Does it make sense to create an
authority that already exists at DoD over at HHS, or does it
make more sense to maybe more formalize that relationship in
times of emergency that DoD will play this role?
I don't know if you have any thoughts, and I would open it
up to anybody else that might be able to help me wrestle with
this as we try to figure out--do you need to give those
authorities the DoD has to HHS, particularly ASPR, or is it
better just to--more efficient to keep them where they are but
make sure that it will be available when we need it?
Dr.  Lutter. That is a good question, but I think I am
going to kick it to GAO or somebody else who has thought about
it more than I have. I wish I could help you.
Dr.  Denigan-Macauley. I can briefly say that we do have
concerns of relying on DoD, because they have a separate
mission. I mean, if they are called off to a war and they are
not available at that time--we saw that they have stepped in
heavily on numerous occasions. So----
Mr.  Hudson. Well, I have run out of my time. If any of you
that would like to would answer that in writing, again, I think
that is something that Ms. Eshoo and I are wrestling with and
would love to have your feedback on.
Dr.  Inglesby. Congressman, I am happy to do that because I
did have very close interaction with the DoD contracting
partners.
Mr.  Guthrie. If you have a half-minute, if nobody objects,
because that is a good----
Ms.  Eshoo. Sure, go ahead.
Mr.  Guthrie. Can you give us a quick--yes.
Dr.  Inglesby. All I would say is that HHS relied very
heavily on DoD contracting specialists. DoD had contracting
specialists from across the Department of Defense, which they
drew in during the emergency. HHS had almost no contracting
specialists to be able to do this mission. And DoD has been
really very clear with HHS from the beginning that they needed
all those people back. And so, even though they have been
generous with their people and their experts, they really want
those people back. They feel like they have full-time work.
And so I felt very strongly after being at HHS, that HHS
needs to have strong contracting capability. They are the
ones--ASPR, in particular, and BARDA--need to be able to work
with industry very quickly, very, very effectively. And without
having to loan--to work with contracting officers on loan, I
think, is a very bad position for them. We expect them to be
able to move quickly, and they can't do it now without DoD.
Mr.  Guthrie. OK, thanks. We would still like your--any
responses you would like to make in writing, as well. Thank you
very much for that.
And the Chair now--the gentleman yields back. The Chair now
recognizes the ranking member, Ms. Eshoo, for 5 minutes.
Ms.  Eshoo. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, and thank
you to this panel. Thank you for waiting, for your patience.
To Dr. Denigan-Macauley: Based on the GAO's work, does HHS
know who in the agency is responsible for different responses
in a health disaster?
Dr.  Denigan-Macauley. Clearly, ASPR is designated to work
with the Secretary during an emergency. But our reports have
shown time and time again that there are not clear roles and
responsibilities, and there is a lack of understanding.
Ms.  Eshoo. Thank you.
To Dr. Inglesby, thank you. You said that one goal of the
PAHPA legislation is to ``put someone in charge.'' What changes
should be made in the next iteration of the legislation to make
clear who is responsible for biosecurity response?
Dr.  Inglesby. Congresswoman, I think it is very important
to have clarity around leadership for different
responsibilities. I think within HHS there is clarity around
that, but I--it is also true that, outside the Government, that
there is confusion at times from State and locals or from other
critical partners. And so I do think there would be value in
the Secretary or, presumably----
Ms.  Eshoo. Let me ask you this. Yes, let me ask you this.
Dr.  Inglesby. Or--yes.
Ms.  Eshoo. Do you think that ASPR and CDC are adequately
empowered to make stronger and faster decisions in the wake of
a health threat?
And if you had the power to make any legislative change to
make the U.S. faster at making vaccines, medicines,
diagnostics, what would you do?
Dr.  Inglesby. I think, for the last part of your question,
we should establish a program for rapid countermeasure
development for unknown threats. I think some people call that
a Disease X program, which allows preparation----
Ms.  Eshoo. I understand what it is.
Dr.  Inglesby [continuing]. And moving through viral
families quickly. I think that is really important.
I think establishing contracting authorities precrisis, so
that there is already existing structure between government and
industry is very important.
And I think, to your first question, I think clarifying
what ASPR is in charge of and what CDC is in charge of could be
very helpful for--especially for outside of the Government.
ASPR clearly is in charge of operational response, contracting
private sector response, but CDC is going to need to remain in
charge of technical guidance, scientific guidance to the States
and locals. So they are going to continue to have leadership
responsibilities, as well.
Ms.  Eshoo. Let me ask you this. Obviously, I think we are
rightly focused on pandemic preparedness because, you know, our
experience with COVID, I mean, it is----
Dr.  Inglesby. Yes.
Ms.  Eshoo [continuing]. Searing experience for everyone in
some way, shape, or form, really searing. How do you think we
should be preparing for new and evolving health threats?
They have been mentioned today. If you heard some of the
things----
Dr.  Inglesby. Yes, yes.
Ms.  Eshoo [continuing]. That were said from the first
panel, such as gene synthesis, where a virus can be made from
scratch in a laboratory. Many of my Republican colleagues have
spoken to that, or the use of open source AI----
Dr.  Inglesby. Yes.
Ms.  Eshoo [continuing]. Models to provide a step-by-step
guide to create a deadly virus. How would you approach this?
Dr.  Inglesby. Well, first of all, I want to commend you on
your letter to the National Security Advisor and to OSTP on the
risks of AI and national security. And I think you were
absolutely right to ask the administration to be developing
security--or to be requiring security and safety guidance for
the AI companies that are in this space. And I think there are
AI risks that relate in particular to biothreats, which I think
is one of the concerns here, and they need to be directly dealt
with.
I think in terms of genome sequence screening, I think it
is now time for HHS to require, through a regulatory process,
that genome synthesis providers are screening both the orders
that come in and the people who are requesting those orders.
That is something that the U.S.--most U.S. companies are
already doing on a voluntary basis, but to level the playing
field around the world and make the entire industry safer, we
can't have companies--some countries in other parts of the
world synthesizing dangerous viruses or components of them and
sending them around the world so we can recreate smallpox.
Ms.  Eshoo. That is why I am asking you about.
Dr.  Inglesby. Yes. So I think we need a regulatory
structure.
Ms.  Eshoo. That is most helpful. Most helpful. Well, thank
you very much.
And I yield back. These are such high-value discussions. It
is----
Mr.  Guthrie. Thank you. The----
Ms.  Eshoo. It is exhilarating that we have such brilliant
Americans that come and testify.
Mr.  Guthrie. Thank you.
Ms.  Eshoo. And that we draw so much from. Thank you, thank
you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr.  Guthrie. The lady yields back, and--the gentlelady
yields back, and Mr. Johnson from Ohio is recognized for 5
minutes for questions.
Mr.  Johnson. Thank you, Chairman Guthrie.
As many of my colleagues know, but you folks certainly
probably do not, I come from an information technology
background. Both of my degrees, graduate and undergraduate, are
in computer science, and I spent about 40 years in the
business. I have seen this space grow and develop into what it
is today.
And cybersecurity is so vitally important to not only
preventing ransomware attacks on hospital networks and ensuring
the safety of patients' personal data, but also to our national
security. Nobody is on the front lines with that issue more
than hospitals are, fighting cyber threats daily.
I believe it is imperative to make cybersecurity an
integral part of the conversation on how America responds to
pandemics and disasters that occur inside our borders. And as
we navigated the pandemic, cyber criminals saw their moment to
strike, taking advantage of the chaos and uncertainty by
repeatedly going after hospital networks when they were at
their most vulnerable.
So what does this mean? It means hospitals are forced to
push resources away from other areas where they are desperately
needed, away from patient care and more toward their
infrastructure or their technology. It means cuts to emergency
services, canceled lifesaving procedures, and ultimately
increased death rates that would have otherwise been totally
avoidable. These cyber criminals are not simply stealing our
data or shutting down networks. They are essentially taking
American lives with them when they leave, or when they get
there.
When this committee last considered PAHPA's reauthorization
in 2018, cyber was a known threat but not truly at the top of
anybody's mind when it comes to preparedness, as evidenced by
the fact that the last bill only had one provision related to
cybersecurity. This provision required HHS to develop a
strategy for public health preparedness and response to address
cybersecurity threats.
In the last couple of years, however, we have seen an
increasing number of cyber attacks on the healthcare sector.
Each of you spoke to the seriousness of this rising threat in
your testimony.
So Mr. Decker, I would like to go to you. I know the answer
to this question, but I want to hear yours: Why should
cybersecurity be considered in the context of all-hazards
preparedness and response?
Mr.  Decker. Well, cyber is very capable of turning into a
kinetic problem. So when situations--when hospitals are shut
down, when they are attacked, when volumes and censuses go up
and the ability to care for patients goes down correspondingly
to that--because we are so reliant on the technology these days
and because healthcare has become digital--when that technology
is disrupted for a prolonged period of time, the hospital
systems have a very hard time managing through that for a
prolonged period of time.
Mr.  Johnson. Got you. How can Congress, Mr. Decker, use
this reauthorization process to improve our Nation's
cybersecurity preparedness and response?
What do you think we need to do? It is obviously not one
measure.
Mr.  Decker. That is correct. This--it is a combination of
multiple things.
I do believe that incentivization is something that needs
to continue to be explored, especially for some of the smaller
and more medium-sized organizations that do not have the
resources to apply, you know, into cyber capabilities. So you
could have a small rural or critical access hospital that are--
that is under water. And the choice between an MRI machine or a
cyber capability tends to go towards the clinical capability.
So there needs to be more incentives, reimbursements, et
cetera, to help support and bolster that. And hygiene is
incredibly important.
Mr.  Johnson. Got you. Well, in your opinion, how should
cybersecurity roles and responsibilities be structured across
HHS?
Does the Department need more organizational structure or
clarity to address its own enterprise cybersecurity needs and
its responsibilities as the sector risk management agency for
the healthcare sector?
Mr.  Decker. Yes, there has been a lot of work on this, and
HHS is, for sure, doubling down on that structure.
I think it is hard for me to answer the question of how HHS
should be organized. But for sure, from a sector's perspective,
we are looking for that one party to work with and get through
that. We are providing them with recommendations on how things
can work. But ultimately, I think that is up to HHS.
Mr.  Johnson. It is a never-ending challenge. Thank you
very much, Mr. Chair. I yield back.
Mr.  Guthrie. Thank you. The gentleman yields back, and the
Chair now recognizes Ms. Blunt Rochester for 5 minutes for
questions.
Ms.  Blunt Rochester. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and Ranking
Member Eshoo, and I appreciate the opportunity to hear from our
witnesses today on this second panel on preparing for and
responding to future public health security threats.
The COVID-19 pandemic devastated the global supply chain
for medical countermeasures such as masks, gloves,
manufacturing components, and many lifesaving drugs. Our
reliance on foreign manufacturing made the issue worse. And as
a result of these shortages, there were many instances where
medical personnel had to treat patients without the proper
protection or equipment.
Dr. Inglesby, what concrete actions can Congress take to
protect our medical professionals and ensure that we are less
susceptible to supply chain failures during a future pandemic?
Dr.  Inglesby. Congresswoman, thank you for the question. I
would suggest two things.
The first is, wherever possible, that we begin to shift to
reusable products that do not require us all reaching for the
same supply chain needs around the world. The single-use,
disposable products that we use do place enormous burden on the
supply chain. And to the extent we can develop, for example,
respiratory devices that can last 100 uses, 1,000 uses, that
will decrease pressure on the supply chain.
The second thing I would say is that there is a new office
at ASPR, the industrial base and manufacturing supply chain
office, which is now organizing--working to organize supply
chain issues. They have said that it will be really important
for domestic manufacturing purposes to ensure the stockpile is
able to pay for domestic manufacturing, where there is
typically a 20 to 30 percent higher cost than international
manufacturing. If they don't have the funds to buy domestic
products, then even if we set requirements for that, they won't
be able to do that. So having an SNS focused on that with the
budget.
Ms.  Blunt Rochester. Thank you, thank you. I actually have
been working on supply chains legislation and also stockpile
legislation with my Republican colleague, Buddy Carter.
GAO has consistently identified data systems as critical to
inform the response to a public health emergency. During the
COVID-19 pandemic, GAO noted that HHS relied on incomplete and
inconsistent data highlighting the longstanding concern in this
area. GAO has asked HHS to prioritize the development of an
interoperable network of systems to allow for real-time public
health situational awareness.
Dr. Denigan-Macauley and Dr. Inglesby, as we transition out
of the Federal public health emergency declaration, how will
HHS's ability to obtain timely and complete public health data
be affected?
Dr.  Denigan-Macauley. Thank you. And first of all, I love
going back to the State, to my alma mater, for a Blue Hen game.
Yes. So we have 12 open recommendations alone just from our
recent report. I think we have, like, almost 200
recommendations completely on how they really need to improve
on getting this real-time data and getting this system
implemented. So it is a very important question, and it is one
that we are tracking quite closely. And, I mean, as was
discussed earlier, they don't even know who is in charge of it,
so it is very concerning.
Ms.  Blunt Rochester. Doctor?
Dr.  Inglesby. I would make two quick recommendations.
The first is that CDC has made very clear that they do not
have the authority in many cases to collect the data they need,
even simple data: How many people are sick, how many people are
dying, what are the trends?
And so, in the example of monkeypox, it took 3 months from
the beginning of monkeypox to the point where they could have
data agreements with all States in place. And we expect the
data to be there immediately. So the first thing is data
authorities for CDC and HHS.
And the second is that, in the realm of diagnostics, as
people are beginning to report data that is collected--for
example, diagnostics--we should have, really, one system, one
system that HHS has set up in collaboration with the States. We
can't have it so that everyone is reporting in 30 or 40
different systems that are not interoperable. So driving
towards a single data collection system, I think, should be our
vision.
Ms.  Blunt Rochester. Well, first of all, I want to thank
you for your answer. But secondly, thank you for preempting my
next question, which was really about the authority that is
needed.
And I think it is a real message for us in Congress to do
our part to make sure that they have that authority and the
resources to make sure that our public health system is strong
and prepared----
Dr.  Inglesby. Yes.
Ms.  Blunt Rochester [continuing]. For any emergency. Thank
you so much.
And I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr.  Guthrie. The gentlelady yields back, and I will now
recognize myself for 5 minutes.
And so Dr. Denigan-Macauley, in August of 2022 GAO
reviewed--there was a GAO review that interviewed eight
hospitals throughout the country. The report found that all
eight hospitals in GAO's review reported multiple challenges
related to staff supplies, space, information.
And under the last PAHPA reauthorization, Congress required
HHS to develop guidelines for regional hospitals and other
facilities relating to treating patients and increasing medical
surge capacity. The reauthorization also created a demo pilot
program for regional healthcare preparedness and response
systems. And do you know the status of both the guidelines and
the demo--demonstration project?
Dr.  Denigan-Macauley. I do. We have recently completed
work on this, and the guidelines have been delayed. They have
not been implemented. We were actually asked under PAHPA to
look at those guidelines, and we were unable to follow through
on that.
Mr.  Guthrie. How about the demonstration project?
Dr.  Denigan-Macauley. And the demonstration project, I
would have to get back to you on that. I know that we did look
at it. I think that they are in the process of trying to
determine its applicability going forward to do in more areas.
Mr.  Guthrie. OK.
Dr.  Denigan-Macauley. But I need to be definitive on that.
Mr.  Guthrie. And do you know who at HHS is responsible for
the----
Dr.  Denigan-Macauley. ASPR.
Mr.  Guthrie. ASPR is responsible for the guidelines?
So I--when the Secretary was here earlier, I asked her a
question about--they were put on the high-risk designation,
GAO's high-risk designation, and the deficiencies you guys
described, particularly not--maybe having product in the
Strategic National Stockpile but not sufficient quantities was
the question for that.
Do you have any updates on where they are, or have they
worked with you on that at all or reported back?
Dr.  Denigan-Macauley. So we have not seen--I know she
reported out that they had--that they were in the final review
of the 2020 threat-based review that would talk about the
stockpiles. We have not seen that, it has not been provided to
us or to Congress is my understanding.
So our latest report is that they certainly still have not
met their goals.
Mr.  Guthrie. OK. My other--I was talking to Dr. Walensky,
as well, and she was talking about CDC data collection. And
this is for you, as well, this question, and it has been the
topic of concern for most of us on the subcommittee and to
local health officials, in addition to the public. And CDC has
received billions throughout the pandemic, and in certain cases
for purposes of data modernization.
So my question is, has GAO done work to understand which
data authorities agencies like CDC and ASPR have, and how these
authorities have been used during COVID-19 and other public
health emergencies, and whether any existing data authorities
CDC and ASPR have are redundant and unnecessary?
Dr.  Denigan-Macauley. I would have to get back to you on
the data authorities, whether or not we have reported out on
that. I don't have that at my fingertips.
Mr.  Guthrie. OK. We would just like for you to commit to
the committee to work with the subcommittee on tracking all the
data collection authorities CDC has accrued during the public
health emergency as well as through the American Rescue Plan
Act and December Consolidated Appropriations Act. I am sure we
can work together to track these down.
Dr.  Denigan-Macauley. Absolutely.
Mr.  Guthrie. Thank you very much, I appreciate it.
I know there is another committee about to meet, as well,
so I am going to step down for just a few seconds. But it seems
to me, when we look at the Strategic National Stockpile, we
have got two things that we have. We have, like, anthrax
vaccines and so forth that we need to have stockpiled, and we
don't need them every day, and we don't ever want to need them,
but we want them in case we have them.
We also saw during the pandemic that we had things that
hospitals use every day, but no hospital could stay in business
if they had to store the inventories required if they had to
have a surge. And so that is part of the Strategic National
Stockpile.
So I think I am just going to make a point that I think
what we need to think about, those types of items, PPE, all the
other things that hospitals use every day, instead of going
from manufacturer, some to the hospital, some to some Strategic
National Stockpile, that there just be a buffer between, so--
and you--and it doesn't go sit in a warehouse and go stale over
time.
I know we have some things we won't use every day, and we
have to do that and rotate as we need. But they go from the
manufacturer to a supplier or so forth that sits for inventory,
and then it flows through. So the first in there will be the
last out of there. So we are always having product flow.
But if we just--I know we need to have substantial
inventories at our regional hospitals and other providers in
hospitals, but we also need to have excess, just in case. And I
think that is something that the Government pays for with the
Strategic National Stockpile.
And I see you are raising your--shaking your head, Dr.
Inglesby. Do you want to comment on that, that it just--it is a
flow.
Dr.  Inglesby. Yes.
Mr.  Guthrie. It continues to flow with us paying for the
inventory.
Dr.  Inglesby. Absolutely. It needs to be a flow, and we
have to rotate it through so that it doesn't expire on the
shelves. There is a shelf life extension program that can be
granted, but in general, I mean, one of the concepts that has
been around for a while is this concept of vendor-managed
inventory. So the people who are making the products, they
actually control them and do exactly as you just described,
they move them out. But there is a big bubble of inventory in
case the Government needs it. The Government owns it, it needs
it, but otherwise it doesn't expire.
Mr.  Guthrie. Thank you. I appreciate it for verifying what
I have been thinking. So I appreciate it very much, and I will
yield back, and the Chair will--I think Dr. Harshbarger is
next.
But if you will come to the chair, because I have got to go
check into another committee, so I am sorry.
She is going to ask her questions from the chair.
[Pause.]
Mrs.  Harshbarger [presiding]. Thank you all for being
here. Sorry I missed your opening comments, but I want to start
out and talk to Dr. Denigan-Macauley.
In a 2022 report, the GAO found significant management
challenges related to the Strategic National Stockpile.
Specific concerns cited included a 3-year gap in the SNS
reviews, which impacted inventory decision making; lack of
documentation regarding reviews; and SNS management not being
in accordance with the 2019 PAHPA reauthorization.
This is my question: If the GAO recommendations are left
unaddressed, how might ASPR's ability to prevent, prepare, and
respond to health emergencies be compromised?
Dr.  Denigan-Macauley. Yes, we have extensive work related
to the Strategic National Stockpile and pointed out the
inconsistencies with what PAHPA was asking them to do. And if
they don't fulfill these--I mean, we have talked about trust in
the past panel. We have to have an understanding of what is in
the stockpile. We recognize that there are homeland security
concerns there----
Mrs.  Harshbarger. Yes.
Dr.  Denigan-Macauley. But we have to understand who all is
a part of making that decision and working with Congress as
well as the stakeholders to ensure that the stockpile has what
it is supposed to have and that they even get their mission. I
mean, changing the mission midway in the middle of a pandemic
is not the appropriate thing to do.
Mrs.  Harshbarger. Well, I think we learned a lot from the
pandemic. And I have been a pharmacist 36 years. So what we
found out--and a compounder, at that--so when it comes to APIs,
we are at the mercy of adversarial nations. And that is just
the bottom line.
So this is really for any of the panelists, but mainly Dr.
Inglesby. Though not directly related to PAHPA reauthorization,
the issue of our country's dependency on foreign countries for
our drug supplies is a continued concern for public health. Do
you know approximately what percentage of prescription drugs
used by Americans are based on active pharmaceutical
ingredients produced in China? Do you know that percentage?
Dr.  Inglesby. I do not know the answer to that. I know
that it is a serious concern, but----
Mrs.  Harshbarger. Oh, it is a terrible--I mean, you know,
just from my practice, I know they can say 72 percent in the
notes, but I guarantee you it is over 90. And yes, over 90
percent. And it is a problem. You know, the shortages, any
given day there will be up to 300 shortages on an FDA list, and
so that is when we would step in.
But hypothetically--now, this can go to anybody--if China
were to cut off that supply, what would the immediate and long-
term impacts be on healthcare in the United States?
Anybody?
Yes, ma'am. Yes, sir.
Dr.  Lutter. I used to work at FDA, and dealt with
shortages there.
Mrs.  Harshbarger. Yes.
Dr.  Lutter. So I think the answer is very large but
uncertain. We had some internal analyses indicating for
particular drugs, where we knew there was particularly old, old
generics----
Mrs.  Harshbarger. Yes.
Dr.  Lutter [continuing]. Were the biggest concern, often
injectables. And there could be only one API manufacturer that
was approved.
FDA lacks data on the--it knows the number of approved
entities, it knows the number of approved facilities, but it
doesn't know the output per facility per entity.
Mrs.  Harshbarger. Yes.
Dr.  Lutter. So therefore, if there is one in China, it
doesn't know that it is making 10 percent or 90 percent of the
total volume. It is blind in that regard.
Mrs.  Harshbarger. Yes.
Dr.  Lutter. However, that doesn't mean to say there is no
concern, because the concern is if it is making 90 percent and
FDA doesn't even know that, then it could be shut down at
substantial risk to public health to the U.S.
Mrs.  Harshbarger. Well, look, we had the facility making
40 percent of the baby formula. That, to me, is not good. You
should spread that out, and you should be able to have
facilities to take that place at any given time. I can help
you. I mean, really, this is something that we have had
expertise in in my profession.
But go ahead. Do you have an answer, as well?
Dr.  Inglesby. I really don't have anything to add. I think
I do think that FDA really began to change their practices
around supply chain inventory and data during COVID, but I
don't have the latest information about where they are now.
Mrs.  Harshbarger. Yes.
Dr.  Inglesby. But I share your concern about single
entities providing a lion's share of our products.
Mrs.  Harshbarger. Yes, we have got a lot of information.
Yes, ma'am. You had a comment?
Dr.  Denigan-Macauley. I was going to say something similar
in that the majority of our manufacturing of our drugs is
coming from overseas in China and India. And so when you have a
global pandemic like you saw, where the supplies--you know,
every country needs the same supplies, and whether----
Mrs.  Harshbarger. Yes.
Dr.  Denigan-Macauley [continuing]. It is a drug to be able
to treat--you know, intubation, or whatever the case may be, it
can have----
Mrs.  Harshbarger. Yes.
Dr.  Denigan-Macauley [continuing]. A serious impact. And
we don't know the number of APIs.
Mrs.  Harshbarger. Yes, the scary thing is they can't track
the API into finished products. That is why we have healthcare
systems that have been reported. They are checking their
finished product for adulterations. It is crazy. It is crazy.
Well, my time is up, so I guess I will yield back.
OK, now it is your turn, Mrs. Mariannette Miller-Meeks.
Mrs.  Miller-Meeks. Thank you very much, Madam Chair. Thank
you all for being here. We know you had to wait through another
panel, so we appreciate your being here.
And in some ways, this is the funner part of the hearing
for some of us. The reason I say that is that you were
mentioning about vaccines, vaccine-acquired immunity, and the
shortcomings of the CDC and the FDA and ASPR, as well, too. And
my background is I was 24 years in the military. I was a nurse
prior to becoming a physician. And I was the director of the
Iowa Department of Public Health. So I filled a variety of
those roles in a variety of different capacities.
And one of the things I introduced into the record at the
last hearing was a letter that the Doctors Caucus sent to Dr.
Walensky of the CDC in September--I think it was September 28th
of 2021--asking were they going to recognize--and I had in May,
at a select subcommittee on the coronavirus pandemic, asked Dr.
Walensky and Dr. Fauci about infection-acquired and herd
immunity. And it was a very nonanswer. So we were again asking,
as all of the evidence and research came out about infection-
acquired immunity.
And the goal was not to tell people to go to COVID-19
parties, as some wanted to allude. It was to allocate resources
that were expensive and that were not voluminous. And so it is
necessary for proper messaging, proper communication with the
public in a pandemic, and then proper allocation, especially as
we know our surge capacity missed.
So Dr. Lutter, you have written extensively on the
shortcomings of the CDC's effort to contain COVID-19 and how
the Biden administration has impeded meaningful reform of the
agency, which includes reversing a Trump regulation that
required CDC to follow certain good guidance practices.
Furthermore, you wrote that the CDC recommendations which
led to school closures more likely than not seriously
contributed to learning loss among America's students, as well
as negative impacts on mental health.
I sent out an RFI to the CDC to hear from--on the CDC to
hear from constituents and stakeholders on how Congress should
consider and implement reforms for America's top communicable
diseases agency, which included a section on CDC's lack of good
guidance practices.
For instance, one of the things we asked was who they
communicated with for information. And we were told ``with a
variety of entities.'' And I said, ``Then why didn't you
communicate with the Department of Education or the Governor of
Iowa, who reopened schools in August of 2020?'' And we had no
superspreading events or, you know, appreciable transmission in
schools.
So given that, you know, what existing good guidance
practices from other agencies or the public, you know, should
the CDC use as examples?
Dr.  Lutter. Thank you for the opportunity to answer that.
FDA is probably unique among the Federal agencies in having a
good guidance practice reg, which dates to the year 2000, I
believe. It adopted the reg at the insistence of Congress as
part of the Prescription Drug User Fee Act reauthorizations.
And I won't say that it is popular there, but it is very
effective and very commonly cited among agency spokespeople who
have to defend why the system works, because it is--embedded in
it is the notion that the agency is not omniscient and always
opens a docket to accept public comment on any formal use of
the word ``should'' or ``ought to'' aimed at regulated
entities. And the reg thereby marries, if you will, FDA's
obligations to use the best available information with a
posture of ``tell us what more you know on this topic that we
don't--haven't yet received.''
Furthermore, the--so that posture is very important, but
then there is flexibility within the--within that reg that
offers substantial opportunities for agency management to act
quickly in times of stress. So the flexibility is that, if the
agency determines on its own that issuing a guidance for--in
draft for public comment is infeasible or inappropriate, fairly
broad language, then it can go direct and issue the final
guidance to take immediate effect, essentially, in emergency
situations. But it still must open the docket.
So even in those emergency settings, which were commonly
used throughout the COVID pandemic, it still has the posture of
``tell us how you want us to improve this guidance and, oh, we
will come back and revisit it later.'' And my writings cite
several examples where that has been used.
Mrs.  Miller-Meeks. Thank you. My time is actually
expiring, however. Thank you for that comment. It sounds like
Congress needs to take up that initiative with other agencies,
as we heard recently with the EPA's guidance on ethylene
dioxide and how it--whether or not they have communicated with
any hospitals or other individuals on what that impact will be.
And then I would just like to have introduced to the
record--and if you would respond in writing, Dr. Denigan-
Macauley--you--GAO published a report in January 2020 entitled
``Significant Improvements are Needed for Overseeing Relief
Funds and Leading Responses to Public Health Emergencies.'' In
the report the GAO states that ``HHS's response to the COVID-19
pandemic has highlighted longstanding concerns we raised about
its ability to execute leading Federal public health
preparedness,'' especially to public health emergencies.
So if you could, detail GAO's existing concerns with HHS's
ability to respond to public health emergencies such as COVID-
19, as well as why the GAO designated HHS's leadership and
coordination of public health emergencies as high risk. If you
could respond in writing, that would be tremendously helpful to
us. Thank you.
Thank you. I yield back.
Mr.  Guthrie [presiding]. Thank you. The gentlelady yields
back. The Chair now recognizes Mr. Cardenas from California for
5 minutes for questions.
Mr.  Cardenas. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Welcome, Doctor, Doctor, Mister, Doctor.
[Laughter.]
Mr.  Cardenas. I feel like I am at a hospital. Thank you
for sharing your expertise and your opinions with us today, and
help to enlighten us to what has been going on and hopefully
what we can do to make things happen better in the future.
COVID-19 taught us a lot about the state of health inequity
in this country. As we move forward to discuss disaster and
pandemic preparedness, we need to ensure we are implementing
policy built for populations as diverse as our great country
is.
Dr. Inglesby, in your testimony you discussed the
importance of addressing social inequities and access to care.
How can we include equity considerations into reauthorization
of PAHPA in what--and in what ways can we improve access to
care, not just during an emergency but before emergency occurs?
Dr.  Inglesby. Yes, I think so much has been learned during
COVID about how our preexisting inequities are terribly
exacerbated in a crisis. And I think for--over the course of
preparedness programs, often at-risk populations or special
groups have been kind of an add-on to our preparedness
programs. They need to be directly incorporated at the center
of our programs, not as a kind of an additional thing.
And part of that is also planning for the data to manage
and make sure our products are getting to the right people. If
we don't have demographic data or data on specific groups that
are at higher risk when we are in the middle of a crisis, we
won't know if vaccine is getting to marginalized groups or to
at-risk populations. And I think they had--a lot of those
systems had to be created on the fly during COVID, and it was
pretty difficult to do for all the different providers.
So I think making sure that we have all of that data built
into our plans, and that we are able to collect it immediately
so we know if we are off track and we are missing really hard-
to-reach people.
Mr.  Cardenas. So to adhere to what you just described, in
some cases, unfortunately, it does mean the difference between
life and death, correct?
Dr.  Inglesby. Absolutely.
Mr.  Cardenas. OK, thank you. I am also concerned about our
health data infrastructure and how it leaves us vulnerable to
worsening inequity in disaster response.
Dr. Denigan-Macauley, you mentioned the importance of
complete and consistent data to maintain public health
situational awareness. And how might deficiencies in our data
infrastructure and limited Federal authority to compel data
leave us vulnerable to assess how equitable our response can
be?
Dr.  Denigan-Macauley. Yes, there--the data, as you had
mentioned, was not complete, and the data comes in many, many
formats. The data is not just being able to track the disease
coming from the disparate localities and jurisdictions that are
collecting it. They were collecting it in different ways.
We also were trying to track data, for example, during the
hurricanes, and unable to follow patient movement. I mean,
imagine losing patients as you are transferring them from one
area to another during the middle of a hurricane.
So there's many different aspects of data. And some of the
authorities that came with COVID helped them to get better
data, but some of those authorities are going to expire, the
CDC and others talked about.
Mr.  Cardenas. Also, Doctor, of the recommendations you
made to HHS to improve our data systems, which will be most
critical to ensuring an equitable response?
Dr.  Denigan-Macauley. Yes, that is a tough question to
know which is----
Mr.  Cardenas. I know there's many----
Dr.  Denigan-Macauley [continuing]. The most important.
Yes, I mean, we have over 200 recommendations on data, so it is
quite--but I will say that, at the very least, you should be in
compliance with the law, and they need to get the surveillance
network so that they can get some real-time data.
Mr.  Cardenas. OK, thank you. We have seen shortages in
critical supplies and even in over-the-counter medications over
the course of the COVID-19 public health emergency. How can
Congress help to improve transparency and access to information
to improve our ability to anticipate and address shortages,
Doctor?
Dr.  Denigan-Macauley. Yes, so drug shortages is a very
complex issue. And so, as Dr. Califf talked about earlier, we
need to ensure that we can--you have to have trust.
There was a question earlier about--I mean, you have to be
able to get the private sector to want to provide the data. So
right now they are compelled to provide some data, but those
authorities are going to run out. And so being able to be
transparent about what data is needed, how it is going to be
used, is going to be critically important.
Mr.  Cardenas. So the compelling of data, some people
describe that as red tape, it is too much government, et
cetera. But in this context, it is really about making sure
that the system overall can actually save lives, isn't it?
Dr.  Denigan-Macauley. Exactly, exactly. You need to know
where to send your supplies. You need to know, you know, who is
vaccinated, who is not, whether it is Mpox or COVID.
Mr.  Cardenas. OK. Thank you so much.
My time having been expired. I yield back, Mr. Chair.
Mr.  Guthrie. Thank you. The gentleman yields back. The
Chair recognizes Mr. Griffith for 5 minutes for questions.
Mr.  Griffith. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, I appreciate it.
I do want to take a minute to correct the record. Drug
manufacturing companies are, in fact--after CARES was passed in
2020--required to report volume as a part of the facility
registration. Unfortunately, it is not happening.
The FDA responded on May 9th, 2023, to a letter from the
Chair of the full committee Mrs. McMorris Rodgers to you, Mr.
Chairman, and myself, as chairman of Oversight, and said that
only 44 percent of facilities are complying as of March 28th of
this year.
And as a part of this hearing, Mr. Chairman, if there is no
objection, I would like to submit the full text of that letter
dated May 9th, 2023, to the Committee on Energy and Commerce
from U.S. FDA.
Mr.  Guthrie. Seeing no objection----
Ms.  Eshoo. Would the gentleman yield for a moment?
Mr.  Griffith. Yes, ma'am.
Ms.  Eshoo. Yes. I want to thank you for raising this. This
was as a result of my getting that into the CARES Act. So we
have a dual interest on making sure it works.
Mr.  Griffith. Yes.
Ms.  Eshoo. Thank you.
Mr.  Griffith. And it is important to make sure that we are
figuring out--as was said just a second ago, we have got to
have the data to know where some of our problems may be
developing on drug manufacturing.
Mr.  Guthrie. Again, without objection, so ordered.
[The information appears at the conclusion of the hearing.]
Mr.  Griffith. Dr. Inglesby, you testified previously--and
as did Dr. Mary Denigan-Macauley in front of the Oversight and
Investigations Committee where we were--or, our subcommittee--
on challenges to investigating the origins of pandemics.
When talking about pandemic preparedness, do you think a
large focus should be on--or at least a focus should be on--
ensuring our Federal agencies provide proper oversight into
research being done by foreign entities that are funded by U.S.
taxpayer dollars?
Dr.  Inglesby. I do. I think it is very important that they
are in compliance with all of the rules and guidances that are
issued by our own Federal agencies. In particular, I have
concerns about areas of research where viruses are being
created that are more dangerous than those that occur in
nature.
So absolutely, whether it is domestic researchers or any
foreign institutions doing that work, they really need to be
governed very rigorously by HHS, and with White House
oversight.
Mr.  Griffith. And now I am going to ask you the tough
question and put you on the spot. And if the grantees for a
Federal agency doing research on viruses or other significant
research that could be a pandemic if something goes awry, if
that grantee is not complying with the requirements of the
grant, should we both cease giving our money to them and then
keep them from getting any new grants until they comply with
the requirements of the old grant?
Dr.  Inglesby. I do think, if it is determined that a
grantee is doing work that is out of compliance with Federal
guidance, particularly on those issues which are, you know, of
particular high consequence and safety concerns, then I don't
think they should continue to get funding until they are either
in compliance or, if they can't be in compliance, then I don't
think they should continue to receive funding.
Mr.  Griffith. Yes, I agree with you. We are having a
little spat right now with one of our agencies.
All right. I previously mentioned that you came before the
subcommittee that I chair on the pandemic issues, Dr. Denigan-
Macauley. Has GAO looked into what incentives are needed to
bring more domestic manufacturing to the U.S. so that we are
not reliant on foreign countries to produce certain items and
ingredients? API, particularly, is what I am looking at.
And if so, what is needed to help bring more manufacturing
to the United States?
Dr.  Denigan-Macauley. We have most certainly, and our most
recent report was looking actually at advanced manufacturing.
It is what FDA considers to hopefully be able to be faster and
bring that manufacturing home and realize the cost benefits of
it. And so we are watching that quite carefully.
It doesn't work for all drugs, though. And we also don't
know, as we talked about before, what APIs that we actually
need to be manufactured here. We don't understand the sources
of them all. So we continue our work in this area.
Mr.  Griffith. And it was interesting--I would just get
your opinion on it--one of the witnesses in the hearing that I
had previously this morning on drug shortages with--
particularly talking about generics--opined that because we
can't bring it all onshore in a short period of time, that we
ought to focus on the top 40, and that we take actions to try
to bring the top 40 back onshore so that we have those API
being made in this country and those medicines being made in
this country.
And of course, then that opens up the possibilities that
they have--as long as they are doing 1 line, they might do 2
lines, and it may be more than just the top 40. But what do you
think of taking a look at focusing on those top 40 most popular
generic medications and trying to bring those back as a
starter?
Dr.  Denigan-Macauley. Well, I know that we do have a
national supply chain strategy that is put in place. And we
have taken a look at some of the supply issues that they have
had. And if it is implemented successfully, we feel that it
will help with bringing that domestic manufacturing home.
I will say, though, that we do have concerns. For example,
saline was in short supply after Hurricanes Maria and Irma. So
it is very--just because we bring it home, we still can't put
all our eggs in one basket.
So--but yes, looking at what is the most critical,
prioritizing, and then making a plan for how we can bring that
onshore, close to shore would be good.
Mr.  Griffith. And I know I am over, Mr. Chairman, but I
will just say I have to agree with not putting all of our eggs
in one basket, because what we should do is we should have two
or three sites across the country on something that is used
daily like saline.
I yield back.
Mr.  Guthrie. Thank you. The gentleman yields back.
Yes, you were a few seconds over, but you had a colloquy
with the ranking member, so I will cede you those seconds
there. So thank you.
Ms.  Eshoo. A colloquy?
Mr.  Guthrie. Colloquy.
Dr. Schrier, you are now recognized for 5 minutes for
questions.
Ms.  Schrier. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I enjoyed that
conversation, as well, so I will give that same allowance.
Thank you all for being here today, and the thoughtfulness
that you have put into preparedness and what we can do next
time--because there will be a next time--to guard our health
security.
Mr. Inglesby, it is wonderful to see you again. And in your
testimony you discuss a more flexible public health response
and adding greater emphasis on at-risk individuals. And I am a
pediatrician. One of those special groups is children. And I
have reflected many times during this pandemic, however awful
it was, I have thought how much worse it would have been had we
seen hospitals full of children on ventilators and children
dying from this disease.
And really, COVID was the exception. I mean, when we think
about pandemic flu, it is kids and pregnant women who are the
hardest hit in many ways. And so children become top of mind to
me. I even have thought about whether the public response and
resistance to masks and vaccines and those kinds of things
would have been different had we seen our children, our
neighbors' children at that kind of risk, whether it would have
been more like polio.
I was wondering if you could talk a little bit about these
flexibilities and what Congress can do to help you or to help
make us better prepared to handle children's needs during the
next pandemic or other emergency.
Dr.  Inglesby. Yes, Congresswoman, thank you very much for
the question. And I, first of all, share your concern that we
don't move forward with the assumption that the next pandemic
will necessarily look like the one we just went through. Kids
could be disproportionately affected at higher risk of dying in
future events, as they are with many infectious diseases. So I
do think we need to be better prepared for pediatric response
than we are now.
Many emergency rooms can't handle the load of children they
have in a normal flu season. We don't have enough beds for kids
in intensive care units in many places in the country. Part of
that is because reimbursement is poor for pediatric practices,
and that could change, particularly with Medicaid. So I do
think we need to be thinking about systemic changes for our
healthcare system for pediatrics.
Ms.  Schrier. Amen.
Dr.  Inglesby. And I think that we also--FDA has
acknowledged the importance of focusing on pediatric products,
but often they come last for somewhat understandable reasons.
People are concerned about the risks. But in those kinds of
environments we have to move as quickly as we can for products
that are--that will work and be safe for children. And that
hasn't always been the case, but we should really press for FDA
to have that at the top of their list.
Ms.  Schrier. Thank you, I appreciate that. I mean, we--I
was just listening to the conversation with Mr. Griffith about
a shortage of saline and thinking that if the next thing is a
cholera-type issue and what we need is abundant saline, that is
so simple, but we might not have enough in this country.
I wanted to turn to testing. I remember that in the first
few weeks of the pandemic we were struggling, like, you know,
tens of tests a day, sending them to the CDC. Meanwhile, South
Korea was doing 10,000 tests a day, drive-through. And I know
we have learned a lot of lessons and was wondering kind of
where you think we are in terms of the next time this hits.
Have we learned enough? Do we have enough resources? Do we have
companies to call on so that we can ramp up quickly?
Dr.  Inglesby. Congresswoman, I think we have learned an
enormous amount about testing over the painful lessons over the
last 3 years. I do think we know now what to do at a strategic
level, but we don't have everything in place, going forward.
Some of it is--will--has eroded or will erode at the end of
this COVID response. But a couple of those things include what
South Korea did, which is having the foundation for contracts
in place with companies between government and the private
sector before things start.
We can't rely on only public health agencies carrying the
entire weight of the country for testing. We have to include
and use the testing infrastructure we have around the country,
which is enormous. And once it got involved, I think we showed
that we could test hundreds of thousands, we--millions of
people a day at one point.
So I think we have the structures. We have to have
relationships between industry and government. We should have a
forum that is enduring and sustained between government and the
testing industry, that includes the leaders from the industry,
that is scouting for new problems, ready to rock in the event
of a crisis.
We should have the report--the guidance system available
from CDC, so that they are able to indicate to industry how
many tests are going to be needed to be produced and on what on
what scale, what timeframe. So I think we know what to do, but
we need to do it.
Ms.  Schrier. Thank you. And I think continuing these
relationships that we built this time with universities, public
medical centers, even veterinary teaching hospitals, to be able
to rally all of those resources. Thank you.
I will submit other questions.
And I yield back my time.
Mr.  Guthrie. Thank you. The gentlelady yields back. The
Chair recognizes the Chair of the full committee, Chair
McMorris Rodgers, for 5 minutes. The Chair is recognized.
Mrs.  Rodgers. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Dr. Lutter, we--earlier this morning I had asked CDC about
the possibility of implementing good guidance practices, and
they had some concerns. Yet your paper explicitly addresses
some of this, about how guidance can still be released in a
responsibly--timely manner. And there is an opportunity for
continued revision and public feedback.
Would you explain the origins of FDA's good guidance policy
and how it was initially proposed, passed in a bipartisan
fashion?
And would you speak to the specific benefits of potentially
adopting a similar policy for CDC?
Dr.  Lutter. Thank you, Chairwoman. The--there's many
benefits.
One is, in an FDA perspective--and it may be less important
for CDC--is it allows a clearer distinction between what is
required and what is recommended because the guidance documents
state these--this document contains only recommendations.
Requirements that you must abide by are already in statute or
regs found elsewhere, and then they are cited. So that is very
helpful to avoid a problem of regulation by guidance, which has
sometimes befuddled the Federal regulatory agencies. So that is
a fairly effective way of avoiding that problem.
Probably more importantly, from a CDC perspective, is
simply is there a recognized mechanism for the agency always to
solicit comment on what it is recommending others to do. And
the advantage of that is it can say publicly, ``This is our
best guess. We want your advice, your technical information,
any data you may have about the benefits and the risks of the
recommendations that we are making, and we will pay attention
to them. See here in the docket. And based on what we receive
there, we will revisit as appropriate and necessary.''
And the FDA good guidance practice reg requires the agency
to respond to important--I think the word might be
``influential''--public comments that it receives on the draft
guidance. So when it issues the final guidance, in a normal
world that is not plagued by a pandemic, it has to offer some
response to public comments that it may have received. It is
modeled, if you will, on the Administrative Procedures Act,
that part of it.
But--so I think the key virtue, from a CDC perspective, is
to increase public confidence--and this is especially important
in this postpandemic era--public confidence that the agency is
paying attention to information that it may not already have
from the public about the merit, the benefits, and the risks of
the recommendations that it is making.
Mrs.  Rodgers. Thank you.
Dr. Denigan-Macauley, GAO identified five areas HHS has
consistently fallen short during public health emergencies, and
two of them, failure to provide clear and consistent
communication and failure to establish transparency and
accountability in order to build public trust, have been
repeated today.
Do you think adoption of good guidance practices at CDC
that we were just discussing might be a first step towards
addressing and resolving an--this area of concern?
And would adoption of these policies help address HHS high-
risk designation?
Dr.  Denigan-Macauley. Yes. So we are certainly familiar
that--with FDA, with our work, and understand that they issue
guidances. We haven't looked at it specifically to understand
how it compares to the CDC, but we have repeatedly said that
there has to be transparency. We found significant problems
with CDC, not with--no scientific rationale for the changes in
the testing guidelines, for example, for masking policies. So--
and with school, things that the--so we would strongly support
any transparent and science-based communication through
guidelines that would help improve communication.
Mrs.  Rodgers. OK, thank you.
Mr. Decker, we have heard a lot about health security
threats today. Cybersecurity continues to be growing, and a
serious threat that certainly has the potential to disrupt
care, mission critical services. And they are coming from
domestic and foreign adversaries.
You speak to the coordination between HHS and the
Cybersecurity Working Group in your testimony today, but also
mentioned the need for increased collaboration with the private
sector. Would Congress explicitly providing clear--clearer
responsibility authority for a specific entity like HHS to help
lead on cybersecurity help?
And what do you see as some of the roadblocks to private
sector participation?
Mr.  Decker. Yes, I--for sure. I think the amplification of
messages from the Government--across all the Government, HHS,
Congress, et cetera--on explaining the need and importance of
this is--would go a long way.
I don't think that this is a problem where people don't
understand that cybersecurity could become a risk. I think it
is more of a problem of people recognizing when it can become
actualized within their own organization. And in some cases,
they don't necessarily even know how to engage.
And so the message and the amplification of that engagement
would go very far into getting better coverage. I think in my
testimony I mentioned we have about 400 organizations that are
part of the Cyber Working Group. There are way more than 400
organizations that make up healthcare, you know, so we have a
lot more to go.
Mrs.  Rodgers. Super. Thank you, thank you, everyone.
I yield back.
Mr.  Guthrie. Thank you. The Chair yields back. The Chair
now recognizes Mr. Sarbanes for 5 minutes for questions.
Mr.  Sarbanes. Thanks very much, Mr. Chairman. Thank you
all for being here today.
Dr. Inglesby, thank you for your testimony. I am going to
ask you probably an unfair question, but on a scale of 1 to 10,
before the pandemic hit, in terms of the amount and quality and
usefulness of data, sort of public health data across the
country and its--our ability to roll it up into a kind of
surveillance perspective that was useful to us, what would you
say--where would you rate it on a scale of 1 to 10 before the
pandemic hit?
Dr.  Inglesby. I would say, depending on the topic,
something on the order of 3 to 5.
Mr.  Sarbanes. OK.
Dr.  Inglesby. I think it got better because of the work
that you all did that was temporary and required agency or
States to send data to CDC.
Mr.  Sarbanes. OK.
Dr.  Inglesby. But that, obviously, is expiring now.
Mr.  Sarbanes. Right, Right.
Dr.  Inglesby. So----
Mr.  Sarbanes. So did we finish at the high point at maybe
6 or 7? Is that where you would put it because of that work,
or----
Dr.  Inglesby. It may--I would say maybe 7 because----
Mr.  Sarbanes. OK.
Dr.  Inglesby [continuing]. Of the requirement of the CARES
Act and other----
Mr.  Sarbanes. Yes.
Dr.  Inglesby. [continuing]. Other work you did.
Mr.  Sarbanes. OK. So one of my anxieties--and I expressed
this to the first panel--is that, because the emergency
situation is behind us, and I am reading every day articles
about local health officials--``closing up shop'' is the term I
am using--when it comes to their data, when it comes to even
some of the other infrastructure they have built, workforce
commitment because it was linked to the pandemic, and what
happened was it linked everything about them. Their whole
operation got linked to the pandemic.
So now, with some of them putting that in the rearview
mirror and our kind of blessing that new perspective to a
certain degree, the danger is that a lot of the things that
took us from the 3 to 5 rating up to maybe a 7 will slide
backwards again.
And if you could just speak to that sitting where you sit,
and whether you have similar anxiety about it, because I think
the argument could be, just from a basic public health
standpoint, we should always be at a 7 so that, when a pandemic
hits, we can get to 8 or 9 or, God forbid, 10. But the risk
here is we are going to slide back to a 4 or a 5 or a 3, and
then we are going to face the same challenge the next time out.
So talk about that, because you are reading about how this
is shutting down, and that is not happening anymore, and
everyone is getting comfortable again, and then we are going to
be caught. You know, we are going to be caught off guard.
Dr.  Inglesby. Yes, I think prior CDC Director Redfield
said that when he got to CDC and he started hearing reports
about data, that it was years old. And he said, ``I don't--why
are we--it seems like we are an agency of history here, not a
public health agency.'' So I think he himself said it very
well. He was seeing data that was 3 years old, and it was the
latest that they had.
So we need to have systems. I think the American people, we
all basically expect that our health agencies are collecting
data in real time, but they can't if they don't have agreements
that are really clear and strong and interoperable between
Federal agencies and States.
I think we generally all are on the same--have the same
goals, but unless we----
Mr.  Sarbanes. Are those kinds of agreements ones that
those agencies, if they collaborate well, can put in place
themselves and create expectations, even if it is for maybe
voluntary, not mandated, contribution of data and other
perspective from locals, or do you feel like there has to be
more authorization, more legislation on the books that gives
that authority?
Dr.  Inglesby. I do think we need--CDC needs more
authority. I think the monkeypox experience showed that they
started to try to get these data use agreements in June, and
they did not have them completed until September, and it was
clearly, you know, declared a pandemic early on. So we were
trying to collect information, but they didn't have the data
they needed to know where vaccine was going and being used.
So I think having something that is set up in statute,
authorities that are clear ahead of time, would be very
valuable for the public health response of the country.
Mr.  Sarbanes. Can you get some percentage of the way
towards the standard you would like to see just through
administrative collaboration, absent some new authority? How--
what--how far can you get with that?
Dr.  Inglesby. You can get partial.
Mr.  Sarbanes. OK.
Dr.  Inglesby. I think some States are going to agree to
give data quickly and in a fashion that they and CDC agree to,
and other States will have less interest in that or less
ability. So I think having a standard playing field across the
country so that we can all see what is happening at the same
time, so you can see--Congress can see what is happening, I
think, would require new authorities.
Mr.  Sarbanes. Thank you, and I yield back.
Mr.  Guthrie. The gentleman yields back. The Chair
recognizes Mr. Carter for 5 minutes for questions.
Mr.  Carter. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank all of you
for being here. This is extremely important. I have always said
that we need to learn our lessons, what we did right, what we
did wrong, what we can do different next time, what we can do
better next time. And if we don't do that, then shame on us. So
I consider this to be part of that process, and I want to thank
you all for participating in that process.
Last year Congress restricted the NIH from funding
dangerous experiments that involve pathogens of pandemic
potential or certain biological agents or toxins in foreign
countries of concern. And I think that is a good thing. This
development materialized out of the growing bipartisan concern
for the oversight of U.S. taxpayer-funded experiments.
So even after--but even after Congress blocked it, you
know, the Government still funds some research in these nations
around the world. And that is very concerning to me. This
hearing here is concerned with preparing for and responding to
future public health threats.
Dr. Inglesby, I want to ask you, what steps can we take to
be prepared for public health threats that, when we got
potentially worrisome experiments being funded beyond our
jurisdiction?
I mean, if we have learned anything out of this pandemic,
it is that the experiments going on in other countries,
particularly countries that are adversarial to us, are very,
very dangerous, and should be of concern to us.
Dr.  Inglesby. Yes, Congressman, I absolutely agree that
any kinds of experiments--I think the ones that you may be
referring to in this case are experiments where researchers are
able to transform pathogens and make them more dangerous than
they exist in nature. And for that work, I think they should be
following the most strict, rigorous policies that the U.S.
Government is putting in place.
I think there is now a review where the policies are going
to become more strict, based on this review that White House
and NIH led last year. I think that will be very important. And
every country that receives research from our Government
absolutely should be complying and fully transparent with the
work they are doing in that space.
Mr.  Carter. Dr. Macauley, I am sure you are aware--and we
mentioned Dr. Redfield, a good friend, who coauthored an op-ed
just recently on the potential dangers of gain of function
research. And look, I will just be full disclosure: I am not a
fan of gain of function research. You know, Einstein said years
ago that the only thing more dangerous than ignorance is
arrogance. And I consider gain of function research to be
nothing more than intellectual arrogance. And I just--I have no
tolerance at all for it.
But just a few months ago there were two National Science
Advisory Board for Biosecurity working groups that released
their findings, their draft findings and recommendations. And
the first finding is that the current definitions of a
pandemic, potential pathogens, and enhanced pandemic potential
pathogens are too narrow and could result in overlooking some
research. And definitions are important, and it is important we
get them right and to be all inclusive.
Do you agree? Do you agree that the current standards
governing pandemic potential pathogens--that were put in place
in 2017, I might add, before the pandemic--that they could miss
some risky experiments?
Dr.  Denigan-Macauley. Yes, we have work in this area. And
actually, HHS is the only agency, to our knowledge, that
actually created oversight of this small type of gain of
function research that is of concern. And the concern is that
the--it does miss some of the other activities that that could
be of high risk.
Mr.  Carter. And HHS, as I understand it, has had a program
to ensure that the U.S. could rapidly produce medical
countermeasures if this were to happen again. Drugs, vaccines,
and public health emergencies. Do you know if HHS has taken
action to incorporate the recommendations that GAO made in 2022
to address these kind of shortcomings?
Dr.  Denigan-Macauley. Yes. So developing medical
countermeasures is complex. It is not something that the
private sector really wants to take on, because there is no
return because it is something that you are creating for a
what-if, and if it never comes. So it is something that the
Government needs to step up and do.
We said that HHS's efforts were not sufficient. We heard
earlier they built for capacity but not for capability, and we
had problems. And so our most recent report came out, and they
have not had an opportunity yet to--it will take time to
fulfill all of the--implement all of the recommendations that
we have. But it is an area of concern.
Mr.  Carter. Well, thank you. And again, thank all of you.
This is extremely important. All of us have always heard the
saying that, you know, ``Fool me once, shame on you, fool me
twice, shame on me,'' and we don't need to be fooled twice. We
need to be prepared. And that is why this hearing is so
important. And so thank you. Thank you for being here.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I will yield back.
Mr.  Guthrie. Thank you. The gentleman yields back, and I
see no other Members present to ask questions, and thank you
all so much. This has been so informative. It is so important,
and I can guarantee the American people we are all working
together to make sure we prepare better for the next pandemic
in a way that--you can't think of everything, you can't
accomplish everything, but we are certainly going to work
together to get as far along as we certainly can.
I do have a unanimous--I have a unanimous consent request
to insert into the record the documents listed on the staff--
that has been distributed before.
Without objection, so ordered.
[The information appears at the conclusion of the hearing.]
Mr.  Guthrie. And I want to remind Members they have 10
days to submit questions for the record. I think a couple
people have mentioned today they want to submit some questions
already. And I ask that you witnesses to respond to the
questions promptly. Members should submit their questions by
the close of business on May the 25th. So we will have those by
May the 25th, and we ask for a prompt response.
We really appreciate the time and effort. It is a--when you
have a two-panel hearing, you are the second panel, it is a
long day. But it means a lot to us, and it means a lot to the
American people. And we certainly appreciate your time.
And with that, without any other comments, the committee
will be adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 2:43 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]
[Material submitted for inclusion in the record follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
