- MACRA CHECKUP: ASSESSING IMPLEMENTATION AND CHALLENGES THAT REMAIN FOR PATIENTS AND DOCTORS

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

MACRA CHECKUP: ASSESSING IMPLEMENTATION AND CHALLENGES THAT REMAIN FOR
PATIENTS AND DOCTORS

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT AND INVESTIGATIONS

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

JUNE 22, 2023

__________

Serial No. 118-54

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Published for the use of the Committee on Energy and Commerce

govinfo.gov/committee/house-energy
energycommerce.house.gov

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
58-105                      WASHINGTON : 2025

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE

CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington
Chair
MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas            FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey
ROBERT E. LATTA, Ohio                  Ranking Member
BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky              ANNA G. ESHOO, California
H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia         DIANA DeGETTE, Colorado
GUS M. BILIRAKIS, Florida            JAN SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois
BILL JOHNSON, Ohio                   DORIS O. MATSUI, California
LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana               KATHY CASTOR, Florida
RICHARD HUDSON, North Carolina       JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland
TIM WALBERG, Michigan                PAUL TONKO, New York
EARL L. ``BUDDY'' CARTER, Georgia    YVETTE D. CLARKE, New York
JEFF DUNCAN, South Carolina          TONY CARDENAS, California
GARY J. PALMER, Alabama              RAUL RUIZ, California
NEAL P. DUNN, Florida                SCOTT H. PETERS, California
JOHN R. CURTIS, Utah                 DEBBIE DINGELL, Michigan
DEBBBIE LESKO, Arizona               MARC A. VEASEY, Texas
GREG PENCE, Indiana                  ANN M. KUSTER, New Hampshire
DAN CRENSHAW, Texas                  ROBIN L. KELLY, Illinois
JOHN JOYCE, Pennsylvania             NANETTE DIAZ BARRAGAN, California
KELLY ARMSTRONG, North Dakota, Vice  LISA BLUNT ROCHESTER, Delaware
Chair                            DARREN SOTO, Florida
RANDY K. WEBER, Sr., Texas           ANGIE CRAIG, Minnesota
RICK W. ALLEN, Georgia               KIM SCHRIER, Washington
TROY BALDERSON, Ohio                 LORI TRAHAN, Massachusetts
RUSS FULCHER, Idaho                  LIZZIE FLETCHER, Texas
AUGUST PFLUGER, Texas
DIANA HARSHBARGER, Tennessee
MARIANNETTE MILLER-MEEKS, Iowa
KAT CAMMACK, Florida
JAY OBERNOLTE, California
------

Professional Staff

NATE HODSON, Staff Director
SARAH BURKE, Deputy Staff Director
TIFFANY GUARASCIO, Minority Staff Director
Subcommittee on Oversight and Investigations

H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia
Chairman
MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas            KATHY CASTOR, Florida
BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky                Ranking Member
JEFF DUNCAN, South Carolina          DIANA DeGETTE, Colorado
GARY J. PALMER, Alabama              JAN SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois
DEBBIE LESKO, Arizona, Vice Chair    PAUL TONKO, New York
DAN CRENSHAW, Texas                  RAUL RUIZ, California
KELLY ARMSTRONG, North Dakota        SCOTT H. PETERS, California
KAT CAMMACK, Florida                 FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey (ex
CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington       officio)
(ex officio)
C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hon. H. Morgan Griffith, a Representative in Congress from the
Commonwealth of Virginia, opening statement....................     1
Prepared statement...........................................     3
Hon. Michael C. Burgess, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Texas, prepared statement.............................    12
Hon. Kathy Castor, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Florida, opening statement.....................................    15
Prepared statement...........................................    17
Hon. Cathy McMorris Rodgers, a Representative in Congress from
the State of Washington, opening statement.....................    19
Prepared statement...........................................    21
Hon. Frank Pallone, Jr., a Representative in Congress from the
State of New Jersey, opening statement.........................    25
Prepared statement...........................................    27

Witnesses

Joe Albanese, Policy Analyst, Paragon Health Institute...........    30
Prepared statement...........................................    32
Answers to submitted questions...............................   150
Aisha Pittman, Senior Vice President of Government Affairs,
National Association of ACOs...................................    50
Prepared statement...........................................    52
Answers to submitted questions...............................   152
Anas Daghestani, M.D., Chair of the Board of Directors, America's
Physician Groups, and Chief Executive Officer, Austin Regional
Clinic.........................................................    69
Prepared statement...........................................    72
Answers to submitted questions...............................   154
J. Michael McWilliams, M.D., Ph.D., Warren Alpert Foundation
Professor of Healthcare Policy and Professor of Medicine,
Harvard Medical School.........................................    80
Prepared statement...........................................    82

Submitted Material

Inclusion of the following was approved by unanimous consent.
List of documents submitted for the record.......................   126
Letter of June 22, 2023, from the GOP Doctors Caucus to Mrs.
Rodgers and Mr. Griffith.......................................   126
Letter of June 21, 2023, from James L. Madera, Chief Executive
Officer and Executive Vice President, American Medical
Association, to Mrs. Rodgers, et al............................   128
Statement of the Surgical Coalition..............................   141
Statement of the American College of Surgeons, June 22, 2023.....   143

MACRA CHECKUP: ASSESSING IMPLEMENTATION AND CHALLENGES THAT REMAIN FOR
PATIENTS AND DOCTORS

----------

THURSDAY, JUNE 22, 2023

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Oversight and Investigations,
Committee on Energy and Commerce,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 10:30 a.m. in
room 2322, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. H. Morgan
Griffith (chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Members present: Representatives Griffith, Burgess,
Guthrie, Duncan, Palmer, Lesko, Armstrong Cammack, Rodgers (ex
officio), Castor (subcommittee ranking member), DeGette,
Schakowsky, Ruiz, Peters, and Pallone (ex officio).
Also present: Representatives Bucshon, Joyce, Miller-Meeks,
and Schrier.
Staff present: Alec Aramanda, Professional Staff Member;
Kate Arey, Digital Director; Sean Brebbia, Chief Counsel;
Lauren Eriksen, Clerk; Peter Kielty, General Counsel; Emily
King, Member Services Director; Chris Krepich, Press Secretary;
Karli Plucker, Director of Operations (shared staff); Gavin
Proffitt, Professional Staff Member; John Strom, Counsel;
Caitlin Wilson, Counsel; Austin Flack, Minority Junior
Professional Staff Member; Tiffany Guarascio, Minority Staff
Director; Liz Johns, Minority GAO Detailee; Will McAuliffe,
Minority Chief Counsel, Oversight and Investigations; Constance
O'Connor, Minority Senior Counsel; Christina Parisi, Minority
Professional Staff Member; Harry Samuels, Minority Oversight
Counsel; and Caroline Wood, Minority Research Analyst.
Mr. Griffith. The Subcommittee on Oversight and
Investigations will now come to order.
The Chair now recognizes himself for 5 minutes for an
opening statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, A REPRESENTATIVE
IN CONGRESS FROM THE COMMONWEALTH OF VIRGINIA

Welcome to today's hearing. Today's hearing is a chance for
Members to check up on the implementation of Medicare Access
and CHIP Reauthorization Act of 2015, more commonly known as
MACRA. I believe we are in a better place now than we were
prior to 2015 because of the work done by the members of the
Energy and Commerce Committee, led by Dr. Burgess, to get MACRA
enacted into law with overwhelming bipartisan support.
MACRA charted a new course for Medicare, and attempted to
put it on a more sustainable financial path. MACRA was designed
to shift physician reimbursements from a fee-for-service
payment model to one that seeks to reward doctors for value
over volume for patient care.
One of the biggest pieces was the elimination of the
sustainable growth rate, or SGR. This was the formula used to
determine the annual updates to the Medicare fee schedule,
which governs physician reimbursement.
On top of eliminating the SGR, MACRA established the
Quality Pay Program, which establishes two pathways to
incentivize physicians to transition to value-based care. One
pathway is the Merit-based Incentive Payment System, or MIPS,
where a provider is subject to a performance-based payment
system that results in payment adjustments based on certain
quality reporting categories. The other pathway is the
Alternative Payment Model, or APMs, which allows physicians to
take a risk-based approach to treating patients to achieve
specific performance goals in order to receive bonus payments.
This hearing will allow Congress to understand what is
working, what is not working, what is showing promise, and what
unexpected challenges have come to light. Among these
unexpected challenges is CMS's implementation of MACRA that has
created additional levels of administrative complexity and
costs. This has slowed down the adoption of MACRA's Quality
Payment Programs.
Savings achieved under these models have also been less
than was hoped for, and CMS's process for approving new payment
models has been something of a disappointment, as well. In
2020, less than 238,000 providers were participating in APMs,
while over 933,000 participated in MIPS.
MIPS has also proven administratively complex to implement,
and costly for providers. This has disadvantaged small and
rural healthcare providers, and in many instances prevented
them from participating in the program on a level playing
field. It is essential that these rural and underserved
providers are not left at a disadvantage due to the lack of
resources and infrastructure.
A small, rural practice needs standards that are relevant
to their practice and different than the larger, suburban
practices. These issues risk further accelerating the
consolidation of healthcare providers. We have seen too often
doctors are forced to pay attention to certain metrics to
ensure reimbursement rather than for quality patient care. We
must strike the right balance between fairly compensating our
doctors and healthcare providers to ensure access to high-
quality care while also being good stewards of Medicare funds.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Griffith follows:]
GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Griffith. I will now yield the remaining remainder of
my time to a leader on this issue, Dr. Burgess.
Mr. Burgess. I thank the chairman. And as he pointed out,
the SGR's unrealistic expectations of spending and efficiency
affected the healthcare profession and Medicare beneficiaries
for nearly 17 years before the final repeal. At the time, docs
were facing a 24 percent cut in Medicare rates unless Congress
stepped in to provide a more straightforward reimbursement
system for America's physicians.
The Medicare Access and CHIP Reauthorization Act introduced
the new Merit-based Incentive Payment System and processes to
adopt Alternative Payment Models. This new system shifted the
approach to physician payment, paying providers based on
quality, value, and the results of care delivered rather than
just the number of patients seen in a day.
I have dedicated a large part of my congressional career to
repealing and replacing the Sustainable Growth Rate formula
and, obviously, the follow-on, the enactment of the Medicare
Access and CHIP Reauthorization Act. This was a major milestone
in 2015 and was supported by over 800 healthcare organizations,
overwhelming support in both the House and the Senate when it
passed. This legislation was a result of bipartisan,
multicommittee negotiations that produced legislative responses
to some of our nation's most pressing healthcare issues.
It is important to note that we were solving the problems
of the time and that our shared goal was to help doctors and
their patients be relieved from the constant threat of payment
cuts and doctors dropping out of the system.
The repeal of the SGR took me personally 13 years from
start to finish. With a product as comprehensive and complex as
MACRA, it was shortsighted of Congress to assume that the need
for oversight would stop after the signing ceremony.
I thank the chairman for this opportunity to examine what
worked and what didn't work, the agency's role in
implementation, and how we can make it easier for doctors to
practice in our healthcare system.
Our work is far from done, and docs deserve a long-term
financial stability, and patients deserve access to the best
care possible.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Burgess follows:]
GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Burgess. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I will yield back to
you.
Mr. Griffith. The gentleman yields back, and I yield back,
as well, and now recognize the ranking member of the
subcommittee, Ms. Castor, for a 5-minute opening statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. KATHY CASTOR, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF FLORIDA

Ms. Castor. Well, thank you, Chairman Griffith, for holding
this important oversight hearing on the Medicare Access and
CHIP Reauthorization Act, or MACRA.
Welcome to our witnesses. Thank you for your expert advice
to the committee.
Our older neighbors and other patients who rely on Medicare
deserve healthcare that is affordable, accessible, and high
quality. MACRA was passed in 2015 with strong bipartisan
support to resolve problems created by the Sustainable Growth
Rate formula that had frustrated Congress and providers for
years. MACRA attempted to replace that system with one that
rewarded physicians for providing high-quality care rather than
a high volume of care. And so I appreciate the approach that we
are taking today to solicit feedback from those who have direct
experience providing care to Medicare beneficiaries, and those
who have studied the impact over time.
The two new payment models established under MACRA were
designed to shift away from costly Medicare fee-for-service
reimbursements by creating incentives for physicians to provide
more value-based care.
The first payment model, the Merit-based Incentive Payment
System, or MIPS, established performance bonuses or reductions
for eligible physicians based on progress on a selection of
metrics, including the cost and quality of the care they
provide.
The second payment model in MACRA created incentives for
Medicare physicians to voluntarily participate in Advanced
Alternative Payment Models that include accountable care
organizations or bundled payment structures for specialized
care. These APMs must show economic efficiency and meet certain
patient thresholds to qualify physicians for the APM bonuses.
Both payment models have had mixed results. The Medicare
Payment Advisory Commission, or MedPAC, has reported to
Congress that MIPS does not adequately measure physician
performance because the assessments for individual providers
vary based upon which metrics they choose to report, and not
enough providers appear to be adopting the APMs in the way that
we had hoped when MACRA was passed out.
So what are we going to do about it? Well, to adequately
pay physicians for improving the quality of care they provide
to our neighbors who rely on Medicare, we need to be confident
that the measures we use to assess and compare performance are
meaningful and incentivize physicians to participate in these
new payment models. The process of monitoring and improving
current methods of assessing quality of care at Medicare
physician payment systems is ongoing, and I hope that this
hearing today will be a productive part of those efforts.
The Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services has launched
a number of initiatives to ensure that our older neighbors who
rely on Medicare are able to access excellent care when and
where they need it. These include investing in greater
participation in APMs that demonstrate patient benefits and
cost savings to serve more patients, particularly in rural and
other underserved areas. These are certainly policy pushes in a
positive direction, but we need your input to go farther.
As MACRA has been in effect since 2017, this is a very good
time to assess how the reforms have lived up to the original
legislative goals and what we can learn from the experiences of
doctors and patients in our communities back home. That is why
it is so important to hear from experts like you. I encourage
other stakeholders out there monitoring this hearing to weigh
in, as well.
I look forward to hearing all of your testimony today on
this important issue that has implications for the well-being
of 60 million of Americans who rely on Medicare for their
health and well-being.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Castor follows:]
GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Ms. Castor. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I yield back
my time.
Mr. Griffith. Thank you. The gentlelady yields back. I now
recognize the gentlelady from Washington, the Chair of the full
committee, Mrs. McMorris Rodgers, for her 5-minute opening
statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, A
REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF WASHINGTON

Mrs. Rodgers. Thank you, Chair Griffith.
This committee is actively working on bipartisan solutions
to enhance transparency and reduce healthcare costs. We moved a
bipartisan health package through the full committee
unanimously last month, and we are now focusing on how current
laws facilitate quality care for American seniors. That is what
we sought to do when Congress passed MACRA in 2015 in a
bipartisan manner, and I want to join in thanking Dr. Burgess
for his leadership on that effort.
MACRA, which replaced the Sustainable Growth Rate formula,
brought stability to the medical provider community. For
decades the traditional Medicare fee-for-service system
inadvertently incentivized the proliferation of low-value
healthcare services by paying for volume rather than health
outcomes for patients. When seniors visited their doctors, they
often received a multiple of services that may not have been
necessary for their health, simply because the system rewarded
quantity rather than the quality of care. MACRA introduced a
new approach that is prioritizing quality over quantity.
The Quality Payment Program, consisting of the Merit-based
Incentive Payment program and the Advanced Alternative Payment
Models, aimed to streamline reporting measures and reduce
administrative burdens on providers, allowing doctors to
dedicate more time to patient care. Today's hearing will deepen
our understanding of MACRA's implementation and help us address
remaining barriers to optimal patient care.
Our work becomes more urgent as more Americans age into the
Medicare program and the financial and regulatory pressures on
healthcare providers inside and outside of Medicare mount. We
must pay special attention to the challenges faced by doctors
in rural areas such as my district in eastern Washington.
We have learned throughout this committee's process to
address healthcare costs and transparency. Outdated Medicare
payment policies and rules can lead to regulatory capture,
which encourages greater healthcare consolidation that leads to
higher prices for patients and reduced quality of care. The
impact of MACRA on rural healthcare providers has been
significant, and small practices in these areas may face large
burdens in transitioning to value-based payment arrangements,
which may be leading to further provider consolidation.
Our rural healthcare providers are integral to our--to the
health of our communities, but they continue to grapple with
financial and technological hurdles. Despite these challenges,
they have shown remarkable resilience and commitment to
providing quality care to our constituents. Our goal today is
to learn more about where improvements are needed to ensure
rural healthcare providers can further improve the delivery of
care.
MACRA has also presented challenges to specialists in small
practices which may not have the resources to build a model of
their own or balance the financial tradeoffs. Take, for
example, the Oncology Care Model and the successor model for--
Enhancing Oncology Model, which are Alternative Payment Models
focused on caring for Medicare patients undergoing
chemotherapy. These models aim to improve the quality of care
for cancer patients by encouraging oncologists to coordinate
care, make evidence-based treatment decisions, and engage
patients in their care, all with the goal of enhancing the
patient's overall experience and health.
While in some ways these models were a step forward, they
have also highlighted areas where we need to improve. This
includes how to better align payment incentives and regulatory
flexibilities to deliver cost savings and better health
outcomes for patients, as well as the uncertainty that comes
with models being phased in and out as administrations change.
Another key issue we must address is the financial strain
on our providers. It is concerning to note that, when adjusted
for inflation in practice cost, physicians' pay within Medicare
has declined 22 percent from 2001 to 2021. And at the same
time, the cost of running a medical practice has increased
nearly 40 percent. This financial pressure is a significant
barrier to the adoption of value-based care models, and we must
think creatively about how to alleviate that pressure and
encourage adoption of innovative payment policies like the ones
I have previously described.
As we continue this hearing, let's remember that our goal
is to ensure that MACRA is implemented in a way that benefits
both American seniors and our healthcare providers. I am
confident that this committee can continue to lead with
bipartisan solutions to lower costs for patients and strengthen
our healthcare system.
[The prepared statement of Mrs. Rodgers follows:]
GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mrs. Rodgers. Thank you, and I continue to look forward to
the discussion. I yield back.
Mr. Griffith. Thank you very much, Madam Chair. The
gentlelady yields back. I now recognizes the ranking member of
the full committee, Mr. Pallone, for his 5-minute opening
statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. FRANK PALLONE, Jr., A REPRESENTATIVE
IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF NEW JERSEY

Mr. Pallone. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Today we are examining the impact of the Medicare Access
and CHIP Reauthorization Act, or MACRA. When MACRA was passed
on a bipartisan basis 8 years ago, there was hope that it would
create a system for reliable Medicare payments to healthcare
providers based on the quality of care that patients received.
Before its passage, Congress consistently needed to
intervene to adjust ever-decreasing payment rates for
providers. The goal of MACRA was to stop that roller coaster of
payment cuts and encourage new approaches for payment systems.
It also includes additional incentives for better care for
Medicare beneficiaries and a reliable system that did not
require constant congressional intervention. And these are all
worthy goals.
But it is fair to say that we have not seen the results
that many of us had hoped for. A fundamental portion of MACRA
was the Merit-based Incentive Payment System. This system was
intended to provide better pay for healthcare providers who
provided better care, and this was and is a laudable goal. We
want doctors and other providers to always have patient well-
being at the core of their practice. But in reality, this
system has appeared to create additional administrative burdens
for providers without producing significant improvements in
patient care. Examinations from both the Medicare Payment
Advisory Commission and the Government Accountability Office
have come to the same conclusion.
However, there are other avenues for improvement of the
Medicare physician payment system. The Centers for Medicare and
Medicaid Services, CMS, is working to increase participation in
Alternative Payment Models that can provide bonuses to
physicians who take on a certain amount of financial risk for
the quality of patient care. And I look forward to hearing from
our witnesses today about how these Alternative Payment Models
have affected experiences and outcomes for both physicians and
patients, and I also want to hear how they can provide the
greatest benefits going forward.
Establishing a system that increases accountability and
efficiency while maintaining quality patient care is a vision
we must continue to pursue. The challenge before this committee
and Congress is ensuring that Medicare remains viable while
ensuring that patients receive quality care and doctors receive
fair compensation. And we need to make sure that any changes we
make help us better evaluate the quality of care that patients
are receiving without overwhelming physicians with
administrative requirements.
At the end of the day, any discussion on changes to
Medicare physician payment systems must prioritize access to
high-quality care for all Medicare beneficiaries when and where
they need it.
It has now been 8 years since MACRA was enacted, and this
is a good opportunity for us to examine what we have learned
from the experience of both patients and physicians in the
Medicare program. I appreciate the witnesses for testifying
today and providing their thoughts on how we can ensure
sustainable quality care for America's seniors. I hope that
today's hearing can give us a bipartisan path forward to
improve the system, and I look forward to working with my
colleagues on that going forward.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Pallone follows:]
GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Pallone. And with that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back the
balance of my time.
Mr. Griffith. The gentleman yields back. That concludes
Members' opening statements.
The Chair would like to remind Members that, pursuant to
the committee rules, all Members' written opening statements
will be made a part of the record. But please make sure you
provide those written opening statements to the clerk promptly,
so that we can get that put into the record in the appropriate
place.
We want to thank our witnesses for being here today and
taking time to testify before our subcommittee. Thank you.
You will have an opportunity to give an opening statement
followed by a round of questions from Members.
Our witnesses today are Joe Albanese, who is a policy
analyst at the Paragon Institute; Aisha Pittman, senior vice
president at the National Association of ACOs; Anas Daghestani,
chair of the board of America's Physician Groups and CEO of the
Austin Regional Clinic in Texas; and finally, J. Michael
McWilliams, the Warren Alpert Foundation professor of
healthcare policy at Harvard Medical School and a professor of
medicine and practicing general internist at Brigham and
Women's Hospital.
We appreciate you all being here today, and I look forward
to hearing from you.
This is the Energy and Commerce Committee and the
Subcommittee on Oversight. We are holding an oversight hearing
today. And when doing so we have the practice of taking our
testimony under oath.
Do any of you have an objection to testifying under oath?
Seeing that no one has objected, we will proceed. The Chair
would also advise you that you are entitled to be advised by
counsel, pursuant to House rules.
Do any of you desire to be advised by counsel during your
testimony today?
All right. I am seeing that none have indicated that they
wish to be represented by counsel today. So accordingly, if you
would, please rise and raise your right hand.
[Witnesses sworn.]
Mr. Griffith. All the witnesses have answered in the
affirmative.
You may be seated, and you are now sworn in and under oath,
subject to the penalties set forth in title 18, section 1001 of
the United States Code. With that, we will now recognize Mr.
Albanese for 5 minutes to give an opening statement.

STATEMENTS OF JOE ALBANESE, POLICY ANALYST, PARAGON INSTITUTE;
AISHA PITTMAN, SENIOR VICE PRESIDENT, NATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF
ACOS; ANAS DAGHESTANI, M.D., CHAIR OF THE BOARD OF AMERICA'S
PHYSICIAN GROUPS, CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER OF THE AUSTIN
REGIONAL CLINIC IN TEXAS; AND J. MICHAEL McWILLIAMS, M.D.,
Ph.D, WARREN ALPERT FOUNDATION PROFESSOR OF HEALTH CARE POLICY,
PROFESSOR OF MEDICINE, HARVARD MEDICAL SCHOOL

STATEMENT OF JOE ALBANESE

Mr. Albanese. Thank you. Chairman Griffith, Ranking Member
Castor, and members of the subcommittee, thank you for the
opportunity to appear before you today to discuss the Medicare
Access and CHIP Reauthorization Act of 2015, or MACRA. I am a
senior policy analyst at Paragon Health Institute, a think tank
dedicated to empowering patients and reforming government
programs.
Providing high-quality healthcare to Medicare beneficiaries
while maintaining fiscal sustainability has been a longstanding
goal for policymakers. MACRA was an attempt to achieve that
goal. I recently authored a paper for Paragon titled, ``MACRA:
Medicare's Fitful Quest for Value-Based Care.'` This paper
serves as the basis of my testimony, which reflects my own
views.
Today I intend to make two main points.
First, despite the good intentions of policymakers, MACRA
has not solved the issues with how Medicare pays doctors.
Second, MACRA's value-based care programs have not
significantly improved the quality of healthcare services.
MACRA has two key components for Medicare: First, it set a
schedule of statutory payment updates for physicians and other
clinicians in Medicare, including a pay freeze between 2020 and
2025; second, it created a Quality Payment Program.
The Quality Payment Program, in turn, has two tracks. Under
the first track, the Merit-based Incentive Payment System, or
MIPS, participating clinicians receive rewards or penalties
based on their performance on certain quality metrics. Under
the second track, clinicians receive annual bonuses for
participating in Advanced Alternative Payment Models, or APMs.
These APMs test new ways of reimbursing providers to
incentivize greater value.
MACRA came in response to real problems in Medicare. In
2015 Congress's existing mechanism for controlling clinician
spending, the Sustainable Growth Rate formula, had not been
enforced in over a decade, and the cumulative payment cuts
required by it were untenable. MACRA's payment updates did help
to slow the growth of clinician spending relative to other Part
B services.
The rationale behind the Quality Payment Program is also
understandable. The consensus among policymakers then, as now,
was that Medicare's fee-for-service reimbursement structure
does not incentivize quality improvement. The Quality Payment
Program streamlined and expanded existing efforts to pay
clinicians for value rather than the volume of care. However,
problems have still emerged from the MACRA framework.
Congress has overridden MACRA's scheduled payment updates
numerous times to boost doctors' fees. This raises questions as
to whether MACRA's payments are sustainable in the long run.
Meanwhile, the Quality Payment Program has not improved value,
which economists at Yale have recently confirmed in a recently
released review. For example, clinicians can pick their own
measures to report in MIPS, which allows them to hide poor
performance and is part of why four-fifths of participants
achieve exceptional performance.
At the same time, complying with MIPS's complex reporting
requirements has been administratively costly, particularly for
small practices. The result is a burdensome program that is
unhelpful for incentivizing actual quality improvement.
APMs have also been disappointing. The Federal body
responsible for most of them, the Center for Medicare and
Medicaid Innovation, pre-dates MACRA and has over a decade of
experience designing and managing APMs. Yet the Innovation
Center has found that only 6 out of its more than 50 APMs have
yielded net savings, and only 2 of those have seen significant
quality improvements.
I will close with two more key points.
First, Medicare is in a tenuous fiscal situation. According
to CBO, Medicare spending is already expected to nearly double
from $820 billion in 2023 to $1.6 trillion in 2033. This is the
single biggest financing challenge that the Federal Government
faces. Changes to payment policy should not worsen this fiscal
situation.
Second, policymakers should reevaluate their approach to
value-based care. Value is a worthy goal that everyone wants to
achieve but is difficult to measure. Policymakers should
consider that patients themselves are best positioned to judge
how they value their own care, often in consultation with their
doctors. Sophisticated metrics and payment incentives that
reflect the priorities of government technocrats will not
necessarily translate into innovations that are relevant to
patients.
Congress can play a key role in examining MACRA's design
and the decisions made during its implementation. It is
important to learn the right lessons made during this
implementation, avoid past missteps, and empower patients to
access the best quality care.
Thank you, and I look forward to answering your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Albanese follows:]
GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Griffith. I thank the gentleman and now recognize Ms.
Pittman for her 5-minute opening statement.

STATEMENT OF AISHA PITTMAN

Ms. Pittman. Thank you, Chair Griffith, Chair Rodgers,
Ranking Member Castor, and Ranking Member Pallone, and members
of the subcommittee and full committee. I am honored to be here
to represent the more than 400 accountable care organizations
that are working to improve quality of care for patients and
reduce healthcare costs.
Accountable care organizations, or ACOs, bring together
clinicians, hospitals, and other providers to innovate care
while being held accountable for the clinical outcomes and cost
of a population. With primary care as a backbone, ACOs employ a
team-based approach to provide patient-centered care.
The National Association of ACOs members serve over 8
million beneficiaries and Medicare value-based payment models,
including the Medicare Shared Savings program. ACOs are a
voluntary approach that has been a good financial investment
for taxpayers, clinicians, and patients. In the last decade,
ACOs have generated more than $17 billion in savings, with 6.4
billion being returned to Medicare, all while maintaining high
quality for patients.
Thank you for holding this hearing to address MACRA.
One of the goals of MACRA was to provide financial
incentives for clinicians to join Alternative Payment Models,
or APMs. MACRA provides a 5 percent incentive payment for
clinicians that adopt risk-bearing APMs. This incentive is an
effective tool to attract clinicians to APMs and has increased
participation.
Additionally, the incentives allow clinicians to reinvest
in their practices and patient care. ACOs account for the
majority of Medicare's Advanced APMs and have used these
incentives to hire care managers to provide personal care to
their sickest patients, provide transportation and meals,
invest in technology, create 24/7 phone lines so that patients
can call their primary care provider rather than seeking
emergency care. These are services that cannot be reimbursed
through Medicare but improve patient health outcomes and well-
being.
While APMs are transforming how patients in traditional
Medicare receive care, adoption of value models has been slower
than originally predicted, due to misaligned incentives,
challenges in APM implementation, and time needed for
clinicians and providers to redesign care processes. MACRA was
a step in the right direction, but more needs to be done to
drive long-term system transformation.
Congress should take the following actions to accelerate
the adoption of value-based care.
First, extend the MACRA 5 percent Advanced APM incentives,
which are set to expire at the end of this year. The incentives
have proven to be a successful tool for recruiting new
providers into APMs and give additional resources to providers
to innovate care.
Second, redesign the physician payment incentives to
promote value. The current approach is complex, and clinicians
who remain in fee-for-service potentially have the highest
incentives. A long-term approach should ensure that clinicians
receive adequate payment updates, with any additional
incentives reserved for clinicians who move to APMs. More
broadly, we should also establish incentives for all other
providers receiving Medicare payment.
Third, we must improve the nonfinancial incentives for
value by removing barriers to participation and giving
additional flexibility to innovate care. This includes removing
distinctions that penalize rural and safety-net providers,
improving financial benchmarks so that APM participants are not
penalized for their own success, expanding waivers that support
patient care, and providing technical assistance for clinicians
new to APMs.
Fourth, work with the CMS Innovation Center to ensure that
promising models have a more predictable pathway for becoming
permanent. Few models have met the criteria for expansion, but
many models have highlighted valuable lessons for improving
care. We should revisit the expansion criteria to account for
factors like expanding participation to more types of providers
and retaining access in rural or other vulnerable communities.
Finally, provide parity between APMs and the Medicare
Advantage program. Like ACOs, risk arrangements between
providers and health plans allow for care innovations and offer
a pathway for moving to payment approaches other than fee-for-
service. We need greater alignment to ease provider burden and
ensure that both APMs and MA are attractive and sustainable
options. These two programs should be more similar in their
benchmarks and flexibilities that improve patient care.
In closing, ACOs and other APMs have demonstrated that,
when clinicians and other providers come together to innovate
care, we lower costs and improve care. We should explore all
avenues to continue to bolster these arrangements.
Thank you for the opportunity to be here.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Pittman follows:]
GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Griffith. Thank you, Ms. Pittman. I now recognize Dr.
Daghestani for his 5-minute opening statement.

STATEMENT OF ANAS DAGHESTANI

Dr. Daghestani. Good morning, Chair Griffith, Subcommittee
Ranking Member Castor, and other distinguished Members. Thank
you for this opportunity to testify. My name is Anas
Daghestani, I am a practicing primary care physician and board
specialized in internal medicine. I come here as the chair of
the board of America's Physician Groups, or APG, as well as the
chief executive officer of Austin Regional Clinic.
APG is a national organization representing approximately
360 physician groups in 45 States. Our members provide
coordinated, integrated, patient-centric care.
Mr. Griffith. Let me interrupt you for just a second. The
technical folks are telling me--if you could move your mike a
little bit closer so the C-SPAN folks can hear you. We could,
but the C-SPAN folks may not be able to hear you as well. And
we froze the time, so you are OK on time. If you want to back
up a little bit, you can.
Dr. Daghestani. Thank you.
Mr. Griffith. All right.
Dr. Daghestani. APG is a national organization representing
approximately 360 physician groups in 45 States. Our members
provide coordinated, integrated, patient-centric care that is
accountable for costs and quality. We engage in full spectrum
of Alternative Payment Model and Medicare Advantage.
Collectively, APG groups employ or contract with approximately
195,000 physicians and care for nearly 45 million patients. APG
groups also take care of 1\1/2\ million in Medicare ACOs, and
nearly 10 million in Medicare Advantage.
Austin Regional Clinic is a multispecialty group that
started 43 years ago. It is physician-owned, physician-led and
physician-governed. It was started by two family medicine
physicians, a pediatrician, and OB-GYN, and a general surgeon,
and a pediatrician coming together with the idea that we need
to be organized, we need to be in a multispecialty setting to
be able to deliver good care. So 43 years later, we have 400
primary care physicians and specialists, 2,500 employees. We
take care of 650,000 patients in the area, including over
55,000 Medicare and Medicare Advantage patients.
I have three main points to cover today.
First, MACRA constituted a great step forward when enacted
in 2015 because it repealed the unworkable Sustainable Growth
Rate, SGR, formula and moved beyond the fee-for-service payment
for clinicians unrelated to quality or cost concern. It
introduced a new Merit-based Incentive Payment, MIPS, and built
on existing structure of Alternative Payment Model, including
through planned physician-focused payment model. These changes
created the incentives for clinicians to improve care for
Medicare beneficiaries while being attentive to cost.
My second point is that all of these positive features for
MACRA have been--have had mixed success. Adjusted for
inflation, Medicare payment to physicians has fallen 26 percent
from 2001 to 2023. MACRA's helpful incentives have not altered
this picture of declining payment. Given shortage of primary
care doctors and other healthcare organization workers and
rapid price inflation, the financial pressures on many
practices are growing. Many lack the capacity for technology
and other infrastructure investment to fundamentally transform
healthcare. These and other pressures are contributing to the
consolidation among physician practices, a phenomena with which
this committee has been appropriately concerned.
Despite best intentions, the MIPS program has failed to
drive sufficient improvement in quality and cost. MIPS assumed
that motivating individual physicians to do better will lead to
improved quality and optimal resource use, even if, as of now
the case, only half of the doctors participate. In fact, it
takes groups of clinicians and multiple aspects of the
healthcare system, not just doctors operating under the right
incentive, to transform healthcare.
This reality leads to my third point: MACRA should be
reengineered to fully fuel the transition to value-based
healthcare that has broad bipartisan support in Congress for
nearly two decades. Although overall Medicare savings from
accountable care organization has been low, participating by
physician group is positively associated with saving.
I currently serve as the chair of a--as chair--medical
officer of Seton Health Alliance, an ACO in partnership with
Ascension Seton Healthcare Family. In 2018 our ACO generated
top-quality results and $10 million in savings. An example is I
had a patient in clinic who had 65 ER visits in 1 year, every
Saturday of the year and a few others. They were mostly for
insecurities: access to medication, access to healthcare, and
access to food, and access to transportation. I worked with the
patient, with our nursing staff, with many others in the
community to address many issues, including medication support,
food security, social services.
One year later, the patient had 20 office visits and 12 ER.
The patient got much better care, holistic care. The cost was
lower, but this cost cannot be recouped through the current
Medicare fee-for-service claims. The patient at the end did
much better from a quality, but again, the cost was not
recouped.
Unfortunately, these value-based care models faced headwind
that policymakers should address. In my written testimony I
advance five critical solutions, but in the interest of time I
will focus only on one.
The current structure of MACRA should be replaced with far
greater incentives and possibly mandatory requirement to move
to primary care capitation and total risk and global capitation
Medicare. For practices new to value-based care, policymakers
should dramatically increase upfront payment for infrastructure
and technology, especially for small physician practices in
rural area and those serving vulnerable population. The
alternative is likely to be more likely primary care deserts
and ongoing practice consolidation.
The looming fiscal crunch that will ensue from rising
healthcare spending and the declining health status of many
Americans creates a burning platform for change. We at APG and
Austin Regional Clinic look forward to working with you further
to advance improvement in the U.S. healthcare for benefit of
patients, providers, and taxpayers.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Daghestani follows:]
GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Griffith. OK, thank you.
Dr. Daghestani. Thank you.
Mr. Griffith. And the gentleman yields back, thank you.
Dr. McWilliams, you are now recognized for your 5-minute
opening statement.

STATEMENT OF J. MICHAEL McWILLIAMS, M.D., Ph.D.

Dr. McWilliams. Thank you, Chairman Griffith, Ranking
Member Castor, members of the subcommittee and full committee.
Thank you for holding this hearing today and inviting me to
testify on the status of MACRA.
My name is Michael McWilliams. I am a professor of
healthcare policy and professor of medicine at Harvard Medical
School and a physician at Brigham and Women's Hospital. I also
serve as a senior advisor to the CMS Innovation Center. My
testimony today reflects my own views and focuses on two major
pieces of MACRA: the Advanced Alternative Payment Model, or
APM, bonus and the Merit-based Incentive Payment System, or
MIPS.
These payment reforms were intended to encourage the
provision of efficient and high-quality care in the Medicare
program. These are important goals, and the reforms were well
intended, but their effectiveness has been limited. The
problems are ones of design, addressable in the case of the APM
bonus but more intractable in the case of the MIPS.
Taking a step back, Medicare looks much different than it
did when MACRA was enacted. Over half of eligible beneficiaries
are now enrolled in the rapidly growing Medicare Advantage, or
MA, program. And while much of the care in traditional Medicare
is now provided in promising APMs, such as Accountable Care
Organizations, or ACOs, participation in those models has
stalled in recent years, and traditional Medicare is shrinking.
Particularly with the APM bonus set to expire next year,
ending a key provision that was to encourage participation in
APMs, it is a good time to take stock of MACRA and how its
provisions could be restructured to better advance the goals of
payment reform in Medicare. My testimony makes six main points.
First, APMs are promising and worth encouraging. APMs are
not--are our best hope for managing spending in traditional
Medicare in a way that produces the most value for
beneficiaries, particularly population-based payment models or
ACOs. Not only do APMs discourage unnecessary care, they also
give providers more flexibility to deliver care in ways that
best meet patient needs by setting payments that encompass all
of a patient's care and limiting fee-for-service incentives
that otherwise interfere by requiring clinicians to select
specific services over others in order to get paid. That
flexibility is really crucial for providers to follow their
intrinsic motivation and respond to market demand for better
care. And the evidence on APMs is generally encouraging.
Savings have been modest.
But second, the design of APMs has hampered their success.
Because APMs have been largely voluntary, it has been
challenging to move away from fee-for-service rapidly. In my
written testimony I detail how design issues have weakened
incentives to participate and save in APMs. With recent changes
to the Medicare Shared Savings program that take effect next
year, I believe that program, which is the largest APM, is now
on the right track. But it has taken time. And now the APM
bonus created by MACRA is set to expire at a critical juncture
in APM evolution.
Third, for that reason, I believe the APM bonus should be
extended but also restructured to be more effective. To date,
the bonus has been structured as a proportion of provider fee-
for-service revenue, which favors higher-revenue organizations
and incentivizes more revenue, more costly care, undermining a
main goal of APMs. The bonus has also been restricted to so-
called Advanced APMs, with downside financial risk. But we now
know that lower-revenue organizations have produced savings
without downside risk and should be encouraged to participate
too. For these reasons, I recommend the APM bonus be structured
as a flat, per-beneficiary sum, independent of provider
revenue, and broadened to include ACO contracts with no
downside risk.
Fourth, the MIPS has been a costly failure. In fact, I
don't recall a more uniform and resoundingly critiqued payment
policy in my career. Many, including MedPAC, have called for
its elimination, and I agree with that recommendation. I won't
belabor the many flaws now but would point out that several are
actually deep, intractable problems that would plague any pay-
for-performance program and should caution us against even a
scaled-back version of the MIPS. We now have over a decade of
evidence on Medicare pay-for-performance programs demonstrating
minimal benefits and costly unintended consequences. In sum, it
should not be at the center of congressional efforts to improve
the quality of care delivery.
Instead, fifth, other strategies to support high-quality
care should be prioritized. These include building better data
systems to support providers and promoting competition.
Competition exerts the primary external check on provider
quality as unhappy patients or unhappy clinicians can vote with
their feet. These strategies may be beyond the scope of this
hearing, but I note them to make the point that eliminating the
MIPS is not conceding defeat.
Finally, any discussion of Medicare reform must consider
the implications of Medicare Advantage's rapid growth. As MA
grows, and if APMs resume their growth, the MIPS will soon
become obsolete and unworkable as the residual population
becomes too small to support it. As MA grows, APMs also shrink.
Thus, any discussion of the value and future of APMs begs for a
discussion of the value and future of traditional Medicare,
especially its role as a public option in facilitating
regulation of MA and strengthening the Medicare program as a
whole.
Thank you again for inviting me to join you today. I look
forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Dr. McWilliams follows:]
GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Griffith. I thank all of you for your testimony. Wow, a
lot of information in there to try to digest.
We now move to the questioning phase, and I will begin by
recognizing myself for 5 minutes.
So many of my questions have, in fact, been answered, but I
am going to give you a chance, Ms. Pittman, to expand on what
you think we need to be doing to get more Alternative Payment
Models working, because the transition has been, as you--as all
the witnesses seem to have said, slower than we envisioned.
And can you tell us what factors have contributed to that
slower adoption of APMs? And I know that is going to come back
to the fee structure you were talking about in your testimony.
Ms. Pittman. Yes, thank you for that question. So part of
the slow adoption has been, one, just the COVID-19 pandemic.
That is when we see a tapering off of more clinicians entering
the models. You don't want to take risks when you are dealing
with a lot of other issues.
Beyond that, it is--it gets to some of the challenges that
are at the baseline of these Alternative Payment Models. So
having the adequate budget to address your patients, bringing
other types of providers into the models--I mentioned both
rural providers and specialists in my written testimonies--
there are some things based in the models that make it
challenging to bring on those types of providers.
For rural providers, the focus there is access and not
necessarily wanting to achieve savings. And so all of the
Alternative Payment Models have cost savings based into it. And
so we might have to think of a different paradigm where, for
certain rural providers, you are giving them a baseline budget
that doesn't have cuts on top of it, as the ACO models do. If
you take, for example, a critical access hospital, they are
paid at cost. Even if you reduce the number of admissions to a
critical access hospital, their payment remains the same. It's
really hard to put that in the framework of a shared savings
approach.
In terms of things that we can do to accelerate more
providers into the models, one, it is to address some of the
base framework with the models in terms of benchmarks and how
you get more providers to participate.
I think also I mentioned the incentive payments. That's a
huge piece that has drawn more clinicians into the models. It's
a huge incentive. When our ACO members go out and try to
recruit practices, talking about this incentive payment is
really a way that brings more of them, more clinicians to the
model. Those incentive payments go directly back to the
practice, not to the ACO, and those practices use it for
innovating patient care.
So one of the great examples that I have heard from a
practice that is part of one of our members is they created
this thing they call the BAT phone, the Before All That phone.
So with that phone, it is a 24/7 line that goes directly to
someone in the practice. And instead of seeking emergency care,
they ask all of the members of that practice to just call the
BAT phone. And that has been incredibly successful. But that
requires additional staff time, more staff to answer the phone.
And so with that, in the absence of having these incentive
payments, they wouldn't be able to do that.
I think one of the challenges with the incentive payments
that we would want to see addressed for the long term is
thinking about how we sort of speed up the incentive over time.
Right now it is a 2-year delay, and if we could sort of shorten
that time so that the practices get that money in hand faster,
they can innovate care faster.
Mr. Griffith. Thank you.
Dr. McWilliams, I noticed you nodding your head on some of
that. You want to agree, disagree, or expand?
Dr. McWilliams. I'd be happy to expand. I think I was
nodding my head in regards to Ms. Pittman's comments on
providers in rural areas, and I think those apply to any
underserved population where the problem may not be so much
overspending as underspending.
One thing about Alternative Payment Models that is
appealing is it allows a more flexible mechanism by which
payment can be rebalanced across populations to serve social
goals. That is very hard to do in fee-for-service and is
something that Alternative Payment Models, by having a single
benchmark covering total spending for a population, can
facilitate.
Mr. Griffith. Yes, and I appreciate that.
So Dr. Daghestani, what should CMS look at to ensure that
the APM bonuses are reasonable enough to allow specialists--we
have kind of touched on this, but--to allow specialists to be
included so collaboration between primary care and specialists
is encouraged and rewarded?
And I want you to particularly--because I am running out of
time, I want you to focus on how we do that in rural areas,
because I serve a very large rural district, and getting
specialists is difficult in many of my counties.
Dr. Daghestani. Yes, thank you for that question.
So we are a multispecialty group. I think, you know, there
is an underestimation of the impact of specialists on the
quality and the total cost of care. Primary care is extremely
important as an access point, but a specialty has an impact on
very complex care, as well as the site of service.
So I think practicing in rural Oklahoma before joining ARC,
we only had two specialists. I practiced for 5 years, and we
only had two specialists. We had to transfer everybody to the
University of Oklahoma. Putting out a financial model to
incentivize specialists and to reward them to be in rural area
and to be part of the ACO and participate in that shared saving
is critical.
Mr. Griffith. And I have to cut you off, because I have run
out of time. But if you could share any ideas with the
committee on how we do that, I would greatly appreciate it.
With that, I yield back and recognize Ms. Castor, the
ranking member of the subcommittee, for her 5 minutes of
questioning.
Ms. Castor. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Well, it is clear that there is a lot of room for
improvement. I am hearing consensus that the MIPS has not been
workable, that you--general consensus to extend the APM
bonuses, extend that in a reauthorization.
I am also hearing some consensus on a frustration of just
basic data gathering, being able to report what works. I am a
big fan of the importance of understanding the data. So Dr.
McWilliams, thank you for your very deep dive in your
testimony, but you highlight this as a problem across the
board, especially in rural and underserved areas. How do we get
at that through an update to MACRA?
Dr. McWilliams. In terms of the data systems?
Ms. Castor. Yes.
Dr. McWilliams. Honestly, I am not sure if it is part of
that same legislative effort.
I think it is important to take a step back and think about
how we can support quality improvement. I think we've sort of
leapt ahead of ourselves in trying to attach payment incentives
to quality measures to try to do that. But there--as
Representative Castor, you are alluding to, there is a lot we
can do to build data systems to better support care for
patients. That would be one of my general recommendations in
terms of trying to start some initiatives in that regard.
We know, for example, that when providers are better
informed in various ways that they do provide better care. Not
always, but that is certainly helpful. I think, for example, of
government efforts in a classic--playing a classic government
role of solving collective action problems and building public
goods in constructing, for example, prescription drug
monitoring programs in States, which has been a big advance.
And those sort of systems, I think, supported by governments
can be very helpful and provide--I know, as a clinician
myself--can provide invaluable information at the point of
care.
Also, understanding what works is very important.
Ms. Castor. Well, then let me ask Ms. Pittman.
Dr. McWilliams. Yes.
Ms. Castor. With all the ACOs, what has worked in being
able to gather data on patients and quality?
Ms. Pittman. Yes, so in the ACO model you actually are
receiving more data than you would outside of the model. So the
ACO receives data about every part of the system that the
beneficiary touches, versus if you are not part of any APM you
only have that data for what you have in your particular
practice. So this is a place where we have seen lots of
benefits of being able to get the full set of claims data and
see the full picture of a patient within the context of an ACO.
And there has been a lot done to speed data over time. ACOs
receive monthly files that give them all of the data for all of
their aligned beneficiaries. There is work being done to speed
that up. Everyone always wants it faster, but that is a place
where there has been a real benefit from the programs.
Ms. Castor. Dr. Daghestani?
Dr. Daghestani. Yes, I think MACRA have forced us to work
together, so we do get data from claims, but also we are in a
better position to get data from hospitals, from ERs, and from
multiple sources and put all the data in one place so we have a
more holistic approach at the patient. So that MACRA
legislation, which was a catalyst for the movement, have really
put us in a more--work to move from a fragmented care to
organized care.
One of the potential solution for having rural area also is
looking at State HIEs. I know in the State of Texas there is
discussion about an HIE, where everybody can submit
information, then everybody has access to the data. And we have
been engaged in that program, as well, and hoping that it will
yield some result.
The challenges for that is the cost. So in a group like
ARC, it is 22,000 per FTE cost of building the IT
infrastructure that--it is important for the quality of care,
but it is a significant upfront investment.
Ms. Castor. So the long-term health of the Medicare Trust
Fund is--we are in a very serious position. And then there is a
recent report that Medicare Advantage is--all of the groups
there are receiving significant overpayments. It was $75
billion, which was, I think, 3 times what MedPAC had projected.
What are--what do we need to consider here on MA as we update
MACRA and move ahead, Dr. McWilliams?
Dr. McWilliams. I think this is an excellent question and
probably the biggest one before us today in terms of Medicare
reform.
That is absolutely right, that the payments to Medicare
Advantage are well in excess of what we spend in traditional
Medicare. Part of the reason for that additional spending, it
seems, has been that that has allowed us to expand benefits for
seniors in the Medicare Advantage program, which is a worthy
objective, however one that we have not sort of addressed head-
on or directly in Medicare reform.
I would--I am certainly in favor of doing that more
directly in the traditional Medicare program to expand the
basic benefits package so that there is a good insurance
program on both sides of Medicare and in the process that would
allow us to engage in additional regulatory reforms to cut back
on some of the overpayments, for example, for risk coding in
Medicare Advantage while preserving benefits largely in
Medicare Advantage, basically making traditional Medicare more
of a viable competitor and therefore allowing us to regulate
the Medicare Advantage program----
Ms. Castor. Good, and I would ask the witnesses to submit
an answer on that. We will get that question out to you.
Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Griffith. The gentlelady yields back. I now recognize
the chairwoman of the full committee, Mrs. McMorris Rodgers of
Washington, for her 5 minutes of questioning.
Mrs. Rodgers. Thank you all for being here.
I represent 12 counties in eastern Washington. Much of my
district is rural, so we live every day the challenges facing
rural healthcare providers. And these challenges run from
higher rates of chronic diseases to difficulties recruiting,
retaining critical healthcare workers, to limited access to
high-speed Internet. As you know, these factors, coupled with
concerning national trends towards consolidation among
healthcare providers, in addition to longstanding provider
payment issues can complicate the successful implementation of
MACRA.
Ms. Pittman, what are some of the most effective strategies
or practices that have been used to navigate MACRA's
requirements in rural settings?
And how can these strategies be further supported or
expanded to better assist rural healthcare providers and
improve patient outcomes, especially among smaller specialty
providers?
Ms. Pittman. Thank you for that question. We have three
members in your district that are really addressing the rural
communities in innovative ways.
They are doing this through the ACO model because of their
ability to manage to a total cost-of-care budget. They can
shift resources to the appropriate place and put in technology
or solutions that ensures that they are able to remotely
communicate with their patients. They rely heavily on
telehealth.
Telehealth is an area where there has--prior to the
flexibility provided during the public health emergency was a
waiver that was allowed in ACOs. We think this is one of those
nonfinancial incentives that brings more providers to APMs
because they are able to take advantage of those benefits that
help them address their patients differently.
I think in terms of some things that we can improve, it
gets to how the models are structured and how you define a
budget for the population. As Dr. McWilliams said, in rural and
underserved communities we are dealing with a problem of being
underserved. And there we are likely going to need to spend
more money than we have historically. And the models are based
on reducing your cost based on your historical costs. So for--
to bring more rural providers in, I think we have to think
about how we set the budget appropriately to address an
underserved population.
Mrs. Rodgers. Thank you.
Dr. Daghestani, certainly in recent years we are seeing
more doctors, especially small, independent practices, they
just simply don't have the resources to comply with all the
rules and processes that larger organizations have been able to
master. Would you speak to how we better tailor financial
incentives and regulatory flexibilities to ensure that we
continue to have the smaller, independent doctors, especially
in rural areas?
And would you also speak to how measurements for more--you
know, how we could move towards more meaningful capture of the
patient's experience and health goals in measuring, and maybe
metrics like net promoter scores or other patient-facing
measures could capture some of that for doctors?
Dr. Daghestani. Thank you for the question. For--so one of
the challenges for small practices is, one, the scale. You just
might not have enough in your population, might not have enough
financial strengths to get into MACRA. So you have to--we have
to recognize that with upfront payments that are done
differently for smaller practices and for rural area, that
incentivize them to work together, collaborate with others,
because it is very difficult for a practice of 2, 3, 4, 10,
even a group like ARC or many of our APG members, without an
upfront investment. So I think that is important.
The other point that I'd like to make is the stability and
the predictability of the model. One of the biggest challenge
for any practice, small practice, is you are not sure what is
going to happen to the model next year.
Mrs. Rodgers. Right.
Dr. Daghestani. So you can invest this year, collect data,
build infrastructure, hire nurse navigators, partner with
somebody around home health. The payment is delayed a year or
two, and then, by the time you get to it, the rules have
changed.
Mrs. Rodgers. Right.
Dr. Daghestani. So I think one of the things we have to
work on--and we are looking for Congress for guidance--is to go
on a 3- or 5- or 7-year, where there is more stability and
predictability.
Mrs. Rodgers. OK, thank you, thank you. I want to try to
get one last question in here, because traditional Medicare
fee-for-service has just simply not been keeping up with
medical innovation.
And so, Mr. Albanese, I wanted to just address this. You
know, whether it is in how Medicare pays for and delivers care,
the slow pace of deploying cutting-edge medical drugs and
technologies to seniors, the traditional Medicare fee-for-
service, one-size-fits-all structure prevents the tailoring of
benefits and care based upon patients' unique needs.
So we have seen with--I am running out of time here, I am
going to have to ask this for the record. But Medicare
Advantage, it isn't perfect, but it has included built-in
incentives to pay for value and an incentive for sometimes when
the healthcare bureaucracy in DC is absent.
So I will yield back and ask those questions for the
record.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Griffith. Thank you, Madam Chair. I now recognize the
ranking member of the full committee, Mr. Pallone, for his 5
minutes of questioning.
Mr. Pallone. Thanks, Mr. Chairman.
Let me initially ask Dr. McWilliams, what changes to
Medicare and the wider healthcare system should inform
Congress' considerations about Medicare payment models that
create appropriate incentives for improving access to high-
quality care?
Dr. McWilliams. Well, when I think about the things that
Congress can do, particularly within the context of MACRA, I do
think that a continuation of the participation incentive is
very important, in part because we have not had yet an era
during this phase of payment reform in which we have had both
the participation incentives and well-designed APMs that give
all providers a chance to participate and prosper financially
by providing more efficient care. So having those two act
together synergistically will be important, and the APM design
has taken time to come around.
Just to expand on that just very quickly. One of the major
issues in the design of the APMs so far--thinking about ACOs,
for example--is that the benchmarks which dictate the total
payment or spending, the allowed budget, will sort of chase
success. So, sort of, success begets failure. As ACOs lower
spending, then in various ways their benchmarks come down. And
so they have very little incentive to actually accomplish the
main goal of the program.
That has been something that CMS has been working on, and,
as I said in my opening statement, I think is now on a much
better track. And so hopefully, between better design and the
participation incentive, we'll see more success in APMs and
more participation. That would be the main thing within the
context of MACRA.
Mr. Pallone. Well, thank you.
Now, CMS has initiatives underway to ultimately allow all
providers to transition to value-based care, including
providers in underserved areas and those who serve the most
vulnerable. So let me ask you again, Dr. McWilliams, how can
Congress or CMS further help more providers transition to
value-based care?
Dr. McWilliams. Ironically, I think one thing may be
eliminating the MIPS. That was intended to help sort of as an
on-ramp for providers to start getting used to various aspects
of value-based care.
There is no rigorous evidence on this in terms of the
causal impact of the MIPS on participation, but certainly there
is anecdotal evidence that some providers find the MIPS easier,
and that the bonuses in the MIPS based--you know, relative to
the cost of achieving those bonuses, is more appealing than the
available opportunities in the APM. So I think that actually
would abet or would help participation in the APMs.
Mr. Pallone. Thank you. Let me just ask Dr. Daghestani a
related question.
I love your name, because I know a little bit about
Dagestan culture and history, although I have never been there.
What types of initiatives have proved to best facilitate
the transition to value-based care and to mitigate any
challenges providers face in participating in new payment
models?
Dr. Daghestani. So, you know, initiative taken by Congress
and by CMMI, you know, having MACRA initially was a catalyst.
Again, I know today we are talking about the challenge of
MACRA, but it has been the catalyst to move those changes. It
made many organizations work together.
I remember 10, 15 years ago we were all in our corner,
basically: hospital run their business, outpatient practices
run their business, specialty ran their business. So the
initiative of having group having to work together on total
cost of care is important. Investing into infrastructure for IT
infrastructure has been critical. Being able to fund that
infrastructure, where Congress and Medicare can help,
recognizing some of that infrastructure for population health.
For example, a group like Austin Regional Clinic, 400
physicians invest $7 million a year in infrastructure for
population health. That is $70 million over the last 10 years.
The return from value-based care on the same Medicare
population is 70 millions. So we have spent 70, received 70 at
a time where we are facing pressure on reimbursement, as well
as fatigue in the frontline and a shortage of primary care.
So I think, again, stability in the model will help us all
double down, move--faster movement from fee-for-service to
value is critical. It seems like we have a window where, if we
move too fast, the system is unstable, but if we move too slow,
as well, is going to be more unstable. So we have a window to
come up with stable and predictable model over the next 3 to 5
years.
Mr. Pallone. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Burgess [presiding]. Thank you. I will now recognize
myself for 5 minutes for questions.
I almost feel like Marc Antony: I am here to bury MACRA,
not to praise it. But I do feel obligated to mention, since
this was an Energy and Commerce Committee product to a large
degree, the--I think the components of MIPS were all
preexisting quality reporting requirements that had really been
developed over several years.
And one of the good news aspects was, during the course of
the first 3 or 4 years after the passage of MACRA, we did have
some implementation and oversight hearings, and removal of
meaningful use was one of the accomplishments of that.
Meaningful use, of course, was one of the components of MIPS.
The other thing I just have to mention, because every year
we had to do a doc fix and keep people from getting a pay cut,
and a lot of times, I don't know, Congress seems gridlocked and
things aren't happening. So you get a fast-moving train coming
through the floor of the House December of every year. You know
it is going to come, you know you can put things on it. So
MIPPA, all of these terrible health policy measures got added
to the doc fix at the last minute, as Congress would strive to
keep from giving the doctors a pay cut.
I also need to introduce for the record a letter from the
House GOP Doctors Caucus and a letter from Dr. Madara at the
AMA, largely supporting our work today of looking into this.
Without objection, so ordered.
[The information appears at the conclusion of the hearing.]
Mr. Burgess. It is easy to be Chair, because you get to do
things. And I don't even have to watch the clock as hard when I
am sitting here.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Burgess. But Dr. McWilliams--and you did a very good
job, and I really appreciate your providing us the--basically,
the one-pager on this in your written testimony.
Philosophically, the reason that MIPS was there was because of
the difficulty that small practices like--that Chairman
Griffith referenced in his district--the difficulty that small
practices would have going to a true APM model. And it was felt
that there would be a pathway to a positive update through a
MIPS structure.
So you have, in your points--I think point number 3 that
you have provided us in expanding and extending the APM, do you
see a pathway for that for the smaller practices?
Dr. McWilliams. I do. And I think it's vitally important
for competition for the success of APMs in the Medicare
program. And what we didn't know then and I think we know now
is that a lot of these smaller organizations and even networks
of independent practices have performed quite well as ACOs, for
example.
So one of my recommendations is to broaden an APM
participation bonus to contracts that are one-sided in nature,
that don't impose downside risk, that organizations like that
are far more comfortable with and have performed well under. I
think----
Mr. Burgess. Let me just ask you.
Dr. McWilliams. Yes.
Mr. Burgess. Do you see a one- or two-person practice being
able to participate at that level?
Dr. McWilliams. Well, so statutorily, I don't think they
can alone because there are limits or floors in terms of the
number of patients that an organization must serve, for
example, to be in the Medicare Shared Savings program. Although
the Innovation Center, through its ACO reach model, considers
smaller organizations at smaller thresholds.
Those--the problem with those thresholds is growing because
of MA's growth. This is just sort of a negative spillover
effect. When the Shared Savings program was started, for
example, if you were about 6,600 patients big in terms of
Medicare, you qualify. Now you have to be 10,000. So it has
risen by an order of magnitude, how big you need to be.
So we could consider lowering those thresholds----
Mr. Burgess. Oh, you would have to.
Dr. McWilliams. We would have to, for sure. And then I
think what we've also seen is some actors come in into the
arena and convene smaller practices to try to achieve the scale
for some of the back office activities to make practices,
independent practice participation, viable in an ACO program.
Mr. Burgess. So let me ask you another question, because
you said you are on the innovation side of Medicare, CMMI.
Dr. McWilliams. I served in advising capacity----
Mr. Burgess. Advisory capacity?
Dr. McWilliams. Yes.
Mr. Burgess. Let me advise you, it ain't working.
We included in MACRA language for a physicians technical
advisory committee to help for--let the doctors participate.
Doctors who have--like, thoracic surgeons have registries, and
oncologists obviously have their registries--to let the doctors
participate in the genesis of these models.
PTAC, unfortunately, has been absolutely ignored by the
agency, and it has been by bipartisan. It has been both
Republican and Democratic administrations that have ignored
PTAC. But clearly, PTAC--Congress saw a role for PTAC when it
created MACRA. And I think we are making a mistake by not
encouraging that and utilizing that expertise.
And Dr. Daghestani, let me just say you said the two magic
words. I didn't want anyone to say ``mandate'` and
``capitation.'` Don't even give these guys the idea. The next
thing you know, someone will do it.
My time is expired. I am happy to recognize Ms. Schakowsky
for 5 minutes for questions.
Ms. Schakowsky. Thank you.
So, Dr. McWilliams, I know that this is not a hearing about
Medicare Advantage, but it is about how we provide services to
our older Americans. And, you know, you were talking about
getting rid of MIPS because of the ability then of it being
manipulated by some providers to take more money.
But if you look at Medicare Advantage, we have seen reports
of upcoding, how they make determinations about who is really
sick and sicker that are not--have not been verified and
ordered to get more money. I have been very concerned about
Medicare Advantage. In fact, I have--I am cosponsor of a bill
that says you can't use the word ``Medicare'` because it is
private insurance. And when you say ``call 1-800,'` it is not
calling Medicare, it is calling a private insurance company.
And the things I am concerned about--because, yes, they
provide more benefits, they say. But there has also been
research that says that if Medicare, traditional Medicare, had
the same kind of reimbursements as Medicare Advantage is
getting, or get some of that money back, that we could provide
dental and hearing and, you know, all those advantages that you
supposedly get from Medicare Advantage.
How concerned do we need to be about the diminution of
traditional Medicare, and what are the consequences that you
see, and the problems?
I am all for, by the way, making sure that we do all kinds
of scrutiny to make sure that we are getting the most for the
money, especially for the consumers themselves, for the
patients themselves.
But is this a problem that we are facing? It seems like you
think it is.
Dr. McWilliams. I thank you for that question. I definitely
think there are some big concerns.
I believe that Medicare Advantage and APMs share some
things in common in terms of giving a--whether it is a plan or
a provider--a fixed payment to take care of a population and
therefore allow them more flexibility in how they deliver
benefits or care. And that takes advantages--it takes advantage
of markets as those plans or providers compete for patients and
clinician----
Ms. Schakowsky. Although can I just say one thing?
Dr. McWilliams. Yes.
Ms. Schakowsky. My constituent advocates in my office are
getting calls from people who are really sick. They got
Medicare Advantage because of these additional--but if they got
really sick, they were often delayed care, denied care, had to
fight for the care.
Dr. McWilliams. Yes. And so I was laying out what is
generally thought of as the promise or the concept. That is
different from the execution. And I think we need to do a much
better job of execution, both on the APM side and the MA side,
and certainly share your concerns about the higher cost of the
Medicare Advantage program. It has been sort of a back-door way
to funnel benefits to seniors, instead of providing those
benefits directly in some ways.
To me, the most--the biggest concern about the rapid growth
of Medicare Advantage is that, as you said, it forces the
traditional Medicare program to dwindle. It is sort of
withering away, and at a pretty steady clip now. And that
presents some very basic foundational questions about how we
want to structure Medicare going forward.
There is some promise in Medicare Advantage, I believe,
just as there is promise in Alternative Payment Models. But it
presents this question of how can we regulate Medicare
Advantage, and how can we make sure that we are getting added
value out of it? Because it is not clear we are now.
I believe that the best way to do that is to have a
stronger traditional Medicare program that presents some
competition. And then we know, if Medicare Advantage is
attracting enrollees, that it is providing an added benefit,
and that would be--involve tighter regulation of some of the
things that you mentioned involving risk--paying more for
higher coding of diagnoses, the higher risk scores to make sure
that, when we set the bar with traditional Medicare, that it is
being beat by Medicare Advantage, that we are getting something
more.
Ms. Schakowsky. The one other advantage of traditional
Medicare is the issue of the networks. We find that--some of
the people in Medicare Advantage find that, if they travel or,
you know, that they may not get reimbursed for things that are
not in network, whereas you have much more choice in
traditional Medicare.
But, you know, the gazillion dollars that are spent on
advertising by Medicare Advantage, I think, has been really
successful in covering up some of the problems that may exist.
Well, I am a big supporter of traditional Medicare, and I
appreciate your testimony.
I yield back.
Mr. Griffith [presiding]. The gentlelady yields back. I now
recognize gentleman from Kentucky, Mr. Guthrie, for his 5
minutes of questioning.
Mr. Guthrie. Thanks. I think what we ought to start with is
what drives a lot of this thinking. And what we are trying to
do is you hear people say all the time in the United States,
``We pay to take care of people when they are sick, and we
don't pay care for health--we don't pay to keep people
healthy.'' And that is the design around it. I know traditional
Medicare is traditionally fee-for-service.
And--but the problem you get into that we are trying to
figure out, and what we need help, is that it is easy to pay or
know what to pay if somebody shows up and needs a leg set
because they broke their leg. It is OK, the cast costs this,
the set costs this, the surgery costs this. But how do you keep
somebody from breaking their leg? I mean, how do you pay for
the value of that and the role of the physician? I know
physicians don't try to keep people from breaking their leg, I
am just using a simple model to do that.
And so when you say value, when you say, ``I am going to do
a blood test,'` that is definitely a play for value. How do
you--and it seems like what we have done is created a way to
try to measure value that has created overhead for practices.
Practices don't participate. I mean, that is the problem. So
how do you make it simple enough that your people can
participate, but you make it meaningful enough that you know
you are getting value?
And so the question, I guess, Mr. Albanese, I had a couple
of questions. You kind of answered them in your opening, in
your testimony. You know, MACRA was intended to have healthcare
providers to be more efficient and to be--have better outcomes
for their patients and save Medicare money overall. And it
seems like we haven't achieved those objectives.
And the question is--I asked Dr. Burgess, he is the expert
on a lot of this, it is hard to follow him: Is it design, or is
it implementation? And the thing is, it is both. So how do we
get the design right, and then the implementation right?
Because what we put in, we put the 5 percent APM add-on to
try to get people in primary to get into that program, and we
are not getting the participation rates that we saw.
And I know COVID 2020--I had a thing yesterday and we were
measuring something against 2020 standards. And I don't think
you can measure anything against 2020, because it is such an
odd year, moving forward.
But--so any of you, why aren't we getting the participation
we thought? And I know some of you sort of talked about it.
I will start with Mr. Albanese, if you want to talk about
that.
Mr. Albanese. Sure, Congressman. So to talk about first the
design aspect, and then move on to the implementation aspect.
From a design perspective, I am certainly skeptical--and
you can see in my written testimony--about the idea of having
government definitions of value-based care. As you kind of
alluded to, value is a subjective term, and it is one that is
best defined by the patient themselves. And so being able to
empower patients to seek out the care that is working best for
them is an overall design that should be the goal of
policymakers.
But then you go into the implementation about how MIPS
works now and the hundreds of measures that micromanage the way
that clinicians work today. CMS has made indications that it
wants to move away from process-based measures, for example,
and take away topped-out measures that have no room for
improvement. But it has been very slow in that respect.
And so I think that, having an implementation of an overall
vision that moves towards that end goal of making measures
meaningful to patients so patients can be the ones to decide
how they are going to spend their healthcare dollars--there has
been a little back-and-forth about Medicare Advantage, for
example--but Medicare Advantage plans, those plans are able to
bear risk for themselves and construct networks on the basis of
value. And I think having more tools like that to give choice
to patients is something that would have more of a feedback----
Mr. Guthrie. OK, thanks. I do have another question. I am
sorry. I would like to hear everybody else answer that
question, but I am not going to have time to do that.
And the problem is that, no matter who defines value, the
overhead and collecting what value is so you know what to pay
for. I mean, that is--there's two things. So how do you define
value, and how do you not be so burdensome you can know what to
reimburse the healthcare provider for?
So Dr. Daghestani, on that, the reporting requirements on
independent community oncology practices is an issue that has
been brought to my attention. Do you believe some of the
components of MIPS and Advanced APMs are leaving independent
physician practices susceptible to consolidation the
reporting--because of the reporting requirements?
And has CMS implementation of the law impacted independent
physicians' ability to meaningfully drive more value-based
care?
I will just leave it at that.
Dr. Daghestani. Thank you for that question. So I always--
when I am talking with a health plan, I always talk to them,
and I have a saying saying, ``Do you want us to manage the
population, or do you want us to manage the contract?'` And I
think one of the challenges is with ever-moving reporting
requirement and changes in the quality measures is we spend a
lot of our time and resources and energy managing the contract
and, in this case, managing reporting, basically.
So it is a heavy lift on rural area, on small practices, as
well as on specialty practices, specifically because you don't
have that infrastructure, you don't have access to that
information. So it does require very heavy investment up front
in building that infrastructure and then collecting the data,
and then submitting the data as well.
So in my experience in our area it has driven actually some
significant consolidation between specialty where we've had
three urology group, now we are down to one; we've had multiple
GI group, now we are down to one--which, if it is done for the
right reason, it is OK to do that. But if it is done for the
wrong reason, it can have a dramatic negative impact on our
ability to actually produce value.
Mr. Guthrie. Thanks. My time has expired, so I will yield
back. I appreciate your answer. Thank you.
Mr. Griffith. The gentleman yields back. I now recognize
the gentleman from South Carolina, Mr. Duncan, for his 5
minutes of questions.
Mr. Duncan. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
[Audio malfunction.]
Mr. Griffith. Yes, do you want to switch chairs? That is
probably the best alternative.
Yes, we are going to turn it over to the Technology
Subcommittee to solve this problem.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Burgess. We are the premier technology committee in the
United States House of Representatives.
Mr. Duncan. OK. All right. The clock got restarted.
You know, I believe that chronic care management is a
meaningful, commonplace way to lower patient costs and is a
conservative solution to provide a higher standard of care for
seniors with chronic care needs. That is why I introduced the
Chronic Care Management Improvement Act of 2023 with my
colleague, the congresswoman from Washington, Ms. DelBene, that
removes cost sharing for chronic care management services under
Medicare. As our national debt grows and our population ages, I
believe the Investing in Chronic Care Management Improvement
Act will ultimately save money for both seniors and the
American taxpayers.
So Dr. Daghestani--is that right--in your written testimony
you state APG's member groups are committed to engage in the
full spectrum of APM and Medicare Advantage. In your experience
in both your role with APG and as a practicing physician, how
would chronic care management services benefit your physicians
who are members of your organization?
Dr. Daghestani. Thank you for that question.
So 80 percent of Medicare spend is probably spent on 20
percent, which is usually the chronic disease management. And
really, to do disease management well, chronic disease, it is
team-based care. A single physician cannot achieve that
objective alone. You have to partner with others, you have to
invest in population health, and you have to build a system
around the patients. And that is a significant investment.
A few examples from APG members and from my group, as well,
again, we take care of about 55,000 Medicare patients, about
half of them under MA in a capitated, prepaid model, and half
of them under an ACO with Medicare. We have a pharmacy team, we
have a home visit team, we have care managers. We are partnered
with a home health, partnered with hospice, and partnered with
a hospital and partner with certain specialty group to be
able--the system.
So being able to provide chronic care is critical. Getting
primary care, as well as--as important, even though it is 20
percent of the spend. But every extra dollar spent there can
prevent the need to spend a lot of dollars on chronic care, as
well.
Mr. Duncan. Yes, absolutely. According to HHS, only 4
percent of 22 million eligible Medicare patients partake in
chronic care management services due to the current payment
structure.
So, Ms. Pittman, in your written testimony you stated that
Congress should encourage Medicare Advantage plans to enter
risk-bearing arrangements and APMs that encourage more value-
based care to help manage chronic care illnesses and quality
access to care. So how would eliminating the chronic care
management cost-sharing requirement under Medicare impact APMs
and the quality of care given to each patient that you are--
that are primarily seniors?
Ms. Pittman. Yes, so one of the things ACOs do currently is
offer the chronic care management outside of billing for it
because of the cost-sharing piece.
And so one of the things that we would want to see as an
additional flexibility for ACOs is to be able to waive
beneficiary cost sharing. So our members are doing risk
arrangements with the MA plans and then their own ACOs. In the
MA plans they are able to provide that chronic care management
without cost sharing. If they do it in an ACO and want to get
paid for it, then they have to--then the cost sharing comes in,
or they just provide it on their own and don't bill for it from
their shared savings, or this is another way that they use
those Advanced APMs.
So eliminating the cost sharing, giving ACOs more
flexibility to waive patient cost sharing just opens up the
flexibilities and what else they can do, and continue to
innovate and provide additional services.
Mr. Duncan. I agree. So I am hopeful that my colleagues on
Energy and Commerce Committee will consider the Chronic Care
Management Improvement Act as a way to lower patient costs and
improve health outcomes for our seniors.
So, great answers. I appreciate your feedback.
And with that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Griffith. The gentleman yields back. I now recognize
Mr. Palmer of Alabama for his 5 minutes of questioning.
[Audio malfunction.]
Mr. Griffith. You could stay up here on the top row. You
got enough seniority to keep up here. There you go.
Mr. Palmer. I am going to start out asking to get better
technology for our hearings.
I do have some questions along the same lines as everybody
else. And Dr. Albanese, in your testimony you mentioned
concerns about CMMI's lack of transparency in its operations
decision making. Could you provide some specific examples?
Mr. Albanese. Certainly, Congressman.
So the studies that I had cited in my testimony kind of
alluded to this a bit, but the overall findings from CMMI's own
analysis of its first decade of models and of its operations
looked at over 50 models. Those aren't all APMs that are
eligible for the bonuses under MACRA, but even with that
broader pool, only about six of those had yielded net savings
and very few have yielded significant quality improvements.
Many of the Advanced APMs that did yield quality improvements,
in turn, did not yield net savings.
So that is a track record from their own analysis that you
are not achieving the goals that it had set out to achieve.
Mr. Palmer. But payments were made, nonetheless, even
though the--would you consider those payments that were made--
would you classify those as improper payments?
Mr. Albanese. I would say that the payments that are being
made are not transforming the value of care as they were
promised.
Mr. Palmer. Right. So the amounts paid should have been
lower. If you are not achieving the objectives, they wouldn't
have qualified for that level of payment, is what I am saying.
So----
Mr. Albanese. Yes.
Mr. Palmer. So that could be classified as an improper
payment.
Mr. Albanese. I would say that the analysis that has been
done of CMMI, it has been far above what has been projected.
And so you are correct that it has been costing more----
Mr. Palmer. All right. The----
Mr. Albanese [continuing]. Should have been saving.
Mr. Palmer. The reason I bring that up is because we have
got an enormous issue with improper payments. I think in the
last GAO report it was about $47 billion. And it has been
mentioned in the opening statements here about the pressure on
Medicare, particularly. It is going to almost double. I think
it was you that made that point.
So if we are looking at new payment models, Alternative
Payment Models--and Ms. Pittman, you mentioned the same thing
about the lack of transparency--I think we have to address some
of the other things, underlying issues related to these models
so that people are getting paid what they should get paid. At
the same time, we are incentivizing a higher quality of care.
Is that--does that make sense in the context of what we are
talking about here, that we want to make sure that we are not
spending more money than we should and that the money that we
do have goes where it needs to go, Ms. Pittman?
Ms. Pittman. Yes. I think one of the things in the study
that he is referencing of looking at all CMMI models, their
cost savings were just very minimal, that they didn't meet the
criteria to want to expand it much more rapidly.
I think, if we really want to improve the CMMI approach,
there are lessons learned from those models in terms of
flexibilities and things like providing upfront payments to
providers to get started on the value transition that have been
proven to save money. And we should rapidly expand all of
those.
I think what the evaluations are missing--part of the lack
of transparency is we don't know how CMS is going to evaluate a
model for if it will be--if it can--should be expanded or not.
The evaluations just look at cost savings and quality. There
are other factors that aren't known. We want to have more
transparency around those factors. Perhaps it's an opportunity
to take it through, like, public rulemaking once, just to make
that really clear.
And then we want to look at other factors like, is this
model retaining access in rural communities? Is this model
bringing in specialists or other providers that typically
haven't participated in the past? So there is opportunity to
really expand----
Mr. Palmer. I want to get one more question in here, Dr.
Daghestani. And I grew up in a rural area, and I am very
concerned about the access to healthcare and--because it is a
huge problem in Alabama.
But in addition to greater transparency, Dr. Daghestani, in
the model development process, how should Congress and the
administration think about the wide range of overlapping CMMI
models and the potential burden and uncertainty that they place
on providers, and particularly rural providers?
Dr. Daghestani. So I think, you know, we are appreciative
of CMS and CMMI's offer to creating those models, but I feel
like we are at the second stage of MACRA right now, where we
need to simplify the model. We need to factor rural areas, we
need to factor small practices, medium, and then large, multi-
State practices, and come up with less models that are fixed
for a longer point of timeframes.
We're not going on a sprint, we're looking at it as a
marathon. I think we've been in multiple sprints, and we are
ready to get into a marathon situation where we say, ``Here is
the outcome. We have these two models, we have this financial
predictability, and this quality measure of predictability.'`
Mr. Palmer. My time has expired, Mr. Chairman. I yield
back.
Mr. Griffith. The gentleman yields back. I now recognize
the gentlelady of Florida, Mrs. Cammack, for her 5 minutes of
questions.
Mrs. Cammack. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for hosting this
very important hearing today. Thank you to our witnesses for
appearing before us. I will jump right in.
Mr. Albanese, CMS has not taken meaningful steps to develop
Advanced Alternative Payment Models, APMs, options for
specialty practices. And I know we have been kind of dancing
around this a little bit today. The current system tends to
focus on primary care rather than the specialty providers like
GI. You mentioned that earlier. As a result, not all
specialties benefit in the same way that primary care providers
do.
So in your view, how can CMS alter the current MACRA
framework to include nonprimary care specialty practices?
Mr. Albanese. Well, I think, to echo what Ms. Pittman
mentioned before, a lot of it deals with how we--what we know
about the decision-making process in CMMI, which is not a lot.
I think there needs to be more transparency in that.
And I think, actually, what might be a better approach is
to have more broad-based models that try to simplify the
measures and the incentives that doctors face. I can turn to
MIPS for an example as a way to describe APMs. There's hundreds
of different measures within that that micromanage the
activities of doctors. And if you have too many models that are
going to be prioritizing what the priorities of government
officials selecting those measures and designing those models
are, you are necessarily going to be missing out on different
priorities that are not included or that patients themselves
might find most relevant.
Mrs. Cammack. Well, and Dr. Daghestani, you had touched on
this a little bit. Do you want to follow up on that? Thank you.
Dr. Daghestani. Yes, I think for specialty, it has been a
challenge. I think in a multispecialty group, our specialists
have been really engaged because they have dramatic impact on
the site of service, which is something we at some point have
to talk about, is how do we work in a way to ensure that
hospitals are supported for the chronic care that they provide
but at the same time we are making sure that the site-of-
service aspect, which impacts quality and cost dramatically.
And I think that will engage the specialists if we have more
clarity on site-of-service discussion and how that impacts the
ACO performance or specialty model, I think that will be an
important next step.
Mrs. Cammack. I appreciate it. I would like to yield the
remainder of my time to my good friend from the great State of
Texas, Dr. Burgess.
Mr. Burgess. Thank you.
And I just had one additional question, Dr. McWilliams,
before I ran out of time. With your unique position being both
an advisor to CMMI and your study of the APMs, what additional
flexibility do you think CMMI needs to provide to the APMs to
see them more functional, particularly in the role for smaller
practices?
Dr. McWilliams. So I think there are some waivers or
flexibilities that could be helpful, particularly in the
context of rural areas. If we think about the APM concept as
giving providers the flexibility to meet patient needs, that is
really critical in an area where you really have to step away
from sort of bricks-and-mortar medicine in order to make it
work.
So, certainly, that should be a goal and would deserve some
careful thought, I think, about how we handle telemedicine.
There's a tension between sort of innovating and care delivery,
and then putting every innovation in the fee schedule, and then
it is really hard to price. And then we get really innovative
in delivering care, and the unit of care gets very vague, and
we run the risk of just sort of increasing more and more use.
That is the conceptual promise of an APM, is to have a general
payment for a population so that then providers can figure out
how to best arrange the care.
So in order to do that, while there may be some
flexibilities that are useful, or some waivers, in the end I
believe it is really the backbone of these models that we need
to design better in setting the benchmarks in a way that
providers don't get penalized for success, and sets them to
grow in a way that allows all providers a chance to prosper in
the models.
That becomes a very weedy conversation fast, one that I
have a lot, and would be happy to have----
Mr. Burgess. Yes, sure.
Dr. McWilliams [continuing]. But it can't be done in 52
seconds. But that, I believe, is generally the crux of the
issue and where there has been a lot more movement recently,
particularly in the Shared Savings program in trying to address
that.
Mr. Burgess. Well, and you are right, that can be part of a
longer conversation, and I would actually look forward to that.
One of the criticisms that I received because of the high
number of people who could succeed into the MIPS program--
someone cynical at the time, but one of the agencies says,
``Why don't you just call that the Every Doctor Gets an A
program''? But the answer to that is you want your doctor to be
successful, right? When I go to my doctor, I want them to be
successful.
So I appreciate your thoughts on that. There perhaps can be
some opportunities for further discussion.
But I thank the gentlelady from Florida for yielding, and I
will yield back.
Mrs. Cammack. I yield.
Mr. Griffith. The gentleman yields back to the gentlelady.
The gentlelady yields back. I now recognizes Mr. Ruiz of
California.
Do you need a second?
Mr. Ruiz. Thank you.
Mr. Griffith. I now recognize the gentleman from
California, Mr. Ruiz, for his 5 minutes of questioning.
Mr. Ruiz. Thank you for holding this important hearing
today.
I grew up, practiced medicine, and now represent an area of
southern California where I grew up that has always struggled
with adequate access to healthcare. Add chronic access
challenges to the growing provider shortage and then add record
numbers of people entering the Medicare system, and we have a
recipe for disaster. OK?
My primary concern is access to care for our seniors. Of
course, there are many ways in which we need to address this
issue, including the creation of a more robust healthcare
workforce. But today I want to talk about fair payments to our
physicians who provide care for our seniors.
Medicare payment rates have declined over time, despite the
increasing cost in running a medical practice. In fact, if you
take into account inflation in medical practice, payments to
doctors have declined 26 percent between 2001 and 2023. This
makes it difficult for small, rural, and low-income-serving
population physician practices to keep their doors open,
further exacerbating the existing physician shortages and
leading providers to turn away Medicare patients.
In fact, nonpartisan government stakeholders have also
expressed concerns about the failure of Medicare payments to
keep pace with the rising costs of running a medical practice
and the damaging impact it could have on patient access to
care. The Medicare trustees and MedPAC have called for
legislative action to address the Medicare physician payment
system by providing physicians with an annual, inflation-based
update tied to the Medical Economic Index. A March 2023 report
from the Medicare trustees states that the trustees ``expect
access to Medicare participating physicians to become a
significant issue in the long term if Congress doesn't take
steps to bolster the payment system.'`
That is why I introduced the bipartisan H.R. 2474, the
Strengthening Medicare for Patients and Providers Act, with my
colleagues Dr. Bucshon--the A Team--Miller-Meeks, and Bera.
This bill addresses payments to Medicare providers to help
prevent a possible physician shortage for Medicare
beneficiaries. It does this by providing an annual Medicare
physician payment update tied to inflation as measured by the
Medicare Economic Index to more appropriately take into account
the costs of running a medical practice to help ensure that
payments to doctors are adequate so that they can continue to
see patients.
So, Dr. McWilliams, what is the effect on patients,
providers, and the strength of the Medicare system when doctors
are not properly reimbursed to make their bottom lines meet?
Dr. McWilliams. Thanks very much for that question, which
is a big one. I think about this a little bit more in
distributional terms than absolute terms insofar as there are
underserved populations for whom more resources would be
beneficial.
And then we also have an overspending problem, as well, so
there seems to be, certainly, the prospect of reducing wasteful
care and converting that into additional care for patients who
need it.
I think there is a difference between talking about how to
set updates for fees and how to set updates for benchmarks,
whether that is for MA plans or for Alternative Payment Models.
It is--we have spent a lot of this discussion today talking
about participation incentives in Alternative Payment Models--
--
Mr. Ruiz. So I think that Alternative Payment Models was
the experimental experience that we wanted to get to the best
way to create incentives to produce a better health.
When Medicare in general isn't paying the doctors enough to
keep their doors open, then doctors are going to be less
inclined to take Medicare, and the patients, ultimately, are
not going to have access to those doctors.
The cost of care has been increasing. Congress has been
cutting rates. It hasn't even been going up over the several
years. And so we have a recipe for failure for seniors not
getting access to care, and that is my primary concern. And so
this is about tying the payments to that inflation that
continues to go up so there is not this end-of-year crisis
trying to figure out how they are going to get paid, which puts
in jeopardy a lot of practices.
How do these inefficiencies you have identified in the
payment systems developed under MACRA threaten to worsen health
disparities?
And what approaches can we take to promote more equitable
health outcomes?
Dr. McWilliams. Yes, I appreciate that. And if we take it
to the extreme, if fees get so low that there is a loss with
every service provided, obviously, providers can never catch
up.
The point I was trying to make is that how this plays out
does differ under the two types of payment systems, whether it
is fee-for-service or an Alternative Payment Model that sets a
fixed payment and then to grow at a rate, in that providers are
no longer penalized with less revenue if they do fewer things
that are reimbursed and can spend more of their time and
resources in doing things like expanding access.
So I do believe that payment reform is rather crucial to
preserving access, particularly for underserved populations,
and that, because the rate of fee growth affects the rate of
participation in these other models, we do need to think
carefully about how we inflate fees. I--and then within APMs we
need to think carefully about how we grow benchmarks. But the
two are related.
Mr. Ruiz. Thank you.
Mr. Griffith. The gentleman yields back. I now recognize
the gentleman from Indiana, Dr. Bucshon, for 5 minutes of
questioning.
Mr. Bucshon. Thank you. First of all, I want to associate
myself with the comments of Dr. Ruiz. I couldn't agree more,
and we have bipartisan legislation we are working on to solve
some of those challenges.
I do want to thank the full committee Chair, Mrs. Rodgers,
and Subcommittee Chair Griffith for scheduling what I consider
a critical hearing for the future of healthcare in the United
States. And I know that sounds a little big, but I am telling
you, this is a big problem we have to address.
The entire premise of MACRA, of course, which was passed
into law in 2015, was to move us away from the old model for
reimbursement of physicians that was driven by volume and
transition us to a system where providers were reimbursed based
on their ability to deliver high-quality care.
Why was this important? In fee-for-service model, the best
provider is reimbursed at the same level as a provider that may
be providing less quality care. I have never thought that was
right. It also leaves volume as the only dial a provider can
turn to impact reimbursement.
Unfortunately, as is all too common in DC, in my opinion,
the executive branch under both political parties has failed to
fully implement the law in an adequate fashion, and in some
cases not even bothered to really try and implement the law--
like ignoring PTAC, for example, as was mentioned.
I mean, there are massive problems that we see in the MIPS
program and in the Alternative Payment Models, primarily that
these programs are somewhat overly bureaucratic and make it
difficult for smaller practices, particularly in independent or
rural practices, to participate, as has been mentioned. This is
not my opinion, by the way. As was mentioned, two GAO reports
have said this.
Dr. McWilliams, the MIPS program is budget neutral,
correct? What I mean by that is whatever--whoever gets bonuses,
you have to have people getting cuts, right?
Dr. McWilliams. That is my understanding.
Mr. Bucshon. Right. And I--honestly, I don't think that
half the providers in America are providing poor quality care.
But essentially, it is a budget-neutral program. Everybody that
goes positive, you have to have just as many negative. That was
a fundamental flaw at the time, but I couldn't do anything
about it. I tried.
These factors and other reimbursement inequities, as was
mentioned by Dr. Ruiz, like a lack of inflationary update for
physician reimbursement, it is just devastating, not even
keeping up with practice costs.
In addition--I just want to say this--it has helped lead to
the morale amongst providers being extremely low, and that is
not my opinion. I talk to doctors who I have known for decades.
And the burnout is high, and we are losing quality people,
particularly in rural America.
I was a practicing heart surgeon for over 15 years, served
as president of my medical group, and I can tell you from
firsthand experience the lack of proper reimbursements for
physicians will ultimately result in our constituents having
access challenges to quality, affordable healthcare regardless
of where you live. I agree with Dr. Ruiz. My issue: Everybody
should have access to quality, affordable healthcare.
Reimbursement is a substantial challenge.
So unfortunately, while we repeal the Sustainable Growth
Rate formula, many physicians continue to experience steep
cuts, and the legislation that was previously mentioned would
help mitigate some of that. Everybody else in the healthcare
system gets these updates. I don't know if people know that.
Physicians don't. Hospitals do, others do. They get updates
based on inflation. So we have to fix that.
I want to touch on a different subject, though. Dr.
Daghestani, my specialty, cardiothoracic surgery, and others
such as neurosurgery and orthopedic surgery, have established
clinical data outcome registries, the STS database, for 30
years, valuable tools to support performance assessment and
value-based care models. Unfortunately, these registries cannot
realize their full power without better access to Medicare cost
data. In the 117th Congress, I introduced Meaningful Access to
Federal Health Plan Claims Data Act to help remedy this
situation and make access to Medicare claims data more readily
available.
Furthermore, CMS has failed to take advantage of these data
registries, in my opinion. And the Qualified Clinical Data
Registries reporting program needs an overhaul. Do you believe
that CMS needs to reimagine how it supports physician-led
clinical data registries, including improving access to cost
data?
Dr. Daghestani. Yes, I think data is not only important, is
critical. None of us can survive in an ACO world if we don't
have access to timely and accurate data. You are taking a risk
at a time where physician reimbursement is down, physician
morale is down. A number of physician going into medical school
is flattened, especially for primary care and some medical
subspecialties.
So I think it is critical to work with CMS and CMMI on
having meaningful access to data and be a stakeholder and be at
the table. Groups like APG could provide a lot of insight. We
are working, as well as group--with our members of 360-plus
group to organize our data and to be able to share that data
and publish study, because without that knowledge, without
knowing what works and what doesn't work, we are not going to
be able to prove and refine those models.
Mr. Bucshon. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Griffith. The gentleman yields back. I now recognize
Dr. Miller-Meeks for 5 minutes of questioning.
Mrs. Miller-Meeks. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
I am proud to be a sponsor of H.R. 2474, the Strengthening
Medicare for Patients and Providers Act, with Drs. Bucshon,
Ruiz, and Bera. This critical legislation would add an annual
inflationary update to physician payments under Medicare.
While operating costs for medical practice have gone up by
47 percent, physician payments have declined 26 percent from
2001 to 2023, when adjusted for inflation, making it difficult
for small, rural, and low-income-serving practices to provide
care to patients across America. It underscores the morale that
was mentioned earlier. And also, the increasing scope of
practice by lower-educated providers also puts additional
pressure.
Our bill stabilizes physician payments year to year and
seeks to preserve access to care, which has only worsened since
the COVID-19 pandemic. Dr. Daghestani, in your opinion, do you
believe that stabilizing physician payments by providing an
inflationary update to docs nationwide will benefit patients?
Dr. Daghestani. Yes, absolutely. I mean, we are talking
about physician a lot, but as a practicing physician I am
really talking about my patients if my door is not open, if
groups--if APG's door is not open.
So the physician payment, yes, it is about physicians, but
at the end of the day is being able--and we have to keep in
mind that all commercial reimbursement is tied to Medicare. So
the impact is triple and quadruple on physicians. So anything
that we can do to stabilize that will be important, and
anything that we can invest in the movement toward being
accountable for the total cost of care and total outcome will
be critical, as well.
Mrs. Miller-Meeks. Thank you.
Mr. Albanese, in 2015 Medicare program spend was $646
billion, with ACO savings reported at 145 million; 145 million
might sound high, but it reflects 0.0002 percent savings in
total Medicare program spending for that year.
Similarly, from 2016 to 2018, Medicare program spend
totaled 2.128 trillion, with ACO savings reported as $358
million, which reflects 0.0001 percent savings in total
Medicare spending for that timeframe. Not--minimal, but still
much smaller than I think is reflected.
Do you think ACOs have been effective at reducing Medicare
expenditures?
As we evaluate reforms to MACRA, what should Congress
consider when reforming ACO models?
Mr. Albanese. So I certainly think that the models that
have actually saved some nominal amount of money have been
nominal in their savings, as you alluded to.
And I think that the concerns that we should be focused on
as policymakers and policy analysts is that, first of all,
trying to alleviate the incentives towards more consolidation
and having bigger providers being able to succeed more
successfully in these programs is something that has happened
all across MACRA.
And ACOs are good, in theory, in terms of trying to have
more accountability for the total cost of care among providers.
But when filtered through different government rules and
different iterations of the Shared Savings program, this turns
out to not actually play out as was expected and as has
happened with other CMMI models and other models besides CMMI.
Mrs. Miller-Meeks. Thank you, and you led into my next
question.
Dr. McWilliams, the physician, clinical ownership, and
employee landscape has dramatically changed in the past decade.
Private medical practices of all sizes and specialties are
being bought and consolidated with larger hospital systems and
groups at alarming rates.
How did these buyouts and mergers and ACOs and lack of
inflationary cost adjustments impact the ability of physicians
to participate in new and innovative Alternative Payment Models
and stay in practice to give high-quality patient care in their
communities versus an independent practice?
Dr. McWilliams. Thank you for that question. I think in the
theme of today of trying to streamline the portfolio of models
and design--have fewer models designed better, I think what we
want to move towards is having these APMs make participation
worthwhile for independent practices and allow them to remain
independent in terms of ownership.
Healthcare consolidation is a massive problem. It has a lot
of bad consequences for patients, including limiting their
options of where they can go. We have evidence that it worsens
the quality of healthcare delivery, it raises prices. And there
is no reason why APMs should not encourage smaller
organizations and allow them to thrive. In fact, it should be--
payment reform can be procompetitive if designed correctly----
Mrs. Miller-Meeks. Excuse me. To that end, there was a 5
percent incentive payment to encourage providers, and in
December of 2022 Congress passed a pared-down, 1-year, 3.5
percent extension of MACRA's incentive payments. If Congress
allows these incentives to expire, what will be the impact on
the movement to value-based payment models?
Dr. McWilliams. I'm glad you brought that up, because this
ties into the point about consolidation. The way that bonus is
designed, as I said in my opening statement, is as a proportion
of revenue. So it favors the bigger organizations. For a
primary care group that could participate in an ACO model, it
is a very small bump. And so I think we need to have an even
playing field in terms of the participation incentives if we
care about competition.
Mrs. Miller-Meeks. Yes, and often not passed to physicians
themselves.
Thank you so much. I yield back.
Mr. Griffith. The gentlelady yields back. I now recognize
Dr. Schrier of Washington for 5 minutes of questioning.
Ms. Schrier. Thank you, Chair Griffith, and thank you for
allowing me to waive on to this committee. I wanted to thank
the witnesses who are here today, as well.
The Medicare Access and CHIP Reauthorization Act, MACRA,
was passed in 2015, long before my time in Congress. But as a
physician I could see what a big deal this was, to just change
the thinking about how we provide--deliver healthcare in this
country, and incentivizing health and value-based care, not
fee-for-service, which can rack up costs.
But of course, we need to make sure we are doing it right
and offering the same incentives, or adequate incentives, and
folding doctors into the program and then getting good outcome
measurements.
So in some cases MACRA has not worked as fast or as well as
we have wanted it to. But in other cases it can really be life-
changing. So I wanted to share a good ACO story in my State. My
State of Washington has been a leader on this issue and very
innovative. And there is a gentleman from my State, Michael,
who has multiple sclerosis and was doing terribly in a fee-for-
service model. He would have had trouble getting to
appointments, costs would have been high. But there were other
complicating factors, very challenging living situation on
multiple levels, lots of risks.
And the model employed by a local ACO in Washington State
called Northwest Momentum Health Partners were able to get
enough wraparound services that they relocated him to a safer
home, got him a low-cost phone, arranged for transportation to
his doctor's appointments. And as a result, his health has been
in much better shape. And so I wanted to highlight a success
story.
We also need to make sure that incentives line up and keep
doctors and hospitals involved. Ms. Pittman, in your
experience--I would just love to hear your thoughts on how
incentive payments can move the needle on patient care, and
maybe how we could update MACRA to allow for more providers to
be incentivized and have more creative solutions like the one
used in Michael's case.
Ms. Pittman. Thank you for that question. I think that's an
excellent example of how clinicians are using those incentive
payments. It's going right back to reinvestment in care. The
Advanced APM incentives go directly to the clinician practice,
not to the ACO, so the clinicians can design what services or
approaches that they see best for their practice. So that has
been a tremendous help.
In terms of designing it for the future, I think we--you
hear from many of us these incentives have worked, but there
are some challenges with them. Part of how the thresholds to
qualify for the incentives discourages bringing in certain
types of providers like specialists. Or if you bring in rural
providers, like a rural health clinic or a critical access
hospital, it decreases your ability to meet the thresholds to
qualify for that incentive. And so we would need to rethink how
we set qualifications for the incentives.
The incentives also are only for the downside risk APMs,
and we need to recognize the movement for the folks that are
not held for risk, as well. And so designing an incentive--so
perhaps that there is a--you know, our suggestion is you want
to have adequate payment for all clinicians. Then beyond that,
having incentives, maybe it is a smaller incentive for those
that are doing the nonrisk-bearing, a higher incentive for
those that are taking on risk.
Ms. Schrier. That makes a lot of sense, thank you. I also
wanted to ask about CMMI and CMS innovation. And they have
tested dozens of these value-care-based models. You referred to
some of the trickier spots there. Some of these demonstrations
have really expanded our understanding about how to shift
payment and improve patient outcomes. But only a few models
have met the criteria for expansion.
And I am not sure if the lessons learned are always
translated into existing models or how to improve models, and I
was wondering if you could talk a little bit, Ms. Pittman,
about CMMI translating lessons and, you know, also just what
can we do to spur more innovation in addition to payment
incentives.
Ms. Pittman. Yes. So in terms of translating the lessons,
if we take something like there are two other ACO models that
have been tested by the Innovation Center, one was the next
generation ACO, one is the current model ACO Reach. They both
have an approach where you shift primary care payment away from
fee-for-service to providing a per-beneficiary population-based
amount, and that allows more investment into primary care,
which we all know is much needed.
That is not something that is in the permanent ACO model,
Medicare Shared Savings. We know that it has worked. We know
that the next-gen ACOs that took on that option have higher
savings than those that did not. And the Reach model requires
that. So that is an example of an innovation that we think
should just automatically come over into the Shared Savings
program. I am encouraged that CMS seems to be working on that
approach.
I think some of the challenges with what the models and
meeting the criteria for expansion is, we just don't know what
the criteria for expansion is. We know that the evaluations
look at cost savings and quality, but there are other factors
that go into whether or not a model should--meets the actuarial
requirements to be expanded in all of Medicare.
So we think that should be made public, have more
transparency around what the criteria are, and then take a look
about other things that might want to go into the criteria,
like is it retaining access in rural or other communities?
Ms. Schrier. Thank you.
I yield back and associate myself with comments from
Representative Miller-Meeks about matching payment for
physicians to inflation. Thank you very much.
Mr. Griffith. The gentlelady yields back. I now recognize
Dr. Joyce of Pennsylvania for his 5 minutes of questioning.
Mr. Joyce. Thank you for yielding, Mr. Chairman, and thank
you for allowing me to waive on to this important hearing.
I would ask unanimous consent to enter two statements into
the record, one from the Surgical Coalition and one from the
American College of Surgeons.
Mr. Griffith. And we will take that up at the end, but I am
assuming there will be no objection.
Mr. Joyce. Thank you.
Small, independent doctors play a crucial role in our
healthcare system, particularly in rural and underserved areas.
However, there are concerns that MACRA's requirements may
disproportionately burden these providers and potentially
exacerbate existing healthcare disparities such as
consolidation of practices and availability for care.
A central goal of MACRA was to move away from a fee-for-
service healthcare model to a system of value-based payment
through the use of Alternative Payment Models. But
unfortunately, many specialty physicians wishing to move beyond
fee-for-service will find that not a single physician-focused
Alternative Payment Model is available because none of the
models approved by the physician-focused Payment Model
Technology Advisory Committee, PTAC, have been tested. While
numerous proposals have been recommended for testing or
implementation by the PTAC, CMMI has not moved forward on any
of them.
Dr. Daghestani, how can Congress move the needle to make
sure that value-based models for specialty medicine are put
into practice?
Dr. Daghestani. Thank you for the question.
So I think one of the things we need to think about,
especially with rural practice, is, one, the threshold that a
rural practice needs to meet to enter an ACO arrangement, and I
think that's critical. We talked about upfront investment, that
maybe the value of that investment in rural practices need to
be higher.
There are additional things that we haven't covered today.
Telemedicine plays a big role in rural practice. Stability and
predictability of what is going to happen to telemedicine is
going to be critical.
Being able to recruit physicians for rural practices right
now. Patients in rural areas, where I used to practice in rural
Oklahoma, they use urgent care for chronic care, and they use
ER for urgent care stuff, and then they delay preventive and
they delay significant issue, as well. So the workforce.
Expanding coverage is something we have to think about,
because Medicare could be a small percent of the practice, and
then you have a huge percentage of underinsured or uninsured
completely, and that have an impact. So we have to figure out,
as we engage small practices, specialty or primary care in
rural area, of how we support the rest of the population with
expanding coverage, as well.
Mr. Joyce. I think you bring into the conversation the need
for telemedicine in rural areas. I too practiced in a rural
part of central Pennsylvania, but the availability for
broadband is a concern. That is for a different hearing, and we
will address that, as well.
The impact of MACRA should be noticed in the quality of
care our seniors receive. MACRA should also lead to savings due
to a decrease in volume of unnecessary services. However, for
small and independent physicians, this has been challenging
and, in some cases, may lead to further provider consolidation.
Mr. Albanese, you mentioned in your testimony that MACRA
has accelerated the trend of hospital acquisition of physician
practices. Could you further elaborate on the specific impact
of this trend on small and independent practices?
Mr. Albanese. Thank you, Congressman.
The scores that we have seen on average from small
providers and small practices compared to large ones have been
significantly lower in MIPS. And that indicates, on one hand,
that the fixed costs and the cost constraints they face are
more difficult to bear, but it also means that they have fewer
resources to navigate the complexities of that system.
So these lead to, as I mentioned, lower scores, less of an
ability to get a payment bump, and more incentives for
consolidation due to----
Mr. Joyce. Let's continue with that consolidation concept
that you have brought back into the conversation. Does this
consolidation affect the ability to participate in value-based
care models?
And what modifications, what adjustments to MACRA do you
believe would support these practices?
Mr. Albanese. Having less burden overall in MACRA through
MIPS and through APMs would go a long way. I think CMS's
approach so far has been to try and exempt more practices from
MIPS in order to alleviate that burden, but it leaves them back
in fee-for-service with the old incentives, and without
incentives for value-based care.
So being able to simplify that and try to move more towards
a system where their own--the quality of doctors is best
expressed through market mechanisms of patients picking their
own care, possibly through intermediaries such as private
payers and Medicare Advantage, is one option. And trying to
shift away from having the Government determine what value
means through hundreds of different measures in MIPS----
Mr. Joyce. I couldn't agree with you more that shifting
away from government determining what the value of a specific
physician or practice is so important. Thank you for those
comments.
My time has expired, and I yield.
Mr. Griffith. The gentleman yields back. I now recognize
Mrs. Lesko for--the vice chair of this subcommittee, for her 5
minutes of questioning.
Mrs. Lesko. Thank you, Mr. Chair. And first of all, I have
to apologize for being gone for a while, so I haven't heard
what questions were asked. And so excuse me if I am re-asking a
question you already answered.
Mr. Albanese, MACRA's incentive structure is a critical
component of our efforts to transition to value-based care.
However, we need to ensure that these incentives are sufficient
and effectively targeted to encourage providers to improve
care, quality, and reduce cost.
In your testimony you mentioned the need to revise MACRA's
incentive structure to make payments more sustainable. Could
you elaborate on your suggestion?
What specific changes or adjustments would you propose to
enhance the effectiveness of the incentive structure?
Mr. Albanese. Certainly, Congresswoman. I know that there
have been--previously there has been discussion about other
ways to reform payments such as by indexing to inflation. It is
a little bit beyond the scope of my testimony to comment
specifically on that, but I would simply urge a couple things
to keep in mind.
First of all, the overall fiscal situation. Part B is the
fastest-growing part of Medicare, even with the changes to
physician payments that have slowed that growth rate. So there
are still policy changes that can exacerbate that situation.
And I think, going back to the example of other payment
systems outside the physician fee schedule, because that is
updated very uniquely under MACRA, there are still
opportunities for mispricing and overpayment in those systems.
And a system where the Federal Government is setting payment
every year is not going to necessarily perfectly predict the
economic value of services.
So just trying to not emulate the worst abuses of those
payment systems and return to that fee-for-service framework,
that, coupled with the fiscal sustainability, would be the
principles I would keep in mind.
Mrs. Lesko. Thank you.
Ms. Pittman, from your perspective, what changes, if any,
would you suggest to MACRA's incentive structure to better
support the transition to value-based care within ACOs?
Ms. Pittman. Yes, I think one of the things that has been
very effective is the incentive payments to move to value, how
we would want to--there are some challenges with that, and we
would want to see some restructuring.
One of the baseline things would be to ensure that all
clinicians have adequate payment. Even when you are in an APM,
the payments to--it's based on historical payment, so whatever
physicians are paid in fee-for-service defines APM benchmarks.
From there we want to see incentives for those that move to
APMs, whether they are risk-bearing or not, and shifting it
slightly from the way that it's structured today.
I think ultimately we also would want to see more
flexibility. That is the nonfinancial incentive. So more
ability to provide additional services beyond what is allowed
in Medicare. Medicare Advantage has that benefit of doing
additional services, and we would want to see the clinicians
participating in ACOs or other APMs to be able to provide some
of those flexibilities.
Mrs. Lesko. Thank you. And thank you for all of you being
here.
And I yield back.
Mr. Griffith. The gentlelady yields back. Seeing there are
no further Members wishing to ask questions, I would like to
thank our witnesses for being here today. You all did a
fantastic job.
I am also going to take a brief moment to go on a little
tirade about our microphones. The committee does not actually
control the microphones. That is the Congressional Recording
Office. They have advised us as a part--as we were going
through this hearing that they don't have the parts to fix that
microphone. It seems to me that the committee overseeing
technology ought to be able to override the Congressional
Recording Office or recording studios that we need to get that
fixed. This room was not used during COVID because it wasn't
wired to do the Zoom-type calls, but certainly we should have
microphones that work.
So there is my tirade. We will be working on it, and
hopefully next time we won't have to play musical chairs in the
committee that oversees technology for a hearing.
With that being said, I ask unanimous consent to insert in
the record documents included on the staff hearing documents
list, which includes both the documents that Dr. Burgess
requested and the documents that Dr. Joyce requested.
Without objection, so ordered.
[The information appears at the conclusion of the hearing.]
Mr. Griffith. Pursuant to committee rules, I remind Members
that they have 10 business days to submit additional questions
for the record, and I ask that the witnesses submit their
response within 10 business days upon receipt of the questions.
And without objection, the committee is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 12:42 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]
[Material submitted for inclusion in the record follows:]
GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
