- FISCAL YEAR 2024 DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES BUDGET

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

FISCAL YEAR 2024 DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES BUDGET

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON HEALTH

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

MARCH 29, 2023

__________

Serial No. 118-17

Published for the use of the Committee on Energy and Commerce

govinfo.gov/committee/house-energy
energycommerce.house.gov
_________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

54-361 PDF               WASHINGTON : 2024

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE

CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington
Chair
MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas            FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey
ROBERT E. LATTA, Ohio                  Ranking Member
BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky              ANNA G. ESHOO, California
H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia         DIANA DeGETTE, Colorado
GUS M. BILIRAKIS, Florida            JAN SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois
BILL JOHNSON, Ohio                   DORIS O. MATSUI, California
LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana               KATHY CASTOR, Florida
RICHARD HUDSON, North Carolina       JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland
TIM WALBERG, Michigan                PAUL TONKO, New York
EARL L. ``BUDDY'' CARTER, Georgia    YVETTE D. CLARKE, New York
JEFF DUNCAN, South Carolina          TONY CARDENAS, California
GARY J. PALMER, Alabama              RAUL RUIZ, California
NEAL P. DUNN, Florida                SCOTT H. PETERS, California
JOHN R. CURTIS, Utah                 DEBBIE DINGELL, Michigan
DEBBBIE LESKO, Arizona               MARC A. VEASEY, Texas
GREG PENCE, Indiana                  ANN M. KUSTER, New Hampshire
DAN CRENSHAW, Texas                  ROBIN L. KELLY, Illinois
JOHN JOYCE, Pennsylvania             NANETTE DIAZ BARRAGAN, California
KELLY ARMSTRONG, North Dakota, Vice  LISA BLUNT ROCHESTER, Delaware
Chair                            DARREN SOTO, Florida
RANDY K. WEBER, Sr., Texas           ANGIE CRAIG, Minnesota
RICK W. ALLEN, Georgia               KIM SCHRIER, Washington
TROY BALDERSON, Ohio                 LORI TRAHAN, Massachusetts
RUSS FULCHER, Idaho                  LIZZIE FLETCHER, Texas
AUGUST PFLUGER, Texas
DIANA HARSHBARGER, Tennessee
MARIANNETTE MILLER-MEEKS, Iowa
KAT CAMMACK, Florida
JAY OBERNOLTE, California
------

Professional Staff

NATE HODSON, Staff Director
SARAH BURKE, Deputy Staff Director
TIFFANY GUARASCIO, Minority Staff Director
Subcommittee on Health

BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky
Chairman
MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas            ANNA G. ESHOO, California
ROBERT E. LATTA, Ohio                  Ranking Member
H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia         JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland
GUS M. BILIRAKIS, Florida            TONY CARDENAS, California
BILL JOHNSON, Ohio                   RAUL RUIZ, California
LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana, Vice Chair   DEBBIE DINGELL, Michigan
RICHARD HUDSON, North Carolina       ANN M. KUSTER, New Hampshire
EARL L. ``BUDDY'' CARTER, Georgia    ROBIN L. KELLY, Illinois
NEAL P. DUNN, Florida                NANETTE DIAZ BARRAGAN, California
GREG PENCE, Indiana                  LISA BLUNT ROCHESTER, Delaware
DAN CRENSHAW, Texas                  ANGIE CRAIG, Minnesota
JOHN JOYCE, Pennsylvania             KIM SCHRIER, Washington
DIANA HARSHBARGER, Tennessee         LORI TRAHAN, Massachusetts
MARIANNETTE MILLER-MEEKS, Iowa       FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey (ex
JAY OBERNOLTE, California                officio)
CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington
(ex officio)

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hon. Brett Guthrie, a Representative in Congress from the
Commonwealth of Kentucky, opening statement....................     1
Prepared statement...........................................     4
Hon. Anna G. Eshoo, a Representative in Congress from the State
of California, opening statement...............................     6
Prepared statement...........................................     8
Hon. Cathy McMorris Rodgers, a Representative in Congress from
the State of Washington, opening statement.....................    10
Prepared statement...........................................    12
Hon. Frank Pallone, Jr., a Representative in Congress from the
State of New Jersey, opening statement.........................    16
Prepared statement...........................................    18
Hon. Michael C. Burgess, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Texas, opening statement..............................    20
Prepared statement...........................................    22
Hon. Tony Cardenas, a Representative in Congress from the State
of California, opening statement...............................    23

Witnesses

Xavier Becerra, Secretary, Department of Health and Human
Services.......................................................    24
Prepared statement...........................................    27
Submitted questions for the record \1\

Submitted Material

Inclusion of the following was approved by unanimous consent.
Bulletin of February 17, 2023, ``Health Care-Related Taxes and
Hold Harmless Arrangements Involving the Redistribution of
Medicaid Payments,'' Centers for Medicare and Medicaid
Services, Department of Health and Human Services..............    85
Statement of the Academy of Physicians in Clinical Research......    91
Report of the Texas Department of Insurance, ``Senate Bill 1264
2021 midyear report,'' July 2021...............................    92
Statement of Hon. Sheila Cherfilus-McCormick, March 29, 2023.....   105
Article of March 28, 2023, ``A Minnesota family's desperate
search for care reveals state's mental health crisis,'' by
Christopher Snowbeck, Minnesota Star Tribune...................   107
Report of the Government Accountability Office, ``Rural Hospital
Closures: Number and Characteristics of Affected Hospitals and
Contributing Factors,'' August 2018 \2\

----------

\1\ Mr. Becerra did not answer submitted questions for the record by
the time of publication. The questions have been retained in committee
files and are available at https://docs.house.gov/meetings/IF/IF14/
20230329/115628/HHRG-118-IF14-Wstate-BecerraX-20230329-SD003.pdf.
Replies received after publication will be retained in committee files
and made available at https://docs.house.gov/Committee/Calendar/
ByEvent.aspx?EventID=115628.
\2\ The report has been retained in committee files and is included in
the Documents for the Record at https://docs.house.gov/meetings/IF/
IF14/20230329/115628/HHRG-118-IF14-20230329-SD003.pdf.

FISCAL YEAR 2024 DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES BUDGET

----------

WEDNESDAY, MARCH 29, 2023

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Health,
Committee on Energy and Commerce,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 10:03 a.m., in
the John D. Dingell Room 2123, Rayburn House Office Building,
Hon. Brett Guthrie (chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Members present: Representatives Guthrie, Burgess, Latta,
Griffith, Bilirakis, Johnson, Bucshon, Hudson, Carter, Dunn,
Pence, Crenshaw, Joyce, Harshbarger, Miller-Meeks, Obernolte,
Rodgers (ex officio), Eshoo (subcommittee ranking member),
Sarbanes, Cardenas, Ruiz, Kuster, Barragan, Blunt Rochester,
Craig, Schrier, Trahan, and Pallone (ex officio).
Staff present: Alec Aramanda, Professional Staff Member,
Health; Sean Brebbia, Chief Counsel, Oversight and
Investigations; Jolie Brochin, Clerk, Health; Sarah Burke,
Deputy Staff Director; Corey Ensslin, Senior Policy Advisor,
Health; Kristin Flukey, Professional Staff Member, Health; Seth
Gold, Professional Staff Member, Health; Grace Graham, Chief
Counsel, Health; Nate Hodson, Staff Director; Tara Hupman,
Chief Counsel; Peter Kielty, General Counsel; Emily King,
Member Services Director; Chris Krepich, Press Secretary; Molly
Lolli, Counsel, Health; Clare Paoletta, Professional Staff
Member, Health; Olivia Shields, Communications Director;
Michael Taggart, Policy Director; Lydia Abma, Minority Policy
Analyst; Jacquelyn Bolen, Minority Health Counsel; Waverly
Gordon, Minority Deputy Staff Director and General Counsel;
Tiffany Guarascio, Minority Staff Director; Stephen Holland,
Minority Senior Health Counsel; Saha Khaterzai, Minority
Professional Staff Member; Una Lee, Minority Chief Health
Counsel; Juan Negrete, Minority Professional Staff Member; Greg
Pugh, Minority Staff Assistant; Rick Van Buren, Minority Senior
Health Counsel; and C.J. Young, Minority Deputy Communications
Director.
Mr. Guthrie. The subcommittee will come to order.
Mr. Secretary, welcome. A former colleague, welcome here
today.
The Chair will recognize himself for an opening statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. BRETT GUTHRIE, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE COMMONWEALTH OF KENTUCKY

Today we are here to discuss the fiscal year 2024 budget
for the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.
First I want to say I have great concerns about the budget.
After driving up inflation and Federal spending, the President
put forth the largest budget request in our Nation's history of
almost $7 trillion. In the HHS budget specifically, the Centers
for Disease Control and Prevention gets a significant increase
in funding. And the question we have to ask is, why should
taxpayers give higher levels of funding to the CDC when public
trust has been eroded in the CDC due to politicized responses
to the COVID-19 pandemic?
The CDC--and we all need to work together to give serious
reforms to restore the public trust, and need to get back to
its core mission.
The HHS budget also has unfunded mandates on State Medicaid
programs.
The President also touts his budget increases Medicare
solvency for another 25 years. This will be done through
increases in taxes on American households and more price
controls to forcibly set prices for pharmaceutical drugs. These
efforts will ultimately backfire and lead to even fewer
lifesaving cures for our seniors.
On fentanyl, the President recently stated, and I quote,
``MAGA House Republicans' proposals would slash funding for
border security, a move that could allow nearly 900 pounds of
fentanyl into our country.'' Clearly, the President has failed
to check the Customs and Border Patrol's website before
releasing his budget proposal.
Under the President's watch, Customs and Border Patrol has
seized over 11,000 pounds of illicit fentanyl at our southwest
border. That is just in the first 6 months of this fiscal year
and represents nearly the total amount seized in all of fiscal
year 2022. These are just fentanyl seizures, not what is
actually being trafficked without being seized by the Customs
and Border Patrol. At the same time, drug overdoses eclipsed
107,000 in 2021, the highest ever in the United States. More
than 70,000 of these deaths were from synthetic opioids, such
as fentanyl.
The President's budget uses the word ``fentanyl'' twice,
compared to the--in the HHS budget, compared to 42 times it
mentions climate change. This is unfair to the thousands of
families across the country who have lost loved ones to
fentanyl poisoning. I call on the administration to join us in
supporting a classwide ban on fentanyl-related substances. The
HALT Fentanyl Act would do this, and it was passed out of this
committee less than a week ago with bipartisan support. It is
long past time we permanently schedule all fentanyl-related
substances in schedule I.
The administration also has--talks about working on health
equity. Well, however, the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid
Services recently declined to cover an entire class of FDA-
approved Alzheimer's treatments for Medicare patients. This
significantly reduced access to care for minority and rural
patient populations with no other options to treat this
treacherous disease.
The Biden administration has also proposed cutting
healthcare benefits for millions of Americans who receive
health insurance through ACA exchanges. And most recently, the
Biden administration proposed slashing Medicare payments for
drugs approved through the accelerated approval pathway, which
have significantly improved access to care for cancer patients
over the past decade.
I was hoping that this budget might offer a focus on
policies where we can work together. This committee held a
bipartisan, very informative hearing yesterday on healthcare
affordability, and most--and transparency--and highlighting the
ways we can improve and empower patients through greater price
transparency. This budget fails to mention price transparency.
It is a real missed opportunity, considering all the bipartisan
support for greater transparency across the healthcare system.
I invite the Secretary to work on all of us on this committee
on this issue.
In closing, I thank you for being here. I know that we may
disagree on some of the things that we are talking about today,
but we do agree that we want people to have access to better
healthcare. And to that end, I believe we can work together on
these pressing issues in a bipartisan fashion, and I hope that
we can work together.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Guthrie follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Guthrie. And I will yield back. The Chair now
recognizes the ranking member of the subcommittee, Ms. Eshoo of
California, for 5 minutes for an opening statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. ANNA G. ESHOO, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA

Ms. Eshoo. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Good morning, Secretary Becerra. Welcome back to the Health
Subcommittee. You are always welcome here.
My thanks to you, to the Biden administration for your work
over the past year to improve our Nation's healthcare system.
Premiums under the Affordable Care Act are at an all-time low,
and enrollment is at an all-time high. So I say bravo. A
record-breaking 16.3 million Americans signed up for health
coverage under the ACA, including more than 3.6 million
Americans who are newly insured. And 4 out of 5 enrollees
qualify for plans that cost $10 or less a month. These are
stunning figures.
And while there may not be applause on one side of the
aisle here, I think there is applause across the country with
the American people. We are very proud of that.
We have also made progress on fighting the fentanyl
overdose crisis. The number of providers able to prescribe
buprenorphine for opioid use disorder has increased by 19
percent, and naloxone prescriptions filled in pharmacies has
increased by 37 percent in the past year alone. For 6 months in
a row there has been a steady decrease or flattening in
overdose deaths. They are--no one can be satisfied with
whatever the number is, but that the number is decreasing is an
improvement. Why? Because access to treatment saves lives.
President Biden's fiscal 2024 budget request builds on
these achievements and addresses the remaining gaps in our
healthcare system. To continue lowering costs, the budget
proposes making permanent the enhanced premium tax credits that
were extended to 2025 in the Inflation Reduction Act, expands
surprise billing protections to ground ambulances, and caps the
monthly cost of insulin at $35 for Americans with group and
individual market coverage. We got that through. Everyone in
the country, whether they are young, middle-aged, or Medicare
beneficiaries, will enjoy that critical benefit of capping
insulin at $35 a month.
Importantly, the budget provides a historic $46.1 billion
to address the overdose crisis. This funding will go toward
efforts to get people like--to get people the evidence-based
care they need, reduce the supply of illicit drugs like
fentanyl, and go after drug traffickers to stop overdose
deaths.
The President's budget outlines a strategy to use over
$13.8 billion to improve our Nation's mental health, including
increasing the availability of crisis care and achieving full
parity, which we have struggled, with between physical and
mental healthcare coverage.
The budget also invests $50.5 billion in pandemic
preparedness, including $20 billion in mandatory funding to
prevent and address current and emerging public health threats.
Finally, President Biden has proposed increasing the
Medicare tax rate to 5 percent for those making over $400,000 a
year and closing loopholes. These reforms will make the
Medicare trust fund solvent beyond 2050 to ensure older
Americans can really retire with dignity and security.
Instead of looking toward the future, I--what I hear--the
House Republican leadership reportedly want to cut 2024
discretionary spending back to the 2022 level. These cuts would
decrease access to the essential government functions each of
our constituents rely on.
So I look forward to hearing from you--we all do--Mr.
Secretary, both on the impact of these cuts and working with
you and your team to build on the progress of the last 2 years
to improve our Nation's health and our overall well-being. When
people are healthy, we have a stronger nation. So we have a
responsibility to keep investing in that.
So thank you for what will be, I am sure, your instructive
testimony.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Eshoo follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Ms. Eshoo. And I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Guthrie. Thank you. The gentlelady yields back. The
Chair now recognizes the chair of the full committee, Chair
Rodgers, for 5 minutes for an opening statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, A
REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF WASHINGTON

Mrs. Rodgers. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Today's hearing on
the President's budget for the Department of Health and Human
Services comes at a time when we need to return hope and
optimism to America again so people can leave--live fuller,
happier, and healthier lives.
We need to come together to stop the fentanyl crisis and
save lives.
We need to rein out-of-control government spending to
reverse President Biden's inflation crisis, so people can
afford healthcare.
We need to help build and support strong communities so
people are less lonely, less anxious, and restore a sense of
purpose and belonging for our children.
There must be accountability from the administration, too,
for too many ways that they have made the crisis worse,
especially the authoritarian COVID-19 policies.
Secretary Becerra, the President's budget should reflect
the solutions we need to make people's lives better.
Unfortunately, that is not what we are seeing.
Regarding fentanyl, as Mr. Guthrie said, the President's
budget only mentions this twice. It is unacceptable, given more
people are dying from fentanyl poisoning in America, the
number-1 killer of 18 to 45-year-olds.
This committee has heard from several parents, such as
Molly Cain, who emphasize their children are not suffering from
a substance use disorder, but that their teenager purchased a
pill off of Snapchat or bought cocaine, not knowing it was
laced with fentanyl, and died. Your budget request for
increased funding for medication-assisted treatment, while
important, doesn't seem like it would have prevented these
individuals from dying from fentanyl poisoning. This is perhaps
the greatest threat facing our communities. But your budget
doesn't reflect all aspects of the terrifying reality of this
crisis.
Regarding healthcare cost, this committee came together
just yesterday in a bipartisan way to explore ways to lower
healthcare costs with more price transparency and more
competition. This is a top priority for those we serve, yet
your budget says nothing regarding bipartisan efforts to
implement and enforce the transparency efforts brought forth
during the Trump administration.
In addition to lowering cost, this administration needs to
take restoring trust in public health agencies more seriously.
The buck stops with you. You oversee our public health and
preparedness policies under CDC and NIH. As I have said, these
agencies need to do the hard work of restoring trust with the
American people and comply with our oversight before they ask
for more money and more authority.
The NIH, in many cases, has failed to be a steward of the
American taxpayer dollars or ensure lab safety. It has
stonewalled this committee's request for information that we
are constitutionally entitled to, and it refuses to completely
answer questions about what sort of risky gain-of-function
research it may fund or what role the National Science Advisory
Board for Biosecurity is playing to keep Americans safe.
Similarly, the CDC has created a crisis of confidence, so
much so that the CDC Director Walensky has undertaken a full-
scale reevaluation and reorganization of the agency. This is
because its guidance was used to justify mandates that have
more parents now questioning routine vaccination. Its guidance,
influenced by teachers unions, kept schools closed to justify
mask mandates on kids. We know these weren't decisions based
upon the best science, data. Now our children are paying the
price academically, physically, emotionally. Like NIH, the CDC
does not need more authority. It needs robust oversight.
Secretary Becerra, let me be clear: We expect better. The
American people are eager for a brighter future. We expect a
high degree of cooperation from you on policies that will help
improve their health and their quality of life. And I hope that
you leave today with a greater sense of the urgency, the
urgency that I feel and every member of this committee feels to
address these problems, and do it in a bipartisan fashion.
We are committed to bringing the Republicans and Democrats
together, together to address fentanyl, together to address the
need for public health--trust in our public health agencies
like CDC and NIH, and together, as we did yesterday, on price
transparency that would really help restore the doctor-patient
relationship and bring down the cost of healthcare. That is our
goal. We are committed to doing it together, and we thank you
for being here today, and there is more to come. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mrs. Rodgers follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Guthrie. Thank you. The gentlelady yields back. The
Chair now recognizes the ranking member of the full committee,
the gentleman from New Jersey, Rep. Pallone, for 5 minutes.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. FRANK PALLONE, Jr., A REPRESENTATIVE
IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF NEW JERSEY

Mr. Pallone. Thank you, Chairman Guthrie. I want to thank
Secretary Becerra for being with us today to discuss the
President's fiscal year 2024 budget request for Department of
Health and Human Services.
But I have to start out by saying I hear my GOP colleagues
criticize the President's budget, but they don't have one. They
don't have one. There is all--every reason to believe that we
are never going to see one from them. And, you know, they
talk--they criticize the fact that--they talk about Alzheimer's
research, fentanyl, price transparency. Well, why don't you go
to the House Republican leadership and say that they should put
a budget together that has more money for Alzheimer's research
or more money for fentanyl enforcement or price transparency?
I mean, I have to say, I don't really think you should be
criticizing something without an alternative. And there isn't
one. And there's a lot of reasons there isn't going to be one.
So thank you for being here and defending something that
exists. And if the criticism is that they don't like something
that is in it, then let--you know, I know you are not going to
do that, but I am going to say, well then, let us see what you
have as an alternative, Republicans, which we're not seeing.
Let me just say--I don't want to repeat all the great
things that the Biden administration and congressional
Democrats delivered for the people in the last year. But thanks
to the--but I am going to say a few things. Thanks to the
Inflation Reduction Act, we finally allowed Medicare to
negotiate prescription drug prices. We have the Medicare--the
cap on insulin. We built on the ACA. We have now 16.5 million
Americans who signed up for coverage through the ACA
marketplaces. Expanded subsidies are driving costs down. An
average family is saving $2,400 a year in premiums.
The President's budget also increases the number of drugs
Medicare selects for negotiation, extends the $35 monthly cap
for insulin to people with private insurance, and makes
permanent the ACA-enhanced premium subsidies. So this
administration is addressing the affordability issue, which is
so crucial to the--to Americans.
The Biden budget also proposes to finally ensure that all
low-income individuals have access to the benefits and
protections of Medicaid, regardless of the political decisions
made by the Governors and legislatures. North Carolina just
became the latest State to recognize that Medicaid expansion is
not only morally necessary but also a sound economic decision.
And I am also pleased to see that the budget would expand
access to home- and community-based services, because if people
stay at home and out of hospitals and out of nursing homes, we
save money.
The budget would also require all States to provide
Medicaid coverage to all low-income women for 12 months
postpartum. We have a maternal mortality crisis. We need to do
that.
There is a lot of progress in other areas, such as
enhancing public health programs. I am encouraged to see that
the budget prioritizes funding for important public health and
workforce programs. It invests in pandemic preparedness and
biodefense to ensure that we are prepared for future
challenges.
Now, the Biden administration lays all this out, but I
don't know what the other side is doing because they have no
budget. But there is a leading Republican proposal that would
cut trillions of dollars from Medicaid, including repealing
Medicaid expansion. It would rip away health insurance from 17
million people by doing that. And these proposed Medicaid cuts
are going to hurt everybody.
The Republicans have also talked about eliminating the ACA
expanded tax credits and subsidies, and more people would then
be uninsured.
Now, let me explain. The burden on the healthcare system
when States don't expand Medicaid or when the Federal
Government ACA subsidies are cut is severe. Red States that
have not expanded Medicaid are seeing their hospitals starved
for funding because of the number of patients receiving
uncompensated care. Medicaid isn't just important to cities. It
is important to hospitals and nursing homes or community health
centers in rural areas, in Republican districts.
So all these things that we are hearing--we don't really
know if they are--you know, what they are doing because there
is no budget. But all the things that we are hearing are going
to hurt that they want to cut: Medicaid in particular, ACA. So
these are going to starve the healthcare system.
And I know that, you know, on the one hand we hear the
Republicans say, ``Oh, we have to reduce spending,'' but then
on the other hand they talk about more spending for other
things. So unless I actually see something as what the
administration has proposed that really reduces the deficit and
expands coverage and makes things more affordable, I have no
reason that a Republican proposal would accomplish any of those
things. And I fear, from what I hear, that, in fact, it does
the opposite, if it ever--if we ever even see it.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Pallone follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Pallone. So thank you again for being here.
And I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Guthrie. The gentleman yields back.
The Chair reminds Members that, pursuant to committee
rules, all Members' opening statements will be made part of the
record.
Are there further opening statements?
The Chair recognizes Dr. Burgess for 3 minutes for an
opening statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. MICHAEL C. BURGESS, A REPRESENTATIVE
IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF TEXAS

Mr. Burgess. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And Mr. Secretary, thank you for being here this morning.
Several times since the beginning of this year I have reached
out to your office, hoping that we could get a chance to talk
about more than the things I can discuss in the 5-minute
question period. Unfortunately, I have not been able to secure
such a meeting. The comment from your office is you are
unavailable for the foreseeable future. I hope that we can, in
fact, get together at some point and talk about a number of
these things, because they are absolutely critical.
One of the things that has come up over and over again in
my world is what is happening to--it is one thing to have
coverage, but if you have got no one to deliver the care it
becomes extremely problematic. So some of the things that are
happening to our providers, to our doctors based on
reimbursement, is really going to set us up for big-time
failure down the road, regardless of the state of coverage.
So price-setting provisions in the Inflation Reduction Act,
physicians are going to see a reimbursement cut as the maximum
fair price replaces the average sales price in Part B. Part B-
administered medicines primarily affect--affecting oncologists,
neurologists, rheumatologists, infused drugs that are given in
a doctor's office. Those reimbursement rates are going to be
significantly cut under the maximum fair price. No one really
knows what that is. It is actually set by you, which is another
reason I would very much like to have a conversation about it.
But at a time when the country is facing physician
shortages, policies that result in physicians being reimbursed
less for the care they are already giving, that is not going to
lead to appropriate physician interaction.
I don't know that this administration realizes the
circumstances that doctors are facing every day. It is not just
that they have seen reimbursement cuts year over year over
year. It is now that they have got 6, 8, 9 percent inflation to
deal with. They still have to pay their office staffs. They
still have to pay their rent. Their electricity bills are going
up. The cost of living for them is going up, and they simply
cannot afford to stay in practice.
So what happens is doctors will say, ``I cannot afford to
see a Medicare patient.'' That is a tragedy. And then, of
course, some doctors are simply saying, ``This has become too
difficult. The Government has made the practice of medicine too
hard, and I am going to stop.'' And that is a real tragedy. We
are in a position in this country where we cannot afford to
lose additional providers.
So again, the policies of the administration, policies of
your agency, are actually adding to this. So at the end of the
day, I hope that you will continue to engage with the physician
community on this. I hope you and I will be able to have
further conversations on this. And beyond that, I look forward
to today's conversation.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Burgess follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Burgess. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Guthrie. The gentleman yields back. Anybody on the
Democratic side?
The Chair recognizes Mr. Cardenas from California for 3
minutes.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. TONY CARDENAS, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA

Mr. Cardenas. I am glad we have the opportunity to discuss
these important issues on this committee today, and I want to
thank you, Chairman, and the ranking member, as well. I want to
welcome the opportunity for us to have a nice, honest, robust
discussion with Secretary Becerra, and I just look forward for
us to getting to the real issues.
It sounds like some people think that we are going to solve
all the world's problems in this hearing, and that is not going
to happen. But we are going to cover some good ground, and
hopefully we can have some robust, honest discussions.
Mr. Ruiz. Yield to me.
Mr. Cardenas. I will yield to Dr. Ruiz.
Mr. Ruiz. Yes, I appreciate the moment. The pandemic was
mentioned, and I think it is important to highlight the
differences that occurred during the Trump administration and
the Biden administration.
We definitely need to have a comprehensive approach to
examining actions taken in the earliest days of the public
health crisis. From the beginning, President Trump and his
administration did not act with the urgency needed to reduce
transmission, communicate honestly with the American people,
and equip our schools with the resources they needed. Instead
of working to efficiently manufacture PPE, scale up testing,
promote basic public health measures like masking and social
distancing, President Trump chose to politicize this virus,
calling it a hoax and downplaying its severity, saying it would
go away like the flu.
But as the coronavirus reached pandemic proportion, public
officials of all political persuasions had to act to suspend
in-person learning, and social distancing, and promoting the
mask wearing. And so President Biden took a different approach:
swift action to develop evidence-based guidance for schools and
work and throughout our society, and all hands on deck, and to
get schools back safely and responsibly, and the results speak
for themselves.
For example, in schools alone, 1 year after President Biden
was sworn into office, our efforts more than doubled the number
of schools open for full-time, in-person learning to 95
percent. And schools didn't just reopen, they stayed open.
Today more than 99 percent of schools in the United States have
safely and responsibly reopened for in-person learning. This is
a direct result of the American Rescue Plan's targeted
investments in childhood education to keep students healthy and
safe while they learn.
In fact, key funding from the American Rescue Plan is
already at work--since schools were mentioned--rebuilding
schools' crumbling infrastructure, upgrading their ventilation
systems, and getting students the resources they need. And so
this is a key component that I know that the all-hands-on-deck
government response by President Biden and oftentimes led by
Secretary Xavier Becerra with the equity focus to make sure
that the hardest hit, the hardest-to-reach communities were
front and center to do the outreach necessary to save lives,
reduce transmission was a key component of why we are back to
where we are now.
And so, with that, I applaud the administration. There is a
lot of work to do. There is--a lot of the pandemic experience
weighs heavy on a lot of people's experiences, and we need to
help our children now with solutions.
And with that, I yield back my time----
Mr. Cardenas. I yield back. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Guthrie. The gentleman yields back. Any other opening
statements on the Republican side?
Any further on the Democrat side?
Seeing none, our witness today is the Honorable Xavier
Becerra, Secretary of Health and--Department of Health and
Human Services.
I appreciate you being here. I know you understand the
lighting system, so I won't explain that.
We will now recognize you for 5 minutes for your opening
statement.

STATEMENT OF XAVIER BECERRA, SECRETARY, DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH
AND HUMAN SERVICES

Mr. Becerra. Chairman Guthrie, Ranking Member Eshoo,
Chairwoman Rodgers, and to Ranking Member Pallone, and to all
the members of this committee, thank you for the invitation.
A lot has happened in a year since I last spoke to you
about budgets. More than 16 million Americans have secured --
and Congresswoman Eshoo, 16.4 million; we added that 0.4
instead of 0.3--16.4 million Americans have secured health
insurance through the Affordable Care marketplaces. That is, as
you have heard, an all-time high. Altogether, more than 300
million Americans today now carry insurance to cover their
healthcare. That, too, is a historic high.
The President's new lower-cost prescription drug law has
capped insulin at $35 per month and made preventative vaccines
like the flu, COVID, shingles, which I hear about a lot,
available for free under Medicare. Moving forward, this new law
gives us the right to finally negotiate lower prescription drug
prices for Americans.
To cap it off, the Biden-Harris administration has safely
and effectively executed the largest adult vaccination program
in U.S. history, achieving nearly 700 million shots in arms
during the COVID pandemic without charge.
The FY 2024 budget proposes $144 billion in discretionary
funding and $1.7 trillion in mandatory funding for HHS. It
positions us to tackle the urgent challenges we face, including
a growing behavioral health crisis and future public health
threats.
It also funds operations and mission-critical
infrastructure needed to build a healthier America, moving the
Nation from an illness-care system to a wellness-care system.
An illness-care system leaves our most vulnerable families
behind. A wellness-care system invests in providing the full
spectrum of healthcare to all Americans.
Illness care allows the price of prescription drugs to
skyrocket. Wellness care starts by prescribing fruits,
vegetables, and exercise. It treats food as medicine.
Illness care requires you to get a referral by your family
physician to see a specialist for mental health services.
Wellness care, well, it lets you get mental healthcare the
minute you walk through the door of your family physician's
office.
Illness care forces hard-working Americans to deplete their
life savings in order to get long-term care that they need.
Wellness care invests early in long-term care, like in-home
care, so our older adults and Americans with disabilities can
thrive at home and in their communities.
Our budget, the President's budget, invests in wellness
care. It includes funding for health centers, the National
Health Service Corps, teaching health centers, and other areas
that provide critical support to Americans. And it should
continue without interruption.
We also invest more than $330 billion to prepare us for the
next COVID or public health crisis, including $1 billion to
replenish our Nation's Strategic National Stockpile.
On behavioral health, too many of our loved ones are dying
from suicide or overdose. So we increase access to crisis care,
we grow the behavioral health workforce, and we beef up
substance use services.
We are also gearing up to handle more than 6 million
additional contacts from people who are experiencing mental
health crisis. We do that through 9-8-8, the three-digit
suicide prevention lifeline we stood up last year.
This budget covers 2 million adults left out of Medicaid by
their home States and extends tax credits that make healthcare
more affordable for millions of Americans.
It would also ensure that expanded postpartum Medicaid
coverage for a new mom and her baby is here to stay.
The President's budget not only strengthens Medicare for
our--today's seniors, but protects and strengthens it for the
next generation.
We also take care of our family members in this budget we--
by investing $600 billion in child care and preschool programs
and $150 billion to strengthen Medicaid home and community-
based services.
This budget funds Cancer Moonshot and ARPA-H. It invests in
title 10 family planning programs so essential to so many of
our families. And it delivers on commitments made as part of
the National Strategy for Hunger, Nutrition, and Health.
And important to me as a former attorney general, it
bolsters our healthcare fraud and abuse detection and
enforcement work.
Finally, the President's budget honors our responsibilities
to Indian country, with more than $2 billion in new resources
in 2024.
This budget reflects the President's values. It reflects
our values and commitments. It helps begin to move from a
nation focused on illness care to one about wellness care. And
most importantly, it ensures health and wellness are within
reach for all Americans.
On behalf of the women and men of HHS, we look forward to
working with you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Becerra follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Becerra. And with that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Guthrie. Thank you. The gentleman yields back. We will
now move to questions.
And before we get started, to respect the Secretary's
time--I think at 1:00 you have a hard stop--and to respect our
Members--everybody have the opportunity to ask a question--at 5
minutes I am going to gavel. So everybody understand--don't ask
your question with 3 seconds left, because we are going to
respect everybody's time to move forward.
So having said that, we will get started now, and I will
recognize myself for 5 minutes.
So, Mr. Secretary, last year when you were here we talked
about scheduling fentanyl, and you said, and I quote, ``I
wouldn't''--I asked you if you were for permanently scheduling
fentanyl analogues, and you said, ``I wouldn't get ahead of the
agencies that actually do the science.''
So the Drug Enforcement Agency has testified before this
committee. We had our hearing, and they said their number-one
priority this session is scheduling of illicit fentanyl, making
it permanent scheduling, their number-one legislative priority.
Do you agree with the DEA that this should finally--we should
finally permanently schedule fentanyl-related substances as
schedule I drugs?
Mr. Becerra. The FDA has spoken on this. And yes, we do
want to see it scheduled. We don't want to have to continue to
see Congress reauthorize this. And so we hope that we will be
able to work with you on that----
Mr. Guthrie. And subject to mandatory minimums?
Mr. Becerra. Well, that is where we can have that
conversation, because we are interested in discussing a
comprehensive approach on how we deal with fentanyl and drug
overdose.
Mr. Guthrie. We want to as well, but I just don't
understand why somebody selling a derivative of fentanyl should
be treated less than somebody selling fentanyl. I can't
understand that.
Mr. Becerra. I--we can discuss----
Mr. Guthrie. I--no, go ahead.
Mr. Becerra. Yes, and the Department of Justice would be
more than willing, I think, to discuss some of these issues
about mandatory sentencing and mandatory minimums.
What I can tell you is from HHS's perspective. What we need
to do is make sure we are helping do the research that will
help us find the cures, the treatments that are necessary.
You probably heard the news today that the FDA has now
announced that Narcan will now be provided over the counter, so
any consumer can go in and purchase it. That will save lives.
So we are doing the things that will help keep people alive,
and we look forward to working with you on a comprehensive
approach.
Mr. Guthrie. Well, thanks. Thanks. I want to move to the
IRA.
On--we had H.R. 19, which--it wasn't bipartisan, I won't
say, but every provision in it had a bipartisan solution,
because we all want lower drug prices. We had a hearing
yesterday on drug--on healthcare costs. We want to deal with
it.
When the IRA passed last year, one of our main concerns was
the innovation, and CBO said that it would lead to 15 fewer
cures over the next 30 years in a modest estimate compared to
others. But the official CBO score--and we have already seen
examples, I think, of a couple of--in 4 months already--drugs
in phase one and phase three, I believe, an eye--a rare eye
disease, and also a cancer drug have an R&D cut.
And so our concern--do you believe that--so my question is,
do you believe that CMS should consider the divestment in
certain therapies that could eventually lead to the development
of cheaper alternatives as the agency makes decisions on
setting the price of certain therapies?
Mr. Becerra. And CMS will be having further conversations
with the Hill on exactly how we are going to move forward on
the price negotiation.
What I think you are going to find is that they are going
to try to move towards a more competitive system that allows us
to get the best price for those drugs but not let drug
companies gouge the American consumer. There is no reason why
we should continue to see Americans paying 2 to 3 times more
for drugs here in America, when those same drugs are sold in
other parts of the world for so much less.
Mr. Guthrie. We agree. That is why we want to expose the
price that people pay, the price it takes to make it, the price
that goes to the system. So we agree on that.
But we are concerned about--and we have already heard that
there are big pharmaceutical companies--and people point out
they have made billions of dollars over the last couple of
years, and we are not here defending that.
What I am saying, though, most innovation comes from small
businesses, a lot of them from Stanford in California, small
people who make--start businesses, they are researchers and
they start their own businesses, and they really need venture
capital to move forward. I am not talking about a handful of
pharmaceutical companies. They really come up with our--moving
forward.
And so they have already talked to us and said the venture
capital is concerned about the 13-year, 9-year--the small
molecule and the other, and now you are talking about going to
5, and expanding more drugs.
So when you were talking about that in your discussion in
making this proposal, did the idea of lack of innovation --we
had a hearing on it last year, and people--and we have had
people in this committee say, ``We are willing to trade some
innovation for cheaper prices.'' Did you all discuss the lack
of innovation when you had these hearings?
Mr. Becerra. Mr. Chairman, without a doubt. Everyone has
discussed innovation. Everyone wants to make sure that we have
a competitive industry. Everyone wants to make sure that we
have a domestic production of the best drugs that the world can
produce. And so all of that is part of this process.
The legislation that passed actually provides a safe harbor
for a lot of those innovative companies so they can continue
forward. It makes sure that we don't take on every particular
prescription drug for price negotiation right away. And what we
are going to try to do is make sure that not only do we
stimulate more innovation and more production, but we do it in
a way that keeps the price fair so that there is still a profit
for the company producing the drug. They deserve to earn a
profit.
But gouging is not acceptable. And--would agree that there
is gouging going on. And that was the purpose of this new
prescription drug law, to lower the price of those prescription
drugs that we know--there is no reason why we couldn't have had
insulin for $35 a month 10 years ago, 20 years----
Mr. Guthrie. We just have to expose the price. You are
right. So I am calling myself down, I guess, on that.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Guthrie. I yield back to myself, and my time is
expired. I recognize the gentlelady from California for 5
minutes.
Ms. Eshoo. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And not to mention the
games that are played with patents by the drug industry. I just
have to throw that in there.
It is great to see you here, Mr. Secretary. Yesterday our
subcommittee held an important bipartisan hearing on
transparency in healthcare. It has been mentioned. Our expert
witnesses testified on the importance of shedding light on
fraud, on waste, on abuse that really poisons the healthcare
industry and hurts patients. So based on their remarks, I think
that--I assume that all of my colleagues should be able to
support your agency's actions to audit Medicare Advantage plans
to recover overpayments.
Now, I remember years and years and years ago at this
committee on the issue of waste and fraud that there were
individuals whose cases had been adjudicated. They were on
their way to prison. This was the private sector ripping off
the public sector in Medicare. It was billions and billions of
dollars. And they testified as to how they did that. It was so
highly instructive, obviously, I still recall it very well
today.
So you mentioned in your testimony that you are doing
audits to save taxpayer dollars. There are ads on TV saying
that President Biden is cutting payments to Medicare. Can you
set the record straight on this, and how much you estimate
those audits are going to cost?
I know it is something in the--there is money in your
budget for that.
Mr. Becerra. Congresswoman, thank you for the question.
The reason we are doing the audits is because now we have
collected enough data to actually show us how some of this--the
money that we provide, taxpayer money, in Medicare is being
spent. And what we are finding is that there is a lot of
overbilling. And we are trying to recoup that money, because
when we recoup it we put more money into the Medicare program
to put back into the services and benefits that Medicare
beneficiaries will receive.
The program will cost us a fraction of the billions of
dollars that we will recoup in these audits. And so we are
hoping to move forward. But the difficulty we have is that
there are millions being spent to date--tens of millions of
dollars are being spent to date on these commercials,
deceptively speaking to Medicare beneficiaries--scaring them,
quite honestly--because there are billions at stake. And that
is a pretty wise investment, if you think about it. They are
trying to save billions of dollars in returning money to the
Medicare program, and it is only going to cost them some
millions of dollars in commercials.
Ms. Eshoo. Yes. So in other words, let's be for fraud and
abuse because it is my plan. Hell of a line.
Mr. Becerra. Yes. We are going to continue forward, and----
Ms. Eshoo. Good, good.
Mr. Becerra. We have to.
Ms. Eshoo. I am with you 1,000 percent on that.
It has been reported that the House Republican leadership
plans to cap 2024--fiscal year 2024 discretionary spending.
What I would like to know is, how many fewer grants would that
mean that NIH would be able to support?
Mr. Becerra. Congresswoman, we estimate that if some of
these proposed cuts--and again, we have not seen the budget,
but what we have heard are some of the proposed cuts--NIH
probably would face a cut of about, well, billions that would
cost us about 5,000 grants that are done by NIH researchers.
Ms. Eshoo. Five thousand NIH grants?
Mr. Becerra. Five thousand.
Ms. Eshoo. Would that include funding for Alzheimer's, for
instance?
Mr. Becerra. It could include Alzheimer's, cures for
different diseases. The research that is being done by NIH is
to fund and find cures for diseases. So some 5,000 grants would
probably have to be rescinded or not put out.
Ms. Eshoo. You know, this debate about how much money--and
it is a worthy debate, it is a very important one--I would link
the dollars to keep building on the progress that the United
States of America continues to make. And when you pull back, it
pulls back on the progress.
So this is not just an accounting exercise, this is about
our collective society and what kind of a--you know, what the
progress is, and what we need to invest in.
Bravo on ARPA-H. I am thrilled. That was a bipartisan
effort here, and I am glad they are up and running and doing
business.
Mr. Guthrie. The----
Ms. Eshoo. Thank you.
Mr. Guthrie. The gentlelady's time is expired. The Chair
now recognizes Dr. Burgess from Texas for 5 minutes for
questions.
Mr. Burgess. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Again, Mr. Secretary, welcome. Good morning. Yes, ARPA-H,
important. I hope you will look favorably on the State of Texas
to locate it at an area that has already proven an ability to
provide what you are looking for with some of the work the
State has done on cancer prevention and research.
So you have had a busy week, and you have been to a fair
number of committees, both on this side of the Hill and the
other side of the Hill. There seems to be a narrative emerging
that HHS is attempting to convince Congress that there has been
a much higher volume of claims under the No Surprises Act, a
higher volume of claims submitted for independent dispute
resolution than anyone could have predicted.
So your responses to Senator Harris--I am sorry, Dr. Harris
of Maryland, Senator Bennet from Colorado, and Dr. Wenstrup of
Ohio, and you cited the sheer volume of claims and asserted
that some were frivolous, implying that providers are not
acting in good faith. Now I have providers calling me literally
every day and stating that they are winning much more often
than they lose during the arbitration process. Their win rate
is over 75 percent. Unfortunately, because of the HHS backlog,
only 3 percent of the submissions have made it through the
process.
So what is the deal here? Are the claims that are being
submitted really not actually necessary? And it is hard to
square that with the fact that so many are decided in favor of
the intervener.
Mr. Becerra. And Congressman, thank you for asking the
question, because I am going to connect the final dots to the--
what you just said.
Those physicians who are having success are, as you said,
they are going to start to see a slowdown in the adjudication
of those claims. The reason they are going to see a slowdown is
because neither you nor I or anyone who actually had the wisdom
to propose and enact the No Surprises Act believed that we were
going to have the volume of submissions of claims.
I guarantee you, you did not believe that in the first 8
months we would have 164,000 claims submitted.
Mr. Burgess. Yes. If I could just reclaim my time, first
off, I want to point out I voted against the No Surprises Act
because I was worried about this exact thing.
But when Texas--Texas, as you know, had their own version
of the No Surprises Act that was passed in the State of Texas.
The first year they saw 45,000 claims in the first year. In the
first 6 months of 2021, the very 6 months where you all were
beginning to implement the No Surprises Act at the agency, they
had another 50,000 claims.
And, Mr. Chairman, I am going to ask that the Texas Senate
bill--evaluation of the Texas Department of Insurance be
inserted for the record.
Mr. Guthrie. So ordered.
[The information appears at the conclusion of the hearing.]
Mr. Burgess. But your Department estimated--so that is
100,000 claims, basically, in the first year. And your
Department estimated the annual number of submissions would be
17,000 nationwide for the whole year. I mean, did you not look
at the data that had already been accumulated in a single State
that had implemented a similar law in the year and a half
before yours started?
I mean, I can only draw the conclusion that you didn't look
at the data that was available. And then to turn around and
blame providers for your Department not being prepared for the
volume of claims--it just doesn't square with me.
And for everything I have heard so far this week, I believe
that to the extent that this process is a failure, it is a
failure because of poor planning on the part of HHS and
mismanagement of the law passed by Congress. So instead of
blaming providers for the Department's mistakes, I hope going
forward we can focus on resolving the backlog. When 75 percent
are decided in favor of the person who brought the claim, but 3
percent are getting through, we got a real problem. And again,
it comes back to keeping doctors involved.
Let me just shift gears and ask you a question, because it
came up in other testimony. You stated you were unfamiliar with
statistics reported by The New York Times that HHS has been
able to contact over 85,000 unaccompanied alien children who
have been released from HHS custody. Are you now familiar with
that 85,000 figure? And are you aware of where it--from where
it comes?
Mr. Becerra. Congressman, I am aware of where it comes. It
is not a statistic. It is a number that New York Times came up
with.
Mr. Burgess. But the fact remains there are children that
you cannot identify where they are that have gone through your
system. And it seems to be the throughput is the critical
thing, not the child. And that is bothersome to a lot of us on
this committee.
Mr. Becerra. No, see, there is a misunderstanding about
what we are supposed to do, and what we are then able to do
once a child is placed.
If you take a look at the law that was passed by Congress,
Congress gave HHS the responsibility, the authority to provide
the custody and care of a unaccompanied child----
Mr. Guthrie. I know you want to answer. We are out of time.
I need to move----
Mr. Burgess. I look forward to your answer.
Mr. Becerra. I look forward to clarify the
misunderstanding. Maybe I will have a chance later on.
Mr. Guthrie. Absolutely.
Mr. Burgess. I will submit that to you in writing, because
it is important.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Guthrie. Mr. Sarbanes, you are recognized for 5 minutes
for questions.
Mr. Sarbanes. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Secretary Becerra, welcome. As you know, a strong, well-
trained workforce is critical to ensuring a high-quality
healthcare delivery system that can deliver all the necessary
care for all patients today and be prepared for future public
health crises.
While nearly every industry is facing workforce challenges
across the country, I want to focus today on how President
Biden's budget addresses those faced by the healthcare
workforce. According to HRSA's most recent workforce estimates,
current demand for healthcare providers, especially primary
care physicians and mental and behavioral health providers, far
outpaces supply. And without meaningful action to turn the
tide, this gap is only projected to widen over the next decade.
We have already seen how shortages at every level can
impact access to care for individuals in Maryland. For example,
we are facing long emergency room wait times and a mental and
behavioral healthcare crisis that is particularly acute for
pediatric patients. While these are complex problems that
require comprehensive solutions, a key part of those solutions
is addressing shortages in primary mental health and skilled
nursing care, so that every patient can access the level of
care they need at the time they need it most.
The President's budget certainly reflects an understanding
of the importance of these investments in a healthcare
workforce, and would provide robust funding for programs that
have a proven track record of strengthening our healthcare
provider pipeline and delivery system.
For example, the budget includes, as you know, $2.7 billion
for HRSA's workforce programs, including a $548 million
increase in funding for the National Health Services Corps,
additional resources for graduate medical education and other
training programs, and $28 million for a new program to address
healthcare workforce shortages.
Mr. Secretary, can you speak a bit more about these
investments, particularly the new program to address workforce
challenges, and how they will work together to build a stronger
provider base that can meet the needs of every community?
Mr. Becerra. Congressman, thank you for the question, and
thank you for championing the ability for Americans to stay in
the healthcare workforce and to increase the numbers.
We are doing what we can in the budget to actually support
the--an increase in our workforce, whether it is the healthcare
workforce or, as you see in the President's budget, for the
child care workforce, because we know that the needs are dire.
What we also are trying to do is figure out how to best
direct the next generation of healthcare workers. So our
National Center for Health Care Workforce Analysis is trying to
collect some of that information, the data that will tell us
where the shortages are, not just geographically but by
profession. And so we are going to do everything we can to give
States the best guidance because they are the ones that
ultimately certify and license individuals, and we want them to
know where their needs will be, coming into the future.
Mr. Sarbanes. Thank you very much. And I appreciate you
talking about the data, the importance of collecting
information on where the shortages are. That can inform
recommendations about a national policy to address shortages
within the healthcare workforce.
Congressman Blunt Rochester and I again have led a letter
this year to the House Appropriations Committee requesting $11
million for the National Center on Health Workforce Analysis
that you mentioned for fiscal year 2024. And, as you know, that
center releases a lot of really critical information about the
supply-and-demand challenges. And increasing its funding is, I
think, very critical to help this committee to help your
Department and agency make the smartest decisions we can
possibly make when it comes to investing in our healthcare
workforce.
Building upon the American Rescue Plan and the Inflation
Reduction Act's historic reforms to lower healthcare costs for
Americans, we have got to look at this workforce shortage. Let
me freestyle a little bit with you here right now a bit more on
this. Do you think we could put together a kind of broad
national health workforce strategy that brings various partners
together who may not have collaborated previously?
For example, we look in Maryland at these shortages around
nursing. We know that we even are lacking instructors for
nursing programs. So we have got some community colleges that
provide nursing. They are now going to hospitals and saying,
``Can you give us some of your nursing supervisors on a part-
time basis to come in and be instructors?'' All hands on deck.
What can that look like as a national policy from your
perspective in the healthcare arena?
Mr. Becerra. Congressman, we are already looking at it.
HRSA is undertaking a number of efforts. They are talking to
States and those in the profession about best practices. We are
also using SAMHSA----
Mr. Guthrie. You are going to have to wrap up. I am sorry.
We are trying to keep your--on time, so our Members can ask
questions.
Mr. Sarbanes. We will continue the conversation.
Mr. Guthrie. I gaveled myself down, so I am going to --
Chair McMorris Rodgers, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mrs. Rodgers. Thank you.
Mr. Secretary, last week this committee advanced my bill,
the Protecting Health Care for All Patients Act, which would
ban QALYs and other similar measures in Federal healthcare
programs. And I am grateful for the hard work of your team to
modify the bill language to resolve all outstanding issues and
help us towards a shared goal of removing discrimination in
Federal health programs.
Prohibitions on QALYs and other similar measures already
exist in Medicare and the Inflation Reduction Act. Since we
already have an additional ban in place for Medicare, do you
think it would be appropriate to ban these measures in all
other Federal care programs like Medicaid?
Mr. Becerra. Madam Chair, can--ban what?
Mrs. Rodgers. QALYs.
Mr. Becerra. Oh, I know that we already have them banned in
Medicare. We do not use them.
Mrs. Rodgers. Thank you.
Mr. Becerra. And I believe that there is an----
Mrs. Rodgers. Thank you. I am going to take back--
reclaiming my time--I have a lot to get through here.
Some questions were raised about Equal Value Life Years
Gained. Do you view the Equal Value Life Years Gained metric as
discriminatory?
Mr. Becerra. Congresswoman, we don't use those kinds of
measures.
Mrs. Rodgers. OK, thank you.
Mr. Becerra. I am not sure what the reference is to.
Mrs. Rodgers. OK, very good. Thank you. Secretary Becerra,
can you tell me how many additional resources you provided to,
in the words of President Biden's Executive order on promoting
competition, ``support existing price transparency initiatives
for hospitals, other providers, and insurers''?
Mr. Becerra. I think my answer is probably going to go
longer than you would like, but we are engaged in quite a few
activities with regard to price transparency, and I could go
through a list of them.
I could also tell you how we are trying to engage real soon
with companies on price negotiation to get the best price for
pharmaceutical drugs.
Mrs. Rodgers. OK, just reclaiming my time, if it is a
priority, why has there only been 2 penalties issued to
hospitals in more than 2 years, despite numerous academic
third-party studies, your own agency demonstrating significant
noncompliance?
Mr. Becerra. Are you talking about the price--I mean, the--
yes, the price transparency laws that are in effect?
Mrs. Rodgers. Yes.
Mr. Becerra. Madam Chair, as you recognize, that that law
was only implemented recently by this administration. It is
taking a while. The industry has to come forward and come up
with plans on how they are going to show their prices.
Mrs. Rodgers. OK.
Mr. Becerra. It differs by region----
Mrs. Rodgers. OK, thank you, thank you. We are going to go
to work on this, and we are going to work on this together, and
we are going to get it done. OK.
I wanted to move on to Medicare. The administration
recently proposed Medicare Advantage changes that will reduce
risk adjustment payments to plans. You have characterized these
changes as reducing overall overpayments to plans. Do
reductions in these types of Medicare payments constitute a cut
to Medicare?
Mr. Becerra. These insurance companies will get more money
this year than they got last year. That is not a cut.
Mrs. Rodgers. OK, thank you. In my opening statement I
alluded to site-neutral payments, a bipartisan policy that
would reduce Medicare spending in what seniors pay by having
Medicare pay the same for services regardless of location. If
lowering payments to plans isn't a cut, would you characterize
such a policy as a cut to Medicare site-neutral payments?
Mr. Becerra. Obviously, different regions have different
pricing. We have to make sure that what we are doing is doing a
fair evaluation of what the cost of a service or product is----
Mrs. Rodgers. OK.
Mr. Becerra [continuing]. In healthcare services.
Mrs. Rodgers. So thank you, I appreciate that. We found an
area of agreement, I think.
President Biden, Speaker McCarthy, and us were agreeing on
not cutting Medicare. And it appears that we can agree on some
payment reductions that don't constitute cuts. So would you
commit to working with us on bipartisan approaches to address
payments that are higher than they might need to be?
Mr. Becerra. Absolutely.
Mrs. Rodgers. OK, thank you.
Just last week, CDC released 25 newly documented
statistical, numerical errors in its COVID-19 data. Eighty
percent of these errors exaggerated the severity of the COVID-
19 situation. And it is especially concerning that--the impact
that this had on children. Ninety-four percent overstated the
risk to children. In less than 50 percent of these instances
did CDC ever fully correct the error.
So can you speak to this report on errors and commit to
specific actions you will take to ensure that these are
corrected?
Mr. Becerra. The CDC has always attempted to be as
transparent as possible. The information, the data they provide
is essential for----
Mrs. Rodgers. OK.
Mr. Becerra [continuing]. States and our consumers.
Mrs. Rodgers. Thank you. So we will work on that together
too.
And then finally, I just want to close by saying I am
concerned about, you know, on one hand we have the
administration talking a big picture on curing cancers,
fighting Alzheimer's, and yet, unfortunately, we see where the
action contradicts that goal. In an unprecedented action to
restrict Medicare patients from accessing FDA-approved
treatments across the board, no matter the promising data or
the results, are disappointing to millions of patients with
Alzheimer's and their families who are looking for hope.
And we are going to continue to press you on this, because
when these--when we finally get these breakthrough drugs, we
must make them available to the people that are dependent upon
these drugs to give them hope.
And I will yield back, Mr.----
Mr. Guthrie. Thanks. The gentlelady yields back. The Chair
yields back, and the Chair now recognizes the ranking member
for 5 minutes for asking questions.
Mr. Pallone. Thank you, Chairman Guthrie. Before I get to
my questions, I would just ask unanimous consent to submit to
the record the GAO report from August 2018 titled, ``Rural
Hospital Closures Number and Characteristics of Affected
Hospitals and Contributing Factors,'' which analyzed data from
the North Carolina Rural Health Research Center and CMS and
found, I quote, that ``from 2013 through 2017, rural hospitals
in States that had expanded Medicaid as of April 2018 were less
likely to close, compared with rural hospitals in States that
had not expanded Medicaid.''
And this, of course, goes to my point that not expanding
Medicaid or cuts to Medicaid are really going to starve the
healthcare systems in rural areas, and impact red States in a
major way.
Mr. Guthrie. Without objection, so ordered. 1A\1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ The report has been retained in committee files and is included
in the Documents for the Record at https://docs.house.gov/meetings/IF/
IF14/20230329/115628/HHRG-118-IF14-20230329-SD003.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Mr. Pallone. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I am very proud of
the historic achievements included in the Inflation Reduction
Act, which I know Secretary Becerra mentioned, particularly the
authority for the Secretary to negotiate lower drug prices for
certain high-priced, single-source drugs as well as to cap drug
prices that increase faster than the rate of inflation in
Medicare Part B and D.
Additionally, IRA will cap out-of-pocket costs of Medicare
Part D at 2,000 a year, beginning in 2025, and beneficiaries
are already starting to see the benefits of capping insulin
copayments at $35 a month, as well as no-cost vaccines in Part
D.
So a few questions, if you can answer quickly so I can get
to them all: Why are these--why were these provisions so
important? And are you already seeing the positive impact of
these changes on the ground, such as the savings generated from
the insulin and vaccine provisions, Mr. Secretary?
Mr. Becerra. Mr. Chairman, we are seeing immediate impact.
I can tell you that, every place I have gone since January 1st,
I am approached by a senior who has mentioned how it is
incredible that they paid only $35 for their insulin. And in
December I remember one lady specifically, it was about 112 or
117 dollars that she said she had paid in December. She was so
startled that she went to the insurer and said, ``I think you
undercharged me for the--for my insulin.'' And when they told
her, no, that is the new price, she was ecstatic.
And so that is what I am running into. I have had people
tell me stories about having to pay close to $200 for a vaccine
on shingles. One in three Americans will at some point
experience shingles. You don't want to experience it. And it is
an expensive vaccine for folks on fixed incomes. It can--it
takes a big bite out of their budget. And so to find out that
today, as a result of the new prescription drug law, the
Inflation Reduction Act, they are paying nothing, it is great
for--great news for them.
Mr. Pallone. Now, can you again talk briefly--because I
have one more question after this--can you talk about whether
legislation extending the protections from the Inflation
Reduction Act to the commercial market could be helpful in
achieving the goal of, you know, reducing drug prices as well?
Mr. Becerra. Without a doubt. There is no reason why
Americans should be paying two or three times more for their
prescription drugs than people around the world for the same
drug, and sometimes manufactured in the U.S. And so the ability
to negotiate for a fair price is something that will reward all
Americans.
Mr. Pallone. Now, the budget notes that additional savings
can be achieved by increasing the number of drugs selected for
negotiation. Can you talk about why the administration supports
legislation to increase the number of drugs subject to
negotiation, and how this would both increase savings to
Medicare beneficiaries and improve Medicare solvency?
Mr. Becerra. The legislation--we are thankful for the
legislation--allows us to move forward with the first 10 drugs.
We identified them this year. And by 2024, 2025, negotiate--by
2026 Americans are receiving the fruits of that negotiation and
lower drug costs. And then every year after the first year, it
will increase another 10 to 15.
The President believes that there are more than 10 drugs.
There are, obviously, quite a number of drugs that are
overpriced, and that if we move faster we save Americans more
money, and we also save the Medicare program more money.
Mr. Pallone. Well, thank you, Mr. Secretary. I am very
supportive of this. And I believe that negotiating the price
for more negotiating--negotiation-eligible drugs will allow
more beneficiaries taking high-cost, sole-source drugs to see
the benefits of this law. And I hope to continue to work with
you on these efforts to build on the IRA and expand savings for
seniors as well as those insured in private insurance.
And, you know, I know I keep saying the same thing, but,
you know, you are here talking about something that exists,
which is the President's budget. And I know that, you know,
Republicans are talking about increasing spending, cutting
things. But until they actually give us a budget, you know, it
is very--it is nice that they come here and criticize you and
the President, but there is no alternative for us to see coming
from the other side.
So with that, I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Guthrie. The gentleman yields back. The Chair now
recognizes Mr. Latta for 5 minutes for questions.
Mr. Latta. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thanks for
calling today's hearing.
And, Mr. Secretary, thanks for being with us. I would like
to go back to what the chairman had started in his opening
statements, some questions on fentanyl. My seatmate and friend
from Virginia, we have the HALT Fentanyl Act that would make
sure that--for once and for all, that fentanyl is going to be a
schedule I drug. And I just want to make sure that you are on
board that fentanyl should be a schedule I.
Mr. Becerra. Congressman, as I have said to the chairman
and others, FDA agrees that we need to continue the scheduling
of fentanyl. I leave it to FDA to make those decisions on how
they should be scheduled. And FDA would also say we need a
comprehensive approach when we deal with either fentanyl or
other drugs that are killing Americans.
Mr. Latta. Well, that is important because, again, we had
roundtables and hearings in here. I think it is important to
point out that one of the terms I try not to use anymore is the
word ``overdoses.'' It is poisoning, especially when we are
talking fentanyl. When we look at the over 71,000 people who
died last year in this country because of fentanyl, it is
poisoning. We had one sheriff actually say that when these drug
cartels know what they are putting in these pills and sending
them north, it is not poisoning anymore, it is murder.
And so I would like to just go to a--some statements that
you have, and just ask a couple of questions.
You said NIH will continue to invest over $1.8 billion in
research on opioid misuse, addiction, and pain disorders,
including the Helping to End Addiction Long-Term, HEAL,
Initiative. Now, the question I have is--because again, I am
not sure exactly when this has been put into place and how long
it has been going. But as we see the trend of fentanyl
poisoning and also all drug overdoses and other sorts going up
in this country to about 107,000 in 2022, that--the question
then is that--is this effective?
Because, again, in this committee, because we do have broad
jurisdiction, when we talk about things that's online and drugs
that are coming into this country, we are being told by law
enforcement and the DEA and everyone else that when drugs are
coming across this border, that the cartels are making a
fentanyl-laced pill for a dime that are killing Americans, and
they are making 30 to 40 dollars off each of these pills.
And so, as was pointed out earlier, that when you have 18-
to-45-year-olds as the leading cause of death now is--looking
at the either fentanyl poisoning or some other type of a drug
overdose, are the initiatives of this $1.8 billion being
effective right now?
Mr. Becerra. Congressman, thank you for the question.
I think $1.8 billion is a major investment. If in the
wisdom of this body you wish to give us more resources, I
guarantee you we will make good use of them. But I understand
that there is a conversation about cutting, not increasing on
your side of the aisle. So I hope that what you are----
Mr. Latta. Well, let me ask--because again, we had
testimony from, you know, parents of lost loved ones. And the
question--and the problem is, again, as I said, these pills are
flowing across the border, and then they are getting in on--
through the internet. And pretty soon we can't even track where
they came from.
But when somebody buys one of these pills, a younger
person, they are thinking they are getting, you know, X, Y, Z,
and it turns out a fentanyl-laced pill, what is the Department
doing to warn Americans?
Because again, with that $1.8 billion, you could do a lot
of information out there as to what is going on, warning
people, kids especially, don't buy anything on the internet.
And the reason I bring this up--it has been a few years
ago, but I sponsored the track-and-trace legislation. And what
that legislation did was to make sure, from the time that a
drug was manufactured to the time it was delivered, we would
know every stop that it was--that it wasn't counterfeited or
adulterated along the way. So, you know, that is--and that is,
hopefully, for a prescription drug or something else that is
flowing naturally and legally through, that people know what
they are going to get.
But how--warning people online--that are online today
buying these pills that it is not a counterfeit or a knockoff,
this drug could have--or this pill could have fentanyl in it
that will kill you. And this is the problem, when you see the
numbers going up.
And so that is my question on this, you know--we--on
research and misuse and addiction and pain disorders, but how
are we getting the word out that, people, don't do this?
Mr. Becerra. Congressman, much of that work is actually
done not by NIH, but by SAMHSA, our substance use and mental
health agency, which deals with that. And they are working with
States and local entities that are actually doing the work on
the ground to support some of those efforts to inform and to do
the surveillance.
They are also taking on best practices using evidence-based
practices. For example, fentanyl strips are now being made
available. We are finally supporting that at a national level,
because we know it saves lives.
You heard the news today that Narcan is now going to be
available over the counter. The FDA has made that announcement.
So we are doing the things that we can at the Federal level to
support the work that is done on the ground at the local level.
Mr. Latta. My time is expired. I yield back.
Mr. Guthrie. The gentleman yields back. The Chair now
recognizes Mr. Cardenas for 5 minutes for questions.
Mr. Cardenas. Thank you, Chairman Guthrie, and also Ranking
Member Eshoo, for having this important hearing. And I
appreciate the opportunity to discuss in front of the whole
world, Secretary Becerra, what we are doing proactively in many
areas, and I really appreciate the budget that the President
has put forth.
And I am thrilled to see that the President has emphasized
in his budget request--placed on funding for 9-8-8 and the
broader continuum of crisis care in America. The 9-8-8 Suicide
and Crisis Lifeline is saving lives by providing urgent and
timely responses to individuals in crisis. It is a key starting
point for the crisis continuum.
But it is not enough to just have someone to call--when you
call--when someone calls 9-8-8, we also need someone to come
and somewhere to go when an individual requires greater mental
health support. I am particularly excited to see requests for
robust funding for mobile crisis response grants so that
trained mental health professionals can be the first responders
to mental health emergencies.
And I would imagine that--I would hope that my colleagues
who represent much of rural America are excited about the
opportunity to have mobile crisis response grants put out in
every corner of this country, especially in rural America.
Secretary Becerra, why maybe, in your opinion, is it so
critical to have a robust crisis care infrastructure in our
country?
Mr. Becerra. Congressman, thanks for the work that you have
done over the years on this issue.
The reason it is so important to have a crisis care system
is because people don't have a mental health crisis just from
the hours of 9 to 5. There has to be a place for them to go
after hours. They have to know that when it hits, there will be
someone there to catch them. And the--a 24/7 crisis care center
is the best way to make sure not only do we save lives but keep
people from harming themselves.
Mr. Cardenas. And I want to make it clear. I think you and
I are talking a little bit inside baseball. When you and I are
talking about crisis, we are talking about mental health
crisis.
Right now in America--or before last year--if there was a
crisis moment in America, maybe somebody was off their meds and
their mother called 9-1-1, who would show up? Maybe there would
be a healthcare professional show up. But 99 percent of the
time it was the law enforcement officer who--even they and we
all agree they are not trained to deal with mental health
issues. We need mental health professionals to show up to the
moment, so that we can actually help the situation instead of,
unfortunately, have a critical moment where it even gets worse.
So when it comes to mental health in America, we are making
improvements, and 9-8-8 is, in fact, a big step in the right
direction. And hopefully, Americans will take 9-8-8 for
granted, like people expect that when they call 9-1-1--and it
happens everywhere in the country--someone comes when they call
9-1-1, and that is what 9-8-8 is about.
What resources are still needed to build out our crisis
infrastructure when it comes to mental health and ensure that
everyone, regardless of circumstance, can access crisis
services, including the LGBTQ+ community and individuals and
people with disabilities, and those whose primary language is
not English?
Mr. Becerra. Congressman, on 9-8-8 I will just mention we
need to get States further invested in it, because this is not
a national program. Only because the President and Congress has
been so willing to help the States have we been able to make it
work so well. But if the States have to make commitments to
have permanent, stable funding for 9-8-8 in their
jurisdiction--and so that means a lot of work.
We need--we are expanding access under 9-8-8 in languages
other than English because we know a lot of folks need that
communication. We are doing a call that is specific--a line
that is specific for veterans. And so we are going to try to
make sure we are approaching as many people as we can,
including our LGBTQI-plus community, as well.
Crisis care, we need to fund further crisis care so that it
is available 24/7. We have to make sure that there is followup
service when someone does reach out and make the call. And so
we are working as hard as we can to make sure certified
community behavioral health centers receive the support to be
able to expand.
Mr. Cardenas. Locally in every community, correct?
Mr. Becerra. That is correct.
Mr. Cardenas. OK. So when somebody calls 9-8-8, they are
not in California talking to somebody in--five States over, or
what have you. Make it local, make it robust.
And you are absolutely right, 9-1-1 is, in fact, a local-
funded program supported by the Federal Government.
Mr. Becerra. Yes.
Mr. Cardenas. But it is primarily supported by locals.
Mr. Becerra. By--the workforce, as well. We are working to
expand the workforce because, if there is a shortage in the
healthcare workforce, it is even more acute in the mental
health and substance use workforce.
Mr. Cardenas. Absolutely. And in order for us to have more
mental health force workers ready and to fill those positions
and do that work, we need to make sure that the local schools
and the local activities are actually educating people, so they
can actually be in that position.
My time having expired, thank you so much, Mr. Secretary.
I yield back.
Mr. Guthrie. Thank you. The gentleman yields back. The
Chair now recognizes Mr. Griffith for 5 minutes for questions.
Mr. Griffith. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, Mr. Secretary. Mr. Secretary, many of us on both
sides of the aisle are concerned about the workings of the
Office of Refugee Resettlement, ORR.
When the Oversight and Investigations Subcommittee holds a
hearing on ORR to address our questions and our concerns and
looking for answers, are you willing to come to the
subcommittee to testify, yes or no?
Mr. Becerra. Absolutely. Absolutely, Congressman.
Mr. Griffith. Thank you very much.
Mr. Becerra. Hopefully we can work out a good time. Just
make sure I am available.
Mr. Griffith. Yes, sir, and we will work on that.
Also, Mr. Secretary, on another subject, the President
recently signed into law a bill that passed unanimously in both
the House and the Senate to declassify information related to
COVID-19 origins and the Wuhan Institute of Virology. When do
you think HHS will be able to comply with the law?
And I am not saying to anybody--I don't want anybody to
misinterpret that I think you all are tardy, because this has
been, like, a week.
Mr. Becerra. Yes.
Mr. Griffith. But I am just curious as to what kind of a
timeline there is.
Mr. Becerra. Thank you. Thank you for clarifying. We will
try to move swiftly, because we are as anxious to get
information out there as you are. There are a lot of entities
around the world who aren't being transparent. We want to make
sure we are transparent.
Mr. Griffith. Let's switch gears and talk about some of the
entities that aren't being so transparent.
According to an article in the May 20th, 2021, China Daily,
Minister Ma Xiaowei of the National Health Commission of the
People's Republic of China said during a phone call with you
that China was willing to deepen cooperation with the United
States in fighting against COVID-19--the COVID-19 pandemic.
What cooperation has China's National Health Commission
provided?
Mr. Becerra. Congressman, what I can tell you is I hope
that those words ring true, that they will try to be more
transparent and more collaborative, because we still are
seeking information from China and--about their research and
about the information they have about the first infections that
they saw of COVID in their country.
Mr. Griffith. Yes, this is very critical, and it is not
just because we want to beat up on the lab or beat up on
anybody else, but we have to have this data to try to figure
out what we can do to try to prevent a future problem of a
similar nature. Would you agree?
Mr. Becerra. There is no way you are going to trace the
origin or figure out how to address these and find remedies
unless you have all the comprehensive information that lets you
determine what is driving this.
Mr. Griffith. In that regard, have you had communications
with Minister Ma since May of 2021?
Mr. Becerra. I have not, and it has been difficult to keep
those communications going. We have made requests. We have done
it directly and through the World Health Organization, and we
are hoping that we will continue to see words that talk about
doing more together.
Mr. Griffith. And speaking of the World Health
Organization, have they been cooperative? Because early on, it
looked like they were kind of running interference on behalf of
the Chinese, and I am just wondering if that has gotten any
better.
Mr. Becerra. I would say that the WHO and the director
general have been making efforts to try to secure information
from China. And I believe that they have tried to be as
transparent as they can. They have done a good job of bringing
so many countries together to deal with COVID.
And all of us are seeking as much information from whatever
the source is--not just from China--that we can get, so we can
figure out where we go from here from--with COVID.
Mr. Griffith. All right. I appreciate that. Mr. Secretary,
last year Republican leaders McMorris Rodgers, Mr. Guthrie, and
myself wrote to you asking you to provide more transparency
about your meeting calendar. You declined to provide the
information.
However, other cabinet Secretaries have publicly posted
their calendars on the websites of their departments to dispel
questions about your level of engagement on HHS matters and to
build public confidence. Will you commit to making your work
calendar publicly available, like other cabinet Secretaries do?
Mr. Becerra. Congressman, we will provide the information
like my work schedule and so forth as those requests come in
and as the law requires.
Mr. Griffith. Yes. And I look forward to the ORR meeting
that I referenced earlier, because there are a lot of questions
that we want to get to. The New York Times article is
concerning.
Further, as you know, last year I raised issues about the
vetting process for where we are sending these children. I want
to look into that more because I think on both sides of the
aisle we want to make sure--we may not agree on how they got
here, how they crossed the border, but once they are here we
have an obligation to make sure these children are in safe
environments, where they are not being abused or exploited. You
would agree with that, would you not?
Mr. Becerra. A hundred percent.
Mr. Griffith. All right. And I look forward to working with
you to try to make ORR better and to figure out what we can do
to live up to at least a minimal standard of security for these
children.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Becerra. Thank you.
Mr. Guthrie. The gentleman yields back. The Chair
recognizes Dr. Ruiz for 5 minutes for questions.
Mr. Ruiz. Thank you.
Mr. Secretary, it is good to see you. Thanks for being here
today.
As you know, I am committed to protecting Medicare for
seniors in my district and across the country, and to build on
the policies that we passed last Congress to make healthcare
more affordable. This includes the Inflation Reduction Act,
which lowers drug prices for American seniors.
The President's budget discussed today further improves
seniors' access to lifesaving care by further lowering
prescription drug costs for our seniors. On the contrary,
Republicans have repeatedly tried to cut Medicare, and leading
Republican plans have proposed to slash Medicare funding and
increase the age for Medicare eligibility. Under the Republican
plan, seniors would be subject to thousands of dollars in
additional out-of-pocket costs.
Secretary Becerra, can you briefly discuss how slashing
Medicare funding would harm seniors?
Mr. Becerra. Congressman, I think everyone knows how much
Medicare has lifted seniors out of poverty, how Medicare has
saved lives. And to now see the chance of that progress eroded
would be devastating. That is why the President came out with a
budget that actually not only protects all those benefits, all
those services for today's seniors, but assures that it will be
there for the next generation as well.
Mr. Ruiz. Thank you. And so can you expand on how the
administration intends to protect seniors and lower their
healthcare costs?
Mr. Becerra. Well, first, you have--everyone now is aware
of the $35 cap per month of insulin. That is a tremendous
saving. I mentioned earlier the money that is now being saved
by no out-of-pocket costs for preventative vaccines. That is
saving a lot of Americans a lot of money.
We are now beginning to watch the pricing that the drug
companies put out for their drugs if they go beyond the rate of
inflation. The law that you helped pass, Congressman, lets us
tell those companies, ``You owe back money to the Medicare
system because you charged more than the rate of inflation for
your prescription medication.''
And as you know, in the next coming years we will be able
to negotiate the prices of prescription medication.
Mr. Ruiz. Thank you.
You know, in addition to affordability, I am also concerned
with access. Medicare physician pay and its impact on patient
access to care remains a major issue for my constituents. In
fact, adjusted for inflation in practice costs, Medicare
physician pay actually declined 26 percent from 2001 to 2023,
or by 1.8 percent per year, on average.
Nonpartisan government stakeholders are recognizing the
damaging impact these cuts are having on patient access to
care. The 2021 Medicare Trustee Report states that ``absent a
change in the delivery system or level of update by subsequent
legislation, the trustees expect access to Medicare
participating physicians to become a significant issue in the
long term.''
To help address this growing problem, I am working with my
friend and colleague, Dr. Bucshon, on legislation to provide an
annual Medicare payment update tied to inflation as measured by
the Medicare Economic Index, the MEI.
Even the March 2023 MedPAC report to Congress includes
recommendations that Congress increase the 2024 Medicare
physician payment rate above current law with an inflation-
based payment update tied to the MEI.
It is critical that we move away from a system where every
year there is uncertainty over potential cuts, threatening
access for seniors across the country.
Secretary Becerra, can you discuss the pressing financial
instability facing physician practices, including the threat of
yearly cuts combined with rising costs?
Mr. Becerra. Congressman--and I know you know this well, as
a physician--my wife, who is a physician also, will talk to me
about this, and I know several members of this committee are
physicians. It is tough. I mean, the workforce is strained.
That is not different for doctors or nurses or other health
professionals.
We want to encourage people to go into these professions.
We saw with COVID how important it is. And what I will tell you
is I now will speak to you as a former Member of this chamber
going through this exercise every year of trying to figure out
physician payments. It is not just a headache, it is a real
threat to how physicians can plan their life forward.
And so I hope Congress is able to work in a way that gives
us a--some certainty for physicians and others moving forward
of what they can expect in terms of payment. You know, I wish I
could tell you we could do more, but we are constrained because
we have to be budget-neutral in whatever we do. So if we are
going to increase payments in one place, we have to decrease
them in another place.
And so I think physicians around the world--around the
country will tell you, come up with a better system.
Mr. Ruiz. I agree. Thank you, and I look forward to
continuing our work together on these important issues.
Mr. Guthrie. Thank you. The gentleman yields back, and I
recognize Mr. Johnson for 5 minutes for questions.
Mr. Johnson. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you,
Secretary Becerra, for joining us today.
You know, fiscal responsibility is an issue that,
unfortunately, is easily forgotten here in the Beltway--inside
the Beltway. It is too easy to spend money that doesn't belong
to you. And the idea of small government and not spending
outside of your means is a sentiment in very short supply these
days here in this city.
Earlier this month, President Biden released a $1.7
trillion budget that does nothing to change the frightening
debt track that the United States is on. In fact, the
administration continues to tout the fact that they are cutting
roughly 10 billion in mandatory spending over the next year.
But what is the catch? It is spending that is solely related to
the COVID emergency.
So I hate to bust the bubble, but you don't get to take
credit for cutting spending on a pandemic that the President
has personally claimed is already over. This spending should
have ended a long time ago, but facts never seem to stop this
White House from continuing its spending addiction.
Today I am going to focus my questions and comments on the
East Palestine train derailment and chemical fire that has
upended the lives of my constituents in this small, rural Ohio
village. A little less than 2 months ago, a train carrying
hazardous materials derailed in East Palestine, Ohio, in my
district, resulting in a controlled release of toxic chemicals,
evacuation, and massive environmental cleanup. No family should
ever be faced with this type of hardship caused through no
fault of their own.
And right now the biggest concern for these residents and
for me is the long-term health and viability of their
community. So, Secretary Becerra, earlier this month you said
the administration would have a whole-of-government--I quote,
``whole-of-government''--response to the train derailment.
Could you explain how that involves HHS, and what you are doing
on the ground in East Palestine?
Mr. Becerra. Congressman, thank you. And if there are other
things that we can do on this issue for the people of East
Palestine, please let us know.
Mr. Johnson. Thank you.
Mr. Becerra. We want to be there as much for you and your
constituents as we can.
Mr. Johnson. OK.
Mr. Becerra. But we know those families need----
Mr. Johnson. Tell us what you are doing. I am sorry for
interrupting you, but he is going to gavel me down in 5
minutes.
Mr. Becerra. We were one of the first on the ground. CDC
was on the ground. We were doing the assessments, going door to
door to find out what people were experiencing. That
information we compiled in the data, because we wanted to find
out what the health effects might be for the families there. So
we were on the ground quickly, talking to hundreds of people
there that were surrounding the incident.
We also knew that there was a community health center that
was providing most of the healthcare immediately to some of
those families that needed help. We provided an emergency grant
of $250,000 to that health center so they could continue to
provide that extra care that they were not expecting to have to
do.
And so we continue to be on the ground. We work with the
EPA and others within the Federal Government. I have been in
touch with the health director at--for the State of Ohio, for
the State of Pennsylvania. We will be in touch, but please let
us know if there is more we can do. We are ready.
Mr. Johnson. It is my understanding our local health
department is continuing its own response efforts. And you just
mentioned that you are coordinating with them to ensure there
is no duplication of efforts, right?
Mr. Becerra. We work with them. We don't do the--we try to
support what they do.
Mr. Johnson. OK. What is the process your agency is using
to communicate information to healthcare providers,
particularly in regards to highly vulnerable populations such
as children, pregnant women, and the elderly?
Mr. Becerra. We work with the State's health department and
with your local health departments, because we are not the ones
that are on the ground all the time, and we respect the work
that they do and the relationship they have with the community.
So we try to support in whatever ways they ask.
Mr. Johnson. OK. And finally, currently there has been only
one SAMHSA and one HRSA grant provided to on-the-ground efforts
there in East Palestine. Are you using HRSA's already existing
current emergency authority to issue these grants?
Mr. Becerra. That is how we got some of the immediate
funding to that community health center. And as I said, we put
out the call, we have let them know, ``Let us know if we can be
more helpful.'' I say that directly to the health director for
the State, and we are ready to try to do what we can.
Mr. Johnson. OK, thank you very much.
Mr. Chairman, let it be noted I answered your call: Thirty
seconds I am yielding back.
Mr. Guthrie. Thank you. The gentleman yields back. The
chairman recognizes Ms. Kuster for 5 minutes for questions.
Ms. Kuster. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And welcome, Secretary Becerra. Great to be with you today.
The Department of Health and Human Services plays a pivotal
role in protecting the well-being of our country, and this
budget proposal reflects that. We all know COVID-19 took a
harsh toll on the healthcare workforce, and I was glad to see
the fiscal year 2024 budget support for workforce programs
across HRSA and the CDC supporting the current workforce and
investing in the future.
We expanded the capacity of healthcare workers throughout
the pandemic by adopting telehealth as an important tool.
Telehealth not only allows a patient to receive care in the
comfort of their own home, but it also empowers providers to
use their skills in communities that need it most. And it is
particularly important in a rural district like mine.
Secretary Becerra, how can telehealth be used beyond the
public health emergency to work across State lines, expanding
access to rural and underserved areas?
Mr. Becerra. Congresswoman, thank you for your work in this
area, because it has become so essential to have access to
healthcare through telehealth.
Perhaps some of the greatest gains we have seen in COVID is
behavioral health. We were having a lot of folks who, for
reasons of stigma and other reasons, were not using services
for mental health. And what we found is that having access to a
physician or a provider at your home through telehealth made
you more likely to participate, more likely to make your
appointment. And so we hope that people recognize at a time
when 9 in 10 Americans believe that America is experiencing a
mental health crisis, that telehealth is indispensable.
We need to continue to work with you because those
authorities for flexibility on telehealth which you extended to
the end of 2024, you can't have that cliff and all of a sudden
have all those flexibilities expire. And so we need to work
with you. We need to work with States to make sure we figure
out if there is a possibility of having a cross-State provision
of healthcare services, because right now a physician license
in one State doesn't have a license to practice in another
State. Telehealth has no borders. And so we have to figure that
out as well.
Ms. Kuster. Thank you. The budget also reflects this
administration's commitment to ending the mental health and
substance use disorder crisis. We made great strides last
Congress, passing the bipartisan Restoring Hope for Mental
Health and Wellbeing Act with a vote of 402 to 20. I think it
was probably the most bipartisan vote we took.
While this was important progress, we know that there is
still a lot of work to be done, particularly in better serving
the hard-to-reach populations. I look forward to working with
my colleagues on reintroduction of my bipartisan bill, the
Humane Correctional Health Care Act, that will end the Federal
rule that prohibits Medicaid from paying for care for people
who are incarcerated.
I am also excited that Representative Tonko is
reintroducing the Medicaid Reentry Act to allow for Medicaid
coverage for 30 days prior to release, and I look forward to
supporting Mr. Trone's legislation to allow Medicaid to cover
pretrial detainees in the Due Process Continuity of Care Act.
Medicaid is the largest public payer of behavioral
healthcare, and it is essential that we defend the integrity
and funding for this essential program as a bedrock of the
Federal budget. Right now, people across New Hampshire are
rallying behind the Medicaid program as the State considers
making expansion permanent on a bipartisan basis. And I know
there are a number of Republican States that have just made
Medicaid expansion.
Medicaid expansion has been an unqualified success. It has
extended health insurance to millions of low-income people,
helping to make them healthier and more economically secure. I
am concerned about how some of the discussed cuts to Medicaid
would affect deeply vulnerable individuals, particularly people
with disabilities, seniors, and children with complex medical
conditions.
Could you describe what some of the consequences would be
if the Federal Government suddenly cut funding for Medicaid
expansion?
Mr. Becerra. Well, Congresswoman, Medicaid has become the
provider of healthcare for not just low-income Americans but
for many middle- or lower-to-middle-income Americans who can't
afford sometimes healthcare on their own.
And if we were to see cuts to Medicaid, well, let's just
put it this way. There were 8--close to 19 million Americans
who received healthcare through Medicaid that was expanded.
Forty of the 50 States have expanded their Medicaid program.
That is about 19 million Americans. If we were to cut those
things, you would quickly see millions of Americans return to
the rolls of the uninsured.
And I mentioned how we have never seen so many Americans
have access to healthcare through their own insurance as we see
today, more than 300 million. It would be devastating to move
backwards instead of trying to get the rest of the country, the
30 or so million Americans who still are not covered.
Ms. Kuster. Secretary, my time is up, but I just want to
point out that that would have a devastating impact on our
workforce as well.
Mr. Becerra. Yes.
Ms. Kuster. So I yield back.
Mr. Guthrie. The gentlelady yields back.
Ms. Kuster. Thank you so----
Mr. Guthrie. The Chair now recognizes Ms. Harshbarger for 5
minutes for questions.
Mrs. Harshbarger. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you,
Secretary, for being here today. I want to delve right in and
touch on a couple of issues which we have common ground on, and
then some where there may be some disagreement.
In one of our previous conversations we have talked about
how pharmacy benefit managers have exploited the lack of
transparency, created conflicts of interest, distorted
competition, reduced choices for consumers, and ultimately
increased the price of drugs. They are really putting the
screws on independent pharmacists, by the way, and you know
that, sir.
Is there anything in the President's budget that would
address or reform the PBM industry to make prescription drugs
more affordable? And that is just a yes or a no.
Mr. Becerra. It is--I have to qualify, because most of that
reform would not be done through the budget. It would be done
through the rules that we set. But we are absolutely trying to
do reform and transparency.
Mrs. Harshbarger. Well, I think we could work together on
that, because there is strong bipartisan support in Congress--
--
Mr. Becerra. Great.
Mrs. Harshbarger [continuing]. To do that, especially on
this committee.
Mr. Becerra. I look forward to it.
Mrs. Harshbarger. Let me turn to another topic that, to me,
is an immediate threat, and it is about mail order of oncology
drugs.
Recently HHS, through frequently asked questions,
implemented a prohibition on community cancer clinics from
mailing their patients medicines directly, forcing patients to
come into the clinic. Now, HHS waived this restriction through
the public health emergency, but it is set to take effect again
in May. And this is extremely disruptive to cancer care, and I
have talked to these oncologists personally.
And I want to follow up with more details in a written
letter, but do I have your commitment to work with me and other
concerned Members in Congress to resolve this issue?
Mr. Becerra. Absolutely, you have my commitment.
Mrs. Harshbarger. OK, fantastic. We will get that letter to
you.
Now let me move on to something you might not--well, you
are probably familiar with, and I want to ask you a couple of
things about the Federal workforce under your Department. Now
you have about 83,000 Federal employees under the Department.
Is that correct?
Mr. Becerra. I am sorry?
Mrs. Harshbarger. You have about 83,000 Federal employees--
--
Mr. Becerra. Correct.
Mrs. Harshbarger [continuing]. Under your Department.
Mr. Becerra. That is correct.
Mrs. Harshbarger. And about 4,000 of those employees work
at CMS headquarters in Woodlawn, Maryland, correct?
Mr. Becerra. I would have to check the number, but I will
assume that you have a correct number.
[Photo displayed.]
Mrs. Harshbarger. OK. Well, I have--I want to show you this
photo, and I am sure that you are absolutely familiar with this
photo. It is an empty parking lot at CMS headquarters in
Woodlawn, Maryland. This photo was taken on a Monday, March
20th at 10:40 a.m.
And Mr. Secretary, I assume that a good number of people
will drive to the headquarters at CMS. And why is the parking
lot empty, and on a Monday morning at 10:40 a.m.?
My question is, do you have a breakdown of how many
employees at CMS do telework on a regular, consistent basis,
sir?
Mr. Becerra. Congresswoman, we are working full-time. We
have been working full-time since the pandemic. The fact that
so many Americans have a vaccine that they have been able to
use to save their lives----
Mrs. Harshbarger. Well, can I stop you just a second? Would
you give me the data on that?
Mr. Becerra. I can certainly get you data on----
Mrs. Harshbarger. Yes, that would be----
Mr. Becerra [continuing]. On the workforce, and we will----
Mrs. Harshbarger. Absolutely.
Mr. Becerra [continuing]. Can try to respond to some of
those questions.
Mrs. Harshbarger. I would love to know how many people are
working from home.
I see in the President's budget CMS is requesting thousands
more dollars for office rent. And my question to you is, why
should we even consider more funding for office rent when you
don't know how many people are showing up at the office?
And there's also other areas in your Department that--you
are potentially looking to get rid of property. You know, and
this is--let me tell you this. This is what the American people
see. They see an image or a situation that does not resemble
good government. And it is not only outrageous to many Members
in Congress, but it also is like a slap in the face to the
Americans and the taxpayers that are coming to work and showing
up, day in and day out, sir, because it is--that is their job,
is to be on site. And we know, we have looked at studies,
people are more productive when they show up in person. And I
am a healthcare provider, and I have been for 37 years. I have
to show up to do my job.
So let me turn to one other thing. And--well, I may have a
little bit of time--and it is about the future of Medicare. In
a recent Washington Post editorial called ``President Biden's
Medicare Solvency Plan,'' and I quote, ``political messaging,
rather than a serious approach,'' and it places the entire
burden of ensuring Medicare solvency on popular--on unpopular
drug companies and high-income--implying incorrectly that
structural reforms are unnecessary.
And I will just say this. When a Democratic administration
loses the faith of the Washington Post editorial board, you
know things are not going in the right direction, sir.
Would these Medicare proposals do anything to prevent
Medicare costs from growing at a far faster rate than GDP?
Mr. Becerra. Congresswoman, the fact that the President not
only maintains benefits and protects them but also can do that
for the next generation will be a great savings for all
Americans who can have guaranteed healthcare when they need it.
Mrs. Harshbarger. Well, I am out of time, sir, and I have a
few other questions, but I will get those to you in writing.
Thank you, sir, and I yield back.
Mr. Guthrie. I now recognize the gentlelady from
California, Ms. Barragan, for her 5 minutes.
Ms. Barragan. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Mr. Secretary, for being here today to testify.
Thank you for all of your work, and thank you for joining the
Congressional Hispanic Caucus on the road to talk about youth
mental health and everything in the administration that you are
doing to address youth mental health. I am sure we will be
seeing you to continue on the road to talk about all of the
accomplishments that we have been able to do in the last 2
years that were--the people are going to barely start to feel.
So thank you for that.
There is an area which we have talked about before, and I
want to take a moment here to recognize the amazing advocates
that are sitting in purple behind you with the Alzheimer's
Association. I stand with them in support of improving access
to FDA-approved Alzheimer's drugs. And I know that you have
heard it from me before, but I disagree with CMS's coverage
decision to tightly restrict coverage for an entire class of
FDA-approved Alzheimer's drugs. And I continue to just say I
think there is a huge disconnect when the FDA can approve a
drug and that CMS will not cover that drug.
Just recently the VA also announced that they were going to
cover one of the drugs that CMS won't cover, which is
lecanemab. And so it seems to me there is just some real
disconnect that we are trying to get to the heart of to see how
we can fix that. It is one of the reasons that my colleague Dr.
Joyce and I introduced the Access to Innovative Treatments Act.
Our bill would ensure CMS fairly considers coverage for
innovative drugs and therapies.
And so this is an issue I am going to continue to work on.
My mother has Alzheimer's. She is 82.
We also know Alzheimer's is one of the biggest threats that
we have, especially in our Latino communities who are at risk
of developing this. And I think when we talk about budgets and
we talk about cost, it is also going to have a huge dollar
impact, you know, on our budget and access to care and
healthcare.
One of the good things, I think, that came out of what
Democrats were able to do in the last couple of years is
investing over $100 billion over 10 years for Medicaid home and
community-based services. I want to thank you for that. That is
something that Congress needs to continue to do, so that people
like my mother who have Alzheimer's can stay in their home,
which they know is the most familiar place, which helps them in
their development.
Mr. Secretary, I want to move on to a topic that is in the
public now and is so critical, and that is the Medicaid
unwinding. I want to thank you for your leadership on this, and
thank you for your leadership in keeping Americans covered. As
a result of your hard work, more Americans have healthcare
coverage today than ever before. Uninsured rates are at an all-
time low.
However, this achievement may be at risk. In just a few
days, States will resume reviewing all Medicaid enrollees'
eligibility, a process called Medicaid unwinding, on April 1st.
Last August, HHS estimated that 15 million people could lose
their Medicaid if the program operates as it did in the past,
including nearly 5 million Latinos who are at risk. More than
half of the people of color estimated to lose coverage will
remain eligible for Medicaid.
In response to these staggering numbers, Congress enacted
strong beneficiary protections, required additional
transparency from States, and authorized powerful new
enforcement tools for HHS to use to protect our most vulnerable
citizens.
Furthermore, more than 60 members of the Congressional Tri-
Caucus, which is made up of the CHC, the CBC, and the Asian
American Caucus, sent you a letter urging you to protect access
to healthcare coverage during the unwinding.
My question, Mr. Secretary: How do you plan to oversee
States to ensure that they are complying with the law?
And how will you commit to act swiftly to protect Medicaid
beneficiaries if it is clear that a State is improperly
disenrolling individuals?
Mr. Becerra. Congresswoman, first, thank you for the work
you are doing on this. We--I look forward to the partnership,
because you are right. There is no reason why someone who is
eligible to receive insurance should lose it and not have
access to medical services simply because they did not get
connected in time.
A year ago--I think about--maybe even more than a year ago,
I wrote a letter to all the Governors in our country, saying at
some point we are going to be moving on from the public health
emergency, and Medicaid will have to unwind, and people may
lose their coverage, so let's start working together to
prepare, because States, as you know, administer the Medicaid
program for the Federal Government.
We have since been following up with those Governors. I now
write them every month, so they know where they stand. We don't
want any Governor to say, ``Oh, I didn't realize that hundreds
of thousands or millions of my residents were going to lose
their coverage.''
I am holding a copy of the letter I sent to our Governor in
California, Governor Newsom. That was dated March 7th. This is
a letter that every Governor--very similar--gets to tell them
where they stand. We are going to bird dog this, and I want to
say especially to those of you who supported the law that gives
us more authority to oversee how----
Mr. Guthrie. The time is expired.
Mr. Becerra [continuing]. That unwind occurs to make sure
that every State is responsible----
Mr. Guthrie. Sorry, Mr. Secretary, the time is expired. So
we are about almost a minute over, I apologize. So the Chair
now recognizes Mr. Bilirakis for 5 minutes for questions.
Mr. Bilirakis. Thank you, thank you, Mr. Chairman. I
appreciate it very much.
Mr. Secretary, I want to talk to you today about the health
concerns plaguing the youth of our Nation. We have seen an
influx of illicit fentanyl and other dangerous illicit
substances coming across the southern border, all while we have
an unprecedented mental health and substance abuse crisis.
Our children are being poisoned by drugs that flood across
our southern border. And I always say that fentanyl is a weapon
of mass destruction. Many of these children do not realize that
they are even encountering illicit fentanyl. Many utilize
social media platforms to purchase pills that they believe are
pharmaceutical grade but in fact are laced with fentanyl. And I
know this has been mentioned before, but it is worth being
mentioned again, that is for sure.
The HHS budget suggests expanding the CDC's--and I quote--
What Works in Schools Program, centered around health education
for middle and high school students. In this program the CDC
has provided health education curriculum tools for schools to
utilize--to help meet the health needs of students. This 940-
page document never mentions fentanyl or opioids, not a single
time. For that matter, illicit fentanyl is only mentioned once
in your HHS budget document, only twice in the President's
budget. And I know that the chairman mentioned this, as well.
Is there confusion at HHS about the deadly impact of
illicit fentanyl when it comes to drug overdose deaths? Please,
sir.
Mr. Becerra. Congressman, I have heard the mention of a
reference once or twice in the budget. I would say to you that
we are addressing fentanyl not once or twice in the budget, but
10 billion, 900 million times, because that is the amount of
money that we are committing to fight drug overdose and
fentanyl and opioids. And so we are in that mix. We don't have
to say the word to be in the mix.
And what we are trying to do is work with our communities
locally to make sure they know that they will be supported by
the Federal Government when it comes to addressing drug
overdose, whether it is opioids, whether it is fentanyl. We
want to be there with them.
Mr. Bilirakis. OK, I will get on to the next question.
Last year you told me--when I asked about the status of
Medicare's transitional coverage of emerging technologies rule
and also expressed concern about CMS acting as a second
gatekeeper to the FDA, particularly due to the agency's
misguided NCD decision on Alzheimer's treatments, you told me
that the two agencies have two separate but distinct missions,
but they were committed to working together to help provide
seniors with new potential treatment options.
Unfortunately, in the year since, we saw you--that exact
opposite. Unfortunately, the exact opposite has occurred. And I
know my colleagues have mentioned this, as well. CMS doubled
down on its policies and blocked coverage for the entire class
of these treatments when it comes to Alzheimer's.
How is it possible for CMS to prejudge an entire class of
drugs as not being reasonable and necessary for seniors after
the FDA approves these very drugs to treat a safe and
effective--for Medicare patients with Alzheimer's, the primary
audience for these drugs?
And this is hope for Alzheimer's patients. It is hope for
our families and caregivers. So please, sir, answer the
question, and let's reverse this ruling by CMS. I mean, isn't
FDA responsible for making these decisions?
Mr. Becerra. Yes, Mr. Chairman, thank you very much.
And for all Americans who are interested in this subject,
not just because a family member has Alzheimer's but just
because this is the kind of thing that could hit their family
at any time, I want to make sure we are clear. We are
following, Congressman, the law that you all have passed--maybe
not you today or in the last few years, but the law that is in
the books treats FDA and CMS differently. The standards that
apply to FDA are different from the standards that CMS must
apply.
And so it wasn't that CMS prejudged or that it didn't
follow what FDA did and said, it is that the CMS is not, by
law, under the laws that Congress passed, supposed to just
follow FDA or judge based on what FDA does. CMS, like FDA, must
collect the evidence to make decisions.
FDA makes the initial decision: Is this a drug that should
be put out into the market for American consumers to have
access to? Is it safe and effective?
CMS has a different standard by law, established by
Congress----
Mr. Bilirakis. What is that standard?
Mr. Becerra. Reasonable and necessary is probably the
shortcut way of saying what CMS must look at for purposes of
determining whether it will provide access to a particular
treatment or medication.
Mr. Guthrie. Great, thanks. Time has expired. I let you go
on because we are all interested in that, and I know a lot of
people in this room are interested in that as well. So we
appreciate it.
Dr. Schrier, you are now recognized for 5 minutes.
Ms. Schrier. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And thank you, Secretary Becerra. Thank you for being here
today. Thank you for the work you have done to make healthcare
more affordable and accessible for the American people. And
thank you specifically for coming to my district to visit a
school-based health clinic, which is pretty remarkable. And I
want to thank you for including support for school-based health
centers in your budget.
Today there are so many things to focus on, I thought I
would focus on healthcare access from a couple of perspectives.
First, in your testimony you discussed the importance of
expanding and retaining the healthcare workforce. In the wake
of the pandemic we have seen early retirements, resignations,
mostly in doctors and nurses, and these shortages are already
being felt in rural areas and underserved areas.
I saw that there is funding in the budget for innovative
approaches to train up some other parts of our healthcare
system, which is great. But I just want to focus on the
importance of graduate medical education needing a bigger
pipeline in order to respond to physician shortages. And I know
it is a lengthy training, but you have got to start somewhere.
I have been working on bipartisan efforts to enhance both
the rural and pediatric workforces. One of my recent bills with
my colleague Representative Harshbarger is the Rural Physician
Workforce Protection Act, which aims to put more providers in
residency programs in rural areas because where people train,
as you know, they stay.
I was wondering if you could talk about your plans to
strengthen GME, and also if you could touch on pediatric
graduate medical education.
Mr. Becerra. First, I have to say what you just said is
music to our ears at HHS. We believe that where a physician
trains probably will determine where that physician practices.
And so, therefore, to the degree that we can drive through the
graduate medical education programs these graduate slots, these
residency slots into communities like rural communities, low-
income communities, we have a chance of ensuring that they will
stay there to practice. And so we support that.
Our Public Health Service Corps, we are sending more people
into communities that are disadvantaged. We pay your education
for 4 years of medical school or nursing school, and then you
commit to 5 years of service in an underserved area, a rural
community, otherwise. So we are going to try to----
Ms. Schrier. Thank you. Music to my ears.
Mr. Becerra. Yes.
Ms. Schrier. You know, I wanted to--just this week in a
meeting I heard that there are some new restrictions on
residency funding so that that cannot be used to have
residents, say, at an urban hospital do some of their rotations
in rural areas unless there is special set-aside funding. So if
you could just take a look at that, that would be counter to
what we want to do in rural America.
Mr. Becerra. OK.
Ms. Schrier. Let's see. I also wanted to talk about
retaining the workforce that we have. I want to associate
myself with the comments made by Dr. Ruiz about the continuing
threats of Medicare cuts and how that impacts the workforce.
And we just ask that, at a minimum, we don't cut and, ideally,
have it keep up with inflation, because there is definitely a
squeeze.
Mr. Becerra. And Congresswoman, recognize that we have to
live with a neutral process.
Ms. Schrier. Yes.
Mr. Becerra. So if we increase in one place, we have to
decrease somewhere else. We don't have a choice. We need you to
change that.
Ms. Schrier. Maybe that neutrality is the problem. I am
happy to talk with you about that and to work on that.
Let's see. I also wanted to talk about Medicaid
reimbursement, which is even lower than Medicare reimbursement.
And I have a bill, the Kids Access to Care Act, which boosts
Medicaid to Medicare reimbursement, which I am working on. And
I hope you will pay attention to that too.
And lastly, this is a big thank you just about the
importance of the Affordable Care Act and the subsidies that we
included in the Inflation Reduction Act that have really made a
difference at the kitchen table for my constituents. Premiums
are at an all-time low. Enrollment is at an all-time high. In
part of my district in a rural area, 82 percent of people on
ACA plans saw their premiums reduced by an average of $450 a
month, and that matters at the kitchen table. So I want to
thank you.
I am short on time, but if you want to touch on the
importance of making those subsidies, those tax credit
enhancements permanent, I would love to hear a couple of words.
Mr. Becerra. Congresswoman, it is all about peace of mind.
If you know that you can take your child to the hospital when
it is necessary and you don't have to fear going bankrupt or
not being able to pay the mortgage, it is peace of mind. And
every American should have that. There is no reason why some
families in America can't make that decision the right way,
which is give my child the care he or she needs.
Ms. Schrier. Thank you.
Mr. Becerra. Thanks.
Ms. Schrier. I yield back.
Mr. Guthrie. I thank--the gentlelady yields back. The Chair
recognizes Mr. Hudson for 5 minutes.
Mr. Hudson. Thank you, Chairman.
Mr. Secretary, thank you for joining us today. I have a
number of questions, so I think I will jump right in.
For the last several years, FDA has allowed certain e-
cigarettes and vaping products with pending premarket tobacco
application to be sold. Unfortunately, FDA has failed to
publicly communicate in a transparent manner which of these
products have filed a PMTA and therefore are allowed to remain
on the market. The result is marketplace confusion and a
related proliferation of illegal vapor products on store
shelves.
In addition to the agency's failure to provide regulatory
clarity to consumers and retailers on what products may be
lawfully on the market, FDA's Center for Tobacco Products is
also facing an unprecedented backlog in new product
applications.
While I understand that CTP is still in the process of
reviewing applications for both PMTAs and nontobacco nicotine
products, some applicants are experiencing historic wait times
on hearing back from the center on the status of their
applications. This does affect consumer and industry confidence
in the administration's ability to bring innovative, next-
generation products to the market.
Mr. Secretary, does the administration have any plans to
use your enforcement discretion to remove these illegal e-
cigarette and vapor products, a majority of which come from
China, from the market?
And additionally, will this administration commit to ending
the confusion surrounding the legality of these products?
Mr. Becerra. Congressman, I look forward to working with
you on this subject, because if I were to ask you how many
applications do you think FDA received to put a vaping product
on the market, what would you say?
Mr. Hudson. Hundreds.
Mr. Becerra. Hundreds? Over--I think it was 5 million.
Mr. Hudson. Wow.
Mr. Becerra. And so that has been the issue. We have--we
were flooded with applications, some really not worth the paper
they were written on. But this way they could try to escape
having direct action taken against them, enforcement action.
And so what I can tell you is FDA has disposed of well over
90--I think close to 98 percent of all of those claims. They
are moving hard. It is just that you haven't seen that because
so many of them they had to dispose of were essentially
frivolous. Now we are being sued because there are companies
that don't like the determinations we have made.
So I would look forward to working with you, because we are
doing everything we can to get some of these products, which
you and I know have no reason to be on that shelf, a grocery
shelf, we need to take them off. So I look forward to working
with you on that.
Mr. Hudson. Absolutely. I commit to working with you on
that. Thank you.
What is CTP's plan to mitigate the current backlog, though?
I mean, I realize it is larger than I thought it would be, but
do you--what is your plan for----
Mr. Becerra. The backlog--there is no--the backlog is not
so much a backlog, it is we are being delayed by litigation. We
can't move forward on a particular product.
The larger companies are the ones that are putting lots of
attorneys in front of us and suing us. They are the ones that
have the majority of the products. And because we are in
litigation, because we are being sued, we are--it essentially
puts a halt on a lot of our enforcement. But we have taken
recent enforcement actions. We are working with the Department
of Justice to help us enforce on those actions.
And as I said, I would love to have that conversation with
you, because we could use some help in letting the public know
what is really going on out there.
Mr. Hudson. Yes, great.
Well, switching gears in the little bit of time I have left
here, I had the honor to work with my colleague Anna Eshoo on
reauthorization of the Pandemic and All-Hazards Preparedness
Act, and we look forward to working with you in a bipartisan
manner on this important reauthorization.
A recent GAO analysis tracking COVID-19 funding and
spending found Congress has appropriated nearly 350 billion to
the Public Health and Social Services Emergency Fund, also
known as PHSSEF. This funding was intended to support and
improve the Nation's preparedness and response for COVID-19 and
other public health emergencies. According to the report, as of
January 31st there remains about 20 billion in unexpired and
unobligated funds within this fund.
Just this morning, the Bloomberg reported, based on a
breakdown directly from the White House, that over 98 percent
of the money from COVID relief bills, including this fund, had
been committed, leaving about 4.5 billion. I then learned from
the Appropriations--my Appropriations counterparts this morning
that there's actually approximately 5 to 6 billion unobligated
as of March 20th.
Could you help us provide a little bit of clarity here? I
think this committee deserves a little bit more information on
an accounting, a summary of what is obligated, what is not, and
what HHS's plans to allocate and distribute all this unspent
money is.
Mr. Becerra. Yes, and Congressman, I commit to follow up
with you on this, because I know we are going to run out of
time.
But what I will say is, first, thank you for the leadership
you have shown on the--because I think what we are trying to do
is build that infrastructure.
We can get back to you on the actual dollars that are left.
Ninety-six percent of all of the COVID dollars have already
gone out the door. The 4 or so percent that remain, 4 to 6
percent that remain, are unobligated but are in the pipeline to
be, you know, signed on the dotted line. So there is not a lot
of money that is uncommitted. Unobligated makes it sound like
it is not yet committed. It really is.
But I can talk to you. We can go through the numbers. But
what I would really love to talk to you about is how we follow
up because what we need to do is strengthen our domestic
production. We have to secure our supply chains. And I suspect
you know all of these things, so I would be interested in
soliciting your support.
Mr. Guthrie. Thanks----
Mr. Hudson. Absolutely. I look forward to working with you.
And Mr. Chairman, thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Guthrie. The gentleman yields back. The Chair
recognizes Ms. Blunt Rochester for 5 minutes.
Ms. Blunt Rochester. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And thank you, Secretary Becerra. Good to see you. Thank
you for joining us in Delaware to focus on child mental health
and for joining us today to discuss the President's fiscal year
2024 budget for the Department of Health and Human Services.
I am pleased that a few of my colleagues have touched on
workforce issues, which underscores how important we think this
is. But I want to focus specifically on the nursing workforce.
With over 5 million people nationwide, nursing is the
Nation's largest healthcare profession. Therefore, a robust
nursing workforce is critical for improving health, economic
security, and equity in our country. During the COVID-19
pandemic, the already overstretched nursing workforce struggled
with a host of new and intensifying challenges. And now they
are leaving the profession in record numbers.
Secretary Becerra, the President's budget outlines several
proposals to reduce healthcare workforce shortages, including
the nursing workforce. Can you discuss why innovative
approaches to strengthen retention and address healthcare
workforce shortages are necessary?
Mr. Becerra. Congresswoman, it is hard to have good
healthcare if you can't find a good healthcare professional.
And we have already had lots of discussion about how it has
become tough, whether physicians, nurses, other healthcare
professionals. And so we are going to be in this game for a
while because we need to support these efforts.
We are providing additional funding for the National Health
Service Corps, which as you know helps put professionals in
some of our most disadvantaged communities. We are increasing
graduate medical education funding. We are providing
scholarship and loan repayment programs for clinicians who
return to practicing in underserved areas. We are beefing up
primary care physicians. We are doing quite a bit.
Ms. Blunt Rochester. Great, thank you. I am concerned that
the nursing landscape is evolving more rapidly than our current
methods of data collection and analysis. And I am also
concerned that we don't have a centralized, dedicated body to
study and advise on ongoing nursing workforce trends as they
occur.
What is the administration proposing to ensure that
policymakers, healthcare leaders, and educators have up-to-date
and actionable information on emerging nursing trends?
Mr. Becerra. We are in the process of fielding the National
Sample Survey of Registered Nurses, which will give us the data
we need to figure out where we are, what we need to do. We are
going to work with HRSA to try to make sure that we put
resources into those areas that help us beef up the workforce,
and we look forward to working with you.
Ms. Blunt Rochester. And how is the administration working
with and supporting State-based entities like nursing workforce
centers that use a local lens to address the nursing shortage
within their respective States?
Mr. Becerra. Well, they are our principle guides, because
they know where we have to put the resources, where folks have
to be. And so we intend to work closely with them.
Ms. Blunt Rochester. Thank you for that answer. I believe
that improved Federal and State coordination is needed to
monitor nursing shortages, coordinate strategies to alleviate
the pressures on the nursing workforce, and advise
stakeholders. I am glad to share that Congresswoman Young Kim,
Senator Merkley, and Senator Tillis and I introduced the
bipartisan Nursing Workforce Shortage--Nursing Workforce Center
Act to do just that. I look forward to working together with
you on this and other healthcare issues.
Switching gears, health centers are a critical part of the
healthcare safety net, treating a sicker, poorer, and more
diverse population than most other healthcare providers. The
President's budget includes several proposals to improve the
reach of health centers by expanding mental health and
substance use disorder care, increasing hours of operation, and
funding new access points for high need areas.
Can you describe the President's proposal and explain to us
why enhanced funding will increase access to affordable,
comprehensive, and high-quality primary care services?
Mr. Becerra. Congresswoman, as you know, some of the real
champions and stellar performers during COVID were our
community health centers. They stepped forward and provided
care to people who didn't have insurance, who couldn't access
regular care through a physician's office or a hospital. And
they did the large work when it came to saving lives in COVID.
We have put additional resources, quite a bit of money into
these centers, the 1,400 or so health centers around the
country. They service tens of millions of Americans, and they
are proven, they are successful. We are going to continue to
fund them. We are increasing funding. We want them to get more
into behavioral health. They are limited in their funding, so
sometimes they can't do certain services, but we hope we can
help them get there.
Ms. Blunt Rochester. I am really pleased, again, to see the
expansion of also hours and access, because that is really
important, too.
And I want to thank those who are here today from the
Alzheimer's, our patient advocates, and others. We look forward
to continuing the partnership.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I yield back.
Mr. Guthrie. Thank you. The gentlelady yields back. The
Chair recognizes Dr. Bucshon for 5 minutes.
Mr. Bucshon. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, Mr. Secretary. As my colleagues heard yesterday,
one of my legislative priorities is to increase transparency
and accountability in the 340B program. In a letter from 2020,
you described the 340B program as, and I quote, public--``for
public hospitals, community health centers, and others serving
indigent patients.'' Do you still believe that?
Mr. Becerra. I do.
Mr. Bucshon. Great. I am sure you may have read the New
York Times article--and there's other articles and other
sources from--this was from last September--describing how
certain large hospital systems have bought up 340B-eligible
entities in low-income areas and then used this location to
obtain 340B eligibility in their facilities in more prosperous
areas, and essentially pocket the profits with--and fail to use
this money to help the patients as the program was intended.
Do you agree that the 340B program participants should be
accountable for how they use savings from the program?
Mr. Becerra. Absolutely.
Mr. Bucshon. In 2018, as attorney general for California,
you sued Sutter Health, one of the largest hospital systems in
the State, alleging that Sutter aggressively bought up
hospitals and physician practices and exploited that market
dominance by raising prices. Certain Sutter hospitals,
including Sutter Davis, Sutter Medical Center Sacramento, and
Alta Bates Summit Medical Center, participate in the 340B
program. If Sutter was failing to meet your expectations as a--
and I quote--``public hospital community health center or other
provider serving indigent patients,'' should it continue to be
a 340B-designated facility?
Mr. Becerra. I----
Mr. Bucshon. That is complicated question, I understand.
Mr. Becerra. Yes, yes, but I am glad you asked it, because
what we don't want is to find that there is opaqueness, there
is little transparency in how money is being used, that 340B
doesn't have the transparency we need.
What I will tell you, with Sutter Health we found that they
were engaged in practices that were stifling competition----
Mr. Bucshon. Sure.
Mr. Becerra [continuing]. Increasing prices.
Mr. Bucshon. Yes.
Mr. Becerra. What we--that is not what we want. And we want
to make sure that, on 340B, we are not driving pharmacists out
of business. We are making sure community clinics can receive
the medicines they need. We are going to do what we can to make
it more transparent.
Mr. Bucshon. Yes. I mean, the whole point of that line of
thought right there that I had was to show that you really just
don't know whether they should--whether they are acting well in
340B or not, because there is no transparency, right?
Mr. Becerra. That is right.
Mr. Bucshon. In 2014, Kathleen Sebelius, then Secretary of
the Department of Health and Human Services for the Obama
administration, testified before the Senate Finance Committee
on the President's fiscal year 2015 budget. In response to a
question on 340B she said--and I quote--``it had been expanded
beyond its bounds.''
At that point there were 9 billion in sales in the 340B--at
the 340B price. In 2021 there were 44 billion in sales at the
340B price. The number of covered entity sites has more than
doubled since 2014 to 50,000 sites. And now more than half of
all hospitals in America participate in the 340B program,
according to MedPAC.
I do want to say, though--I failed to mention that--I am a
huge supporter of 340B, if done properly. My community
hospitals need this program. My intent is to make it
transparent, so that it doesn't continue to struggle and
jeopardize their participation.
But it seems to me that, logically, such an expansion would
also mean exponential growth in the amount of charity care and
other patient benefits. You would think. That was how the
program was intended, right? But that is just not the case that
we have seen over the last 8 years. So what are your thoughts
on that?
Mr. Becerra. So we are trying to do reforms in 340B. We
need your help to have statutory authorities to make some of
these changes. We know that there has been a lot of lawsuits
filed because of 340B.
What I will simply say to you, compliance, transparency,
two crucial aspects of making sure----
Mr. Bucshon. You need legislative action for most of that,
some of that?
Mr. Becerra. A great deal of it.
Mr. Bucshon. Yes, well, I am working on that.
I want to talk briefly about the No Surprises Act. As you
know, this took the patients out of the picture. They no longer
get surprise medical bills from out-of-network providers, which
is a tremendous success.
However, as you probably might imagine, I was disappointed
in the implementation from the agency, which I feel didn't
follow congressional intent. I know the people on Capitol Hill
that didn't get their way tried--now are trying to do it
through the agencies. I know that. So I would just--I don't
have much time, but, you know, I would hope that, you know, the
intent of the law was to have a balanced approach between the
providers and the insurance companies.
And I recently heard in the IDR situation the--you know,
the dispute resolution, that even though providers are winning
those cases, we still don't have insurance companies actually
paying after they have lost. So we need to see what we can do
to make sure that that happens.
With that, I yield back.
Mr. Guthrie. Thank you. The gentleman yields back. The
Chair recognizes Ms. Craig for 5 minutes for questions.
Ms. Craig. Thank you so much, Mr. Chairman, and thank you
so much, Secretary Becerra, for taking the time to answer our
questions about HHS's proposed budget. It is so good to see you
again.
I had to step out for a few minutes of our hearing, but I
am just wondering, did my colleagues on the Republican side of
the aisle issue a budget while I was away?
Mr. Becerra. No, Congresswoman.
Ms. Craig. OK. OK, good. I just want to make sure I was up
to date.
I want to use my time today to discuss the mental health
and substance use disorder crisis currently facing our Nation.
I represent the 2nd congressional district of Minnesota.
Our State is home to some of the most recognizable names in
healthcare, including the Mayo Clinic and a host of medical
technology companies. We consistently rank in the top 10 of all
States for access to and quality of care, and we have recently
emerged as a beacon of reproductive and gender-affirming care
in a country where States have grown increasingly hostile
toward the concept of individual choice and freedom.
In short, in Minnesota we have a lot to be proud of.
But as--even as Minnesota operates on the cutting edge of
healthcare, I am hearing from my constituents that mental
health and substance use disorder-related crises are only
rising. Often our law enforcement officials, our healthcare
workers, and our teachers are being forced to intercede outside
of their areas of expertise to de-escalate dangerous
situations. And it is causing a malicious cycle of mental
stress for both them and the people in their care.
According to a recent analysis published in the Minneapolis
Star Tribune, which I would like to ask to be entered into the
hearing record----
Mr. Guthrie. Without objection, so ordered.
[The information appears at the conclusion of the hearing.]
Ms. Craig. The number of behavioral and mental health
patients transferred from hospitals in the Twin Cities area to
out-of-State facilities more than doubled from 66 in 2017 to
154 in 2021.
Further, hospital-based mental healthcare workers are in
short supply, with 80 percent of Minnesota counties designated
as areas with a mental health shortage.
From 2011 to 2021, the age-adjusted death rate due to
opioid overdose in Minnesota increased from 5.3 per 100,000 to
17.9 per 100,000, more than threefold.
I am proud of the bipartisan work we have done on the
Energy and Commerce Committee to improve mental health across
the Nation. I believe we have to attack these overlapping
national crises head on through a comprehensive, whole-of-
government approach.
So Secretary Becerra, can you describe how the Department
coordinates with other agencies like the Office of National
Drug Control Policy and the Drug Enforcement Administration?
Mr. Becerra. Congresswoman, thank you for the question and
for the work that you have done on this issue.
Because drugs fall under the jurisdiction of Health and
Human Services as medicines and because they fall under the
jurisdiction of the Department of Justice when it comes to
enforcement of our laws, drug laws, we have a joint effort that
takes place on some of these matters.
Oftentimes we find that, in trying to move in a direction,
for example, making medications more available, that it might
be listed as harmful drugs or drugs that can be abused. We find
that law enforcement and the health sector don't always see eye
to eye. DoJ, DEA, ONDCP, Office of National Drug Control
Policy, all of us working together with HHS and others, we try
to make sure that we are consistent in the way the Federal
Government handles this.
For HHS, we want to make sure we are concentrating on
health and making sure that whatever we do with our policy on
drugs, it provides for the best outcome, healthcarewise. And so
we work with our different agency partners to make sure we can
move forward. That is why, for example, on the X waiver, we
were able to make it possible for physicians to actually
prescribe treatments that could help someone survive an
addiction--at the same time, wouldn't put themselves in
jeopardy of being accused of actually trying to feed a drug
habit.
Ms. Craig. Mr. Secretary, I just want to end with I am
incredibly pleased to see--request 190 million in increased
funding for 18,000 new behavioral health providers and expand
Medicare coverage of and the payment for additional behavioral
health professionals. We appreciate your continued focus on
these areas that are going to help support underserved
communities and, in particular, rural areas.
So appreciate it, and thank you for coming.
Mr. Becerra. Thank you.
Ms. Craig. I yield back.
Mr. Guthrie. Thank you. The gentlelady yields back. The
Chair now recognizes Mr. Carter for 5 minutes.
Mr. Carter. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, Mr. Secretary, for being here. It is always good
to see you. Mr. Secretary, as you are aware, we have had quite
a bit of consolidation in healthcare----
Mr. Becerra. Yes.
Mr. Carter [continuing]. Here in the recent years,
including and certainly not limited to in pharmacy and in drug
pricing. And I am very concerned about that. I am very
concerned that now we have three PBMs, 3 PBMs that control 80
percent of the market. And those PBMs, all three of those, are
owned by an insurance company. The insurance company not only
owns the PBM, but it also owns the pharmacy. That vertical
integration is something that I have been asking in the 8 years
that I have been in Congress for the FTC to look at. Finally,
last summer, they agreed to do 6(b) study, and they are looking
at that now.
But it is not just in drug pricing. It is in healthcare
altogether. It is also with hospitals. There have been almost
1,800 hospital mergers between 1998 and 2021, leading to about
2,000 fewer hospitals in this country than we had before. This
consolidation in healthcare is such a problem.
We had the CBO here before us and before this committee,
before the Energy and Commerce Committee. We had the director
of the CBO, the Congressional Budget Office, as well as about
20 of his staff members. And I asked them pointedly the
question: ``Give me one example--one example--of where
consolidation has saved money.'' Nothing. None of them could
give me one example of where consolidation had saved money.
Now, look, you have been a member of this august body, and
you understand we all want the same thing, regardless of which
side of the aisle you are on. We want affordable, accessible,
quality healthcare.
And I know that the administration, the Biden
administration, has repeatedly said that competition--they want
more competition across all industries in America. Given that,
can you tell me what HHS's proposed budget does to address
healthcare vertical integration and consolidation?
Mr. Becerra. And Congressman, I will mention that when I
was attorney general I took on hospital consolidation in
California. It is a problem. It is not coordination of care. It
is the consolidation which leads to less care that we are
concerned about.
HHS doesn't have the direct jurisdiction to deal with
consolidation as you speak. That is more in the jurisdiction of
the Department of Justice and the FCC. But we do try to make
sure that care is coordinated, but not in a way that removes
competition.
Mr. Carter. I would submit to you--and I mean this
sincerely--I don't know that there has been another agency in
the Federal Government that has failed the American people more
than the FTC has in allowing this consolidation to take place,
not only in drug pricing, not only with the insurance companies
owning the PBM, owning the pharmacy, with spread pricing, with
everything that is going on--and you are aware of it, you know
what is going on.
There was a study done by the Berkeley Research Group--and
granted, it is a little bit aged now, but it was last year, in
March of 2022. It showed that only 33 percent--only 33
percent--of the price of a drug goes to the pharmaceutical
manufacturer, which begs the question, where does the other 67
percent go? It goes to the people who--to the middleman. We
have got to address that. It is so clear and such an abuse.
And then we see the egregious practices that are taking
place with the PBMs. I have got a bill now, the Help Copays
Act, that--they are not allowing a credit from a manufacturer
to go toward their deductible. They do not allow that. It is
just awful.
Let me switch gears for just a second. In October of 2022
on social media--a social media post, after swearing in the new
Director at the National Cancer Institute, you tweeted,
``Cancer knows no bounds, and neither should our efforts to
prevent cancer deaths. Together, we will advance Cancer
Moonshot.''
As you know, in the IRA there was a part in there that
dealt with drug pricing. And you are aware of that and, I am
sure, trying to implement it and administer it now. The CBO has
said that that is going to result in 15 fewer cures in the next
30 years.
How can you say that we are going to advance Cancer
Moonshot when we are eliminating, potentially, 15 cures in the
next 30 years, a cure that could be the cure for Alzheimer?
Mr. Becerra. Congressman, I actually disagree with that. I
think you are going to see more than 15 new cures come on the
market over the next several years, as a result of the
legislation that we have.
Mr. Carter. Then why did CBO say that? I didn't say it, CBO
said it.
Mr. Becerra. That is a question you would have to ask CBO.
Mr. Carter. So you disagree with that?
Mr. Becerra. I disagree.
Mr. Carter. Unbelievable. Thank you, Mr. Secretary, for
being here.
Mr. Becerra. Thank you.
Mr. Guthrie. The gentleman's time has expired. The Chair
now recognizes Mr. Crenshaw for 5 minutes.
Mr. Crenshaw. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, Mr. Secretary, for being here. I want to follow
up on that, because it bugs me.
I thought it was actually 30 drugs that the CBO estimated
would not exist, and plenty of other estimates have much, much
higher. We have already seen--we have talked to industry--we
have already seen the dollars drying up from investing in what
they would call higher-risk investments. That would definitely
be Alzheimer's.
So drug companies are going to do--because of this price
cap rule, what they are going to do is they are going to invest
in ``safer investments.'' So the drug companies will be fine.
They will be fine. Do you know who won't be fine? Alzheimer's
patients who want that cutting-edge drug. That is a fact. And
you guys can sit there comfortably in your position on this,
because you know that we can never prove the counter-factual,
because there is another element of history that we will never
know about. And it is very, very frustrating.
But I want to talk about your budget. So one thing that
concerns me--and the chairman mentioned it--is the President's
budget mentions climate change 42 times, mentions fentanyl
twice. What is the leading cause of death for adults aged 18 to
45?
Mr. Becerra. Congressman, I would mention that while we may
have mentioned the word fentanyl, we put $10.9 billion more
than I think any administration has to----
Mr. Crenshaw. All right, let's--I appreciate that. I am not
sure what that money is going towards, but----
Mr. Becerra. We can----
Mr. Crenshaw. It is opioid. I mean, the answer to my
question--you didn't answer my question, but it is opioids, so
I will just answer it for you. It is opioid overdose, right?
And most of that is fentanyl. We lose about 100,000 people or
more to opioid overdose. Almost 80,000 that is fentanyl
directly related. You can't even compare that kind of number to
climate change. Not even close.
If we want to actually compare--let me ask you, actually. I
mean, is HHS in charge of regulating carbon emissions? Am I
missing something here? Why do you guys have an Office of
Climate Change and Health Equity funded in this budget?
Mr. Becerra. Congressman, I think it is a proven fact that
the impacts of climate change are affecting the health of
Americans and people around the world.
Mr. Crenshaw. How have you quantified that?
Mr. Becerra. Excuse me?
Mr. Crenshaw. How have you quantified that?
Mr. Becerra. I can get you some of the research that has
been done. I can show you some of the communities that have
been affected. We can do any number of ways to quantify it
that--you can let me know.
Mr. Crenshaw. I have a way of quantifying it. Here, I will
help you out.
So in the last--since 1900, deaths from--due to nature have
plummeted by over 90 percent. They have actually plummeted over
70 percent just since Biden took office. So weather accounts
for somewhere around 0.07 percent of worldwide deaths, 0.01
percent in the United States. And that is with the--by the way,
with the population increasing, like, tenfold.
So there is a completely negative correlation there, and we
are pretending like it is a crisis, and we are scaring people
to death about it. And you are telling hospitals that they
should be going to net zero.
Of all of the locations in America that I would want to
have reliable energy sources because people are on life
support, I think hospitals would be one of them, right? And if
hospitals go to net-zero emissions, what kind of effect is that
going to have on our temperature in 100 years?
Mr. Becerra. A hospital is one of the major--well, the
healthcare sector is one of the major contributors to pollution
in the world.
Mr. Crenshaw. What? How did you--how do you quantify that?
Mr. Becerra. We can get you the information that shows that
the healthcare sector, because of its production of lots of
different--and uses of lots of different chemicals, the fact
that it is a very widespread industry, it does have a major
impact on the climate.
Mr. Crenshaw. And so you are just going to get rid of these
chemicals?
Why don't we get rid of plastics too, the plastics that are
used for medical devices that save people's lives, is that a
good idea?
Mr. Becerra. I think most people would say to you that
there is a use for plastics, but we don't have to have so much
plastic in the world that it is causing major degradation of
our environment.
Mr. Crenshaw. What you are saying is terrifying. What you
are saying will harm people. I mean, high-quality plastics are
used in an extraordinary way for cutting-edge medical devices.
They are used in everything in a hospital.
What percentage do you think our healthcare sector
contributes to overall carbon emissions?
Mr. Becerra. Well----
Mr. Crenshaw. You said it was significant. You said it is
one of the most significant. So what is the percentage? Do you
have a ballpark?
Mr. Becerra. Of the industry that--of the----
Mr. Crenshaw. So you just said the healthcare industry is
one of the biggest contributors to carbon emissions. So do you
have a ballpark percentage of what that might be?
Mr. Becerra. I don't have it in front of me, but I can get
you that information.
Mr. Crenshaw. I think it is probably less than a percentage
point. I mean, I see these numbers all the time, especially on
this committee. Transportation is a big one, right? Power
production is a big one. The healthcare sector is a big one?
That is what you are saying?
Mr. Becerra. The healthcare sector is a big one.
Mr. Crenshaw. How much money are you guys wanting to spend
on this in your budget?
Mr. Becerra. Spend on what?
Mr. Crenshaw. On this office.
Mr. Becerra. It is a small fraction of the entire budget. I
can tell you the exact amount if you give me time to look
through the book.
Mr. Crenshaw. I only have 7 seconds, but thank you.
I yield back.
Mr. Guthrie. The gentleman yields back.
So no one on the Democratic side?
The Chair recognizes Dr. Dunn for 5 minutes for questions.
Mr. Dunn. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Many sectors of our healthcare industry today are, frankly,
in crisis. Last year the Democrats passed inflationary spending
policies that are squeezing American families to their limit.
Today they are facing tough decisions on whether they buy food,
gas, or medicine.
Artificially subsidizing the Affordable Care Act
marketplace at the expense of the taxpayers and forcing price
fixing on our innovators are two examples of top-down
government policies that distort the market and fails the
American people.
This next-year White House fiscal year 2024 HHS budget
calls for continued propping up of the ACA. It makes no mention
of expanding health savings accounts or alternative insurance
frameworks that would actually meet individual needs. So that
leaves the ACA as often the only choice for consumers. I think
seeing these top-down price controls mean that the government
bureaucrats will choose which medicine patients will have
access to. So this is taking choices away, rather than giving
choices to patients.
Mr. Secretary, under the IRA small-molecule drugs will be
the first subject to price negotiations after 9 years, while
biologics at 13 years. Economic analysis of this has
suggested--and we have talked to the pharmaceutical companies--
that this will eviscerate investment in small-molecule drugs.
Can you look into the crystal ball of the future and tell us
which diseases and which patients are not going to get their
medicines because of this?
Mr. Becerra. Congressman, thank you for the question. And
while I won't use a crystal ball, what I will tell you is that
Americans are going to save a lot of money by having to pay
lower prices for the prescriptions that they need.
Mr. Dunn. I think they are just not going to have the
medicines to take. That would be my opinion.
But 90 new therapeutics approved just since 2020, 26 of
those were for cancer, and all of those were primarily small
molecules, all right? So therefore, innovation in the cancer
space is going to be hit hard in the future. That is a
prediction that our economic analysis and the pharmaceutical
industry has been making loudly.
Keeping with theme of drug development, Mr. Secretary,
another concern is that we are not producing the drugs that we
need, the drugs we use daily, whether at home or in doctor's
office or hospital here in America. For more than a decade,
China has been the largest producer of APIs in the world. And I
won't go into the statistics of it, but even before the
pandemic, in 2019, the Department of Defense acknowledged in
testimony before the U.S.-China Economic and Security Review
Commission the national security risk of Chinese dominance of
global API markets.
Mr. Secretary, given how important domestic drug
manufacturing is to ASPR's National Health Security Strategy,
what is the Department doing to incentivize domestic supply of
production of API and API substrates as well?
Mr. Becerra. Congressman, thank you for the question. I
think this is one of those issues where there is bipartisan
support.
We are trying to increase the domestic production. We are
trying to make sure the supply chains aren't disrupted. We make
some investments in the budget to make sure that there is the
capacity for us to incent the production of a lot of the kinds
of things that we saw during COVID, basic things from masks to
also having the materials for vaccines, have that material made
available through the U.S. domestic manufacturing sector, and
we are hoping that we will get the support to do that with
Congress.
Mr. Dunn. Well, so I certainly hope that--I want to ask you
to go back and take a look at the FDA's approval process of
manufacturing, as well, because it gets bogged down. Even if
you have a plant, you can't use the plant. It is--that is a
problem that our industry is facing now.
What is HHS doing to prepare us against future pandemics,
epidemics, biologic attacks?
Mr. Becerra. We continue, through NIH, to do the research
on the next generation of vaccines and treatments. We continue
to see CDC reach out to our State partners to make sure that we
can collect the information that not only lets us detect and
surveil, but also to spread the information on best practices.
We continue to have ASPR working to deal with COVID as it
stands today, our preparedness and response agency. They are
the ones that are still tracking what goes on with COVID. And--
--
Mr. Dunn. We are running out of time, Mr. Secretary, but I
want to make a comment. I want to add to it.
I saw action--well, was a doctor in the Army, worked at the
Chemical Biological Warfare Headquarters up at Fort Detrick,
and know something about surveillance of these organisms all
across the--we did not do a lot of the things that we can do,
that we know how to do, that we are actually pretty good at in
terms of surveillance diagnostics.
And again, I want to say the small molecule therapeutics,
which are really, really critical, we can't just depend on
vaccines. That is way too one track, one minded.
So with that, I see my time is expired, and I will yield
back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Guthrie. Thank you. The gentleman yields back. The
Chair recognizes Dr. Joyce for 5 minutes.
Mr. Joyce. Thank you for yielding, Mr. Chairman.
And Mr. Secretary, I would like to turn to the Orphan Drug
Act and its impact on patients. Rare disease and cancer
patients have benefited from the development of over 600 new
treatments since its enactment. Despite these advancements,
there are still too many patients living with rare diseases and
cancers that still have no treatments available to them.
Unfortunately, Democrats' so-called Inflation Reduction Act
threatens the continued success of the Orphan Drug Act.
Specifically, it does not protect therapies that treat two or
more orphan diseases from the law's price-setting scheme. As a
result, we already know of two companies that have cited the
IRA as a reason not to continue rare disease drug development.
As a physician, I believe that we must do more, not impede
the pipeline of new life-altering therapies for patients living
with rare diseases and cancers.
Secretary Becerra, can you please expand on the commitment
from yesterday's hearing at Ways and Means on how you will
specifically utilize the guidance and the rulemaking process
under the IRA to ensure that these patients aren't robbed of
the future of cures?
Mr. Becerra. Congressman, thank you for the question. And
absolutely, that would--that is the goal, to make sure that we
are putting as many innovative and curative medicines out there
for Americans to be able to buy.
The difficulty is they are not able to afford so many of
those medicines. And so this law would do nothing to impede the
innovation, the research. What it would simply say is, once you
have got a drug out there, make sure you are charging a fair
price. And a fair price would mean----
Mr. Joyce. The pharmaceutical----
Mr. Becerra [continuing]. Profit off of your----
Mr. Joyce [continuing]. Have already stopped--they have
already announced to us that they are going to decrease their
ability to do that research and development into new lifesaving
medicines.
Mr. Becerra. Why would they say they are going to decrease
their investment?
Mr. Joyce. I think my questions will reveal that answer.
The guidance process for the IRA that you designed greatly
discourages input----
Mr. Becerra. How does----
Mr. Joyce [continuing]. Patients, and physicians.
Mr. Becerra. And how does----
Mr. Joyce. You gave them hardly any time to submit--no
clear direction on treatment alternatives and outcomes that you
are interested in, and then you won't tell them how, if at all,
you consider their input until months after a final decision,
months after a final decision was made.
Will you commit today to use the input that you get from
patients and from doctors?
Mr. Becerra. Oh, absolutely. But, Congressman, you have
misinterpreted the law. We don't tell any company what they can
and cannot do. We simply say, when it comes time to put it on
market, let's make sure you are charging a fair price. Let's
negotiate for----
Mr. Joyce. Under your guidance, what is the earliest that
individuals, physicians, patients will hear from you on how you
use their input?
And would you consider additional steps to engage with them
during the process?
Mr. Becerra. We will begin the process this year, where we
will announce which are going to be the first 10 drugs that
will be negotiated. We will go through a very public and
transparent process, and we hope the pharmaceutical industry
will join us in trying to make that transition.
Mr. Joyce. And what about patients? What about patients?
What about physicians?
Mr. Becerra. The public--patients are the public, and we
want them----
Mr. Joyce. And what timeline will your response be when
they submit their concerns to you?
Mr. Becerra. Ongoing----
Mr. Joyce. And outline a process that--they will receive
that before the final decision is made?
Mr. Becerra. That--yes, the public----
Mr. Joyce. Thank you. I appreciate that commitment.
Mr. Becerra. But Congressman, I don't understand how we are
stopping a company from making investments. All we are saying
is, once you have created that drug, let's negotiate to get the
best price for Americans.
Mr. Joyce. Well, I think there is a case in point right in
front of us, and sitting right behind you today.
While testifying last week about CMS's decision to limit
coverage of new Alzheimer's disease therapies to clinical
studies, you made a distinction between the FDA's process and
CMS review process. You responded, quote, ``CMS has to remain
consistent in the way it treats any drugs.''
How many other times has Medicare refused to cover or
impose CED requirements on an FDA-approved drug administered
according to its label, for medically appropriate use?
Mr. Becerra. Yes, and Congressman, that approach is
misguided, because it doesn't take into account the laws that
you all put in the books that make--that tell CMS how to
operate. CMS is following the laws that Congress passed.
Mr. Joyce. Are there any other medications that have these
restrictions?
We both know that the answer is zero. There is no other
medication. In fact, CMS actions are unprecedented,
representing the first time Medicare has refused to cover an
FDA-approved therapy administered, according to its label, for
medical appropriate use. And the barriers imposed by the CED
mean that people living in rural areas and other medically
underserved communities like my district in Pennsylvania will
face huge restrictions to access.
Mr. Secretary, how many national coverage determinations
have been issued under coverage with evidence development
paradigm, which I understand first came into existence in 2005?
Mr. Becerra. Congressman, you misrepresented what CMS has
done. CMS did provide a pathway for coverage. As more evidence
comes in, that pathway probably will expand.
And recognize that CMS must follow the laws that Congress
imposed upon it.
Mr. Joyce. But right now patients in rural areas who do not
have access to tertiary facilities are not eligible to receive
this important life-altering medicine.
Mr. Becerra. Congressman, I would suggest that you change
the laws that tells CMS how it can operate, because we are
implementing the law that Congress passed.
Mr. Joyce. But CMS has not done that with any other
approvals.
Mr. Becerra. CMS is following the laws that you all put in
the books.
Mr. Joyce. But why restrict one medicine, which has such a
huge impact on so many American patients and citizens, families
who care for individuals with Alzheimer's, why exclude this one
specific disease?
Mr. Becerra. It is not excluded. There is a pathway. It
could expand.
Mr. Joyce. When I go home to the patients in my community,
that pathway has been blocked.
I realize my time has expired, and I would ask you to take
consideration to allow all patients to have access to FDA-
approved drugs.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I yield.
Mr. Guthrie. Thank you. The gentleman yields back. The
Chair recognizes Mrs. Trahan for 5 minutes for questions.
Mrs. Trahan. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Good afternoon, Mr. Secretary. Thank you for being here
today.
As we navigated the deadliest pandemic of our generation,
the U.S. made tremendous progress in our fight against COVID-
19. As a founding member of the Congressional Pandemic
Preparedness Caucus and as this committee prepares to
reauthorize the Pandemics and All-hazards Preparedness Act this
year, it is critically important that we take an all-of-
government approach to expand our pandemic preparedness
efforts.
We must look at our response systems through fresh eyes,
and get creative on how we protect the health of the Nation
moving forward. For example, in response to 9/11, Congress
established ASPR, stood up BARDA, and required the development
of a National Health Security Strategy. As we come out on the
other side of COVID, we must again apply the lessons of a
costly crisis by updating our preparedness and response
structures and recalculating the resources necessary to
robustly fund our pandemic preparedness efforts.
HHS has relied heavily on industry to develop medical
countermeasures. These public-private partnerships saved
millions of lives through vaccine development when HHS, with
essential support from the Department of Defense, launched
Operation Warp Speed. However, I am concerned that HHS doesn't
have the capacity to achieve similar success in the future with
current budget constraints. Unless appropriately resourced,
ASPR can only go so far to support the development and
manufacturing of scale--at scale for future vaccines and
therapeutics against unknown viral threats that can lead to a
devastating pandemic.
While taking a look at HHS's budget justification for
fiscal year 2024, I am curious to hear why the administration
generally included funding to address longstanding, established
threats in their discretionary requests but concentrated
funding to address emerging, unknown threats in the mandatory
request.
So, Mr. Secretary, if we are unable to fund these mandatory
components this Congress, is it fair to say that we will remain
vulnerable against unknown viral threats like we saw with
COVID?
Mr. Becerra. Without the preparation, without the resources
to prepare, without the resources to employ the best practices
that we know, we are vulnerable for--to further attacks from
disease, for other ways that could cost the life of many
Americans.
Mrs. Trahan. Thank you.
In December 2022 the Department of Defense issued a new
approach for research, development, and acquisition of medical
countermeasures and test products, which moves away from an
acquisition focused on a set list of known threats. The revised
strategy pivots toward a new emphasis on broad spectrum MCMs as
a first wave of protection against novel and emerging threats,
paired with capabilities to rapidly develop a second wave of
narrow spectrum MCM as the threats are identified and
characterized.
Is HHS thinking about the threat to the public at large in
a similar manner?
And if so, does the budget request provide sufficient
funding to provide broad spectrum MCMs to achieve this
flexibility capacity?
Mr. Becerra. We have a request that would let us address
the public health threats that are coming before us. It is not
all we need. We will need more over the years. But this at
least allows us to continue the work that NIH, ASPR, our
unified effort across the government are working on to try to
have that preparation in place.
We would love to see more domestic preparation done, so we
are ready to deal with it here domestically if we need a
particular material or medicine. We are trying to make sure
that we are prepared with a stockpile, a strategic national
stockpile that can address needs. We want to make sure that we
are prepared for any supply chain issues that could result if
we have international disruption.
And so the monies that you see in our budget are geared
towards making sure we continue the work that is being done.
But long term, it is going to take much more than that.
Mrs. Trahan. Thank you. I think I have time to switch gears
for one other question, because you are probably aware that
last Congress I authored the Bio Preparedness Workforce Pilot
Program, and it is a new loan repayment program at HRSA aimed
at incentivizing individuals to enter infectious disease
healthcare professions in underserved areas. I am pleased that
the pilot was enacted last year as part of the omnibus and that
the President's budget request included an increase in funding
for HRSA to support the health workforce.
Mr. Secretary, do you believe we need a strong infectious
diseases workforce to improve the Nation's pandemic
preparedness?
And will you work with us to fund and implement the Bio
Preparedness Workforce Pilot Program in order to boost
recruitment into infectious disease careers in underserved
communities?
Mr. Becerra. I absolutely agree. Thank you for your
leadership on this, and we look forward to your success and
providing the resources.
Mrs. Trahan. Thank you.
Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Guthrie. The gentlelady yields back. We have--the
committee has a bill on the floor, and I understand there is
one Member rushing back, if that is OK, because we are a little
ahead of time, if that is OK with you.
Mr. Becerra. That is fine.
Mr. Guthrie. Dr.--we have got a physician coming back to--
and if she is here in a minute or so--we won't hold you up, if
not.
But so--while we are doing that, I have documents submitted
for the record. There has been a list distributed amongst the
minority and majority for documents that both sides of the
aisle want to submit for the record.
And without objection, so ordered.
[The information appears at the conclusion of the hearing.]
Mr. Guthrie. Thank you.
Voice. We probably need to call it.
Mr. Guthrie. Let me see if she is within 30 seconds. If so,
we will stay. I appreciate the opportunity--I appreciate you
doing that.
As you know, when you are at the end of the line, you have
got a time when--you have been there before, right?
Mr. Becerra. I have been there, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Guthrie. Well, thank you. I appreciate the offer. And
while we are waiting, I am not taking more time for--unless you
want time, as well.
We really--there are some opportunities for us really to
work together, particularly on price transparency. And I think
that we are going to do that. That was an excellent hearing
yesterday, I think, from both sides of the aisle. And we really
want to get to the healthcare costs and get to the bottom. And
so----
Mr. Becerra. Mr. Chair----
Mr. Guthrie. I will give you some time, too, since I am
taking it, but----
Ms. Blunt Rochester. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman. I
didn't expect to have additional time, but I will----
Mr. Guthrie. I----
Ms. Blunt Rochester. Well, I will take it, and really just
say thank you again for all of your work and focus on improving
the health outcomes for the American people.
And I now am going to give 1 second for the gentlewoman to
get herself seated and situated, and doctor to doctor, I will
turn it back over to the chairman.
Mr. Guthrie. I will turn it back--and just a point of
personal privilege, we have some guests you see in the room
with us today concerned about the CMS rule. And I could comment
on it, but that gets into a new set of questions. So I am not
going to do that.
But if Congress does have something in the law that is
preventing you from moving forward with that, which I am not
sure that is actually the--I mean, I understand that the
process is set up, but if we need to improve something, let us
know, and we will----
Mr. Becerra. Yes, the standards are different, and that is
where I think people don't recognize that FDA and CMS operate
under different standards. And we have to follow that guidance
that we have in the law. Congress could change that, but we
have to follow those different standards for the different
agencies.
Mr. Guthrie. Well, I appreciate it. I don't want to get in
more questions on that, so I am going to yield to Dr. Miller-
Meeks, and that will be our last questions for the set of
questions.
Dr. Miller-Meeks, you have 5 minutes.
Mrs. Miller-Meeks. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
And Secretary Becerra, thank you for testifying before the
committee today.
HHS's Budget Summary document asks for a 5.2 billion
increase in healthcare fraud and abuse control program funding,
specifically listing cutting-edge data analytics to detect
trends and outliers. In a Senate Finance Committee hearing, you
mentioned that the President's fiscal year 2024 budget request
bolsters HHS's healthcare fraud and abuse detection and
enforcement work.
Furthermore, HHS's OIG, Christi Grimm, stated in her
confirmation hearing that she is committed to expanding HHS
OIG's use of sophisticated data analytics, including leveraging
artificial intelligence and machine learning to proactively
monitor and address fraud, waste, and abuse in the HHS
programs.
Both in the Healthy Future Task Force for the Republicans,
as chair of the Modernization Committee, I talked a great deal
about artificial intelligence and its use in detecting waste,
fraud, and abuse in the Medicare system. I am currently
drafting legislation that would require Medicare to use
advanced algorithmic technologies such as artificial
intelligence, machine learning, and predictive modeling to
combat fraud, waste, and abuse in the fee-for-service program.
Estimates of healthcare fraud range from 50 billion to 300
billion annually. And unfortunately, OMB and GAO have
identified Medicare as an at-risk for improper payments.
According to a 2015 OIG report, every dollar invested in AI
fraud detection yields $5 of savings, highlighting the need to
invest in this technology.
I support the use of AI in improving program integrity but
want to ensure that AI technology is not misused to deny
legitimate patient claims. Mr. Secretary, how can we apply
lessons and AI innovations from the commercial and Medicare
Advantage space to root out fraud, waste, and abuse in Medicare
fee-for-service?
And will you commit to working with me to responsibly
strengthen HHS's fraud reduction capabilities?
Mr. Becerra. Congresswoman, we would absolutely look
forward to working with you, because everyone is still trying
to figure out how we can make the best use of AI and, as you
said, use it for the right purpose, where we can probe, but not
for the wrong purposes, where we might exclude people from
care.
So I very much would look forward to working with you,
because we know there is a lot of fraud that is going on within
the Medicare system.
Mrs. Miller-Meeks. Yes. As a provider, there is fraud
within all of our systems, and we don't want to deny legitimate
patient claims, we want them done in a timely fashion, and we
don't want to delay provider reimbursement.
Let me also echo the sentiments of other individuals and
other Representatives in this chamber this morning. I took care
of my mother with Alzheimer's the last 2 years of her life. And
I would say that for CMS to deny coverage of a medication that
has been shown and approved by the FDA that could benefit those
with Alzheimer's, I think there, you know, we can--you said
that we don't want to cut spending in Medicare because we want
to provide people access to care. And I would say we can ration
care, and that is another name for cutting spending.
I also want to, as a physician, express my displeasure at
CMS's rule on surprise billing. We were very specific in the
law. I was not one of those Members of Congress but followed
that very closely, was very supportive of the legislation that
was passed. And it was done in such a way to make sure that the
rulemaking process followed what we were passing in
legislation.
As a provider, as a doctor, you know, we feel that the
comments we have had back from HHS and CMS have been less than
satisfactory. And I would strongly recommend and encourage you
to revisit the rule on surprise billing and make sure we are
protecting providers and patients.
Thank you very much. I yield back.
Mr. Guthrie. I thank the gentlelady for yielding back, and
Mr. Secretary, that concludes all Members' questions.
We really appreciate your time and your effort to be here.
I know you have seen it from both sides, and hopefully you have
had a nice morning. We appreciate it very much and appreciate
you being here and, like I said, look for the opportunity to
work together.
I will remind Members they have 10 business days to submit
questions for the record, and I ask the witness to respond to
our questions promptly. There were several times when you said
you would get back. We just--we don't want to be here next year
going, ``You said last year you would get back with us,'' so we
would appreciate just prompt response for that. And I know you
will do that, and we appreciate it.
And Members should submit their questions by the close of
business on April the 12th.
And without objection, the subcommittee is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 12:56 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]
[Material submitted for inclusion in the record follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
