- AMERICAN NUCLEAR ENERGY EXPANSION: POWERING A CLEAN AND SECURE FUTURE

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

AMERICAN NUCLEAR ENERGY EXPANSION: POWERING A CLEAN AND SECURE FUTURE

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON ENERGY, CLIMATE, AND GRID SECURITY

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION
__________

APRIL 18, 2023
__________

Serial No. 118-23

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Published for the use of the Committee on Energy and Commerce

govinfo.gov/committee/house-energy
energycommerce.house.gov
__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

54-899 PDF                WASHINGTON : 2024

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE

CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington
Chair
MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas            FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey
ROBERT E. LATTA, Ohio                  Ranking Member
BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky              ANNA G. ESHOO, California
H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia         DIANA DeGETTE, Colorado
GUS M. BILIRAKIS, Florida            JAN SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois
BILL JOHNSON, Ohio                   DORIS O. MATSUI, California
LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana               KATHY CASTOR, Florida
RICHARD HUDSON, North Carolina       JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland
TIM WALBERG, Michigan                PAUL TONKO, New York
EARL L. ``BUDDY'' CARTER, Georgia    YVETTE D. CLARKE, New York
JEFF DUNCAN, South Carolina          TONY CARDENAS, California
GARY J. PALMER, Alabama              RAUL RUIZ, California
NEAL P. DUNN, Florida                SCOTT H. PETERS, California
JOHN R. CURTIS, Utah                 DEBBIE DINGELL, Michigan
DEBBBIE LESKO, Arizona               MARC A. VEASEY, Texas
GREG PENCE, Indiana                  ANN M. KUSTER, New Hampshire
DAN CRENSHAW, Texas                  ROBIN L. KELLY, Illinois
JOHN JOYCE, Pennsylvania             NANETTE DIAZ BARRAGAN, California
KELLY ARMSTRONG, North Dakota, Vice  LISA BLUNT ROCHESTER, Delaware
Chair                            DARREN SOTO, Florida
RANDY K. WEBER, Sr., Texas           ANGIE CRAIG, Minnesota
RICK W. ALLEN, Georgia               KIM SCHRIER, Washington
TROY BALDERSON, Ohio                 LORI TRAHAN, Massachusetts
RUSS FULCHER, Idaho                  LIZZIE FLETCHER, Texas
AUGUST PFLUGER, Texas
DIANA HARSHBARGER, Tennessee
MARIANNETTE MILLER-MEEKS, Iowa
KAT CAMMACK, Florida
JAY OBERNOLTE, California
------

Professional Staff

NATE HODSON, Staff Director
SARAH BURKE, Deputy Staff Director
TIFFANY GUARASCIO, Minority Staff Director
Subcommittee on Energy, Climate, and Grid Security

JEFF DUNCAN, South Carolina
Chairman
MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas            DIANA DeGETTE, Colorado
ROBERT E. LATTA, Ohio                  Ranking Member
BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky              SCOTT H. PETERS, California
H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia         LIZZIE FLETCHER, Texas
BILL JOHNSON, Ohio                   DORIS O. MATSUI, California
LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana               PAUL TONKO, New York
TIM WALBERG, Michigan                MARC A. VEASEY, Texas
GARY J. PALMER, Alabama              ANN M. KUSTER, New Hampshire
JOHN R. CURTIS, Utah, Vice Chair     KIM SCHRIER, Washington
DEBBIE LESKO, Arizona                KATHY CASTOR, Florida
GREG PENCE, Indiana                  JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland
KELLY ARMSTRONG, North Dakota        TONY CARDENAS, California
RANDY K. WEBER, Sr., Texas           LISA BLUNT ROCHESTER, Delaware
TROY BALDERSON, Ohio                 FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey (ex
AUGUST PFLUGER, Texas                    officio)
CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington
(ex officio)
C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hon. Jeff Duncan, a Representative in Congress from the State of
South Carolina, opening statement..............................     2
Prepared statement...........................................     4
Hon. Diana DeGette, a Representative in Congress from the State
of Colorado, opening statement.................................     6
Prepared statement...........................................     8
Hon. Cathy McMorris Rodgers, a Representative in Congress from
the State of Washington, opening statement.....................    10
Prepared statement...........................................    12
Hon. Frank Pallone, Jr., a Representative in Congress from the
State of New Jersey, opening statement.........................    15
Prepared statement...........................................    17

Witnesses

Jess C. Gehin, Ph.D., Associate Laboratory Director, Nuclear
Science and Technology, Idaho National Laboratory..............    19
Prepared statement...........................................    22
Answers to submitted questions...............................   121
Regis Repko, Senior Vice President, Generation and Transmission
Strategy, Duke Energy..........................................    32
Prepared statement...........................................    34
Answers to submitted questions...............................   128
Armond Cohen, Executive Director, Clean Air Task Force, Inc......    40
Prepared statement \1\
Jeremy Harrell, Chair, Board of Directors, U.S. Nuclear Industry
Council, and Chief Strategy Officer, ClearPath.................    41
Prepared statement...........................................    44

Submitted Material

Inclusion of the following was approved by unanimous consent.
List of documents submitted for the record.......................   104
Article of April 14, 2023, ```On the verge of a crisis: The U.S.
nuclear fuel Gordian knot,''' by Matt Wald, Nuclear Newswire...   105
Report of the Department of Energy, ``Pathways to Commercial
Liftoff: Advanced Nuclear,'' March 2023\2\
Letter of April 17, 2023, from Jon Indall, Counsel, Uranium
Producers of America, to Mrs. Rodgers, et al...................   117
Letter of April 14, 2023, from Mrs. Rodgers, et al., to Todd
Abrajano, President and Chief Executive Officer, U.S. Nuclear
Industry Council...............................................   119

----------

\1\ Mr. Cohen's prepared statement has been retained in committee files
and is available at https://docs.house.gov/meetings/IF/IF03/20230418/
115741/HHRG-118-IF03-Wstate-CohenA-20230418.pdf.
\2\ The report has been retained in committee files and is included in
the Documents for the Record at https://docs.house.gov/meetings/IF/
IF03/20230418/115741/HHRG-118-IF03-20230418-SD097.pdf.

AMERICAN NUCLEAR ENERGY EXPANSION: POWERING A CLEAN AND SECURE FUTURE

----------

TUESDAY, APRIL 18, 2023

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Energy, Climate, and Grid Security,
Committee on Energy and Commerce,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 2:20 p.m., in
the John D. Dingell Room 2123, Rayburn House Office Building,
Hon. Jeff Duncan (chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Members present: Representatives Duncan, Burgess, Latta,
Guthrie, Griffith, Johnson, Bucshon, Walberg, Palmer, Curtis,
Lesko, Pence, Armstrong, Weber, Balderson, Pfluger, Rodgers (ex
officio), DeGette (subcommittee ranking member), Peters,
Fletcher, Matsui, Tonko, Veasey, Kuster, Schrier, Castor,
Sarbanes, Cardenas, Blunt Rochester, and Pallone (ex officio).
Also present: Representatives Carter, Allen, and Fulcher.
Staff present: Kate Arey, Digital Director; Sarah Burke,
Deputy Staff Director; Syndney Greene, Director of Operations;
Jack Heretik, Press Secretary; Nate Hodson, Staff Director;
Tara Hupman, Chief Counsel; Sean Kelly, Press Secretary; Peter
Kielty, General Counsel; Emily King, Member Services Director;
Elise Krekorian, Professional Staff Member, Energy; Mary
Martin, Chief Counsel, Energy and Environment; Jacob McCurdy,
Professional Staff Member, Energy; Kaitlyn Peterson, Clerk,
Energy and Environment; Karli Plucker, Director of Operations
(shared staff); Carla Rafael, Senior Staff Assistant; Emma
Schultheis, Staff Assistant; Olivia Shields, Communications
Director; Peter Spencer, Senior Professional Staff Member,
Energy; Michael Taggart, Policy Director; Dray Thorne, Director
of Information Technology; Waverly Gordon, Minority Deputy
Staff Director and General Counsel; Tiffany Guarascio, Minority
Staff Director; Kris Pittard, Minority Professional Staff
Member; Kylea Rogers, Minority Policy Analyst; Medha Surampudy,
Minority Professional Staff Member; Tuley Wright, Minority
Staff Director, Energy, Climate, and Grid Security; and Camden
Burk, Minority Intern.
Mr. Duncan. All right. The Subcommittee on Energy, Climate,
and Grid Security will now come to order. We are going to
address today the ``American Nuclear Energy Expansion: Powering
a Clean and Secure Future.''
The Chair will now recognize himself for 5 minutes for an
opening statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. JEFF DUNCAN, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF SOUTH CAROLINA

Mr. Duncan. I want to thank all of you for being here. I
called this hearing to set the table for what I hope will be
bipartisan, durable policymaking this Congress to expand
American nuclear energy and its many benefits for the Nation.
I think we are off to a good start. Just last week, Chair
Rodgers, Ranking Member Pallone, Subcommittee Ranking Member
DeGette, and I wrote a number of key nuclear associations and
stakeholders to assist our efforts.
We asked for comments and recommendations for what may be
needed to update nuclear licensing and regulatory activities to
provide for a robust and growing industry.
The stakeholder information we seek will inform our work to
deploy more nuclear energy.
Just yesterday, several of my colleagues on this committee
and I returned from a trip to Europe. We met with several
groups excited about the promise of deploying more nuclear,
especially advanced reactors like SMRs. And I believe the
chairwoman will probably talk a little bit more about that.
While many European countries are expanding nuclear power,
Germany is actively shutting it down--just on Sunday stopping
and closing three nuclear reactors. We cannot let this be the
reality in the United States. Nuclear energy must be a part of
our energy matrix.
To expand the industry, it is vital we encourage regulatory
certainty and make sure our reactor licensing processes enable
the safe and broad deployment of nuclear technologies. This is
especially important for advanced reactor technologies.
The Department of Energy and the Nuclear Regulatory
Commission play important roles to advance a new era of nuclear
innovation.
DOE and its national labs provide critical support to
developing, demonstrating, and promoting advanced nuclear. The
NRC, of course, is important to assuring the public of adequate
protection of health and safety of our nuclear operations.
I am from South Carolina. My State is a leader in nuclear
energy. Nuclear power is responsible for 54 to 58 percent of
electricity in the State and over 90 percent of our carbon-free
electricity.
We also are home to the Savannah River Site, a DOE Nuclear
Security Enterprise site, which supports our Nation's nuclear
weapons and environmental management missions
South Carolina also witnessed the failure of V.C. Summer.
This project has created perceived risks of uncontrolled cost
overrun and project abandonment, which has limited commitment
to new reactor development in this country.
We cannot let this concern inhibit nuclear deployment.
Nuclear energy is by far our Nation's leading source of carbon-
free electricity. It is also among the most reliable sources of
power, with a capacity factor surpassing 90 percent, more than
any other generating source.
Being a leader in nuclear technology provides the United
States significant geopolitical advantage and leverage. A
robust nuclear energy export market gives America credibility
to set global nuclear norms, the guidelines that ensure safe
nuclear energy generation and exports.
Despite this, growth in the U.S. nuclear industry has
stagnated over the past decade. China and Russia are seizing
this opportunity and doubling down on their nuclear
investments.
We cannot cede our global leadership to adversaries. We
must prioritize modernizing our regulatory structure in the
United States and do what is needed to encourage growth
throughout the industry.
We also look at what is standing in the way of
demonstrating and deploying advanced reactors. Our engineers
are developing new reactor designs that promise less expensive,
more efficient, widely deployable, and walkway safe technology.
We must modernize our licensing structure and establish an
advanced fuel supply to bring these technologies online. The
U.S. nuclear fleet is operating at the highest levels of
performance and safety in history. If you visit a nuclear
plant, you will see the commitment to safety in their
procedures.
Let's talk about that experience today and how it should
inform our policies.
Our witnesses today provide testimony from different
perches in the stakeholder community, from a leading DOE
National Laboratory to utilities and industry, to policy think
tanks. They can help guide us through some of the promises and
challenges to expanding nuclear energy here in the United
States.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Duncan follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Duncan. I want to thank all of you for being here, and
I want to yield the remainder of my time to Mr. Fulcher from
Idaho to introduce one of our panelists.
Mr. Fulcher. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
It's an honor for me to introduce Dr. Jess Gehin today,
associate laboratory director at the Idaho National Lab, the
Nation's nuclear laboratory in Idaho, the Gem State.
Dr. Gehin is responsible for research, development, and
demonstration of advanced reactors at INL through such programs
as the National Reactor Innovation Center.
He has 30 years of experience in our National Laboratory
system with a career focused on nuclear energy. Dr. Gehin has
served as the National Technical Director for the Department of
Energy's Microreactor Program. Currently, he is working on INL
small modular reactors that range from 220 to 300 megawatts of
power.
Dr. Gehin has advanced degrees in nuclear energy, including
a doctorate degree from Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
He was an associate professor at University of Tennessee, is a
fellow of the American Nuclear Society.
And with that, Mr. Chairman, I welcome Dr. Gehin and thank
you. I yield back.
Mr. Duncan. Well, I thank the gentleman for his
introduction. I am excited about today's hearing. We are going
to delve into it. Jump into it with all fours, and with that I
will recognize the Ranking Member DeGette for 5 minutes.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. DIANA DeGETTE, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF COLORADO

Ms. DeGette. Thank you so much, Mr. Chairman.
As we look to transition our Nation to zero-carbon-emitting
forms of energy to stave off the worst effects of the climate
crisis, it is important to know the role that nuclear energy
can play in that fight.
Nuclear energy is responsible for generating nearly 20
percent of all of our Nation's electricity. And it is now
responsible for almost half of the carbon-free electricity that
we create here in the United States.
So we know that to combat the climate crisis, we must
reduce our emissions. And the only way to do that is to reduce
our reliance on fossil fuels while electrifying every part of
our lives.
If done with rigorous, science-based regulations, nuclear
energy can help us manage that load. It has the ability to help
us move towards a zero-carbon energy future without sacrificing
Americans' access to the electricity that they need.
Because here is the thing: If we are going to reach our
climate goals, we are going to need a diverse mix of energy
sources, and nuclear can be one of those sources. However, that
is not to say that nuclear energy is the single, perfect
solution to our country's energy needs.
In fact, if nuclear energy is to play a role in our energy
transition, we must address two things. First, the United
States must develop a comprehensive, science-based strategy to
dispose of spent fuel--a strategy that does not cause harm to
public health or our environment.
If we do not have a long-term, permanent solution for
disposing of nuclear waste, then we will struggle to be able to
use this source of carbon-free electricity. We must also figure
out how to handle the aging of our nuclear plants.
Since I have been in Congress, we have only had one new
nuclear power plant come online. And during that same time, we
have shut down and decommissioned many reactors across the
country, including the one reactor we had in my State of
Colorado.
Because of advancements in technology that have been made
over the years, the U.S. nuclear industry has been able to
maintain its noncarbon-emitting electricity generation
capability for more than three decades now.
But with several more nuclear plants scheduled to close in
the coming years, and as the impacts of the climate crisis
become more apparent, we have to find ways to avoid any
reductions in the noncarbon-emitting portfolio of our energy
sector.
As the chairman said, he, and I, and the chairs of the full
committee sent a series of letters yesterday to key
stakeholders in the nuclear industry asking for their input and
recommendations on how we can improve the licensing process
without sacrificing the health and safety of our constituents.
So as we continue to invest in and expand our use of
nuclear energy in this country, it must be done in a way that
continues to protect the health and the safety of the American
people.
I am sure all of the witnesses here today will agree with
that foundational statement. We need rigorous, science-based
regulations, and we need strict oversight. So I look forward to
hearing from the witnesses today about potential improvements
to the application and licensing process.
I also believe, however, it's important that we hear from
the body overseeing this work, the Nuclear Regulatory
Commission. And so, Mr. Chairman, I would ask that as a follow-
up to this hearing, we should have another hearing with
Commissioners from the NRC to discuss, from their point of
view, where we can make improvements without sacrificing public
health and safety.
Thank you for having this hearing. I think this is a great
bipartisan step towards our energy policy, and I yield back.
[The prepared statement of Ms. DeGette follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Duncan. And we plan on having that hearing with NRC
coming up this summer.
It is now my honor to recognize the Chair of the full
Committee on Energy and Commerce, Mrs. McMorris Rodgers, for 5
minutes for an opening statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, A
REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF WASHINGTON

Mrs. Rodgers. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
American leadership in nuclear energy and nuclear
technology is critical to our economic security and our
national security.
It must be part of a strong energy mix. It is how we win
the future with clean, reliable, and affordable energy to power
our way of life, keep the lights on, build stronger
communities, and keep our economies going.
Many of us just returned from Europe where we heard a lot
about the scary realities of shutting down nuclear energy.
Putin is weaponizing Europe's reliance on Russian natural gas.
As he shuts down gas pipelines, countries have been forced to
scramble to secure their energy supplies, keep their economies
running and energy affordable.
Germany, which just completed its phaseout of its nuclear
power plants this weekend, is especially in crisis. Since Putin
began cutting supplies, electricity prices have skyrocketed.
The government has asked citizens to ration energy, and, as
reported by NPR, Germany is even stocking up on candles to
prepare for blackouts.
Without reliable sources of energy, like nuclear, Germany's
security is weakened and is returning to the Dark Ages. Just
yesterday--yesterday morning when we were in Warsaw, we
participated in a signing ceremony for an agreement between the
United States and Poland in conjunction with GE-Hitachi's small
modular reactor deployment.
It was inspiring to see all the excitement in Poland for
this nuclear deal and another one for the three large nuclear
reactors and potentially three more.
Poland's leaders, like so many of us in Congress,
understand and appreciate the reliable and secure energy that
comes from nuclear. They are looking at other American nuclear
technologies like NuScale's VOYGR reactors. Not only is this an
indication of a strong U.S.-Poland relationship, it shows that
nuclear energy must be a key part of our future.
America, not Russia or China, must lead to restore and
expand our leadership in nuclear energy. And we do it by
unleashing our unmatched genius for innovation by assuring a
predictable regulatory landscape to help attract investment and
support decisions to expand nuclear deployment and by
encouraging new technologies that will provide exciting new
nuclear applications, such as providing power and heat for
industrial uses.
Our central question today is, What does it take to ensure
a healthy exiting nuclear fleet and deploy the promising new
innovations? What does it take to be sure that we have the
nuclear infrastructure and fuels for our fleet and advanced new
reactors? And what does it take to assure America can lead the
world and our allies and partners on nuclear and nuclear
innovation?
Sixtnine years ago, Congress enacted the essential policies
that can guide safe nuclear development in the United States
and export abroad. The Atomic Energy Act of 1954 encouraged the
widespread use of atomic energy for peaceful purposes,
consistent with ensuring our common defense and public health
and safety.
With that policy, we led the world for several decades in
developing civilian nuclear technologies and set the standard
for safety. We must continue to build on this leadership to
bolster our long-term nuclear competitive edge and strategic
interests.
If we don't lead, China and Russia will. China and Russia
combined have already announced plans to construct an estimated
66 reactors in multiple nations. They are working more closely
on nuclear technologies, which raises more serious security
concerns.
America has also witnessed a weakening of our nuclear fuel
infrastructure, building an unhealthy reliance on Russian-
sourced nuclear fuels, a security problem intensified by the
Ukraine invasion.
What does it take to increase our own secure supplies? What
does it take to enjoy the economic benefits of a domestic
nuclear infrastructure?
Despite Germany's poor decisions, other European nations,
like as I mentioned in Poland, are looking at American
technologies.
Closer to home, I have been following the work of Energy
Northwest with innovative companies like X-energy. This work
holds great promise for eastern Washington, one of the early
leaders in deploying nuclear technology, to once again lead in
advanced nuclear generation.
This is encouraging for a brighter and stronger future.
This hearing is a solid first step for the committee, in a
strong bipartisan way, to update the Nation's regulatory
policies that are necessary to restore American nuclear energy
and to advance clean and secure energy here and around the
world.
I look forward to the suggestions from all our witnesses
today, your suggestions, and I also want to just say I
appreciate the bipartisan approach to this hearing and working
with Ranking Member DeGette of the subcommittee and the full
committee, Frank Pallone.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
[The prepared statement of Mrs. Rodgers follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Duncan. Thank you, Madam Chair.
I now recognize the full committee ranking member, Mr.
Pallone, for 5 minutes for opening.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. FRANK PALLONE, Jr., A REPRESENTATIVE
IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF NEW JERSEY

Mr. Pallone. Thank you, Chairman Duncan, for holding
today's hearing, and I hope that today is a sign that we can
work in a bipartisan matter on energy issues.
Last Congress, this subcommittee spent a lot of time
studying the power sector and our Nation's electricity grid and
how they impact the worsening climate crisis.
And while the power sector has made significant progress in
reducing carbon emissions over the last two decades, thanks in
large part to the growth of renewable energy, it still
accounted for 28 percent of total carbon pollution in the
United States in 2022.
So decarbonizing the power plants that keep the lights on
in our homes and businesses is crucial to addressing the
climate crisis.
Now, nuclear power plays an important role in producing
carbon-free power for the electric grid. Last year, nuclear
power accounted for nearly half of all carbon-free power
generated in the United States.
In my home State of New Jersey, it supplies nearly 90
percent of the State's carbon-free power. Committee Democrats
have long been committed to decarbonizing the power sector to
combat the climate crisis and to lead the world in a clean
energy transition.
In order to achieve 100 percent decarbonization in the
power sector while keeping prices low for consumers, we need
reliable carbon-free resources that can sustain output for long
periods of time, and nuclear power can meet this test.
The Nuclear Regulatory Commission has done an admirable job
over the years ensuring nuclear power is safe and secure. The
nuclear industry often touts its safety successes over the past
decades, but that success is partly due to the efforts of
Federal regulators to stay on top of inspections and safety
protocols of plants around the country.
Last week, I joined Chairs Rodgers and Duncan and Ranking
Member DeGette in a request for information asking nuclear
power stakeholders for comments and recommendations on the
NRC's licensing and regulatory process.
It is important the committee hear from all interested
stakeholders about any possible regulatory improvements that
could make the process more efficient or to improve safety and
security.
Now, as we explore any possible changes, first and
foremost, it is critical that they do not undermine the safety
and security of our Nation's nuclear fleet.
Now, as we look at the licensing and regulatory process, I
also want to take a moment to highlight investments Democrats
and President Biden have made over the last 2 years in our
Nation's nuclear power industry.
The Bipartisan Infrastructure Law authorizes Civil Nuclear
Credit Program, a $6 billion fund to the Department of Energy
to support our existing nuclear fleet. And these investments
will help support continued operation of nuclear facilities to
prevent increases in carbon pollution from the power sector.
Then, as part of the Inflation Reduction Act, we created a
tax credit for zero-emission nuclear power and invested 700
million in a program, originally established by this committee
in the Energy Act of 2020, to support next-generation nuclear
fuel.
The Inflation Reduction Act was the single largest
investment in climate action in American history. It is going
to finally allow us to begin to protect our communities from
the impact of worsening climate crisis while also creating
nuclear energy jobs and lowering energy costs for American
families.
So I would like to see this committee work together to
build on the progress we made during the last Congress. That is
why I appreciate the bipartisan nature of this hearing today
and hope that we will see more hearings where both sides of the
aisle can work together.
And with that, Chairman Duncan, I yield back the balance of
my time.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Pallone follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Duncan. I thank the ranking member, and that will
conclude the Member opening statements. I want to remind
Members that, pursuant to committee rules, all Members' opening
statements will be made part of the record.
So now it is time to dive in. I want to thank all of our
witnesses for being here today and taking time to testify
before this subcommittee. Each witness will have the
opportunity to give a 5-minute opening statement followed by a
round of questions from Members.
Our witnesses today: Dr. Gehin, associate laboratory
director, nuclear science and technology, at Idaho National
Laboratory, as recognized and introduced by Mr. Fulcher; Mr.
Regis Repko is senior vice president, generation transmission
strategy, at Duke Energy; Mr. Armond Cohen is the executive
director of Clean Air Task Force; and Mr. Jeremy Harrell is
chair of the board of directors for the U.S. Nuclear Industry
Council and chief strategy officer at ClearPath.
So gentlemen, we appreciate you being here today. And I
will now recognize Dr. Gehin for 5 minutes for an opening
statement.

STATEMENTS OF JESS C. GEHIN, Ph.D., ASSOCIATE LABORATORY
DIRECTOR, NUCLEAR SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, IDAHO NATIONAL
LABORATORY; REGIS REPKO, SENIOR VICE PRESIDENT, GENERATION AND
TRANSMISSION STRATEGY, DUKE ENERGY; ARMOND COHEN, EXECUTIVE
DIRECTOR, CLEAN AIR TASK FORCE, INC.; AND JEREMY HARRELL,
CHAIR, BOARD OF DIRECTORS, U.S. NUCLEAR INDUSTRY COUNCIL, AND
CHIEF STRATEGY OFFICER, CLEARPATH

STATEMENT OF JESS C. GEHIN, Ph.D.

Dr. Gehin. All right. Thank you very much, Chairman Duncan,
Vice Chairman Curtis, Ranking Member DeGette, and members of
the committee.
It is an honor to be here and a privilege to be here today.
I have already been introduced. I'm Jess Gehin, associate
laboratory director for nuclear science and technology.
I appreciate Representative Fulcher's introduction. So will
just proceed with my comments.
As we look to the future of nuclear energy in the United
States, I would encourage members of this committee to consider
the following questions to enable America's nuclear expansion.
First, how do we leverage our existing nuclear industry to
ensure domestic energy security?
Our current fleet of 92 reactors, soon to be 94 operating
reactors, provide a tremendous resource for us, a key
imperative to ensure that these reactors continue to provide
clean and reliable power.
To do this, we need to ensure our plants are not subject to
economic variations that can result in them being shut down
prematurely, which we have had several that have been in that
situation.
We also need to extend their operating lifetimes to
continue to get the value in clean energy from these
investments.
Second, our reactors require a reliable supply of uranium
and enrichment services. We already heard some of that in the
opening statements.
Currently, our Nation imports 90 percent of our uranium
needed for our reactor fleet. This includes imports fromRussia.
Eliminating these imports from Russia requires us to establish
an expanded uranium enrichment capability domestically and with
our close allies.
The second question is, How do we ensure successful
deployment of nuclear energy--of new nuclear energy that is
critical to our energy security, global leadership, and climate
objectives?
The recent DOE report on ``Pathways to Commercial Liftoff''
for an Advanced Nuclear states that the domestic nuclear
capacity has the potential to triple by 2050 and is key to
meeting our clean-energy goals.
This ambitious goal requires us to aggressively develop,
demonstrate, and most important, deploy nuclear reactors. To
enable this, we must support the near-term reactor
demonstrations.
This starts with INL's plans to start up the first new
reactor on the INL site in 50 years, a reactor called MARVEL,
by the end of next year. It's a small reactor, but an important
step as it gives us the experience and shows that we can move
reactors forward relatively quickly.
This will be followed by several other reactor projects,
first-of-a-kind commercial projects. This includes the carbon-
free power project being developed by UAMPS, which is a NuScale
SMR, and other reactor demonstrations, including TerraPower's
Natrium reactor in Wyoming, and X-energy's Xe-100 reactors
planned for deployment on the Gulf Coast. And there are others
in the next decade.
We must ensure a domestic supply of high-assay low-enriched
uranium. This high-assay low-enriched uranium has a higher
enrichment than is used in our current fleets, and we do not
currently domestically produce that uranium.
Expanding the deployments to meet this goal that I outlined
of tripling our nuclear generation will require us to even
expand much more our uranium supply and enrichment.
And we should encourage the deployment of nuclear energy
such that it is on a level playing field of generation. The
Inflation Reduction Act provided technology-neutral credits
that stimulate early deployments and will also likely improve
access to finances, which is important for expanded deployment.
Third question: How does nuclear energy support our
national security interests? There have already been good
comments on this. American ingenuity created the nuclear
industry. It was invented in the U.S.
The majority of the reactors around the world are based on
U.S. technology. As a result, our safety in nonproliferation
standards are the world's standards. But as the nuclear
industry in the U.S. has been stuck in neutral for decades,
other nations have moved forward, notably China and Russia.
Given the momentum that I just talked about, with the
demonstrations and the deployment, we have an opportunity to
lead again and establish our world leadership in nuclear
energy.
And recent announcements, such as those in Poland for
international deployments, are very encouraging, and we should
increase our support for export of our technologies.
Fourth question: How can regulatory processes be improved
to accelerate deployment in nuclear plants? The United States
benefits from the Nuclear Regulatory Commission, which is
viewed as the world leader. However, one of the most
significant time- and resource-intensive activities for new
reactor developers is the NRC licensing process.
The NRC is undertaking a new regulatory approach called
Part 53, but what else can be done? There's other efficiencies
that can be gained: reducing regulator timeframes by looking at
mandatory hearings; approaches to expedite environmental
reviews; roles of bodies within the NRC, including the Advisory
Committee on Reactor Safeguards; NRC licensing processes that
include more scheduled certainty; and fee structures to reduce
the burden.
Finally, I would like to close with some comments on the
backend. We need to address our near-term/long-term spent fuel
management responsibilities. We have the capability and
knowledge to responsibly and safely manage spent fuel.
Congress has directed DOE to use a consent-based siting
approach, in pursuit of a Federal consolidated interim storage
for the Nation's spent fuel inventory. However, the interim
storage facilities of sufficient capacity cannot be constructed
without revising the Nuclear Waste Policy Act to remove the
prerequisite for the repository construction authorization.
I will also mention quickly, and then I will close:
Recycling remains a potential option for the industry and
policymakers to consider. INL and other laboratories conduct
research, more research is needed to improve the economics of
recycling while addressing proliferation risks.
So I will stop there. Thank you, and I appreciate----
[The prepared statement of Dr. Gehin follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Duncan. Thank you. There will be a lot of questions
as--the witnesses, just try to stay in 5 minutes, as we have
got a lot to cover.
Mr. Repko, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF REGIS REPKO

Mr. Repko. Thank you. Chairman Duncan, Ranking Member
DeGette, members of the committee. Good afternoon.
My name is Regis Repko. I appreciate the opportunity to be
with you here today representing Duke Energy, where I serve as
the senior vice president of generation and transmission
strategy.
I have 38 years in the energy industry experience, 31 in
nuclear generation in a variety of roles, including having held
a Senior Reactor Operator License at the Oconee Nuclear Station
in Seneca, South Carolina.
Duke Energy is one of the largest energy holding companies
in the United States. We serve 8.2 million electric customers
and 1.6 million natural gas customers across the Southeast and
Midwest.
We own 50,000 megawatts of energy capacity, including the
largest regulated nuclear fleet in the country. Duke Energy is
currently overseeing the largest clean-energy transition in the
industry, and I'm proud to represent the 28,000 Duke Energy
employees that are leading this effort.
As we continue lowering carbon emissions from electric
generation, maintaining affordability and reliability for
customers is critical. We plan to add unprecedented numbers in
amounts of solar, energy storage, wind power to the grid, as we
continue to retire our aging coal fleet.
However, we must have firm, dispatchable resources, such as
nuclear and natural gas, to support renewable energy resources.
Our customers depend on us, and we must not jeopardize
reliability or affordability in this transition.
Our nuclear generation is a vital part of Duke Energy's
generation portfolio. Our nuclear fleet delivers more than 80
percent of our company's carbon-free energy today. While
generation from renewables is increasing, the existing nuclear
fleet continues providing baseload, carbon-free capacity that
our customers need.
We cannot achieve our Nation's carbon-reduction goals
without nuclear power. Our 11 nuclear power units provide about
50 percent of the electricity in the Carolinas and remain
economic drivers for their communities, providing thousands of
well-paying jobs, significant tax revenues, and partnership
opportunities and benefits.
To advance new nuclear, we see a need for certainty in
three areas, in the area of licensing, fuel, and financing.
In terms of licensing, it's both for the existing fleet and
advanced reactor designs. Our licenses of our current nuclear
fleet will expire between 2030 and 2046. Renewing our nuclear
plant licenses for an additional 20 years will help ensure a
reliable, carbon-free, cost-competitive power for our customers
for decades to come.
Duke Energy is closely monitoring the Nuclear Regulatory
Commission's rulemaking on the Generic Environmental Impact
Statement guidance as we will rely on that guidance for future
applications for our existing fleet.
The NRC's adherence to this rulemaking schedule will be an
important predictor of the needed regulatory stability. And
congressional oversight of these matters is appreciated.
In terms of looking forward to new nuclear, Duke Energy
intends to build eight gigawatts of new nuclear generation to
meet our energy goals. We are working with industry groups,
reactor technology companies, and leading research universities
studying the deployment of advanced nuclear technology.
Regulatory clarity is important in any utilities decision
to move forward. Duke Energy looks forward to continuing to
work with the nuclear generation industry and the NRC to
develop the Part 53 licensing process so that it is effective
and efficient and commensurate to the safety of the new reactor
designs.
Fuel certainty is an issue. Russia's the largest supplier
of nuclear fuel worldwide. As the U.S. and its allies pivot
from Russian nuclear fuel, there is not enough production
capacity to satisfy long-term demand.
And although Duke Energy has a diverse set of suppliers,
both domestic and from ally nations, there's still a need to do
more.
And then financial certainty. First, I would like to thank
Congress for funding the Advanced Reactor Demonstration
Program, supporting reactor vendors to accelerate deployment
and develop under their designs.
I would also like to thank Congress for the IRA, which
includes the production tax credits that support our existing
nuclear fleet, as our customers will see the values of these
credits flow right back to them.
The IRA also supplies the clean energy PTC, a tax-neutral
credit, the technology-neutral credit. So out of both of these,
our bottom line, our customers will see lower electric bills
because of the IRA production tax credits.
So we see the potential for costs and scheduled
uncertainties with current estimates for reactor technologies.
And we anticipate these cost reductions for successive projects
will lessen as learnings are passed around from one project to
the next.
The Federal Government has an opportunity to accelerate
deployments of new designs by reducing the risk of these first
and early projects. This can be done through options, such as
Federal insurance, if projects were to exceed cost caps.
We anticipate these types of programs would only be needed
for the first several projects, but their availability to
support decisions by utilities to commit to new projects is
vital.
Mr. Duncan. May I ask you to conclude?
Mr. Repko. Yes. In closing, thank you very much for being
here, I appreciate the opportunity to be here with you today,
and I look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Repko follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Duncan. I get that the subject of nuclear energy is
very complex and I understand going over a little bit, but
let's try to stay within 5 minutes.
Mr. Cohen.

STATEMENT OF ARMOND COHEN

Mr. Cohen. Thank you very much, Chairman Duncan, Ranking
Member DeGette, and honorable members of the subcommittee.
I am going to jump right in. It is the best of times for
nuclear energy, and it is the worst of times, to borrow a
phrase. On the one hand, this very hearing, the bipartisan
nature of it, the experience that some Members have had in
Europe, my recent experience even in California working on the
Diablo Canyon Plant suggest that there's actually very broad
support for nuclear energy as a climate and energy security
tool.
That is great news. We are in a different place than we
were a few years ago on that issue. The problem is that we are
just not moving at any scale and pace that is relevant to
climate.
To be relevant to climate, nuclear is going to have to be
churning out something like 100 gigawatts per year globally.
That is about in the range of where we were with coal and gas
in a sustained way for a few years.
We have to be really running at that scale. We are about 10
gigawatts a year. So we need to be 10X where we are, and we are
just not there. We are nowhere near there, and so the thesis of
my testimony is that we are going to need a very radical
rethink of this sector.
That is a radical rethink of the business model, of the way
we regulate, the way we finance, and our international
institutions because, after all, the U.S. is only 15 percent of
global energy consumption and about the same amount of
CO
2
. So what we do in the U.S. really isn't going to
matter to global climate or much anything else unless what we
build and create is exportable and readily diffusible.
So the key, we think, to this revolution moving from 10
gigawatts a year to 100 gigawatts is a very different ecosystem
that could basically produce a commoditized standardized
product.
Think about Boeings, not cathedrals, or Timexes, not
handmade Swiss watches, is what we are building right now. If
we look in Georgia, for example, our $12,000 Vogtle unit.
Now, not only do we need to be cost competitive, we also
need to be able to deliver on time. We can't take a decade or
two to deliver these units. We need to be out there in 3 to 5
years with very low risk.
These things need to be financeable on near commercial
terms and suitable for deployment in the developing world, as I
said, where most of the energy growth is going to be.
So how do we get there from where we are today, which is
basically nowhere? We--in the testimony, we lay out a number of
things that we think the U.S. can do to drive the innovation,
not just the technical innovation, which we are really, really
good at--not so great at regulatory innovation, not so great at
financial innovation, at least in this sector.
So we kind of have a laundry list in the testimony. I will
just hit a couple points that I think some of my fellow
panelists are not going to hit or haven't hit.
The first is that we need some sort of private-public
collaboration to really build this commoditized product
ecosystem, those Boeings. We don't have that right now. There
has to be a rethink of standardization and commodity, and
that's not an easy thing to do. It is going to take some big
brains, but we need to do it.
We need public policies that drive large orders enabling
repeat deployment of standardized designs. That is how you get
the cost down. We can't continue to build one offs that end up
being last of kind.
We need a comprehensive program to drive nuclear CAPEX
costs down below $4,000 per kilowatt. As I said, the Vogtle are
12. That is not going to work. We need to be in a very low-cost
range.
We need also global initiatives because, as I said, what we
do in the U.S. isn't really going to matter to climate over the
long run unless we can do this for the rest of the world.
So we list a number of reforms that are needed. We think
there needs to be an international bank for nuclear
infrastructure finance. We believe there needs to be some sort
of international licensing authority or platform by which
licenses can transfer from one region to another and some
mechanism for helping newcomer countries adopt this technology.
We need a sandbox or an innovative licensed live testing
environment in the U.S., which we don't have now. Importantly,
we also need to look at how we regulate, and the question of
low-dose radiation standards is at the heart of some of the
dysfunction in regulation, in our opinion.
The U.S. DOE was given authority and money to do this, and
unfortunately it has not moved that forward, and Congress
should be encouraging them to do so.
Finally, the few other items that we mentioned. If we are
going to scale up uranium mining at the scale that 100
gigawatts a year, we are going to need to ensure socially and
environmentally responsible mining practices.
And there's several other opportunities we highlight that I
look forward to engaging on. Thank you for your attention. \1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Mr. Cohen's prepared statement has been retained in committee
files and is available at https://docs.house.gov/meetings/IF/IF03/
20230418/115741/HHRG-118-IF03-Wstate-CohenA-20230418.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Mr. Duncan. Thank you for that.
Mr. Harrell, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF JEREMY HARRELL

Mr. Harrell. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
My name is Jeremy Harrell, and I am the chair of the U.S.
Nuclear Industry Council's board of directors. The Council
represents more than 80 companies engaged in nuclear innovation
and supply chain development. I am also the chief strategy
officer at ClearPath. Thank you for the opportunity to testify
today.
American nuclear energy can power a clean and secure future
if the U.S. seizes this moment. Global energy markets are
demanding a carbon-free, reliable, secure energy source more
than ever, and the U.S. nuclear supply chain is ready to
deliver.
This increase in demand has coincided with unprecedented
private-sector momentum. For example, American electricity
providers are calling for 90 gigawatts of new nuclear power by
2050, doubling current capacity.
The U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission anticipates at least
13 applicants for new nuclear by 2027. And at least eight U.S.-
based companies have announced international partnerships in
more than 10 countries.
These data points underscore the U.S. is entering the era
of deployment. Now, we must show the world that we can bring
projects in on time and on budget, at scale.
Thanks to Congress's support, particularly this committee,
we have seen bipartisan nuclear policy wins, like NEIMA, NEICA,
and the Energy Act of 2020. The resulting tax incentives, NRS
modernization, and public-private partnerships like the
Advanced Reactor Demonstration Program are bolstering the
interest of new investors and new customers--not just
utilities, but chemical facilities, steel producers, and data
centers.
There are three challenges this committee could tackle to
further accelerate American nuclear expansion. First, secure
the nuclear supply chain and end global reliance on Russia.
Second, enhance the U.S.'s offerings for new American nuclear
abroad. And third, improve regulatory predictability here at
home.
I will start with the supply chain. From mining to
enrichment, our Nation is too reliant on Russia. About 95
percent of our uranium used in the U.S. today is imported.
Nearly 50 percent of that comes from Russia and Kazakhstan.
Russia is the only source of large volumes of high-assay low-
enriched uranium, the fuel needed for many of our advanced
designs, and Russia has been supplying more than 20 percent of
our low-enriched uranium for our current fleet.
Russia's invasion of Ukraine has made it even more clear
that the U.S. and its allies must end the global reliance on
the Russian nuclear sector now.
To enable a private-industry-led HALEU supply, the Biden
administration must immediately launch the Advanced Nuclear
Fuel Availability Program already authorized by this committee.
Second, the U.S. must enhance its offerings for American
technology deployment abroad. Demand in Europe, Africa, the
Middle East, and South Asia has never been higher. Nations want
affordable, cmlean, reliable, and secure energy, and
unfortunately China and Russia are filing that desire, building
dozens of new reactors both within their borders and
internationally.
The United States and its allies should be the ones who
establish these new 100-year partnerships, not China and
Russia. New policies like the Bipartisan International Energy
Act send a strong signal that the U.S. will reestablish itself
as a leader in the global marketplace, but Team America must do
more with the tools available.
For instance, in 2020 the Development Finance Corporation
removed its restrictions on supporting nuclear power projects
but has been slow to promote American technologies.
Similarly, XM's bank--the XM Banks China program provides
financial support for wind and solar but excludes nuclear. This
week's U.S.-Poland deal to support roughly 20 SMRs with $4
billion in loans, the agreement that the full committee
chairwoman mentioned earlier, is a great first step, but the
U.S. must pursue this aggressive whole-of-government strategy
to compete.
Third, neither of these goals work if we do not modernize
regulations here at home. To lead the NRC must be structured
and incentivized to license the next generation of new
reactors.
While the NRC is working to modernize, attract new talent
and further its technical understanding of new technologies--
efforts that I commend them for--the Commission admits it will
still struggle to review these new applications--understandably
so: Thirteen new applications in the next 5 years is
unprecedented.
To rise to that challenge, the Commission should do three
things. One, realign the NRC's processes for new technologies
around their safety benefits and new applications, like clean
heat and disaster relief.
Two, increase review efficiencies so it doesn't take years
to come to a decision.
And finally, be proactive. That means asking Congress for
support in preparing to be a regulator that not only meets its
safety mission but also enables nuclear's role in our clean
energy future.
USNIC also applauds early House action with the Lower
Energy Cost Act and stands ready to support a bipartisan deal
that overhauls our Nation's antiquated permitting system.
Meaningful permit reform is essential to growing new American
clean energy.
In conclusion, this committee has an incredible record of
bipartisanship in nuclear energy and is positioning the U.S. to
lead the world in the deployment of affordable, reliable clean
energy.
The challenge before us today is to double down on those
efforts and further increase U.S. supply chain security and
international competitiveness. USNIC and ClearPath greatly
appreciates what this committee has accomplished and stand
ready to support your efforts in the months ahead.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Harrell follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Duncan. I thank all the witnesses. That concludes the
witness testimony, and I will move into the question portion,
and I will recognize myself for 5 minutes.
I and several of my colleagues, as the Chair mentioned, on
this committee just returned from Europe, where several of our
meetings focused on nuclear.
I am optimistic about the partnerships we can make to
advance the safe deployment of civilian nuclear globally. To
foster these partnerships, the United States must work to
advance our domestic industry.
For a variety of reasons, it is important that we continue
to advance nuclear energy in the United States and, as
Assistant Secretary Huff recently said at an Atlantic Council
announcement on the Poland project, ``deploy, deploy, deploy.''
Now, we need to determine how to achieve that deployment of
nuclear here at home, nuclear and technology across the globe.
So I would like to ask Mr. Repko: Duke is responsible for
providing affordable and reliable energy to many of my
constituents and many more throughout the country. What will it
take for utilities to put orders in for new reactors?
Mr. Repko. Thank you for that question, Chairman Duncan.
I laid out the three priorities for us, right? The
licensing, certainly. Certainly, the fuel certainty for the
entire fleet. But for Duke Energy it really comes down to that
financial certainty.
We have introduced nuclear, in terms of our generation of
resource planning to our regulators in North Carolina, and they
are supportive of it--so much so as they have approved for us
to be getting costs around early site development. But as you
pointed out, everybody wants to be second, a fast second
follower to save that risk.
As a matter of fact, the North Carolina Commission
recognized and endorsed us being a second follower, relative to
managing the risk to the customer.
So I think it is those kind of financial constructs that
are laid out well in the ``Pathways to Commercial Liftoff''
that the DOE issued last month.
There's a number of different avenues or programs that
could be put in place, whether it be direct grants that would
lower that cost of energy or more of the cost share, relative
to these first few projects, that would have some kind of
Federal insurance above a certain cap and cost share between
customers or investors alike.
If we were to have that in place, it would put new nuclear
not even at an equitable cost but a competitive cost relative
to the value that it adds in other aspects. We would have the
support of our regulators, relative to moving faster as well.
Mr. Duncan. Thank you for that.
I would ask unanimous consent to insert in the record a
report from the Department of Energy, ``Pathways to Commercial
Liftoff: Advanced Nuclear.'' It is a really chock-full paper.
And so without objection, and so ordered. \1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ The report has been retained in committee files and is included
in the Documents for the Record at https://docs.house.gov/meetings/IF/
IF03/20230418/115741/HHRG-118-IF03-20230418-SD097.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
It mentions SMRs, advanced reactors, in this report. So Mr.
Harrell, advanced reactors will be critical for the future of
energy in the United States. We need to modernize our
regulatory framework.
NRC's putting effort into preparing for the initial
advanced reactor applications, but how will they need to
rethink their licensing and oversight roles to accommodate
these new technologies?
Mr. Harrell. Yes, Mr. Chairman, it's a great question, and
thank you for your leadership on these issues. And I think
having and really pressuring them to really rethink how we do
this is going to be important.
Advanced reactors have a lot of different attributes than
our traditional gigawatt-scale reactors. They are more
flexible, they are smaller, they can be paired to provide heat
to industrial facilities, just like it could be used for
electricity generation. And there are a lot of different
dynamics that the NRC needs to consider in that vein, right?
We don't need the significant security zones, for example,
like a gigawatt-scale reactor does, and so changing and making
the emergency preparedness zones small for a small modular
reactor makes a lot of sense and actually would reduce costs
without any loss in safety or security.
The ability to streamline a deployment of more reactors
because we are going to build multiple of them in a package,
right? The new scale package, in many cases, are eight to 12
small modular reactors to have a power facility. X-energy is
four reactors, things along those lines. We need to be able to
site those more quickly. That way we can scale these
technologies abroad.
So really they need to rethink and really put forth a
process that accommodates the natural attributes that these new
reactors have.
Mr. Duncan. Mr. Gehin, what are the regulatory costs a new
reactor applicant faces when they are going through the
licensing process at NRC?
Dr. Gehin. I'm sorry. Could you repeat that?
Mr. Duncan. So what are the regulatory costs a new reactor
applicant faces when going through the licensing process at the
Nuclear Regulatory Commission?
Dr. Gehin. Regulatory costs? Is that what you said? Yes, so
there are fees. When you go to license a reactor, you usually
go through a prelicensing phase, you go through the typical
submissions. Those all are costs borne by the applicant that
the NRC charges.
In addition to that, the reactor design has to be of
sufficient mature level to go through that. So there's a lot of
costs on design. That's indirect. that needs to be done, but
has to be done in advance before the licensing.
Those costs----
Mr. Duncan. What would you say is the percentage and the
overall cost of a reactor project? What's their percentage of
regulator application fees and compliance versus construction
costs?
Dr. Gehin. For a large--and maybe Mr. Repko can comment on
that for large plants. Of course large plants cost more money,
so that percentage is pretty small, but as you get to these
small reactors like we are advocating for, microreactors and
smaller reactors, you can get to----
Mr. Duncan. The economies of scale will kick in at that
point, once you get the first one approved, right?
Dr. Gehin. Yes.
Mr. Duncan. They will be cheaper as they go.
Dr. Gehin. But for the first one, there is significant
cost. So you have to get past this first one. I don't have an
exact percentage number, but it can be quite high, and it can
be a barrier to get through.
That is why some regulatory reform, such as eliminating
costs for prelicensing application, would remove barriers to
get those small--particularly those smaller ones moving and
into the regulatory process.
Mr. Duncan. I'm out of time. So we will now go to the
Ranking Member DeGette for 5 minutes.
Ms. DeGette. Thank you so much, Mr. Chairman, and thanks to
the panel for your excellent testimony.
As the chairman referenced, all the leadership of this
subcommittee sent a letter actually to the U.S. Nuclear
Industry Council on April 14th asking for comments on how we
could improve the regulatory process.
And so Mr. Chairman, I would ask unanimous consent to put
that letter in the record.
Mr. Duncan. Without objection, so ordered.
Ms. DeGette. Thank you. And I am assured by counsel that we
would like to--even though this is directed at Mr. Harrell's
group, we would like to have comments from everybody, because
we don't have time to get into all the specific
recommendations.
But, Mr. Repko, you said that you have worked through the
renewal process, you are working through that right now with
some of your facilities. And so I just want to ask you, Do you
see unnecessary approval processes that could be streamlined
without sacrificing safety standards that are needed to protect
public health and safety?
Mr. Repko. Well, thank you for that question.
Ms. DeGette. Yes or no will work.
Mr. Repko. Yes, we do. We absolutely do.
Ms. DeGette. Thank you. And Mr. Harrell, the same question
for you. For your industry.
Mr. Harrell. Could you repeat the question again?
Ms. DeGette. Yes. Do you see unnecessary approval processes
that could be streamlined without sacrificing the safety
standards that are needed to protect public health and safety?
Mr. Harrell. Absolutely.
Ms. DeGette. So what I would ask of you and everybody else,
it is all well and good to sit here in this hearing and talk in
general about that. And we all agree, in a bipartisan way, but
where the rubber hits the road is when you look at the specific
proposals.
So I would ask everyone if they could please submit
specific recommendations, so as Mr. Duncan and I sit and think
about how to do this, we can see exactly what can be done.
And that goes to my next point, which is about the waste.
So I have been on this committee since 1997--and you don't have
to do the math, that is fine--but I will say, we have been
talking about what we are going to do about nuclear waste ever
since well before I got here, and I think one of the issues
that we have, in the whole nuclear industry, but also
particularly with waste, is we don't have any clear sense of
what to do that we can give to the industry.
And therefore, it makes it really hard to make business
decisions. As Mr. Repko said in his written testimony,
regulatory clarity is important in any utility's decision to
move forward.
And so one time I went down to Yucca Mountain with Joe
Barton, when he was the chairman of this committee. We are all
looking around and it looked pretty remote to me, but we were
still going through the scientific process.
And then with whichever party took over Congress, then it
was either certified or decertified and it was based on
politics, not on science. We need to get beyond that. And so
what I want to do is help develop some certainty about what we
do around this waste.
Because for public health and safety reasons, we need to
figure out what we are going to do. And right now, Dr. Kathryn
Huff of the Department of Energy, Assistant Secretary for
Nuclear Energy, said there are only 76 interim storage sites in
the United States. That's clearly not going to work if we are
going to actually include nuclear energy as part of our
portfolio.
So I want to just ask you all a very brief question about
this. And I will start with you, Mr. Harrell. In your work, in
your industry's work, has the lack of a comprehensive strategy
to store spent fuel impacted your members in the industry?
Mr. Harrell. Absolutely has. And it's an opportunity that I
think we can turn on a dime and ultimately deal with this issue
and grow the industry as a whole.
Ms. DeGette. And what about you, Mr. Repko? Same question
to you. Has that impacted your company's ability to do this?
Mr. Repko. It has. There are operational resources
necessary to store the fuel onsite.
Ms. DeGette. And Mr. Gehin, what have you seen to this
effect?
Dr. Gehin. Yes, so we, being a DOE research lab, we
primarily look at the future research, and I can support your
statements here on the scientific basis. That is what we do. We
do science and want to have that strong basis.
I think we can achieve that. I agree that it is the
policy--policy issues need to be resolved. DOE is also working
on this consent-based siting approach for consolidated interim
storage that will address the 76 or 77 sites.
Ms. DeGette. Your participation in this, your agencies
participation is going to be critical----
Dr. Gehin. Yes.
Ms. DeGette [continuing]. As we move forward. And finally,
Mr. Cohen, I don't want to leave you out. What are your
thoughts on this?
Mr. Cohen. We are not from the industry, but it definitely
is a public perception----
Ms. DeGette. No, I know.
Mr. Cohen [continuing]. Barrier. That's the argument that I
oddly enough get most common when I advocate for nuclear
energy, is what about the waste? We know it's a manageable
problem, it's not rocket science. Sweden and Finland are moving
forward. In fact, Finland is starting to put things in the
ground.
It's a question of public perception and politics, and the
consent-based siting approach is the way you do it. It's the
way Sweden and Finland have been able to move as far as they
have.
So we need to reboot----
Mr. Duncan. Yes.
Mr. Cohen. We have to reboot the process.
Ms. DeGette. I have been to Sweden, and I have seen what
they are doing there. It's incredible.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, I look forward to working on this
further.
Mr. Duncan. Yes. Those are great questions, and we plan to
have a hearing on reprocessing nuclear waste that sits at 121
sites in 39 States around the country. So commercial waste and
there is defense waste included, so we are going to have a
hearing on that. That is my plan.
I will now go to the chairwoman, Mrs. Rodgers, 5 minutes.
Mrs. Rodgers. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
To restore America's nuclear leadership, we also must have
strong and secure supply chains, especially for nuclear fuels,
to meet the needs of American industry and innovators.
We must confront current nuclear fuel security and
vulnerabilities, which have been caused by outdated policies
that allowed our nuclear fuel infrastructure to atrophy to
unacceptable levels.
And certainly this has become clear in wake of the Ukraine
war. This exposed the risk of reliance on Russia for a large
portion of America's enriched nuclear fuels.
Three years ago, in the Energy Act of 2020, Congress took
steps to limit Russia's imports to 15 percent of American
supplies by the end of the decade, but the invasion shows that
more must be done so we don't fall into the same trap as
Germany did, for natural gas supplies, and so that U.S.
taxpayers no longer support Russia's malign regime.
So my question, Mr. Harrell and Mr. Repko, you both
acknowledge the need to enable enhanced domestic supplies and
diverse supplies. Beyond the Federal investments you mentioned,
how important is it to send a clear signal that a date certain,
America's nuclear industry can no longer rely on Russian-
sourced low enriched uranium?
Mr. Harrell. Thank you, Congresswoman McMorris Rodgers, and
it's a great question and I think it is an extremely important
piece of the puzzle to provide some certainty and ensure that
companies can make multihundred-million-dollar investments to
ramp up enrichment capabilities here in the United States and
with our allies.
I think it's telling, we saw out of the G7 just yesterday,
our allies the UK, Canada, the French, and the Japanese all
coming together and say, ``We need to ween all of our reliance
off of Russia together.''
And so we should work together, as like-minded countries
and kind of take a stand and say we are going to end this
reliance moving forward.
Mrs. Rodgers. Well, would you speak to what it would mean
for supply contracts and investments into new facilities too?
Mr. Harrell. I would say, probably Mr. Repko, as an
operator of the existing fleet, is probably suited to answer
that question.
Mrs. Rodgers. OK. OK. Thank you.
Mr. Repko. I would be glad to. Thank you for the question.
Mrs. Rodgers. OK.
Mr. Repko. So first off, it's absolutely a risk. As we take
a look at our portfolio, in terms of fuel, currently our
production is around 5 percent domestic, growing to 14 percent
next year, but that's really at the upper end of the
availability domestically.
The conversion process is--this is Duke Energy I am
speaking to--is roughly 50 percent domestic, again, due to
limitations. Now, all of our fabrication is domestic. So that's
kind of the portfolio that we are in.
But to the point being made, the domestic capacity around
the production and conversion is limited. So the perspective I
would give, though, the 2028 goal, 2028 relative to permitting,
constructing, and getting these kind of facilities operational,
it's right around the corner.
I mean, action needs to happen immediately in order to
progress to that goal.
Mrs. Rodgers. OK. Thank you. Mr. Gehin, I wanted to turn to
you also. We just returned from Europe, and we saw the
excitement for deploying not only large conventional reactors
but also advanced small modular reactors.
To assure that American technology continues to lead, can
you describe the importance of licensing and deploying advanced
nuclear here in the United States, and how does that strengthen
our ability to compete globally against Russia and China?
Dr. Gehin. Yes, great question. By constructing the
reactors in the United States, we demonstrate our trust and
confidence. We get the first one, as it was mentioned, the
first one is always a hard one.
I can give you a good example with NuScale and the carbon-
free power project. They announced their project out in Idaho
several years ago. When we talked to Romania, Ghana, Poland,
and other countries that are interested in that technology,
they point to that reactor as a showpiece and come to Idaho
specifically, because that reactor is going to be there.
So it is a huge boost in confidence, attraction. Give us
the ability to demonstrate to other countries that we are
leading. And that's just the first one. These other
demonstrations I mentioned will do the exactly the same thing.
So it is vitally important. It is also important because we
develop the supply chains, we develop the talent, the
expertise, the capability that then will support all these
broad international deployments, we will develop that here in
the U.S. rather than internationally.
Mrs. Rodgers. Would you also speak to the current time
lines for some of these projects that you are working on?
Dr. Gehin. Yes.
Mrs. Rodgers. And how an improved regulatory process
would----
Dr. Gehin. Yes, well, the current timeframes we are looking
at for various reactors, there's some, the smaller
microreactors, that will happen in the next 3 to 5 years. The
larger reactors, the SMRs, we are looking 2027, 2028, 2029,
2030.
Those will be licensed under current regulatory processes,
mostly by taking exceptions and other aspects. It is going to
be heard to impact their licensing timeframes. I think we need
to look at the licensing that is going to really blossom to get
to the ``deploy, deploy, deploy'' and get us to where we are
getting 10 to 20 gigawatts per year deployed of the U.S. maybe
in the 2030s, late 2030s timeframes.
So we need to be looking for that deployment stage.
Mrs. Rodgers. Thank you. Thank you, all. I yield back.
Mr. Duncan. Thank you, Madam Chair. I now recognize the
gentleman from New Jersey, the ranking member, Mr. Pallone, for
5 minutes.
Mr. Pallone. Thank you, Chairman Duncan, and let me thank
our witnesses.
In my opening statement I discussed the need for carbon-
free generationt, resources that can sustain output for long
periods of time.
So let me ask, Mr. Cohen, you spent a lot of time
discussing this concept in your written testimony. Could you
elaborate on the importance of these long-duration power
generation assets, particularly as to why they are important to
make decarbonization of the power sector more affordable for
consumers?
Mr. Cohen. Yes, thank you, Member Pallone. So as I detail
in the testimony, wind and solar are great resources. They are
cheap, they have gotten a lot cheaper. The problem is, it is
not just a daily fluctuation problem, it is a seasonal problem.
Anywhere in the northern hemisphere we are talking about months
where we have solar or wind output at about half peak. So you
can see the problem.
If it were a daily fluctuation problem--and, you know, just
the wind doesn't blow all the time and, obviously, the sun goes
down--we could manage that with battery storage pretty easily,
you know, 4- or 8-hour storage.
The problem is when you have December, where you have got a
January, February where you have got no solar energy, something
needs to fill that gap.
And so that's--all the modeling that's done, typically,
combines the variable sources, wind and solar, because when
they are there, they are cheap, but usually building on a
baseload of nuclear or something else, carbon capture or
something else that's zero carbon to offset that variability.
It is a solvable problem, but again the basics physics are
it's not a daily issue we are dealing with. It's seasonal, and
that's why you need something that is steady, 24/7/365 at the
base of the system.
Mr. Pallone. Well, thank you. Now, last week, I mentioned
in my opening, I sent out a request for information letter with
Chairs Rodgers and Duncan and Ranking Member DeGette, and we
asked for comments and recommendations on the NRC licensing and
regulatory process. And I know our witnesses haven't had enough
time to develop a formal response to this letter, but I wanted
to get some initial feedback.
So, again with Mr. Cohen, I know that Ms. DeGette mentioned
this, but if you could just maybe elaborate a little bit. And
that's the industry's desire to make the licensing process
simpler, but the concern that we have: Can that be done without
jeopardizing public health and safety?
Can you just maybe give me a couple examples? I know she
asked the question, but if you could just elaborate and maybe
give me some examples?
Mr. Cohen. Sure. Well, in the testimony and in comments we
filed with the NRC, we think there is an approach, and it is an
approach actually taken by other countries like South Korea,
Canada, the UK.
We call it kind of the less-is-more approach in which you
are not requiring, you don't have a rulebook that's 1,400 pages
with a bunch of box ticking. You are basically requiring the
applicant to come forward and make a safety case.
And what we have recommended to the NRC is that they
rethink what they are doing and say, basically, let's strip it
down and say what are the essential output issues, what are the
essential metrics that we are going to judge safety by, and
then let the applicant say how they are going to fit in with
that.
Don't require them to tell you about some valve that has no
relevance to safety because it happens to be some vestige in a
rulebook.
So it's a flexible approach, but it's tied to actual safety
metrics rather than a laundry list of things. That's as simple
as I can make it, but there is a lot of detail in the testimony
and in our comments that we would be happy to supply, but
that's how you thread the needle: You hold very firm on safety,
but you allow flexibility in how those metrics are met.
Mr. Pallone. All right. Then last question. I mentioned,
again in my opening, about the Bipartisan Infrastructure Law
and the Inflation Reduction Act, grants, tax credits for the
existing nuclear fleet, and also funding for developing next-
generation fuel.
Could you just discuss the impact of these new programs and
where there are maybe additional Federal funding needs?
Again, you, Mr. Cohen.
Mr. Cohen. So we think there are a couple of areas. One
would be the potential for the U.S. Government to become a
purchaser at scale. I mentioned the need to get scale and build
many versions of the same unit over and over again, which is
how we get the cost down.
So having the Federal Government step in as a purchaser,
whether through DoD or other agencies, would be a good first
step--providing, it was alluded to, some kind of insurance
against market risk.
So, for example, if something like a contract for
difference could be an interesting mechanism, which is what the
UK used to get offshore wind costs down. And then in addition,
Mr. Pallone, there are a variety of things we think we can do
on the innovation front that I wouldn't describe as large
expenditure items, but things like we should have a program
that drives costs down, that examines where are we getting
stuck in the process that drives the reactor costs up and what
can we do, by way of innovation, to drive those costs down.
So those would be three examples of, I think, where
additional Federal money could help.
Mr. Pallone. Thank you. Thank you, Chairman.
Mr. Duncan. Thank you, Ranking Member. I will now go to Dr.
Burgess from Texas for 5 minutes.
Mr. Burgess. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Cohen, let me just stay with you in the line of
questioning that Ranking Member Pallone was just pursuing.
So Texas has Comanche Peak, which is not in my district but
not very far away. I have been fortunate enough to visit there.
They are very impressive, and the operations are very
impressive.
So I think the phrase used was, ``You don't want to have a
vestige in a rulebook.'' So the question I would have is about
the evolving of the Nuclear Regulatory Commission regulations
to evolve to reflect the actual safety performance that's been
historically exhibited.
Is that something that you had in mind with your reference
to the ``vestige in a rulebook''?
Mr. Cohen. Yes, in a way. I think the reality is, we have
got a bunch of new advanced designs coming forward, so it
probably wouldn't be the right thing to do today because the
large light-water reactors have proven safe, we can assume that
all these other reactors are safe.
It does suggest, though, that you could have a much more
outcomes-based process. It would be a lot simpler. So the idea,
again, is set a boundary, you know, exposure limit or whatever
the right metric is--we detail some of those things in our
testimony--and have a back-and-forth and allow several pathways
for the applicant to meet that requirement.
Mr. Burgess. It just seems like it should be a learning
exercise, and, I mean, the country has a long history with
nuclear Navy and long history of safety of a lot of data and
experience to go on.
It just seems like the learning from a regulatory agency
should be part and parcel of what they do. You build on what
your experience was.
Mr. Cohen. Absolutely. And we make, in the testimony, we
make two specific recommendations on that line. One is that the
rule itself should be evolving. So as applicants come forward
with novel solutions, those should be explicitly kind of built
in as pathways that the regulators may not have thought of.
And the second idea is license by testing, that there
should be more ability of--and we don't have the details in the
testimony, but that if we could be testing things in situ and
having the regulator involved and looking at things being
dispatched or built in real time and looking at the
performance, that could really speed things along.
Mr. Burgess. Now, as a practical matter, do you envision
that that's possible to do that in real time?
Mr. Cohen. Absolutely. There is nothing preventing us from
that. And in fact, you know, in the early days of the nuclear
program, as I think my fellow witness will attest to, we did
much more of that at Idaho.
We had several dozen, I think, reactors being demonstrated.
What would be different about our proposal is that you would
have the regulator quite involved with an eye towards
commercial licensing on site and actually thinking about it as,
OK, it's not just does the thing work, it's like how are the
safety metrics performing.
Dr. Gehin. Yes, if I could comment?
Mr. Burgess. Sure.
Dr. Gehin. Yes, we tested 52 reactors on the INL site over
a 25-year period. Many of these were specifically doing tests
to support the light-water reactor fleet and enabled that.
I think as we I talked about these demonstrations we are
considering and the test facilities we have, we can do testing
in our nuclear facilities. We can do demonstrations on DOE
sites. Maybe that's a good place to do those demonstrations and
get that experience.
So I agree with your comments. We have decades and decades
of operational experience--civilian, government--and that
should be factored in for sure.
Mr. Burgess. Right. It seems like there should be a
continuous learning and updating exercise.
Let me just ask you a question, probably Mr. Repko, and you
too, Dr. Gehin. This committee 20 years ago did the Energy
Policy Act of 2005, and the idea was that we were going to help
with the funding. In the case with Comanche Peak, they have two
reactors onsite, but they have got a footprint that would
permit two more, so the idea was to help them with the funding.
Now, I get it, the world changed with fracking and
inexpensive natural gas, and suddenly the electrons could not--
the performance was not quite the same as what the pricing had
indicated that it might be, but again, as a practical matter
going forward, is that something we can relook at? And is that
something that you are doing, Mr. Repko, with your energy?
Mr. Repko. Yes, Congressman. That's absolutely something we
can look at. You know, as we see it right now, as I said, just
to meet our clean energy goals right now we will have to build
to 8 gigawatts from new nuclear.
So even beyond that, mandates around, relative to the risk
of other resources, we can certainly do that, in terms of just
additional goals, right? Mandates relative to new nuclear, in
terms of energy security, other type of aspects like that.
Mr. Burgess. Sure. What happens to those licenses when they
didn't build? Do they still exist?
Mr. Repko. The licenses can be maintained, in terms of
construction licenses, but generally they are surrendered. They
expire.
Mr. Burgess. I see. OK. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, I yield
back.
Mr. Duncan. The gentleman's time has expired. Now I will go
to Ms. Matsui for 5 minutes.
Ms. Matsui. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. And I really
appreciate this hearing, and thank you for the witnesses.
When done right, I support nuclear energy as a clean energy
source that has the potential to play a very significant role
in decarbonizing our power grid.
However, we cannot build a new fleet of advanced nuclear
reactors and continue to dodge the question, What we do with
spent fuel and other radioactive materials? Eighty-eight
thousand tons of spent nuclear fuel is currently stranded at
reactor sites around the country, including the decommissioned
Rancho Seco Nuclear Generating Station in my district.
Rancho Seco closed in 1989, and the spent fuel is still
awaiting transport to a consolidated storage facility. That is
why I have led appropriations letter in support of DOE's
interim storage program and why I lead the Store Nuclear Fuel
Act. We need a solution to this problem, especially if we are
going to be starting to build more nuclear power plants.
And believe me, I know we have been having this
conversation here, but we hear about it all the time and, if
there is this type of hurdle, we need to really address it.
The cost. Mr. Repko, according to the latest nuclear waste
fund audit report, the temporary storage of spent nuclear waste
at decommissioned reactors sites has already cost taxpayers
$10.1 billion, and the remaining additional liabilities will
total $31 billion.
Mr. Repko, how much does it cost Duke Energy to store spent
nuclear fuel and other radioactive material from your operating
and decommissioned nuclear power plants?
Mr. Repko. To date, we have received $780 million from the
DOE due to the Government not meeting its obligation, willing
to take up a national storage of used nuclear fuel.
So that is across all of our sites, starting in 1995, to
date.
Ms. Matsui. OK.
Mr. Repko. Seven hundred eighty million dollars.
Ms. Matsui. OK. Thank you.
I will be concerned about waste. Mr. Harrell, nuclear power
is and will likely continue to be a key part of the solution to
climate change, but public questions about safety remain an
important concern.
Those questions include, What should we do about nuclear
waste? Mr. Harrell, nuclear power has faced strong public
opposition for a variety of reasons, which has led to plant
closures in my district and around the world.
If the nuclear industry hopes to see a renaissance, are you
concerned that public opposition, including concerns about
nuclear waste, could derail that renaissance?
Mr. Harrell. Thank you, Congresswoman for the question. And
I agree with what Mr. Cohen said earlier.
It is a question that we hear very frequently on the ground
in the public, and it is a very solvable problem. I think, no
doubt, we need a spent fuel storage strategy. It will be
multipronged. Consolidating storage--at least a repository and
most likely multiple repositories--across the country is going
to be necessary, but also there's opportunities here as well.
Some advanced reactors burn existing spent fuel, so they
can contribute to the solution. Our Nation should be exploring
recycling. Ninety-five percent of the products--of those
products' energy potential is not being utilized. So existing
spent fuel stockpiles could actually be used proactively to
improve fuel security.
Ms. Matsui. OK. You mentioned advanced nuclear storage
designs. Dr. Gehin, advanced nuclear reactor designs and small
nuclear reactors have the potential to address many of the
challenges facing today's nuclear fleet. However, I understand
these reactors will continue to produce hazardous waste.
Dr. Gehin, can you briefly explain how spent fuel and other
radioactive waste products produced by advanced nuclear
reactors would differ from the current generation of reactors?
Dr. Gehin. Yes. Thank you for the question.
You know, as we have been talking about the supply of
enriched uranium, advanced reactors generally use higher
enrichment uranium, higher assay LEU. So the enrichment will be
higher. It will be higher as you feed it in, it will also
retain more residual uranium, enriched uranium, as you
discharge it.
It will also be a different form. Our current fuel form,
our ceramic pellets, we are looking at a variety of fuel forms
for these advanced rectors, whether they are ceramic-coated
particles, metallic fuel is a good example.
So they will have a different form as well. The geometries
would be different. Rather than the large array of pens, they
could be smaller, it could pebbles. So there's some variety in
that, as I just mentioned.
Ms. Matsui. OK. Fine, thank you and I have already reached
my limit here in the time.
Thank you, and I yield back.
Mr. Duncan. I thank the gentlelady. And now I will go to
Mr. Latta, who is having a birthday today. Happy birthday, and
you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Latta. You are too kind, Mr. Chairman, but thanks very
much for holding today's hearing and thanks for our witnesses
for being here, because this is a really important subject, and
as you can tell, this committee is very concerned with.
Mr. Harrell, you cite in your testimony our nuclear fuel
supply chain and our overreliance on Russia for fuel that
powers our current advanced reactors.
I have longed believed that nuclear energy can be a game
changer, and for the United States it is unfortunate we have
surrendered our leadership and competitive edge in the nuclear
fuel space.
Now, alarmingly, 90 percent of the uranium purchased for
the U.S. used in the United States reactors today is produced
by foreign countries, including Russia.
I ask unanimous consent, Mr. Chairman, to include an
article from Nuclear Newswire that highlights these issues
entitled, `` `On the verge of a crisis: The U.S. nuclear fuel
Gordian knot.' ''
And, Mr. Harrell, what are the implications if we don't do
anything to address this problem and the U.S. continues to be
reliant on Russia and Russia-aligned nations for nuclear fuel?
Mr. Harrell. Thank you, Congressman, and a happy birthday,
and I appreciate the question.
We, potentially, if we fail to invest in the U.S. supply
chain, we could reach this catch-22, where we have really
exciting commercial technologies that both can improve
affordability, reliability, and our national security in this
country and can allow us to reassert ourselves with global
leadership and really push to compete with Russia and China in
the global marketplace and deploy in countries like in Africa
and the regions like Africa, the Middle East, and Europe.
And so, frankly, our failure to do so has the likelihood of
both threatening our national security and threatening global
energy security, and the invasion of Ukraine by Russia has only
further accentuated that point.
Mr. Latta. OK. Let me follow up on something you said. You
know, this ``we failed to invest in our United States supply
chain.'' What is holding us back?
Mr. Harrell. Ourselves.
Mr. Latta. No, again, but why?
Mr. Harrell. We need to make some smart long-term
investments that take matters into our own hands so that we and
our allies can both mine, can produce and enrich our resources
here at home or within our kind of like-minded allied
countries.
And then, ultimately, I do think the regulatory barriers
are going to be a problem here in the U.S. We need to modernize
the Nuclear Regulatory Commission. I am worried that we are
going to have cutting-edge technologies that aren't able to get
through an antiquated regulatory system.
We need to lead by doing. As I mentioned in my testimony,
it's the era of deployment, and we need a regulator that's
nimble and ready to deploy these exciting tech.
Mr. Latta. Well, you know, I introduced the H.R. 1086,
which is the Nuclear Fuel Security Act, and this legislation is
the House companion to the bipartisan bill introduced by the
senior Senators from West Virginia and Wyoming, and that bill
would establish the Nuclear Fuel Security Program, increase the
quantity of low-enriched uranium and high-assay low-enriched
uranium produced by U.S. and nuclear energy companies, expand
the American assured fuel supply program, ensure the
availability of domestically produced, converted, and enriched
uranium in the event of a supply disruption--you never know
when that might happen--and then also establish that HALEU for
advanced nuclear reactor demonstration projects program.
You know, again, Mr. Harrell, how important is it for
Congress now to act and pass this legislation, like this bill
that I have that sends signals needed for the industry to
respond and build up our domestic capacity? And I hate to say
it this way: in a timely manner?
Mr. Harrell. It's an urgent priority, Congressman. And I
should give you kudos. I know you've been talking about this
issue for many years, and I think the Ukraine issue has brought
it even more to the forefront.
As mentioned, 13 new reactor companies to come before the
NRC by 2027. We need to start ramping up our enrichment
capacity, our HALEU domestic production capacity now so we have
time to license those facilities, to build them, and then
provide the fuel needed for this new wave of reactors.
There are a bunch of exciting companies that are all
looking at deploying here in the U.S. by the late 2020s and
early 2030s. If we don't make the investments now, we may have
this catch-22 fuel situation, which would be really
catastrophic for both our security interests, our economic
interests, and ultimately our mission's goals as well.
Mr. Latta. Well, thank you.
Mr. Repko, how important is it for Duke to have certainty
over fuel sourcing as you look to implement your carbon plan
and meet your customers' needs?
Mr. Repko. It's absolutely critical. As I talked about 8
gigawatts. So if you think about that, that's over 20 SMRs or
the small advanced reactors, and you typically put those in
sites of four to five at a site just for economies of scale.
But to sustain that operations for that energy output, it
would be absolutely critical to have that sustained supply.
Mr. Latta. Thank you. Mr. Chairman, my time has expired,
and I yield back.
Mr. Duncan. The gentleman yields back. I will now go to Mr.
Tonko for 5 minutes.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you, Mr. Chair. And I do thank you for
holding this hearing.
I want to associate myself with many others' comments on
the importance of nuclear as part of our energy mix, and we
especially should recognize and support nuclear energy for
being such a large zero-emission resource contributing to our
climate and clean-energy goals.
So Mr. Cohen, your testimony mentions there have been
several studies that found achieving a net-zero electricity
system will be much more difficult and expensive without
nuclear as part of that mix.
How can nuclear reduce systemwide costs in the clean grid
of the future, even if individual projects look expensive
today?
Mr. Cohen. Right. Well, as I explained earlier, the
fundamental way that nuclear reduces system costs of a zero-
carbon system is by not requiring a massive overbuild of
renewables.
If you rely, for example, only on wind and solar, you would
have to build enough wind and sun to meet your peak demand,
which might be four or five times the average demand, in some
cases.
So by having an always available source, you reduce the
need to have that massive overbuild plus storage, and that's
just a cost savings. Every study, almost, that's out there will
prove that, and we put a couple in the testimony. That's the
fundamental driver. It's the ability to have 24/7/365 without a
massive amount of capital expense to meet the most stringent
day.
Mr. Tonko. You have also discussed an ambitious vision for
the U.S. nuclear industry of mass producing and deploying
advanced reactors. Why is that level of ambition necessary?
Mr. Cohen. Because if we don't really get to a mass-
produced model, we're going to continue to build these one-
offs, and the costs are going to be very, very high.
Every time that--and to be fair, there's no country that's
done this. We are not building Boeings anywhere in the world,
using that analogy. So this is difficult. We need to think
about how do we sort of incentivize that kind of mass-produced,
factory-built kind of model? And I think we can do that with
Federal incentives to say that the kinds of things that the
Federal Government is going to support are going to be things
that look like the Boeings, not the cathedrals.
That's the key on the policy side.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you. And there have been several major
incentives enacted recently in the Infrastructure, Investments
and Jobs Act, and certainly the Inflation Reduction Act, to
support both new and existing nuclear projects. This builds
upon existing programs like DOE's Title 17 Loan Program, which
was critical to the development of the Vogtle Project.
So Mr. Cohen, would the vision you have outlined be
possible without a fully committed U.S. Government offering its
support to project developers, and just how important are these
Federal incentives?
Mr. Cohen. Well, these are great steps forward and nothing
in my testimony should detract from the fact that the IAJA and
the IRA have made a huge difference in terms of the interest in
the investment community, among other things.
What I would say is that you would need to build on that
because to build a multigiga factory, if you will, for nuclear
is going to take a lot more than just a job production tax
credit or investment tax credit.
So there needs to be a strategic approach to actually
building that supply chain and that capability. And that is
something that really hasn't been addressed in current
legislation.
Mr. Tonko. OK. And Mr. Harrell, I believe ClearPath has
also worked on and supported several of these incentives,
including support to protect and expand the Loan Programs
Office.
What do you see as the Federal Government's role in
supporting the growth of our domestic nuclear industry?
Mr. Harrell. Absolutely. I think the Loan Program Office,
cost share programs like the Advanced Reactor Demonstration
Program that do a 50/50 cost share to employ the very first-of-
a-kind technology and tax incentives, like an investment tax
credit, are important tools in the toolbelt to offset the
original cost.
Mr. Repko was mentioning no one wants to be the first to
build these, right? They want to be second, third, or fourth.
Programs like the ARDP or the LPO Program are really important
to derisking that first build so that we can show that we can
build it and then ultimately be able to then get the learnings
from that and drive down the cost. I think that's going to be
really important for the future of nuclear.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you. And over the years this committee has
taken a lot of time to examine nuclear waste issues, which
given the long-term uncertainty for disposal of waste remains a
significant economic and social risk to future growth of the
industry.
I heard Representative Matsui quizzing about this, but can
anyone provide more context on how these new advanced reactor
designs may help limit or address waste challenges?
Dr. Gehin. Yes, maybe I'll make a few comments on that. So
the advanced reactors, many of these advanced reactor types
can, while you feed them with high-assay LEU or higher
enrichment, they can actually burn the fuel more in situ, so
you generate less used fuel per unit energy produced.
Maybe longer term, especially, some of what we call fast
reactors have the capability to actually burn waste. So if we
do the research on recycle or in situ burning, we can actually
burn the fuel deeper.
If you go far enough to continuous recycle, you can reduce
the waste burn by maybe up to an order of magnitude, but
there's a lot of research that would need to be done to get to
that point.
Mr. Tonko. OK. Thank you very much. I went over my time, so
I thank you for being generous, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Duncan. The gentleman's time has expired. I will now go
to Mr. Griffith from Virginia for 5 minutes.
Mr. Griffith. Thank you very much. First, let me make a
slight correction to Mr. Harrell. I come from Virginia.
Governor Youngkin wants to be first. You were just saying
nobody wants to be first, Governor Youngkin wants us to be
first, and we've been debating all those issues and,
interestingly, today in the Cardinal News, an online news
service, Dwayne Yancy does a report where he talks to the head
of the Virginia Tech Nuclear Engineering Department and he
says, even though Virginia's well positioned, we have North
Anna, we have Surry Nuclear, we have Newport News shipbuilding,
which does all the nuclear submarines, we have BWX
Technologies, about 6 or 7 miles outside of my district, maybe
10. They also have got a facility in Erwin, Tennessee, also
just outside of my district, and my district is only about a
little less than 2 hours from Oak Ridge, Tennessee.
So we think we are well positioned, and the professor comes
out today and says, yes, all the issues you all have been
discussing are not the major one. The major one is the
workforce. Finding the people who know how to build it and know
how to manage it is going to be the real issue.
So can you all talk about that and how we are going to be
prepared? Because we have been thinking that with all the
skilled folks that we have coming out of natural gas and coal
production in the district, that we would have people that were
used to energy and comfortable with it, but he says we don't
have the workforce ready.
So can you all discuss that a little bit? The workforce to
manage a small--and we are looking at a small modular reactor.
Mr. Harrell. Sure. Yes, absolutely.
Mr. Griffith. I'll start with you, but I am happy to get
everybody's opinion.
Mr. Harrell. Appreciate the question, and yes, very
exciting what's happening in Virginia now, and I think Virginia
is very well positioned to be a leader in new nuclear. Your
universities have robust nuclear energy programs, they are
trying to get at some of that training. Obviously BWXT, big
employer there in the State and really the driver, and it's one
of the big upsides for nuclear, right? The nuclear energy jobs
pay significantly higher relative to other energy industries,
and they're long-term high-paying jobs.
And you mentioned the nexus with the national security
side. Civilian nuclear is a great spot for our servicemembers
who have been involved in Navy nukes, things like that.
So once they leave the service to land in a high-paying
industry that still has significant impact on our national
security. And so I do think we need to be thoughtful about
those types of investments.
And so I think these universities are doing the right
thing. The VNEC has made a lot of big moves, kind of in advance
of this military----
Mr. Griffith. Hold on. The V-what?
Mr. Harrell. The VNEC, the Virginia Nuclear Energy
Commission.
Mr. Griffith. Gotcha.
Mr. Harrell. It's kind of the coalition in the State that
over the last couple of years have really wanted to make some
of these investments to position the State well.
And so I think those are going to be really important. The
crux of it is we need projects. This is the era of deployment.
Like, we need to attract new young people who are excited about
this.
Mr. Griffith. But if we build it, will there be people to
build it, operate it, run it, and make sure that it's doing
what it's supposed to? That's the question.
Mr. Harrell. Not yet. Not yet, but I think all this
excitement in the industry is giving us that moment.
Mr. Griffith. How long will it take to gear up? Because we
are ready to, I mean, a lot of us are ready to go forward. I
understand that not everybody in the State feels that way, but
a lot of us do.
Mr. Harrell. It's why some of these programs, so that we
have more than just one project, or big manufacturing
facilities are so important, because it gives long-term
certainty to folks to come into this field. And so----
Mr. Griffith. So what you are saying is, is that we, as the
Federal Government, should incentive a couple of projects in my
district on this level?
Mr. Harrell. And the State should as well. I think this
Virginia Nuclear Energy Hub is a really great idea by Governor
Youngkin and I think will drive more investment in the State.
Mr. Griffith. All right. My clock is running, but I did
promise that I would let all of you weigh in. Anybody got
anything to add on workforce?
Mr. Repko. I would echo much of what has been said but
thinking even beyond the operation, just the constructability,
the workforce relative to those skills, that's an area I think
Europe is ahead of us, with their strong apprentice-type
programs.
But I do think the answer that Mr. Harrell said, creating
the market first, the urgency with creating that market will
subsequently develop those kind of programs, either through
community colleges, apprenticeship programs, and that. We have
some of those in place right now at Duke around transmissions
skill sets, right? Linemen skillsets, that can expand.
Mr. Griffith. We are not that far from Duke territory
either.
Mr. Repko. And I understand.
Mr. Griffith. I'm in southwest Virginia. Go ahead, yes,
sir?
Dr. Gehin. Yes, I was just going to make one point. I agree
with all this, projects, everything, the demo projects, but,
you know, we're finishing two large plants in Georgia. It would
be great if they were actually moving right on to the next
plant. There are a lot of people that have a lot of experience
that could just continue constructing plants, moving from one
to one----
Mr. Griffith. All right. So we might be able to----
Dr. Gehin [continuing]. A lot of them----
Mr. Griffith [continuing]. Pick up some workers out of
Georgia short term. We want them to come live and spend their
money in our area.
Dr. Gehin. Yes.
Mr. Griffith. Mr. Harrell, a lot of folks are concerned
about just being used by the nuclear industry as the next
stop--what kind of investments do they make? Besides the good-
paying jobs, what else can the community look for if we get a
small modular reactor in the area?
Mr. Harrell. Yes, absolutely. I would say nuclear is the
exact opposite. We've got a track record across the country and
in your State and in South Carolina as well, that nuclear is
there to stay. These are 50-, 60-, 70-year projects. They
invest in communities. They're contributing significant local
tax resources.
It's not an industry that comes in and out. The
construction, obviously, there's a big uptick, but unlike the
solar industry, the wind industry----
Mr. Griffith. And the safety record is pretty good.
Mr. Harrell [continuing]. Most people are on----
Mr. Griffith. My time is up. I'm going to have to yield
back. I yield back.
Mr. Duncan. I thank the gentleman. I now go to Mr. Veasey
from Texas for 5 minutes.
Mr. Veasey. Mr. Chairman, I thank you very much and I thank
the witnesses for being here as well.
Last year the power sector accounted for 28 percent of the
total U.S. carbon dioxide pollution. If we are going to slash
that figure, we need reliable, carbon-free energy sources like
nuclear that can sustain output for long periods of time,
particularly while we work on things like battery storage,
which we are making great progress on in Texas.
According to the Energy Information Administration, nuclear
power accounts for about 46 percent of the zero-carbon
electricity generated here at home. And the Inflation Reduction
Act, Democrats created a tax credit of up to 1.8 cents per
kilowatt hour for zero-emissions nuclear energy and provided
the DOE with $700 million to invest in increasing the
availability of next-generation nuclear fuel for advanced
reactors. And all of you have mentioned in your testimony a
significant priority must be enhancing the domestic supply
chain for uranium and boosting the U.S. enrichment and
conversion industry.
What we have learned since the Russia/Ukraine conflict is
that geopolitical events have complicated the supply chain for
these materials even further, as a substantial portion of the
supply comes from Russia and the Eastern European region. And I
wanted to ask, for anyone to answer this, Russian and Chinese
nuclear companies, as we know, receive the full backing of
their government when competing for export bids and projects in
overseas markets.
This integrated government support has made them very
competitive in global markets and dominant in the nuclear
energy supply chain, despite this influence, recent research
shows that the U.S. industry is well positioned to become a
global leader in key parts of the value chain for nuclear fuel
and the manufacturing of small modular reactors worth $180
billion-plus in market value.
What are we doing to ensure that we have the necessary
technology and infrastructure to compete globally, and how can
Congress best support such efforts so that the U.S. can lead
the development of new nuclear reactors with the highest
standards of safety, security, and nonproliferation in the
world?
Anybody jump in.
Mr. Harrell. I'm happy to start. As I mentioned, I think we
need a whole-of-government approach. You're exactly right.
China and Russia are willing to do 100-year partnerships with
these countries. They're willing to build, they're willing to
staff, they are essentially owner operators. We're never going
to get at that model, right? That's not the American way, and
there's a lot of other inherent advantages to working with a
country like the United States, but we do need to put in
competitive financing packages.
So things like this Poland announcement that happened
yesterday, where we're putting loans from XM and Development
Finance Corporation, that we're willing to make fuel deals so
that we ramp up our enrichment capacity and we can be a fuel
provider to these countries as well.
It's a really important piece of the puzzle, and if we
don't do that, we're not going to compete with the Russias and
Chinas, because when we're talking about a country like Ghana,
for example, they want a partner that's going to ensure that
they can deliver electricity to their people now to meet their
needs.
The U.S. can win those contracts. Ghana has every advantage
to do it with the U.S., but we've got to be competitive with
our offerings.
Mr. Veasey. Yes.
Mr. Cohen. Mr. Veasey, we also suggest, in our testimony,
that maybe the U.S. doesn't have to carry the only--is not the
only party bearing the financial derisking burden. So we
recommend a creation of something called an International Bank
for Nuclear Infrastructure.
The World Bank won't touch nuclear right now for a variety
of reasons, but it's a world imperative. And so the proposal
really here is that a coalition of the willing--not just the
U.S. but other countries and other investors that want to see
this technology go--should be providing derisking financing for
global expansion, and American reactors could compete in that
environment.
So I don't know that we necessarily have to go at it alone.
We detail--there actually is a proposal out there, quite a
concrete proposal, to create this multilateral bank that would
do some of that work.
Mr. Veasey. Yes. Let me also ask Jeremy Harrell. I like to
inquire about the synergy between DoD and DOE. I know that
there has been some growing interest with the U.S. military to
explore the use of advanced nuclear technologies to help power
land bases at home or reliable energy assets in forward areas.
As the interest increases and DoD-led projects move
forward, what are the synergies between these efforts and those
occurring within the commercial sector and how can defense-led
programs benefit the advancement of new nuclear technologies in
the civilian sector?
Mr. Harrell. Yes, it's a great question, Congressman. So
there has actually been a study that shows that there is
roughly a $3 billion benefit of the civilian nuclear industry
to our defense apparatus, and vice versa. It's an
interchangeable supportive organization.
And so this program you mentioned, Project Pele, which gets
at one critical issue that affects our servicemembers abroad.
So many deaths are related to diesel resources getting brought
to troops on the ground and for deployments.
This Pele project, for example, would use transportable
reactors to take that diesel dynamic out and get at one of the
single largest casualty risks that servicemembers have in
forward deployments.
Mr. Veasey. Thank you very much. Mr. Chairman?
Mr. Duncan. The gentleman's time has expired. I will now go
to the Bluegrass State, Mr. Guthrie, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Guthrie. Thank you. Thanks, gentlemen, for yielding the
time--the Chair for the time--and I thank all of our witnesses
for being here.
Mr. Repko, this is kind of going to be directed at you,
questions for you. In 2017, Kentucky actually, during the 7-
month Three Mile Island and all that other stuff, put in a
nuclear ban where you couldn't do atomic energy in Kentucky.
Finally, in 2017, effort of people I was in the general
assembly with and others finally got it across the line when
Governor Bevin was in office and rolled back our background.
And there's been a really strong interest, particularly in
Western Kentucky, in bringing nuclear power, including small
modular reactors. And, you know, Kentucky's obviously
historically been an energy-producing State, particularly coal,
and State and community leaders see nuclear energy as a way to
continue Kentucky's leadership as an energy-producing State and
also improving reliability of our grid, which we've struggled
with. We actually had rolling blackouts in Kentucky in
December, because of some--I don't know, it's debatable--but I
think some decisions on taking out coal-fire plants left us
below our baseload.
So the question is nuclear, and my question for you is, is
Duke Energy looking at converting old coal-fire plants into
nuclear power plants, and what would be your considerations?
And what are some performance features of new technologies that
make it appropriate for you to invest in this type of thing?
Mr. Repko. So we are looking at siting new technologies,
new nuclear at existing sites. There are some technologies
around retrofit of coal plants. Those would typically involve,
like, storage-type technologies, molten salts, but for where
we're at right now, the existing retiring sites provide the
best opportunities for deployment of new nuclear.
So if you think about it, the water infrastructure is
already there. The transmission interconnection and
infrastructure is there. They're already paid for by the
customer, and there are very generous incentives for
replacement of generation and things.
So that's how we are approaching, in terms of utilizing
existing or retiring facilities.
Mr. Guthrie. OK. Anybody else want to comment on that? Mr.
Cohen?
Mr. Cohen. Yes, if I may.
Mr. Guthrie. Yes.
Mr. Cohen. There's an easy layup here, which is the
Government already has a lot of authorities, as well as money,
through the IRA, to move forward these coal-to-nuclear
conversions.
What we've yet to see from DOE--and I know they have a lot
on their plate--is a kind of whole-of-government approach where
you're kind of made into a one-stop shop, to kind of, like,
knit together the regulation, the funding, the planning,
support, all of that to make these things happen.
It really is a great opportunity, as Mr. Repko said, and
we've looked at this in detail. And you typically have good
political support at the local community level.
So again, there's really gold to be mined there, and we
just need to do it.
Mr. Guthrie. Appreciate that. Mr. Harrell, you seem like
you want to answer something?
Mr. Harrell. Yes, just one quick thing I'll flag: It's low-
hanging fruit for regulatory reform.
Mr. Guthrie. I'll end, and Mr. Gehin next. Yes, go ahead.
Mr. Harrell. It's low-hanging fruit for regulatory reform.
Like, if we're building at brownfield sites, a lot of the
dynamics of building a nuclear power plant, the coal plant,
similar dynamics there.
The NRC should make it a lot easier to----
Mr. Guthrie. The transmission lines are already there,
right?
Mr. Harrell. The transmission lines is already there. A lot
of synergies that make this--and it's great for the workforce
too. A lot of these new designs, like TerraPower, for example,
that's building their first project in Wyoming, they separate
the nuclear power unit and the power plant operations.
And so many of those coal workers could work at that power
plant operations with pretty minimal training.
Mr. Guthrie. Yes. I was just sending out TBAs, plant in
Paradise--in Muhlenberg County, if you know the song--but it
was at Paradise, but they went from a coal plant that had 400
employees to a combined gas plant that has about 32, I think.
So I think it's just all automated. So sometimes that
doesn't translate. Is that--Mr. Gehin, Doctor?
Dr. Gehin. Yes. And what I wanted to add is certainly
Kentucky is a great location for this. DOE did a study that
identified about 80 percent of the coal sites could be
converted to nuclear, and it would result in a 15 to 35 percent
cost reduction in deploying nuclear plants by reusing some of
the things that Mr. Repko talked about here.
So there's huge opportunities in this space.
Mr. Guthrie. Thanks for adding that. And then one more, Mr.
Repko, and for 30 seconds that I have, you mentioned in your
testimony that Duke Energy's applied for license renewals for
expiring license for one station that plans to do for other
expiring licenses.
Can you explain how these expiring licenses will be safely
extended and continue to improve reliable and affordable
energy, and what are your regulatory challenges? Twenty
seconds.
Mr. Repko. Yes, very quickly. I will tell you that the age
of these plants do not reflect their actual physical condition.
There are constant replacements of valves, pipings, and things
like--very few of the physical assets there, the reactor vessel
being one of which undergoes very extensive monitoring of that,
but these are not ages, the equipment there is not the age of
the plants.
So, you know, in terms of that, we're really looking for
the regulatory certainty around the GEIS to enable the future
applications.
Mr. Duncan. Ms. Kuster is recognized for 5 minutes.
Ms. Kuster. Thank you very much for hosting this hearing,
Chairman Duncan.
Until recent emergence of cheap solar and wind energy,
there were two energy generation resources that provided the
United States with the bulk of our carbon-free energy: nuclear
and hydropower.
These two energy resources are often thought of in the same
breath. When the United States built out our nuclear energy
fleet during the 1960s and '70s, we also built hydropower pump
storage projects around the country to capture excess nuclear
energy when there was not sufficient demand on the grid for the
energy.
I am glad we are talking about nuclear energy today,
Chairman Duncan, and I encourage you to hold a similar hearing
on hydropower in the near future.
Turning to the issue at hand, the Seabrook Nuclear Power
Plant in New Hampshire is responsible for nearly three-fifths
of the electricity generated in my State. The facility is a
source of reliable power and provides high-paying, high-skilled
jobs.
While nuclear energy plays an important role in keeping the
lights on, our Nation is sadly too reliant on nuclear fuel
imports from Russia. Russia provides nearly 14 percent of
America's low-enriched uranium, which is the key component for
nuclear fuel. And, unconscionably, the proceeds from Russian
fuel sales to the United States may be supporting Russia's
aggression in Ukraine.
Last year, Congress acted in an overwhelming bipartisan way
and banned the importation of Russian oil and natural gas.
Mr. Harrell, my first question is to you. Should Congress
also ban low-enriched uranium imports from Russia?
Mr. Harrell. I think it needs to be a piece of the puzzle
as we provide some certainty for U.S. and allied providers and
enrichers to move forward.
We need the financial--or the assurance that the Russians
aren't going to flood the market and drive those investments
out of business. So I think it's a piece of that long-term
picture.
Ms. Kuster. And to Mr. Harrell and Mr. Cohen: In both of
your testimonies, you touted the benefits of new advanced
nuclear reactors. These new electricity-generating technologies
have the potential to reliably produce power with fewer
environmental externalities and safety concerns than existing
nuclear technology.
But I also understand that high-assay low-enriched uranium,
or HALEU, which is a critical fuel source for advanced nuclear
reactors, also largely comes from Russia.
Again, would banning the importation of Russian uranium
help America and our allies win the future by creating an
incentive to move this HALEU production to friendlier nations?
Mr. Cohen. Yes.
Mr. Harrell. Sure. I think the biggest thing that we can do
for HALEU production here is to get the Biden administration to
launch the Advanced Fuel Availability Program that this
committee authorized in the Energy Act before.
Launching that program, providing the initial certainty for
companies to ramp up production of HALEU, can immediately
challenge Russian dominance in this space. And so I think it's
the biggest thing that we can do on that front, and we can
ensure that the HALEU problem isn't just like the LEU problem
that we've got here.
Ms. Kuster. Great. Would you like to add, Mr. Cohen?
Mr. Cohen. Yes. I just was going to say, I think it's a
supply-side answer as well as managing demand side. It might
provide us additional incentives to do our domestic program,
but we're still--we still need a lot of effort there.
We've supported appropriations for the domestic HALEU
program.
Ms. Kuster. All right. Thank you. And I have a followup
question for you, Mr. Cohen: Can you describe one safety
benefit of advanced nuclear reactors and how having a secure
fuel supply for advanced nuclear reactors would help the U.S.
realize those benefits?
Mr. Cohen. Sure. Well, obviously, if we don't have the
advance fuels, we're not going to have the advanced reactors,
but probably the most significant safety feature of many, not
all, of the advanced reactor designs is that they're not
relying on water as a coolant or as a reaction moderator.
The major accidents we've had--Chernobyl, Three-Mile
Island, and Fukushima--were all driven by loss of coolant.
Water boiling off, essentially. And many, not all, of the
designs have moderators or coolants that have much higher
temperature thresholds. You know, they can withstand a lot of
runaway heat.
So that's probably the single most significant safety
attribute, which is the inability to have a runaway reaction
that, you know, essentially melts through the core and the
containment vessel.
Ms. Kuster. All right. Well, thank you very much. Mr.
Chairman, there's bipartisan interest in banning imports of
Russian uranium. It will make our energy supply chains more
secure now and into the future, and I look forward to working
with you to get this done. Thank you very much. I yield back.
Mr. Duncan. Agreed. And the Chair will now go to the chair
of the Environment, Climate, and Critical Minerals
Subcommittee, Mr. Johnson, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Johnson. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman. And let me say
thanks to our panelists for being here with us today. Let me
start by saying I'm very encouraged today. We disagree on a lot
of things on this committee, but I do believe that bipartisan
support for nuclear power hasn't been this strong since I have
been in Congress for the last 13 years.
And it's not a mystery why. The fact is that nuclear is the
only--and I mean only--large-scale, reliable baseload, carbon-
free electricity source available to us. It's not going away,
and the world needs more of it.
The only question now is, Will America lead in this
critical energy sector, or will we cede our leadership to our
adversaries like Russia and China?
When Russia and China export their civilian nuclear
technology to other nations, it gives them a near century-long
foothold. I don't have to tell you guys this, you know it. A
geostrategic advantage.
So how do we respond to that? Back in the mid-20th century,
America took the global lead in the Atomic Age, but
unfortunately for our 21st-century nuclear entrepreneurs and
innovators, our regulatory framework is, in many ways, quite
literally stuck in the 1950s. That's got to change.
Mr. Harrell, it's good to see you here again. I plan on
reintroducing my Strengthening American Nuclear Competitiveness
Act this year, and a key aspect of my legislation is requiring
DOE to provide a report on U.S. civilian nuclear commerce.
With China and Russia currently dominating the
international market, we have got to make sure we have a robust
supply chain.
So, Mr. Harrell, why is it so important to understand the
gaps in our supply chain, particularly as it relates to
nuclear?
Mr. Harrell. Yes, thank you, Congressman, for the question,
and it's good to see you as well.
You get at the very crux of this issue, right? This is not
a zero-sum game. If the U.S. doesn't meet the demand that
Europe, Africa, the Middle East, South Asia have, it doesn't
mean that they're not going to build nuclear, it just means
they're going to build it with someone else, most likely Russia
or China.
And so it's a national security imperative for us to
compete on that front. And so your focus on technology exports
and ensuring that we invest in our supply chain here to ensure
project delivery is really a critical piece of global energy
security as a whole.
Mr. Johnson. OK. Thanks. Another provision in my
legislation directs the Nuclear Regulatory Commission to look
at unique industrial and manufacturing uses as well as
innovative advanced reactors that can be safely located closer
to cities and businesses.
So Dr. Gehin and Mr. Harrell, you can chime in too if you'd
like. If we can get this right, what would this mean for U.S.
nuclear leadership?
Dr. Gehin. Yes, great question. It was talked about--mostly
the discussion today has been about electricity, where 28
percent of our, you know, talk about carbon from 28 percent.
What about the other 62 percent?
Well, reactors, particularly advanced reactors, produce a
lot of energy, but they produce at a higher temperatures that
can be directly used for industrial processes, whether it's
hydrogen, steel, chemicals, you know, X-energy is working with
Dow Chemical, oil refining, you know, to reduce the carbon for
that.
So it really opens the door to address all these other
areas that we need a lot of energy, and those can be deployed
worldwide. We can establish them here. They can be deployed
worldwide.
Mr. Johnson. OK. Mr. Harrell, any comments?
Mr. Harrell. Yes, I would completely agree there. There are
immense opportunities here: chemical production, steel
production, hydrogen production, especially if we're going to
use that for a variety of different applications.
But that's going to force the regulator here in the United
States, in particular, to think about these things differently.
We need to be able to put a microreactor right pretty close to
that Dow Chemical facility to use both the heat and the
electricity for that process.
If we had the same emergency preparedness zone of the
plant, like, Davis-Besse in Ohio, you know, you've got a mile
security zone around that.
Mr. Johnson. No.
Mr. Harrell. That doesn't quite make sense in Louisiana and
chemical country.
Mr. Johnson. One final point in question, I want to address
fuel. You know, it's a chicken-or-egg problem. You need the
fuel, you need the new reactors as a market for the fuel, but
you need a reliable fuel supply in order to build a reactor.
The future of advanced reactors depends on HALEU, that's
already been mentioned. Mr. Harrell, why is having a domestic
supply of HALEU so important, and what happens if we do not
have a sufficient supply of it for our nuclear innovators?
Mr. Harrell. The Russians are the only entity that are
capable of large supplies of HALEU. We don't want to be relying
on Russia, so we absolutely need our own domestic supply. It's
why the administration moving on this fuel program is
critically important.
Mr. Johnson. Basically, it comes down to whether or not we
are going to lead or we are going to cede leadership to Russia
and China, right?
Mr. Harrell. One hundred percent, sir.
Mr. Johnson. OK. Mr. Chair, I yield back.
Mr. Duncan. Great questions. I will now go to Florida, Ms.
Castor for 5 minutes.
Ms. Castor. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank you to
all our witnesses for your testimony today.
I was privileged to lead the House Select Committee on the
Climate Crisis for 4 years as we took a fresh look at
electricity generation from nuclear power and the role it can
play in fighting climate change, and we also issued a broad
request for information.
A lot of your folks responded to us, and you all provided
very important input. So we developed very specific
recommendations for ambitious reductions in carbon pollution
through a cleaner, more resilient electricity sector. And then
we successfully passed these important new laws boosting
carbon-free nuclear power in the Bipartisan Infrastructure Law,
the $6 billion for the civil nuclear credit initiative, to keep
the existing nuclear power plants online and save thousands of
jobs.
In the CHIPS and Science Act, we authorized the historic
research, development, demonstration, and deployment, including
on both nuclear, fusion, and fission technologies. and then, of
course, the Inflation Reduction Act that you all have all
highlighted today for the generational investments in clean
energy production, the production tax credit, clean energy
production tax credit, the investments tax credits for new
nuclear power plants that go into service at 2025.
We are here to work with you to make that happen, but I
would like to go back to the how do we extend licenses and the
safety considerations.
Mr. Gehin, you said we have 92 reactors today, going to 94.
As you look out across all of the reactors, what do you want us
to know going in as we have invested money to safely look at
extending these licenses, but what should we be anticipating?
What should we know?
Dr. Gehin. Yes. So let me comment on it. Maybe Mr. Repko
might want to comment as well.
Ms. Castor. Yes.
Dr. Gehin. So many of the reactors--in fact, I think most
of the reactors currently operating--will go from 40 to 60
years. They go through a regulatory process that's very
rigorous on safety, safety of those reactors to ensure they can
operate safely.
As Mr. Repko mentioned, those reactors are maintained
impeccably. You know, new components, new parts looked at
rigorously. There's been a few plants, including I believe
Turkey Point, you know, going to 80 years.
It goes through the same rigorous process, from a safety
point of view, to get to those 80 years. I think the biggest
threat, at least in the past several years, for these reactors
has been less to do with the technology and more to do with the
economics as they've been competing with low-price natural gas
as well as incentivized renewable energy.
So the Inflation Reduction Act and other activities have
helped that. So I think the vision here would be all of our
existing plants operating 80 years, as we bring on, you know,
new reactors, whether SMRs, advanced reactors, to get to
perhaps this 300-gigawatt goal that I mentioned from this DOE
report.
Ms. Castor. Mr. Repko, anything you want to add?
Mr. Repko. Thank you, Congresswoman. As I said, we've
already committed to the relicensing of our entire existing
fleet, all 11 reactors. We have submitted that for the Oconee
Station and making plans for the Robinson Station next.
You know, in terms of our resource planning? These assets
are proving valuable and necessary in terms of meeting our
requirement goals, and they have the regulatory support for
that.
And a lot of that is contributable, not just for the clean,
reliable power that they serve--our entire fleet has served 24
consecutive years at capacity factors greater than 90 percent.
Twenty-four years consecutive.
So impressive reliability, impeccable safety, and then in
terms of the community support----
Ms. Castor. Can I move on, because I just have 1 more
minute?
Mr. Repko. Sure. I'm sorry.
Ms. Castor. I was so happy to hear you say that our
customers will see lower electric bills thanks to the Inflation
Reduction Act.
Mr. Repko. They will.
Ms. Castor. That is music to my ears because Florida
families are really being squeezed right now with high electric
bills, and a lot of the reason for that is--Florida, you would
think the Sunshine State, we would be a leader in solar power,
but we generate electricity 75 percent based on gas.
So they put all the eggs in one basket, so you have these
price spikes like we had at the pump, and then our electricity
bills go out of sight.
So I really hope that Duke Energy, in addition to what you
are going to do across your service areas in all States--you
know, expanding, making sure carbon-free nuclear power is
there--that you are also just as enthusiastic about using these
tax credits for solar power and wind power, where it makes
sense. But in Florida, we have such great potential for solar
power to lower electric bills and to power our communities.
I trust that you are just as enthused about that?
Mr. Repko. Absolutely. Eight hundred megawatts of solar in
Florida, planning on 300 megawatts a year in our future plans.
All the incentives going back to the customers.
Ms. Castor. Thank you very much.
Mr. Duncan. The gentlelady's time has expired. We will now
go to Mr. Bucshon from Indiana.
Mr. Bucshon. Thank you, Chairman Duncan. When it comes to
the energy policy of the United States, Congress must act in an
all-the-above energy strategy, in my view, in order to maintain
grid reliability, lower emissions, and ensure affordable energy
prices using all sources of available energy is crucial.
There is no doubt that nuclear energy plays an important
part, if not critical part, of this diverse energy mix. So I
appreciate the opportunity to discuss it here today.
Chairman Duncan and maybe Chairwoman McMorris Rodgers might
have discussed, we were recently in Europe, in Poland, Czech
Republic, and in Belgium, and what we heard on the nuclear side
in Poland is dramatic.
A lot of opportunity. In fact, American companies--right
now, American companies are competing for that business as
Poland has completely taken themselves off of Russian natural
gas and oil, for that matter.
So there's a lot of opportunity for us here in the U.S. if
we do this, not only to deploy nuclear power sources in the
United States but around the world in our allies, and also in
high-emissions countries like India, for example.
I mean, how are we going to get the worldwide emissions
down if we don't have the opportunity to help deploy nuclear
around the world?
And so this is really important. And somebody may have
touched on this earlier, but 4 years ago in the Nuclear Energy
Innovation and Modernization Act, which came out of this
committee, Congress directed the NRC to establish a risk-
informed, technology-neutral framework suitable for licensing
advanced nuclear.
Mr. Harrell, can you tell us, has NRC met those objectives
under Congress's direction?
Mr. Harrell. Thank you for the question, sir. The answer is
no. The initial draft for the Part 53 Rule does not meet those
objectives, and effectively, the NRC needs to go back to the
drawing board.
And to his credit, Chairman Hanson said at the RIC
Conference a couple of weeks ago that they are going to send it
back and they need this to get moving, because the key is going
to be to get this right.
All these designs that are about to move forward in this
kind of 2025-to-2027 time period are going to use Part 50 and
Part 52. It's an imperfect process, but they've got a strategy
to go through the process and get their first reactors built.
We need Part 53 for the future, the scaleup of these
technologies, and what the Commission put forth publicly a
couple of weeks ago simple doesn't meet that goal.
Mr. Bucshon. Great. Anyone else want to comment on that?
Mr. Cohen?
Mr. Cohen. Yes, we agree with that position. The current
draft just doesn't do it. It just compiles more complexity on
an existing system. As I said earlier in the hearing, there's a
way to do this in which less is more.
Mr. Bucshon. Yes.
Mr. Cohen. And it's other countries that have demonstrated
the ability to do that.
Mr. Bucshon. Anybody else want to?
Mr. Repko. And I might offer, for this committee, is that
NEI and the United States Nuclear Industry Council did a survey
of 21--or a survey of components we might use in the new
rulemaking, and 18 of 21 responded back they would not use the
rule in its current draft.
So that alone tells you there's opportunity.
Mr. Bucshon. Yes. Sounds like we have a consensus for the
most part here.
And Mr. Johnson touched on this, using nuclear for other
things, other than electricity, right? I mean--and specifically
hydrogen power, for example, has a lot of potential in the
near-zero greenhouse gas emissions and certainly a source of
growth in both the stationary and transportation energy
sectors.
Mr. Harrell, can you discuss some of the barriers to
building reactors that can produce other end products like
directly using processed heat or hydrogen?
Mr. Harrell. Yes. We need to take on a few key issues
there. For example, how do we site a microreactor close to a
chemical facility or to a steel production facility? How do we
put those resources next to critical infrastructure to
distribute hydrogen, for example?
The existing regulator framework really isn't conducive to
that. To the NRC's credit, that is one area post-NEMA that they
are starting to advance. They've done a proposed rule on
emergency preparedness zones. They've done a proposed rule on a
generic environmental impact statement, but they haven't voted
it and moved it forward.
And so it would be great to see the Commission advance
those things forward, because it's looking at these issues
differently.
Mr. Bucshon. Great. I appreciate that. And I just want to
say, I know the comments were made that if you had a lot more
renewables, like solar, for example, that the cost of energy
would be lower. And the actual fact is that the data shows that
energy costs would be slightly higher in the short run with
that situation.
So I support on an all-of-the-above energy approach, but I
think the record needs to show that the data is inconclusive
about if you go all the way to renewables that you are going to
have lower-cost energy.
That's just not true. And the other thing is, then you have
some potential for a grid unreliability and instability, as
some people have mentioned. But that's why I think this nuclear
discussion is really critical going forward.
I yield back.
Mr. Duncan. I thank the gentleman. I will now go to
Maryland and Mr. Sarbanes, 5 minutes.
Mr. Sarbanes. Thanks very much, Mr. Chairman. I want to
thank you and the ranking member for collaborating on this
hearing today, and I haven't been here as long as some and
therefore not as focused on this issue as long as some have
been. But I have been in a kind of listening/learning mode the
entire time I have been here, which is a little over 16 years
now, and certainly appreciate the important role in our energy
portfolio that nuclear power can play.
There's all kinds of concerns about it. You know what those
are. Some of those are squarely within the jurisdiction of this
committee, others are not. But we recognize that this an
important part of the conversation.
So I want to thank the members of the panel for being here
today.
Dr. Gehin, I am interested in these advanced nuclear
reactors because whatever little understanding I have of their
potential encourages me to think that they may solve for some
of the challenges that we have seen with kind of the larger,
more traditional fleet of reactors, both in terms of what it
means for siting, for waste, for cost, et cetera.
So I wondered if you could talk a little bit more about
what that potential is?
Dr. Gehin. Sure.
Mr. Sarbanes. Maybe point to current examples of where it's
begun to be deployed, and can one argue that it could change
the landscape on this or not?
Dr. Gehin. Sure. Thank you for the question. Yes, one of
the features that you mentioned, the advanced reactors, they
tend to be smaller. You know, we're completing these large
light-water reactors at Vogtle, these are massive construction
projects.
As we can shift, for the advanced reactors, from
construction to manufacturing--we have already mentioned a
little bit about factory, making more of these in the factory
where it's more cost effective to do so where you can use all
of our improvements in manufacturing technology to produce a
large number of smaller reactors versus a few large reactors.
There will be benefits.
It also puts less capital at risk if you're an investor,
that you're not investing in one giant thing, you're investing
in a few smaller things, and you can deploy them as you're
generating revenue from them.
In terms of the technology itself, higher temperatures
gives other applications that may generate higher revenue,
higher-efficiency reactors get more energy out of your reactor
because it's a higher temperature. You can transfer heat better
and produce more efficient electricity as well.
And then the designs tend to have--one of the key safety
features is they tend to be passively safe, so you have fewer
systems in these reactors, which will lower their cost.
Admittedly, the first ones will probably be more expensive,
but you need to go down that learning curve. So one of the
objectives there is to build, you know, build several of these.
get an order book, get committed to building, build more of
them.
Mr. Sarbanes. Right. Could you hazard a guess as to, like,
could you quantify what you think the ultimate allocation of
the nuclear part of our portfolio might be between the
traditional larger reactors and these--I mean, could we live in
a world one day where it's all advanced nuclear reactors or no?
Dr. Gehin. Yes, I mean, I hope we continue to operate our
current fleet for a long time. So we keep our existing large
reactors.
Mr. Sarbanes. Yes. OK.
Dr. Gehin. There is interest internationally in large
reactors. Poland's a great example, as they really need to do
major deployments. I think in the U.S., we'll be deploying
small modular reactors----
So you can scale those, those can be larger----
Mr. Sarbanes. Yes.
Dr. Gehin [continuing]. Reactors just by scaling the number
of modules as we build those out. That seems to be where most
of the interest in--and maybe Mr. Repko can talk about Duke
specifically and the type of reactors.
The large reactors, you build them, build them on schedule,
they operate very well, generating a lot of power, very cost
effective, but right now we're in a situation where it's
challenging for us to build those things.
Mr. Sarbanes. Yes, it's interesting to think about whether
this sort of time that's passed in terms of making any more
progress on the legacy kinds of reactors has brought us
technologically to a place where this new opportunity is more
available to us.
Mr. Cohen, can you talk about the climate impact dimension
of advanced reactors versus--?
Mr. Cohen. It's a pretty straightforward connection, in my
mind, which is that if we can deploy these things faster and
cheaper, we're just going to have a bigger climate impact more
quickly.
There's nothing, I mean, it's zero-carbon kilowatt hours--
--
Mr. Sarbanes. Either way.
Mr. Cohen. Yes. That's the major issue.
Mr. Sarbanes. Yes. OK. All right. I think I have run out of
time. Thanks, Mr. Chairman. I yield back. Appreciate it.
Mr. Duncan. I thank the gentleman. Now go to Michigan, Mr.
Walberg for 5 minutes.
Mr. Walberg. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thanks to the
panel for being here.
Last week I had the pleasure of touring the Cook Nuclear
Facility at the west edge of my district on Lake Michigan. I
also have the Fermi II facility on the other side of my
district, on Lake Erie, and sadly, we are losing the Palisades
nuclear facility just north of my district, on Lake Michigan.
The two plants that are still operating certainly are
producing enough clean, reliable energy to power millions of
homes, and they do. At both plants that I have toured, both
Fermi and Cook, I have seen the incredible safety measures, the
redundancies, the planning, and the experienced workforce that
makes those things operate, including having the what Cook
calls the Fukushima building, where they have all the
preparations made to handle anything that would come on--not
expecting it, but prepared nonetheless.
Instead of being spooked by problems of the past and doing
away with nuclear power, like our friends in the EU, U.S.
companies invested time, money, energy, expertise to make this
essential baseload power source even safer and more effective,
and we have seen that.
The energy crisis you see in Europe right now proves which
decision was right. I am excited about the future of nuclear
energy with the challenges as well that are there, but I think
we are also missing an opportunity to preserve and expand our
existing fleet that we have in place, and so I am glad this
panel is here today.
Mr. Gehin and Mr. Repko, you both discussed how to support
our existing nuclear fleet. Some plants have looked into
uprating and increased power generation, something we
significantly need as more and more coal and gas plants are
forced--I say that clearly--forced to shut down.
What are the challenges to uprating existing facilities?
Mr. Repko. I'll go first. I will say--so thank you for the
question, Congressman. So actually, half of our fleet has
already been uprated. We've gone through that process already,
and we are currently evaluating the opportunities for the
remaining fleet.
We think collectively we could gain another over 300
megawatts again of clean, reliable energy. So the process is
established relative to doing that. It comes off of the
economics, and as we see it, it's viable and supported by our
regulators as well.
Mr. Walberg. Mr. Gehin, what are the challenges?
Dr. Gehin. Yes, let me again add to that. You know, as you
uprate the power, you need to look at the safety parameters,
the evaluation of those things. Mr. Repko talked about that.
That process has been established. You've uprated the plants.
Occasionally, some plants need upgraded equipment. None of
those, I would consider, are challenges. The challenge is
whether the economics makes sense. Fortunately, uprated plants
probably offer some of the cheapest additional generation that
you can get because you've already invested in the plant.
You're getting more out of the existing plant.
So it's making the economics work. Production tax credits
could be a benefit there, as well as driving those decisions.
The technical aspects are similar to what's done in operating
the plants already in making the safety case.
Mr. Walberg. Well, let me move on, Mr. Gehin. Flowing from
that, what should Congress look at to ensure timely licensing
decisions from the Nuclear Regulatory Commission? Because
that's part of the big cost, isn't it?
Dr. Gehin. It is. It definitely is part of the cost, and so
some of the things I, you know, I outline in my testimony are
looking at some of the processes of the NRC regarding timelines
for mandatory hearings. If there are environmental reviews,
those can be time consumingy, and there's been a number of
discussion, broadly, on trying to streamline environmental
reviews for energy deployment.
You know, some of the processes: internally specifically
setting timelines at the NRC and trying to enforce those to try
to move things on efficiently and effectively and to meet the
expectations of being able to deploy these improvements when
needed, rather than there being delays in those processes.
So some of these aspects of how the NRC does business could
be looked at, and there could be improvement there.
Mr. Walberg. My final 25 seconds. Any of you could answer
this if you would like to hop in. Fermi has a license that they
spent a lot of time, money, and effort to get, but they don't
think they probably will ever use it.
Is there a scenario where building one becomes financially
viable at a site like Fermi?
Mr. Repko. So are you asking in terms of new nuclear, or
extending Fermi?
Mr. Walberg. This is new. This is a third license, and it
appears that my time has expired. So I will have to yield
back----
Mr. Repko. So we certainly see it for our fleet. So I think
there could be lessons learned.
Mr. Walberg. OK. Thank you.
Mr. Duncan. And we are hoping those licenses get renewed, I
can tell you, because one of those is Oconee Nuclear Station.
I will go to California, Mr. Cardenas for 5 minutes.
Mr. Cardenas. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you for
the book.
I commend this committee for convening this discussion,
which should be happening far more often than it does, but at
least we are here today.
I am hopeful this is something we can continue to make
progress on in a bipartisan manner going forward. Nuclear
currently accounts for nearly half of the zero-carbon
electricity generated in the United States and, if done safely,
could play a role in our efforts to address the climate crisis
that we are in today.
However, I have serious concerns about the effects nuclear
waste has on the health and safety of the communities living in
proximity within it. Inequities and exposure to pollution are
already persistent across our great country, and as we consider
nuclear we need to consider and address the legacy of toxic
waste associated with this source of energy so as not to
recreate, reinforce, or worsen environmental injustices upon
communities in our country.
Mr. Repko, of the nuclear plants that operate in the United
States, how has low-level and high-level waste been dealt with
and managed, and how has the safety, health, and security of
nearby communities been impacted?
Mr. Repko. Yes, Mr. Gehin might be better to answer that
one.
Mr. Cardenas. Sure. Absolutely.
Dr. Gehin. Yes, I mean, currently, when you look at the
used nuclear fuel, that's stored in the spent fuel pool moved
to dry storage, which I think is the preferred longer-term
storage, until we work on this consolidated interim storage,
you know, I think to your point, trying to move to a central
location. Those storage containers are incredibly robust. I
don't know if you happen to visit a nuclear plant and see them,
but that's pretty well established.
The low-level waste? I think there are standard commercial
processes that handle that. I'm not as familiar in that aspect
of an operation of a plant, but those are usually processed out
pretty quickly, the way I understand it, and moved to a low-
level waste disposal facility.
And so the longer the material stays at the site, and in
many of these sites, after operation, tends to be the used fuel
that we're looking at this consolidated storage.
Mr. Cardenas. So if you can continue on high-level waste.
How long would that waste need to be in that dry-level storage?
How many years?
Dr. Gehin. Yes, I mean, it will need to stay in that high-
level storage until there's a geologic repository developed,
and this is the discussion today.
Mr. Cardenas. So today, how long have they been in storage,
of the facilities that have been active in the United States to
this day?
Dr. Gehin. Yes. Since we don't have a geologic repository,
we've been storing that since, you know, the original fuel is
being stored in those. For some plants that are 40 years old--
maybe Mr. Repko can comment--but for 40 years, these canisters
have been designed, I think, for in excess of 100 years, maybe
even longer than that.
And so they're designed for very long-term storage, even
though that's not the ultimate solution.
Mr. Cardenas. Got it. Yes?
Mr. Repko. Yes, I would say the same. I mean, the casts are
very robust. They have very extensive design basis relative to
the Transportation Acts that's in vehicle, rail, fire, all
those kind of aspects, but to the point made, all of the
original fuel is still maintained.
We have even had to go so far as to ship used fuel to our
other nuclear locations to maintain room in our spent fuel
pools for some of our sites. So it's a problem that needs to be
addressed.
Mr. Cardenas. Yes. So my point is this: Looking at nuclear
facilities as a whole, 360 degrees as a whole, yes, it's a
cleaner fuel on the front end, but at the same time there's a
byproduct that we still need to solve long term to make sure
that the safety and the efficacy of the facility and also the
people potentially being affected long term is actually solved.
So we are still working on solving those issues, right?
Mr. Repko. I completely agree. Those issues need to be
addressed. I will say there are radiological controls relative
to this high-level waste. The design of the cask is built to
attenuate those kind of aspects of it as well.
I think there's perhaps a valuable perspective. You take
all of the high-level nuclear waste that's been generated for
operating our reactors in the U.S.
Mr. Cardenas. OK.
Mr. Repko. This is back to the '50s, it would be a volume
of roughly a football field 30 feet high. That is the total
volume of nuclear high-level used fuel waste that we're looking
at.
So in terms of solving this problem, it should give a
perspective. It's quite solvable.
Mr. Cardenas. It is quite solvable, but you actually put it
in the perspective of how much volume there is so far, but if
we are going to have nuclear facilities going forward, we are
going to have more than that one football field size. But so my
point is, I think that we need to have longer discussion about
how will we make sure that long term, 360 degrees, how we can
actually make sure that this is not only a cleaner fuel but
also a safer fuel.
Thank you so much, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Duncan. I thank the gentleman. And now I will go to
Alabama to Mr. Palmer, 5 minutes.
Mr. Palmer. Thanks, Chairman. I want to get a little deeper
into the whole issue of the nuclear fuel issue and the safety,
particularly the next-generation nuclear.
I have been looking at what France has done, and they have
very tight legislation and a very strong regulatory body, which
I think you have to have, but I think the real key to the
safety and efficiency of the French nuclear fleet is the
standardization of their design.
It's almost cookie cutter. And the interesting thing about
this--and this is what I would like to talk to my colleagues
across the aisle about--is France recycles what we have always
considered spent fuel rods. I think that they are able to
recover up to 96 percent of reusable material, and what is
left, I think, can be used for other purposes.
So it largely solves our issue of spent fuel, and I would
like for your comment on this, Mr. Harrell?
Mr. Harrell. Yes. Thank you for the question, Congressman.
There is an opportunity in spent fuel management, right? We
can use the spent fuel repositories for productive use. You
underscore a really key point. Ninety-five percent of the
energy in that spent fuel is being wasted. It's just sitting
onsite, and so advanced reactors (1) could burn some of that
resource as their fuel, and recycling is a huge opportunity.
We see it abroad. We should invest in that. There are a lot
of exciting companies that are USNIC members who are working in
that space, like Oklo and Curio, for example, and so it's
something we should explore moving forward.
RPE has recently done a program to explore recycling as
well. I really think it is an opportunity. I wish Mr. Cardenas
had stuck around, because new nuclear could actually reduce our
spent fuel----
Mr. Palmer. Well, I promise you that when they are back in
here, I will remind him of it repeatedly.
Mr. Gehin, I just wonder, with the amount of spent nuclear
fuel that we have right now that we are trying to deal with,
how many--I know this is a crazy question--but how many units
do you think that would fuel and for how long if we wanted to
use all of that? Because it doesn't take a lot.
Dr. Gehin. Yes, it's a--thank you for the very good
question. I actually did that calculation. If you just look at
the spent fuel, which is not all the material I have--I'll
comment on that in a minute--use that in a particular type of
reactor such as we're developing, you could provide all the
electricity for the U.S. for well over 100 years.
That's a lot of power.
Mr. Palmer. Just using up what we have?
Dr. Gehin. That's using the used fuel.
Mr. Palmer. Yes
Dr. Gehin. Now, in making that rich uranium, we also have
depleted uranium that we produce, and there's a lot of that as
well. That could also be fuel if we choose to use it.
So in terms of fuel supply, if we choose to go that
direction, we do the research and develop that technology,
there's a lot of fuel available. Now, that's a longer-term
endeavor to get to that point, but----
Mr. Palmer. Yes, but it largely takes care of the issue of
what we are having to do, in terms of storage and sending
billions of dollars----
Dr. Gehin. We would still have disposal of radioactive
waste or fission products----
Mr. Palmer. Right.
Dr. Gehin [continuing]. And other things. So you still
would need disposal, but the scale would be lower.
Mr. Palmer. And Mr. Cohen, I really appreciate your answers
to the questions, and particularly in regard to renewables. And
I'm one of these all-of-the-above, but I also understand that
variability issue, but I also understand the physics. And you
touched on the physics a little bit, and we are not going to
have an order of magnitude leap forward in terms of power
generation from renewables, because we are pretty close to
their maximum efficiency.
But when you compare it to next-generation nuclear, as I
understand it, there are a couple of advantages that Next Gen
nuclear would have over renewables. One would be the physical
land use. I think you can put one nuclear facility on 640
acres, 1 square mile, and it would take about--it would
generate the same amount of power, from a turbine farm, it
would take about 77,000 acres.
But the other thing that I want to address--and you other
guys can answer this; I've only got a few seconds left--is that
a Next Gen nuclear facility would probably operate 24/7 except
when it's shut down for maintenance. And it would operate for
80 years plus, which Lord knows what the technology will be by
then.
Whereas the turbine, the average turbine, I think, starts
losing generating capacity after 10 years, and it's pretty much
done after 25 to 30, and right now we are not able to recycle
the blades.
I would just--for you guys, all four of you, in the little
bit of time left to respond to that.
Mr. Harrell. In my testimony, there is a comparison, and it
doesn't even take into account the longevity of nuclear, it
just says head-to-head nuclear is, in terms of material
consumption--cement, steel, all of the critical minerals, you
know--many orders of magnitude smaller than--it's very compact,
and that's one of the great advantages.
So resource efficiency, hands down.
Mr. Palmer. Mr. Chairman, I think this has been a very
constructive hearing. I am very grateful that we have held it,
and I appreciate the comments from my colleagues across the
aisle. I think we are at a place where we can have agreement
and work together and get some things done.
I yield back.
Mr. Duncan. I thank the gentleman for yielding back. And I
recognize the gentlewoman from the State of Washington, Ms.
Schrier, for her 5 minutes.
Mr. Schrier. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. First, let me just
thank all of the witnesses today and say how refreshing it is
to have such a bipartisan committee hearing where everybody in
this room is looking at how we can employ nuclear in a safe way
to give us the baseload that we need to power our communities.
I also want to say that it was really pretty exciting to
hear my Republican colleague talk about recycling. So I am
eager to get started.
Let me first say, also, that I am very supportive of
integrating nuclear energy into our energy portfolio. That
includes bringing advanced nuclear to Washington State.
Washington only has one nuclear plant right now, the
Columbia generating station. It produces about 12 percent of
our State's electricity with only a 1.7-square-mile footprint,
which meets, in addition to hydropower, our baseload needs and
avoids a tremendous amount of greenhouse gas emissions.
So by expanding our nuclear portfolio in addition to the
hydropower we have--but in many States that don't have that,
this is baseload--we can really better integrate other
renewables and wean ourselves off of fossil fuels.
According to the Pacific Northwest, its National Lab
benefits of small modular reactors and other advanced reactors
are expected to help reduce economic, security, technical,
perceived safety, and regulatory barriers associated with
nuclear power, which could then help establish new nuclear
power throughout the country.
Mr. Harrell, I am going to direct this first question to
you. You know, whenever we talk about a change in energy
portfolio, there is anxiety about what will happen to people
working in a different part of that industry at any given time,
for example, coal that is on the decline.
But according to the 2023 Department of Energy ``Pathways
to Commercial Liftoff: Advanced Nuclear'' report, advanced
small modular reactors can create about 230 permanent onsite
jobs per gigawatt.
The report--and I will need some translation of how that
breaks down, what kind of jobs those are, but the report also
found that the median nuclear industry wage is the highest in
the energy industry.
So coupled with the possibility of transitioning existing
coal plant sites to advanced nuclear, this could be a boom, in
terms of employment opportunities. I was wondering how we can
work with industry and labor to improve nuclear workforce
development, where those jobs are, and how we can expand.
Mr. Harrell. Yes. That's a great question. Thank you,
Congresswoman. And a lot of exciting things happening in
Washington State in the advanced nuclear space, and so you're
exactly right: The U.S. supply chain already employs half a
million Americans. They are good, high-paying jobs. And you
know, I think we see, in advanced nuclear, some major
opportunities.
I'll just give you the example, the TerraPower Natrium
project. They are headquartered there in Bellevue, Washington,
but building their first project in Wyoming. It's going to
create 2,000 construction jobs and then support 250 full-time
employees.
And a lot of those employees are going to transition from
the coal plant that had retired there. I was talking a little
bit earlierr, they're separating the nuclear island verse the
powerplant functions. That way there's kind of a direct
translation between the people who are working at the coal
plant who could then work in that powerplant function with
minimal training.
I think assets like the National Labs and some of the
universities who are making a big push here--we're seeing
universities, like Abilene Christian, for example, is a USNIC
member, that are building a research reactor on their campus
and then really ramping up their nuclear energy program.
And so things like that, I think, are really forward-
leaning policies. And some of the universities in Washington
State have done the same.
Mr. Schrier. Thank you. I think that provides a great
degree of comfort when these anxieties about transitions come
up. I just wanted to thank you and in the remaining moments
wanted to underscore this bipartisan support.
I am excited to work with my colleagues. I also look
forward to engaging with my colleagues on the other side of the
aisle and in the Senate, with the recent introduction of the
Bipartisan Advance Act.
So thank you very much, and I yield back.
Mr. Duncan. I thank the gentlelady. And now I will go to
Mr. Curtis for 5 minutes.
Mr. Curtis. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Ms. Ranking Member.
You know, I just have to think that anybody that cares
about affordable, reliable, clean energy has to be very excited
about today's hearing.
This is, I think, a big deal for us and Mr. Chairman and
Ranking Member, please, my appreciation for pulling this
together and having this productive conversation. And I am so
pleased that it is fair to have questions about nuclear. I
think that is great that questions are coming out.
I personally believe there is not a single one of these
obstacles that the industry can't overcome and tackle, and I
regret that it seems like we have taken almost a couple decades
out of innovation of this for a number of reasons we won't go
in today, but I have no doubt had we had our head in the game
for a long time, all of these things would have been resolved.
A couple of thoughts quickly. I am from Utah. We have a
UAMPS. It's an organization--you are nodding your heads, you
are probably familiar with them. They have been engaged in
trying to license a small nuclear reactor for a decade. They
have spent about $100 million, and they are halfway through the
process.
Almost overwhelming, particularly if nuclear is really
going to be part of our energy mix going forward. How can this
be, right? This is clearly not acceptable if we are going to
make nuclear a major part of what we are doing.
I am also fortunate, PacifiCorp, Rocky Mountain Power in my
district is working with Mr. Buffett on a very unique concept
to put a nuclear plant that would actually be positioned in
Wyoming; ironically, both of these would be in Wyoming.
But, Ms. Schrier, I am really pleased that part of their
process is to look at previous coal plants where they have
closed down, that are perfect homes for these small nuclear
reactors. They have the transmission lines, and it is a really
good answer.
Most answers for these towns haven't really worked. This is
an answer that I think would be very helpful and would work
and, quite frankly, they would welcome this facility into their
neighborhood.
A couple questions, like, how do we help these early
adopters, these early movers, right? How do we encourage this?
I actually had a bill that would authorize the Secretary of
Energy to make targeted awards to cover the regulatory costs of
first technologies.
Jeremy, you are nodding your head. Do you want to weigh in
on this? How do we start this thing?
Mr. Harrell. Yes. It's a great question, Congressman. It's
great to see you,and you underscore this kind of crazy
scenario, right?
NuScale, NuScale itself, beyond UAMPS, had to spend $500
million in 5 years to get their design certification. The
customer, UAMPS, is then spending another insane amount of
resources. That's not feasible for a municipal co-op or
organization along----
Mr. Curtis. Or anybody.
Mr. Harrell [continuing]. Or anyone, frankly, right? And so
that is why it's important to have prizes, for example, to help
early movers go through the process.
The entire industry is benefiting from what NuScale did to
go through the process first. They should get support, and they
did from the Federal Government going through it. It's why tax
incentives and having those be refundable, so municipals or co-
ops can use it to deploy their first project in programs like
the Advanced Reactor Demonstration Program, because, as we
mentioned, folks want to be project two, three, or four, but we
need those pioneers, the folks like UAMPS, to be successful so
that we unlock the scaleup of these technologies.
Mr. Curtis. Yes. Big shout out to them, right, for trying?
Mr. Harrell. One hundred percent.
Mr. Curtis. I wish I had time to hear from all of you. Let
me kind of switch gears just a little bit. Where does uranium
come from to do this? My district has a uranium mill that is
constantly under attack. We are dependent on China, right, for
this and other places outside the United States.
How do we change that dynamic to where we are not dependent
for uranium? Anybody want to--and I need a short answer.
Yes, Mr. Gehin, please.
Dr. Gehin. Yes, I'll talk a little bit about that. One of
the things that was talked about a little bit earlier, you
know, about there being enough demand to make this economically
feasible to mine uranium.
Uranium has been very cheap for a while, internationally
selling at low prices. So we need this demand signal for this.
Mr. Curtis. And I'm so out of time. So let me just push it
along a little bit.
Dr. Gehin. OK.
Mr. Curtis. Like processing too, right? We got to talk
about not just mining it.
Dr. Gehin. It's the whole supply chain.
Mr. Curtis. Processing it.
Dr. Gehin. Mining, processing, conversion.
Mr. Curtis. Yes. Now, also this PacifiCorp project is going
to produce hydrogen. Jeremy, will you talk about real quick
about how important it is to not forget hydrogen as part of
this, and are we offering the right incentives for that?
Mr. Harrell. Yes, absolutely. I think it's why permitting
reform is really important. We're going to need to build out a
hydrogen distribution infrastructure because of the production
that's going to be happening at exciting sites, like our
nuclear facilities.
Mr. Curtis. I'm out of time. Thank you all for coming.
Thank you for having this hearing. I would just end with: I
have heard--and nod your head if you think it's true--that
nuclear is actually one of our safest forms of energy, all
things said?
The big incidences we all hear about, right, but we forget
how many people's lives have been lost in other forms of
energy. So despite its reputation, this is actually very safe.
And Mr. Chairman, I regrettably yield my time.
Mr. Duncan. I thank the gentleman.
Members votes are going to be called at 5. We are going to
continue and just work right through it. We will swap the Chair
out here, but when votes are called, if you feel like going to
vote, come straight back. It's one vote, so we are just going
to move through.
The Chair will now go to Arizona, Ms. Lesko, who has the
largest nuclear power facility in her district, and for 5
minutes.
Mrs. Lesko. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Yes, just outside of my district is Palo Verde Nuclear
Plant. So I am very proud about that.
We have talked a lot about needing new sources for uranium
and nuclear fuel, especially if we are going to expand and have
more modular nuclear reactors, and that we are too reliant on
Russia for nuclear fuel and crucial isotopes.
And so, Mr. Harrell, what are your thoughts on recycling
nuclear waste?
Mr. Harrell. Yes. Thank you, Congresswoman, for the
question, and Palo Verde was the very first nuclear facility I
ever visited.
Mrs. Lesko. Good.
Mr. Harrell. So it really is a gem in the fleet.
Recycling is a huge opportunity, right? We should
absolutely be investing in research and development and
exploring it as an option. It can both reduce our spent fuel
reserves and increase our own fuel security by turning that
spent fuel into product that we can use.
Mrs. Lesko. And what do you think the obstacles are to
recycling waste?
Mr. Harrell. Some of it is just political gumption. You
know, I think the DOE is not restricted on exploring that
option. We heard Rita Baranwal, the Assistant Secretary of
Nuclear Energy in the Trump administration, talk about it
regularly.
RPE is doing some public/private partnerships with
companies at the moment. I think we need to explore. There's
absolutely nonproliferation concerns that need to be taken into
account, but Japan has solved for those issues with the IAEA,
as have the French and others. It's absolutely a manageable
situation and, frankly, an opportunity that we're squandering
at the moment.
Mrs. Lesko. And how about the cost? Is it too costly?
Mr. Harrell. The fuel that would be produced from a
recycling would be more costly than, for the lack of a better
way of putting it, green fuel production, but what you do need
to factor in is the cost liability of spent fuel that we have,
right?
Mrs. Lesko. Right.
Mr. Harrell. Someone earlier was talking about the millions
of Federal taxpayer dollars that have been used because we
don't have a long-term repository. The offset of that cost to
the Federal Government needs to be considered in the price as
well.
Mrs. Lesko. All right. My next question is to any of the
witnesses. Today I just met with electric cooperatives from
Arizona, and they were very concerned about making sure they
have reliable electricity on the grid.
One of the electric co-ops said they were now down to one
coal plant and that they were having a really hard time getting
batteries for energy storage for the solar, that they were
waiting now for 2 years. They haven't been able to get it. The
supply chains are terrible, costs are going up.
And we are spending, in the United States, billions of
dollars on subsidies for solar and wind energy. And I was
wondering what your thoughts are and if we should divert some
of those subsidies to nuclear. That's my question.
Mr. Cohen?
Mr. Cohen. We're going to need it all. I mean, we'll be
lucky if we have a lot of nuclear and a lot of solar and get to
where we need to go.
I just don't think we can do this as a zero sum. It's
certainly true that nuclear is not being rewarded in the
marketplace for its characteristics. So you often get this
false comparison and people say, ``Well, solar is 3 or 4 cents
and nuclear is 7 or 8,'' you know. Well, that's just on a
straight kilowatt-hour basis, it doesn't account for
reliability.
So there's some things that can be fixed in State
regulation to make that happen. I don't know that you'd call
that a subsidy. I'd call that recognizing the value, and if we
could sort that out I think we'd get a long way towards, we
certainly wouldn't be seeing plants shut down like they are
right now.
But I don't think there's a silver bullet here, honestly. I
think tripling the electric supply in the U.S. all zero-carbon
is going to need everything we've got and more.
Mrs. Lesko. Anyone else?
Dr. Gehin. Yes. Maybe I would totally agree with that. I
also think making sure nuclear is included as part of the
option set. You know, in some places I suspect it's not yet
because of the, you know, the concerns about risks, actually
completing projects.
So as we see these advanced reactors develop, that create
more opportunities to include it in integrated resource plans
and things like that.
Mrs. Lesko. All right. Thank you. And I yield back--oh.
Mr. Harrell. The last thing I'll add is I'm confident that
new nuclear is going to compete in the commercial marketplace
without these types of incentives, eventually. I think they are
critical for these first movers, to do their first-of-a-kind
deployment, but as we scale these, mass produce them and
deploy, I think we're going to see a very similar situation to
what we saw with U.S. natural gas that's going to be really
attractive in U.S. electricity markets and globally from a
price affordability and security standpoint.
Mrs. Lesko. Well, great. I am looking forward to seeing
what happens at the Idaho National Laboratories on the modular
reactor and see if we can replicate it and use it.
It's exciting, and thank you all for being here for now 3
hours without leaving the table. I really appreciate all of
your expertise. And I yield back.
Mr. Duncan. The gentlelady yields back. I will now go to
Mr. Pence from Indiana.
Mr. Pence. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and Ranking Member
DeGette, for holding this meeting, bipartisan meeting. And
thank you to the witnesses being here today.
And I echo my peers. I don't know how you sit there for
that many hours. I could never do that.
You know, in the Hoosier State, innovators are leading the
way to power the next generation of nuclear energy. Purdue
University is a national leader in nuclear engineering programs
and home to the country's first and only fully digitized
nuclear reactor used to train students in research, cyber-
physical protection.
Purdue has also undergone extensive collaboration with Duke
Energy to study opportunities to use next-generation small
modular reactors to power their campus. Rolls-Royce, in
Indianapolis, is advancing their reactor designs for
transportable small modular reactor design to provide 470
megawatts of baseload power.
While Indiana currently does not have nuclear assets
powering our grid, the State legislature has begun paving the
way for utilities to deploy advanced nuclear reactors across
our State. We are looking forward to it.
Mr. Repko, earlier this year I had the opportunity to meet
with DOE Assistant Secretary Dr. Huff and Duke Energy at Purdue
University as you collaborate with the school on a joint
feasibility study to bring nuclear power to their campus.
The joint effort from Purdue and Duke made several
important policy recommendations to accelerate commercial
deployment of advanced reactor technologies. In particular, one
recommendation focused on a university-led consortium of
industry leaders and researches for advanced nuclear convergent
manufacturing, qualification of manufacturing components, and
workforce development.
In order to bridge the gap of commercialization for small
modular reactors, research universities are well positioned to
utilize advanced technologies and expertise in material science
to assist the deployment and operation of small modular
reactors.
Can you speak, sir, about the importance of your company's
collaboration with Purdue University and the potential benefits
for implementing a public/private consortium, including the
universities, for convergent manufacturing and workforce
development?
Mr. Repko. Yes, Congressman. And thank you, thank you for
the opportunity to comment.
So we have been working with Purdue, as you said, and we
very much valued those interactions. Purdue is an engineering
leader, and we very much appreciate their interest in small
modular reactor technologies.
So, you know, I would offer that, you know, the
recommendation around the consortium is really at the heart of
what we've been talking about collectively here, right?
All of the different aspects of risk, some of the technical
challenges, the environmental considerations, the workforce and
supply chain--it's going to take more than just a one singular-
type solution set around that.
Granted, it's going to be necessary, in terms of that
market signal, to get the rest moving, but that's only going to
be the start. So I think that framework gives us the
opportunity to look broader around all of the aspects that will
enable small modular reactors for Purdue University and beyond.
Mr. Pence. Yes. I think as Mr. Harrell said, you know,
being able to deliver projects on time, you know, you need the
workforce, educated workforce in this space. And I know that
Purdue is dedicated to that.
Dr. Gehin, in your testimony you mentioned Project Pele, an
innovative microreactor that holds tremendous potential to
advance military and civil capabilities. Rolls-Royce, who has
facilities in Indianapolis, has partnered with the DoD for
microreactor development through Project Pele.
Can you take a moment to speak to the importance of this
project and the steps you are taking to bring this innovation
to the commercial market?
Dr. Gehin. Yes. Thank you. Thank you for the question. Yes.
Project Pele is the Department of Defense project to develop a
mobile microreactor. It's a pilot project.
The reactor is being designed and developed by BWXT with
Rolls-Royce and other partners, as you mentioned. It will be
tested at Idaho National Laboratory. We have a large site able
to do tests, so the plans are to test it there. The fuel that's
used for that was technology developed through DOE R&D
programs, TRISO Fuel as well.
So the research is being led, the technologies that will go
into that reactor. And then as that reactor is developed and
tested, it will be authorized by the Department of Energy.
So with all the discussion on regulation, it's taking a
little different path, because----
Mr. Pence. So that's the timeline in----
Dr. Gehin [continuing]. It's very appropriate to----
Mr. Pence [continuing]. In innovation?
Dr. Gehin [continuing]. Do that and, in a quick timeline,
get that demonstrated with the goal of this is the first, you
know, we talked about the first mover. This should lead to
further developments in this space.
Mr. Pence. OK. Thank you. Thank you all for being here. I
yield back.
Mr. Duncan. Thank you, Mr. Pence. I will now go to Mr.
Weber from Texas.
Mr. Weber. Thank you. I appreciate that, Mr. Chairman.
For those of you who don't know when I was in the Texas
legislature, I had the South Texas nuclear project in my
district, and it's about 35 so miles from my district now, from
the county line.
We were there in 2010 and watched them change out spent
fuel rods with their own isotopes. It's a fascinating--they
could do it cleanly, they could do it safely.
I was encouraged to see that you were having a discussion
with Congresswoman DeGette and Congressman Cardenas about
nuclear waste. Are any of you all aware of any waste control
specialists in West Texas, at Andrews, Texas? Dr. Gehin is, and
you are, Mr. Harrell?
But the other two are not. Have either of you all been
there? I have been there. I was on the environmental reg
committee in the Texas legislature. It's a fascinating
facility. It's so huge and so big and so intense. Of course, I
get that that's low level.
So we ought to be focused on their concerns that they
legitimately raised. What do we do with some of that waste?
First of all, reprocessing and using as much of it as we could
is what I think the best alternative.
Mr. Cohen, I am going to go to you. Can you talk more about
how nuclear waste recycling can be a solution to the problem?
Storing waste and a way to produce valuable fuel and isotopes?
Mr. Cohen. I don't consider myself an expert on that,
Congressman Weber, to be fair. I'd like to get back----
Mr. Weber. You know, an expert's just someone who is 50
miles from home.
Mr. Cohen. OK. Fair enough. You know, I think clearly
there's the opportunity to harvest the remaining energy value
in the fuel, for sure. I do think that it's sometimes--we had
an earlier back-and-forth about whether you're really reducing
a lot of the volume, and that's debatable. You can certainly
reduce the total amount, but whether it's an order of magnitude
or not is another question.
I really think I ought to defer to the scientists on the
platform regarding the harvesting of the other----
Mr. Weber. Is it ``Jee-in''? How do you say your last name?
Dr. Gehin. ``Jee-in.''
Mr. Weber. Mr. Gehin, to you.
Dr. Gehin. Thank you. Yes, we've been doing research on
recycling for a long time. In fact, we are recycling fuel at
Idaho National Laboratory from the EBR 2 reactor to produce
HALEU, so there's real value to that. So we have a lot of
expertise.
The question is, I think the questions around this have
been, right, is it economic to do so? And it hasn't been,
because uranium has been very inexpensive and then, you know,
can you factor in the benefits addressing the back end?
So the studies that we've done, if you do full continuous
recycle, which you keep recycling through the reactors, you
potentially get to an order of magnitude less spent fuel and
high-level waste, because you're burning things and turning it
into shorter-lived things.
That's a long-term endeavor. You can do limited
intermediate recycle. There's some benefits to that. So there's
a range of options. I think the real need is to do research to
improve the economics as well as research on ensuring we can
deploy it confidently, in terms of proliferation risk, if we
deploy this broadly.
So those are the types of areas that need to be looked at.
Mr. Weber. So you said you had been, are you are of waste
control specialists out in----
Dr. Gehin. Yes.
Mr. Weber [continuing]. In Andrews County, Texas?
Dr. Gehin. Yes.
Mr. Weber. Have you been there?
Dr. Gehin. I haven't been there, unfortunately. I would
love to visit there.
Mr. Weber. You have not been there? Well, just for the
benefit of our friends across the aisle and our team here too,
South Texas nuclear project basically took and sent, showed
videos of how they store--some of you all are talking about
waste in a canister. I forget, was that you, Dr. Gehin?
Dr. Gehin. Yes.
Mr. Weber. OK.
Dr. Gehin. Yes. It's moved from the spent fuel, dried, put
in canisters, and what you'll see is a concrete pad with these
cylinders on it----
Mr. Weber. Right. Well, back then in 2010, what we saw was
they would take that canister, they didn't put waste in it.
This was testing of the canisters to show how viable they were
and how strong. They put it on a flatbed railcar, and they ran
that railcar into a solid concrete wall, and it just--railcar
just went to pieces, wheels came off it, and it rolled, the
chains holding the canister broke, canister goes out spinning,
you know, on the ground wherever it was. Canister stayed
intact. We can store this stuff safely.
Thoughts on the Yucca Mountain? I will stay with you, Dr.
G., for my last 40 seconds.
Dr. Gehin. Yes. So, obviously, Yucca Mountain is I'll call
it a political issue. It's been investigated extensively for
spent fuel storage. It hasn't gone through the full regulatory
process. There could be value in doing that, of course, to
understand if it could be a viable place
But from a--the way I understand it, I'm a scientist. I
think this is in the political space.
Mr. Weber. So it's a political science, but you don't want
to get in that realm? I got it. I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Curtis [presiding]. Thank you. The gentleman yields.
The Chair recognizes the gentleman from Georgia, Mr. Allen.
Mr. Allen. Thank you, Chairman, and I appreciate Chair
Duncan holding this important hearing to discuss the critical
needs, which we talked about, in expanding nuclear energy and
really an all-out energy program for this country.
We know that our energy needs are going to increase
dramatically, and I think nuclear energy is going to play and
it will play a big part of that, because it's clean,
affordable, safe, and we got to work towards solutions to
expand the use of commercial nuclear energy to be energy
dominant, as we were just a few years ago.
In my district, we have plant Vogtle, where Units 3 and 4
are currently under construction. It's well known that these
are the first nuclear reactors under construction in the United
States in more than 30 years.
Currently in operation are Units 1 and 2, which power more
than 500,000 homes and businesses. Unit 3 is expected to come
online in the next few months, and Unit 4 is expected to come
online towards the beginning of next year.
Unit 3 actually hit a milestone in April, as Unit 3
recently generated electricity on the grid, and it's connected
to the grid. Once both Units 3 and 4 come online, Plant Vogtle
will be the largest single generator of clean energy in the
United States.
This is a huge accomplishment for nuclear energy in
America, and I'm proud that it is being done in my home
district. I am hopeful that we can use what we have learned in
constructing Plant Vogtle to further expand our nuclear energy.
I also want to shout out a big thanks to Southern Company
and their perseverance through multiple challenges to finish
the construction of these important facilities.
Mr. Gehin, we have learned a lot about what it takes to
build large-scale nuclear reactors from Plant Vogtle. Units 3
and 4 cost more than anticipated, and when seeing projects of
this size and cost, companies may be wary, and we have talked
about the investment risk in building large-scale nuclear
reactors.
So how can we use lessons of Plant Vogtle to help build
future facilities to better predict investment cost and capital
risk?
Dr. Gehin. Right. Thank you for the question, and
congratulations on these plants.
Mr. Allen. Thank you.
Dr. Gehin. A lot of times you learn the most from things
that maybe don't go well, and you take those lessons learned.
So there's plenty here to take from this regarding construction
planning, finalization to design, probably input there on
regulatory processes. So this will be a case study on those and
taking that to future nuclear plants.
I also think, in addition to the Vogtle plants, there are
other plants that are being built in the world and are being
done well, and we can take lessons learned from them.
One of the lessons learned is you really want to build a
pipeline of these reactors. So you take the lessons from Vogtle
3 and 4, carry those on to the next one. So it's kind of
unfortunate that we're not continuing to build more of these.
The experience has been in United Arab Emirates, for
example, where they built four units that the labor
productivity on Units 3 and 4 was double that on Units 1 and 2.
And so there was sort of the cost of doing business in Vogtle 3
and 4 that could have benefited the next units, and
unfortunately we're not going to be doing that.
So we'll have to take that to other reactors that are being
designed and built.
Mr. Weber. And I agree with that, because it's almost like
over that 30 years, we had a few people around that had
actually built reactors and could understand exactly the unique
construction application there.
Will any of these issues that we have seen, as far as labor
force and training and that sort of thing and inefficiency in
module fabrication that caused the challenges at Vogtle 3, be
issues for these small modular reactor generation reactors, Mr.
Gehin?
Dr. Gehin. Yes. And so if we don't learn the lessons, they
could be. Fortunately, we are learning the lessons. The other
aspect is on the smaller reactors, as I mentioned earlier,
we're shifting more to factory fabrication, which has also
reduced those risks.
Also the fact that they're smaller, puts less at risk at
any one time. So it's maybe more tolerable.
Mr. Allen. Well, I am out of time. Thank you all for being
here, and with that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Curtis. The gentleman yields. The Chair recognizes Mr.
Balderson.
Mr. Balderson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. That was quick.
Thank you all for being here today and for your patience.
My first question is for Dr. Gehin. In your testimony you
mentioned the schedule and fees structures should be reflective
of the scale and complexity of the reactor designs.
How could the fee structure be improved to encourage
reactor demonstrations and investments?
Dr. Gehin. Yes. So some thoughts on that. First of all--and
the question I got from the chairman related to the fraction of
cost for a plant--obviously, if you're building a large plant,
that's different than if you're building, say, a 10-megawatt
microreactor, where you really need to minimize those for fees
and costs.
This should be right-sized to the risk, it should be a
risk-informed approach based on the size of the reactor. There
are also costs and fees of just entering into the regulatory
process through preapplication meetings, things like that.
That could also be the offset to lower a barrier to
entering that regulatory process.
Mr. Balderson. I'm somewhat caught off guard here, so hold
on. You're next.
And Mr. Bucshon asked part of my question on the 53 issue,
that's why I am kind of jumping around here. But Mr. Harrell,
thank you.
There is a significant market for nuclear energy abroad,
obviously, and we have talked about that all afternoon. We have
talked about the trip. I was part of the CODEL that we went
with my colleague and friend Mr. Pfluger. China, Russia,
Poland, they all are at a pretty good place. We do know about
the issue that just happened with Germany being shut down.
How imperative is it that the United States continues to
lead the way in developing these new, innovative technologies?
Mr. Harrell. It's an imperative, as I discussed a little
bit, it's not a zero-sum game here. The countries who are
interested in nuclear here, if the U.S. doesn't partner with
them, it doesn't mean they're not going to pursue nuclear, it
just means they're going to do with China or Russia, most
likely, or maybe other international competitors, but the U.S.
really has the position to seize this opportunity.
Some of our friends at Third Way and Energy for Growth Hub
did an analysis that by 2050 the global nuclear market could be
$360 billion annually. That's a market that we want to seize
economically here, right? And we have cutting-edge designs. Our
entrepreneurs are ready to come to the commercial market space.
And so let's get the economic benefits, let's get the
energy security benefits and ultimately forge these centurylong
partnerships with some of these allies rather than China and
Russia.
Mr. Balderson. OK. Thank you. I have spoken at previous
hearings about the global environment benefits of exporting our
clean natural gas, especially to these developing nations.
Can you discuss the possible environmental benefits that
nuclear energy exports could provide? It's an easy one for you.
Mr. Harrell. Yes. It's a great question. IEAs, the
expectation is that we need to double nuclear globally by 2050
to have any shot of meeting deep emissions reduction goals.
So it's a huge, huge opportunity, a huge economic
opportunity for the U.S. and so we should be exporting clean
U.S. natural gas, and we should be exporting these exciting
zero-emission nuclear technologies.
Mr. Balderson. All right. Thank you very much. Mr.
Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Curtis. Thank you. The gentleman yields. The Chair
recognizes the gentleman from Texas, Mr. Pfluger.
Mr. Pfluger. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I would like to thank you for holding this hearing. I think
it's critical. As has been mentioned that there was travel by
this committee abroad and really one of the things that came
out of the trip, and we know this, but it was highlighted
especially by the Polish Government, the Prime Minister, the
President of the Czech Republic on just how important energy
security is.
Very happy to see Eastern Europe that literally has been
the victim of the weaponization of Putin and Putin's energy
plays moving towards a realistic view.
I kind of want to get into some numbers here. Mr. Cohen, I
think you mentioned some of the numbers with regards to actual
the wattage that nuclear power can provide. Let's just look at
estimates in the United States of the electricity demand that
we are going to have.
Concerned about the Biden administration's move to mandate
some of the electric vehicles and not have enough electricity
for this. So what can nuclear do in providing the supply that
this country needs?
Mr. Cohen. Thank you, Congressman, for that question. So in
the testimony we cite at least one study that suggests that
between vehicle electrification, industrial electrification,
and just underlying growth, we'll probably need to do something
like double to triple kilowatt hours produced in America in the
next three decades, just an absolute hyperleap.
So--and if we are to meet climate goals, all that is going
to have to be zero carbon, and we're going to have to replace
all the unabated fossils, like, if you want to meet that
objective.
So you're really talking about a massive amount of stuff,
and the question is, you know, what can nuclear contribute to
that?
We do know that France was able to decarbonize its grid in
15 or 17 years with repeat builds, standardized designs. If we
can get to that, I would guess that we could meet 30, 35
percent, 40 percent of that total build with nuclear, but we're
going to have to get busy.
Mr. Pfluger. Which is double or triple what we are
currently seeing right now?
Mr. Cohen. Yes. So we're probably--what that means is we're
probably something like quadrupling our current----
Mr. Pfluger. So is nuclear power baseload capable?
Mr. Cohen. It has proven to be.
Mr. Pfluger. The softball question. I think, of course, we
all know that it does provide reliable, affordable, and also
securitywise is a great option.
Mr. Harrell, I love your comments on--and Mr. Cohen, yours
too--on how if we don't do this here, and this question was
just posed, and it's going to be export. Somebody else is going
to do it.
So both for security reasons, to remain competitive, and
also for climate reasons, we have to export what we're doing
here. And can you expand on, if we don't, just how vulnerable
that makes us on a demand issue but also on a security issue?
Mr. Harrell. Yes. I'll give you a perfect example. There's
been increased partnership with Romania over the last couple of
years. We're going to build some small modular reactors in
Romania.
They directly canceled partnerships with China because they
saw the direct impact of that type of relationship with China.
China was going to control their reactor builds, have a
significant influence over their grids. They thought the U.S.
is a better partner. It's a perfect model.
It's why countries like Poland are real excited and cutting
one of the single largest clean energy deals in the history of
this country to build 5, 6 gigawatts of the beautiful AP 100
reactors that are being completed in Georgia right now.
And so it's a huge opportunity for us as we drive forward,
and we should use our technological prowess and those inherent
advantages to kind of spread affordable, clean, reliable,
secure energy across the globe.
Mr. Pfluger. I'm actually not an advocate for all of the
above. I am an advocate for the best of the above. And when you
have the ability and the technology and it makes sense, then we
should use it.
One of the concerns I have is about storage, and for either
of you gentlemen, in West Texas we have a tremendous amount of
energy. All types of energy. There's an interim storage
facility that has caused quite a commotion. I don't know that
it's gone through procedurally, at least for our community, the
right steps.
I am interested, when it comes to storage, in finding a
permanent solution or a permanent facility, what your thoughts
are. I know we have 25 seconds left.
Dr. Gehin. Yes. As I've talked about it, you know, as far
as interim, the approach that's being pursued is a consent-
based approach to put interim storage where it's welcome type
of thing.
Long term, you know, again, I think you'd use a consent-
based approach, but we're going to need a repository----
Mr. Pfluger. Permanent site.
Dr. Gehin. A permanent repository at some part, regardless
of what we do.
Mr. Pfluger. OK.
Dr. Gehin. So we'll have to get there.
Mr. Pfluger. I will have to take yours for the record in a
written form. I am out of time, but thank you so much.
With that, I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Duncan [presiding]. I thank the gentleman. I now go to
Georgia to Mr. Carter for 5 minutes.
Mr. Carter. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate you
letting me waive on this committee. This is extremely important
to me and I have a high interest in it, and that's why I asked,
as a member of the full committee, to waive on this
subcommittee.
And I am, like you, Mr. Chairman, I am very excited about
the future of nuclear. Very excited, and it's going to provide
our country with reliable, clean, secure baseload power. And as
you just mentioned, we in the State of Georgia are very proud
of the fact that we have the first two nuclear reactors that
are going to be going online, and one of them is already online
and connected to the grid, producing electricity.
So we are very, very excited about that, the first time in
decades that we have had one in this country. And there have
been 31 reactors that have commenced construction since the
beginning of 2017, and 27 are either Russian or Chinese.
We have got to get past this and we have got to, not only
in this country, but we have got to convince our allies that
this is the way to go. I am convinced of it, and then we hear
the exciting news that the NRC approved the first advanced SMR
nuclear design and the breakthroughs in fusion.
So exciting times in energy, and thank my colleague from
Texas, because he's right. I want the best of the above. Yes,
all of the above is important, but I want the best of the
above, and I am convinced that nuclear is part of that.
Venture capitalists have been putting money into this, we
know that as well. And that is very important, and we are
encouraged to hear that, but we are missing the boat and we
have been missing the boat for quite a while now with not
investing in nuclear.
And the nuclear reactor market is valued at $500 to $750
billion over the next 10 years. We need to be part of that here
in the United States. That is why, along with my colleague,
Representative Scott Peters, we have introduced legislation,
the Global Nuclear Energy Assessment and Cooperation Act.
This is a multipronged approach to what we are trying to
do. First of all, it will prohibit us from importing the fuels
from hostile foreign nations like Russia and China. That will
encourage energy independence and to prevent our country from
becoming reliant on other countries, on our enemies for our
nuclear energy needs.
Secondly, it will introduce a program, the International
Nuclear Reactor Export and Innovation Branch. It will introduce
that program at the Nuclear Regulatory Commission to focus our
international nuclear efforts, including training and sharing
expertise with our allies.
That's something I hope that you will agree--and I think
you will--that we need to be doing. We don't have to do this by
ourself, but we need to encourage our allies to be in this with
us.
So with this growing appetite for nuclear power around the
world--and clearly, we would much rather help provide that than
Russia and China, who will only use it for leverage.
Mr. Harrell, let me ask you, do we have a comprehensive
idea of all the countries that want to pursue nuclear energy
and would be happy to work with us to get what it would take to
make it happen?
Mr. Harrell. Yes. There's roughly 50 countries and a little
more that have expressed interest in either starting nuclear
programs or growing their nuclear programs in the last couple
of years. And so it's an immense global market opportunity.
Mr. Carter. So how would having a strategy such as I
mentioned here--and I am self-serving. This is our legislation.
It's bipartisan legislation, by the way. Representative Peters
is on the other side of the aisle, but we both believe in it
strongly.
So what would having a strategy and a full picture of the
potential nuclear market benefit the U.S.? How would it benefit
us?
Mr. Harrell. I think there's license harmonization that you
mentioned is a really key piece. Armond actually mentioned this
a little bit as well. We need to be able to use the NRC
standard and then ultimately have that translate over to
building in Poland, into Romania, and to Ghana or wherever it
may be.
And so this direct partnership among the regulators and
literally opening up global markets. If there's an easy
translation there, of course the country is going to be more
excited about partnering with the U.S., because they can build
off our expertise and then ladder it up.
It's exactly what we're seeing with Canada, U.S., and
Poland with the GE Hitachi, but----
Mr. Carter. And that's what we need to do. There's no need
to reinvent the wheel. We need to be sharing our knowledge and
sharing our expertise here, and we need to be gaining as well.
I will go to the rest of the panel. I know that we are at
the end, and I am probably the last one, I am not sure. But
anyway, how does the U.S. nuclear energy--or excuse me, the
U.S. nuclear industry standards compare to China and Russia's?
Anyone want to take a stab at that?
Dr. Gehin. Yes, maybe others can comment. I don't have deep
knowledge of China and Russia. I know we have the--if you just
look at the operations of our plant, Mr. Repko can talk about
are our plants highest capacity factors. We get the most energy
out of them. They are most economically run.
Just based on what we know about ourselves, I think we are
world leaders with the existing fleet.
Mr. Cohen. The cheeky answer would be, how would we know?
But I'll just share one data point. We asked an experienced MIT
nuclear engineer who had actually helped build some of the
China plants to go back and see if they were being operated
safely.
And his conclusion was, basically, Western standards are
being applied in the safety--he did an audit. You couldn't go
much farther than that. They don't do much publicly, but----
Mr. Carter. Right.
Mr. Cohen [continuing]. He said, ``I don't lose a lot of
sleep over that.'' For whatever that's worth.
Mr. Carter. Good. I'm glad to hear that. Well, again, I'm
excited.
Mr. Chairman, thank you for letting me waive on this
committee, and thank you all for being here.
Mr. Duncan. I thank the gentleman. Seeing there are no
further Members wishing to ask questions. I would like to thank
all of the witnesses for being here. Your testimony was
phenomenal, and I think you saw the bipartisan nature.
I wish more of the Democrats would have shown up and
engaged in this, but they are going to have some opportunity
because I have asked staff to put together a summary of the key
takeaways so that we can start crafting a legislative package,
have a markup, and push some legislation through Congress to
really expedite and propagate nuclear power in this country and
get us back on track.
So I want to thank you.
I ask unanimous consent to insert in the record the
documents included on the staff hearing documents list. Without
objection, that will be the order.
[The information appears at the conclusion of the hearing.]
And pursuant to committee rules, I remind Members that they
have 10 legislative business days to submit additional
questions for the record, and I ask witnesses to submit their
response within 10 business days upon receipt of the questions.
And so that will conclude the ``American Nuclear Energy
Expansion: Powering a Clean and Secure Future'' hearing. And
without objection, the subcommittee will stand adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 5:30 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]
[Material submitted for inclusion in the record follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
