- GOVERNMENT RESPONSE TO EAST PALESTINE: ENSURING SAFETY AND TRANSPARENCY FOR THE COMMUNITY

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

GOVERNMENT RESPONSE TO EAST PALESTINE:
ENSURING SAFETY AND TRANSPARENCY FOR
THE COMMUNITY

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON ENVIRONMENT,
MANUFACTURING, AND CRITICAL MATERIALS

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

MARCH 28, 2023

__________

Serial No. 118-14

Published for the use of the Committee on Energy and Commerce

govinfo.gov/committee/house-energy
energycommerce.house.gov

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
53-961 PDF                  WASHINGTON : 2024

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE

CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington
Chair

MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas            FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey
ROBERT E. LATTA, Ohio                  Ranking Member
BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky              ANNA G. ESHOO, California
H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia         DIANA DeGETTE, Colorado
GUS M. BILIRAKIS, Florida            JAN SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois
BILL JOHNSON, Ohio                   DORIS O. MATSUI, California
LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana               KATHY CASTOR, Florida
RICHARD HUDSON, North Carolina       JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland
TIM WALBERG, Michigan                PAUL TONKO, New York
EARL L. ``BUDDY'' CARTER, Georgia    YVETTE D. CLARKE, New York
JEFF DUNCAN, South Carolina          TONY CARDENAS, California
GARY J. PALMER, Alabama              RAUL RUIZ, California
NEAL P. DUNN, Florida                SCOTT H. PETERS, California
JOHN R. CURTIS, Utah                 DEBBIE DINGELL, Michigan
DEBBBIE LESKO, Arizona               MARC A. VEASEY, Texas
GREG PENCE, Indiana                  ANN M. KUSTER, New Hampshire
DAN CRENSHAW, Texas                  ROBIN L. KELLY, Illinois
JOHN JOYCE, Pennsylvania             NANETTE DIAZ BARRAGAN, California
KELLY ARMSTRONG, North Dakota, Vice  LISA BLUNT ROCHESTER, Delaware
Chair                            DARREN SOTO, Florida
RANDY K. WEBER, Sr., Texas           ANGIE CRAIG, Minnesota
RICK W. ALLEN, Georgia               KIM SCHRIER, Washington
TROY BALDERSON, Ohio                 LORI TRAHAN, Massachusetts
RUSS FULCHER, Idaho                  LIZZIE FLETCHER, Texas
AUGUST PFLUGER, Texas
DIANA HARSHBARGER, Tennessee
MARIANNETTE MILLER-MEEKS, Iowa
KAT CAMMACK, Florida
JAY OBERNOLTE, California
------

Professional Staff

NATE HODSON, Staff Director
SARAH BURKE, Deputy Staff Director
TIFFANY GUARASCIO, Minority Staff Director
Subcommittee on Environment, Manufacturing, and Critical Materials

BILL JOHNSON, Ohio
Chairman

EARL L. ``BUDDY'' CARTER, Georgia    PAUL TONKO, New York
GARY J. PALMER, Alabama                Ranking Member
DAN CRENSHAW, Texas                  DIANA DeGETTE, Colorado
JOHN JOYCE, Pennsylvania, Vice       JAN SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois
Chair                            JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland
RANDY K. WEBER, Sr., Texas           YVETTE D. CLARKE, New York
RICK W. ALLEN, Georgia               RAUL RUIZ, California
TROY BALDERSON, Ohio                 SCOTT H. PETERS, California
RUSS FULCHER, Idaho                  NANETTE DIAZ BARRAGAN, California
AUGUST PFLUGER, Texas                FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey (ex
MARIANNETTE MILLER-MEEKS, Iowa           officio)
JAY OBERNOLTE, California
CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington
(ex officio)
C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hon. Bill Johnson, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Ohio, opening statement........................................     1
Prepared statement...........................................     5
Hon. Paul Tonko, a Representative in Congress from the State of
New York, opening statement....................................     8
Prepared statement...........................................    10
Hon. Cathy McMorris Rodgers, a Representative in Congress from
the State of Washington, opening statement.....................    12
Prepared statement...........................................    14
Hon. Frank Pallone, Jr., a Representative in Congress from the
State of New Jersey, opening statement.........................    17
Prepared statement...........................................    19

Witnesses

Debra Shore, Regional Administrator, Region 5, Environmental
Protection Agency..............................................    21
Prepared statement...........................................    23
Answers to submitted questions...............................    74
Anne M. Vogel, Director, Ohio Environmental Protection Agency....    27
Prepared statement...........................................    29
Answers to submitted questions...............................    85
Wesley J. Vins, DPA, Health Commissioner, Columbiana County
(Ohio) General Health District.................................    32
Prepared statement...........................................    34
Answers to submitted questions...............................    87

Submitted Material

Inclusion of the following was approved by unanimous consent.
Statement of the National Safety Council, March 28, 2023.........    66
Letter of March 27, 2023, from Ian N. Jefferies, President and
Chief Executive Officer, Association of American Railroads, to
Mrs. Rodgers...................................................    68

GOVERNMENT RESPONSE TO EAST PALESTINE: ENSURING SAFETY AND TRANSPARENCY
FOR THE COMMUNITY

----------

TUESDAY, MARCH 28, 2023

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Environment, Manufacturing, and
Critical Materials,
Committee on Energy and Commerce,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 10:02 a.m., in
the John D. Dingell Room 2123, Rayburn House Office Building,
Hon. Bill Johnson (chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Members present: Representatives Johnson, Carter, Palmer,
Joyce, Weber, Allen, Balderson, Pfluger, Miller-Meeks,
Obernolte, Rodgers (ex officio), Tonko (subcommittee ranking
member), DeGette, Schakowsky, Sarbanes, Clarke, Ruiz, Peters,
Barragan, and Pallone (ex officio).
Also present: Representatives Dingell.
Staff present: Sarah Alexander, Professional Staff Member,
Energy and Environment; Sarah Burke, Deputy Staff Director;
Jerry Couri, Deputy Chief Counsel for Environment; Sydney
Greene, Director of Operations; Jack Heretik, Press Secretary;
Jessica Herron, Clerk, Innovation, Data, and Commerce; Nate
Hodson, Staff Director; Tara Hupman, Chief Counsel; Sean Kelly,
Press Secretary; Peter Kielty, General Counsel; Emily King,
Member Services Director; Mary Martin, Chief Counsel, Energy
and Environment; Kaitlyn Peterson, Clerk, Energy and
Environment; Karli Plucker, Director of Operations (shared
staff); Olivia Shields, Communications Director; Dray Thorne,
Director of Information Technology; Hannah Anton, Minority
Staff Assistant; Timia Crisp, Minority Professional Staff
Member; Waverly Gordon, Minority Deputy Staff Director and
General Counsel; Tiffany Guarascio, Minority Staff Director;
Anthony Gutierrez, Minority Professional Staff Member; Caitlin
Haberman, Minority Staff Director, Environment, Manufacturing,
and Critical Materials; Mackenzie Kuhl, Minority Digital
Manager; Kylea Rogers, Minority Policy Analyst; and Andrew
Souvall, Minority Director of Communications, Outreach, and
Member Services.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. BILL JOHNSON, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF OHIO

Mr. Johnson. The committee will come to order.
First, I want to say thank you to a few people. I give
special thank you to Chairwoman Cathy McMorris Rodgers and all
our staff, especially the committee staff, for the hard work
putting this hearing together during such a busy time, and to
the Members on both sides for preparing and attending this
important hearing today.
When I first received this gavel, I never imagined that our
first subcommittee hearing would be on something that hits so
close to home. So I want to especially thank all of my
colleagues here on both sides of the aisle for your continued
well wishes for my constituents and for your genuine concern,
participation, and willingness to help this small, rural Ohio
community.
Next, I recognize and thank the first responders at the
State and local level who were on the scene immediately, who
ran into the danger, risking their lives to respond to this
incident with professionalism and bravery. In particular, I
recognize the firefighters, the all-volunteer firefighters in
East Palestine who jumped into action into the smoke and fire
to quite literally save the lives of their neighbors in this
small, tight-knit village of fewer than 5,000 people. It is a
spirit of unity and selflessness much more common outside of
the Beltway than within it. But I will speak on that a little
more in a moment.
Since this disaster happened, when we aren't in session
here in Washington I have been in East Palestine, listening to
the concerns of residents and meeting with local and State
officials and Federal agencies. This includes our three
witnesses here today. We have spent a lot of time in person, on
the phone, talking about these things lately.
These witnesses have all been deeply involved in the
response efforts, and I thank each of them for their commitment
to assisting the East Palestine community and for their
willingness to take the time to appear before our subcommittee
today.
Administrator Shore and Director Vogel, I thank you two,
specifically, for representing your agency so well, for you and
your team's responsiveness from the State and Federal EPAs.
Your effective coordination has been and remains key to getting
this cleanup and long-term remediation done right.
And a very special welcome to Dr. Wes Vins, Columbiana
County health commissioner, who has been on the front lines
since the very beginning. Wes is a problem solver. And no
matter if you are a Republican or a Democrat, he is ready to
work with anyone to ensure the safety and health of our
community.
Wes, thanks for being here. Your input will be extremely
valuable to our subcommittee as we dig into these important
issues today.
So that brings us to theme of our hearing today. The intent
of this hearing is to be precise and targeted, to get answers
for the still-suffering residents of East Palestine. Our goal
simply is to try and know what we don't yet know. The longer
this goes on, more and more questions arise about the long-term
health effects of chemical exposure, the testing that is needed
for the soil, water, and air, and the commitment of those
responsible for the cleanup.
In addition, the cleanup--which is still ongoing, by the
way--has been a bumpy road, to say the least. As we speak,
there is a many-thousands-of-tons-of-toxic-dirt pile still
sitting there, very slowly being trucked out because the proper
legal certified disposal process was improperly turned into a
political football. I do wonder if this train derailment in
inner--had occurred in inner-city Philadelphia or an affluent
Chicago suburb rather than rural flyover Ohio country, would
those communities get the same treatment?
So to those watching today, I know that many of you
probably saw in the news the plume seen around the world at the
outset of this disaster. Almost immediately, folks on all sides
of the political spectrum wanted to use this tragedy for photo
ops or political gain on the national stage, or to drive clicks
on social media.
But here is what we know: At some point the cameras will go
away, the news cycle will move on to something that gets better
ratings, but for this small community, this isn't over. It
isn't going away. To them, it is very real. Families are still
displaced from their homes, and children are missing school.
These folks don't just get to move on to the next thing. It is
our job today to get answers for them, not to play politics at
their expense.
Now, I know this happened in my district, so it is personal
to me. I acknowledge that. But it could have happened in any of
my colleagues' districts. It is our job to reassure this small
community that here in Congress on this committee we will work
to ensure the cleanup is completed and that we will not stop
our questions and oversight until the health and environmental
concerns of this community are addressed, because we would do
the same, regardless of where it had happened.
Now, I understand that our roles as national policy makers
are significant here also. I know that there has been some
disappointment from my Democratic colleagues that the railroad
isn't here today. More specifically, I read about this
disappointment in a press release the minority blasted out late
last Thursday evening.
I want my friends on the other side of the aisle who have
not visited the site, have not seen the mountain of
contaminated dirt still looming over the village, and who have
not spent time with the worried families there to understand
this: this hearing isn't about you, it is not about me or any
member of this subcommittee. This hearing is about them, the
citizens of East Palestine. It is about those worried families
who have had their lives flipped upside down. It is about
getting them answers and ensuring their long-term health,
period. That is what it is about.
Many aspects of this incident, the response and the
cleanup, fall directly under this committee's jurisdiction.
Whether it be CERCLA, hazardous waste disposal, chemical
safety, EPA oversight, there is a lot to unpack here. But if
you want to talk rail safety, let's do that after this hearing.
In fact, I introduced bipartisan rail safety legislation
with my friend and colleague, fellow Ohio Congresswoman Emilia
Sykes, 2 weeks ago that I urge you all to consider cosponsoring
if you truly want to help prevent what happened in East
Palestine from happening again. There--that is a way we can
hold railroads more accountable. But that legislation will have
to go through the Transportation and Infrastructure Committee.
So I urge my colleagues to please take our responsibility
here today seriously. There are lessons to be learned from what
happened in East Palestine, and we can use that as members of
the Environment Subcommittee to inform our work for the
American people.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Johnson follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Johnson. With that, I recognize the ranking member, Mr.
Tonko, for 5 minutes.
And I know I went over my time, so I will give you some
additional time, too, if you need it.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. PAUL TONKO, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF NEW YORK

Mr. Tonko. That is fine, Mr. Chair. Thank you, Mr. Chair,
and thank you to our witnesses for joining us today.
Mr. Chair, I would like to again offer my support to you
and your constituents in East Palestine. I am prepared to work
with you to do whatever we must do to protect the public health
and environment of the community and surrounding areas and to
hold Northern--Norfolk Southern accountable. I know recovering
from a disaster like this will require a long-term commitment,
and the community deserves clear and consistent communication
about ongoing remediation activities and any remaining risks.
Today we will have the opportunity to learn about the
government response to the derailment. The U.S. EPA, the Ohio
EPA, and the Columbiana County Health District, along with
numerous other State and local agencies, have played roles in
the response effort to date. It is important for us to
understand what happened, how intergovernmental coordination
has worked, and what lessons can be learned for future incident
responses.
But we must also remember that Norfolk Southern is
responsible for this disaster, not these agencies. And while I
believe today's hearing will be worthwhile because there is
much we can learn from the witnesses, I am disappointed that
Norfolk Southern is not testifying alongside these government
officials for a thorough discussion. Norfolk Southern is a
critical part of the response effort's Unified Command and is
responsible for carrying out remediation activities. By not
hearing the company's perspective, we are not getting the full
picture. So I do hope we can have an additional hearing to
examine their role in the response and in the recovery efforts.
We know that successful responses to industrial disasters
require cooperation amongst all levels of government. It is
only through a closely coordinated effort that a comprehensive
response can be achieved, including communicating risks to
affected residents. I do know this response was not perfect,
and I hope we can learn more about what worked and truly what
failed in order to inform other communities' preparedness
planning.
I also know that after the immediate response there begins
a much longer and more difficult remediation effort. After the
camera crews are gone, we cannot forget about the people that
will continue to live with the fallout from this disaster. But
I have no doubt that EPA will continue to enforce its laws and
conduct oversight of Norfolk Southern's remediation efforts.
And certainly, congressional oversight of EPA can help keep
remediation activities on track both in East Palestine and in
other contaminated sites across our country, because, sadly,
the situation is not unique.
There are hundreds of communities across our great country
along the fence lines of ports and rail yards and power plants
and industrial facilities that may never make the news but
whose residents are often exposed to harmful air, harmful
water, and soil pollution that undermines their health and
their quality of life. Even in my own district, about a decade
ago local residents and first responders became very concerned
with the increasing number of trains moving hazardous materials
through their given neighborhoods. Those were oil trains, but
they were shipped in the same inadequate DOT 111 tank cars.
Upstate New York has been fortunate to avoid any major
incidents, but in a different world this hearing could have
easily been about an Albany situation or one of those many
other communities that must live with the production, the
shipment, the storage, or disposal of hazardous materials in
their backyards. And that is why this tragedy is a stark
reminder of the critical importance of our Nation's
environmental laws.
Over the years, I have heard many claims about these laws
putting onerous requirements on businesses and stifling
economic development. But let's be clear. These laws exist for
a good reason: to protect public health and the environment
from polluters, polluters that are all too willing to cut
corners to increase profits and, indeed, avoid responsibility.
Efforts to erode these laws will only make it harder, harder to
hold polluters accountable and prevent similar disasters from
occurring in the first place.
There can be little doubt that, without EPA's Superfund
laws, the community and State would still be fighting with the
company. While this remediation effort will certainly take
time, it is EPA's oversight and enforcement that will ensure
that it occurs in a timely and in a responsible manner.
I know there is much more work to do, and I am fully
committed to supporting EPA's efforts to hold Norfolk Southern
accountable and to make the community whole. And I look forward
to seeing how this subcommittee can indeed contribute to that
effort.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Tonko follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Tonko. With that, I thank you, Mr. Chair, and I yield
back.
Mr. Johnson. The gentleman yields back. The Chair now
recognizes the chairwoman of the full committee, Cathy McMorris
Rodgers, for her opening statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, A
REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF WASHINGTON

Mrs. Rodgers. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate you
holding this critical hearing. There is no better person than
you to lead this oversight effort than the people's
representative for the community of East Palestine, Ohio, and
the surrounding region. Since the train derailment and chemical
spill in early February, you have been on the ground alongside
those you serve. You know their concerns, their worries, and
their fears. Our top priority is their health and safety.
As you have said, Chairman Johnson, it is not about scoring
points or playing political games. The hardworking people of
Ohio need to be able to trust that their community is a safe
home to live, raise their families, go to work, and have hope
for the future. Their livelihoods are on the line. They need to
be able to trust the environmental and public health protection
government officials who are a part of the derailment response,
and that starts with full transparency of what happened with
this derailment and the extent to which air, water, and soil
has been contaminated.
That is our goal today: to gain a complete understanding
regarding the ongoing Federal, State, and local government
efforts of this response. To that end, we will hear from EPA
Regional Administrator Shore this morning. She has been at the
forefront of the Federal Government's environmental testing and
response to help the people who work and live in East
Palestine. We will be seeking answers from the EPA on why it
has taken some of the actions that it has, what the EPA is
doing to speed this cleanup along, as well as how this
committee can help the EPA's efforts to ensure people are
protected from health or environmental risk.
A particular concern for our committee is the nexus between
disposal of excavated contaminated soil, the pace of the
cleanup, and the risk posed from delays of soil removal and
proper disposal. I have concerns about actions the States take
to discriminate against the acceptance of waste and facilities
built, licensed, and permitted for this exact purpose in cases
spanning the late 1970s to the early 1990s.
The Supreme Court declared unconstitutional State and local
laws that discriminate against waste disposal based upon the
origin of the waste. I am glad that Administrator Regan
reminded States on March 17th, 2023, that they cannot put
restrictions on proper waste disposal that are different from
the rules in their State. My biggest question with his
announcement, though, is why was this reminder needed, and what
took the Agency so long to step in?
I also want to recognize Director Vogel from the Ohio
Environmental Protection Agency. We want to learn about how the
State is working and coordinating with Federal EPA on
environmental testing and responses to problems under its
delegated authorities, as well as under State law.
Finally, I want to express appreciation for Dr. Vins being
here. As the county's health commissioner, he has been leading
to address the public health needs and communicate directly
with the people in the community on the risks faced. As the one
on this panel who serves in local government, he is the closest
to the people. Like Chair Johnson, he knows his community well.
He knows the people, and cares deeply for his friends and
neighbors. We value the expertise he brings from the county's
health assessment clinics and the private drinking water well
sampling activities, and we are eager to learn more about what
he is observing, and what he believes is critically needed for
the cleanup.
I want to emphasize again that we are not here to score
political points. We are here to get the facts from the
government agencies on the ground in charge of the response to
this tragedy. Any efforts to politicize the train derailment
and chemical spill will hurt our ability to help the people of
East Palestine. They must be our number-one priority, and they
need to hear from the officials charged with responding to this
terrible event that has upended their lives.
As Chair Johnson and I have both said, this will not be our
last hearing on this. We also need to hear from Norfolk
Southern, and we will. Our work will continue for more robust
oversight with more hearings in the future.
Again, thank you, Chair Johnson, for the strong leadership
you are bringing to your district and on this committee. You
have my support, as well as--as we work together to get full
transparency and answers on behalf of those you serve. Thank
you.
[The prepared statement of Mrs. Rodgers follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Johnson. The gentlewoman yields back. The Chair is now
recognizing the ranking member of the full committee, Mr.
Pallone, for his opening statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. FRANK PALLONE, Jr., A REPRESENTATIVE
IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF NEW JERSEY

Mr. Pallone. Thank you, Chairman Johnson. Today the
subcommittee is holding a hearing on the Norfolk Southern train
derailment, but without a representative from the company
responsible for this disaster and for the cleanup. And I don't
think it is acceptable that the committee Republicans did not
invite Norfolk Southern to participate in this hearing. And,
unfortunately, this omission will result in the American people
and this committee being deprived of the answers we all deserve
directly from the company.
Most of all, the people of East Palestine deserve answers.
It is certainly good that we are having this hearing today, but
Norfolk Southern should be here. Norfolk Southern caused this
mess, and they are tasked with cleaning it up, not the
Environmental Protection Agency or the Ohio EPA or the
Columbiana County Health Department. The company should have to
explain what happened, how they plan to prevent it from
happening again, and what more must be done to ensure the long-
term health and safety of the community.
Now, cleaning up a toxic site creates an emotional and
physical toll for a community. No one should have to fear that
the water they drink or the air they breathe is unsafe. The
panelists in front of us today can surely answer many of our
questions about the response and remediation efforts. But
Federal, State, and local agencies have largely shifted into
oversight roles over Norfolk Southern's cleanup activities.
Norfolk Southern is actually removing the contaminated soil,
contracting with the waste facilities and hiring the
contractors to manage the cleanup, and their glaring absence
holds us back from fully understanding the breadth of this
catastrophe and the work being done to clean it up. So my hope
is that the tragedy can offer lessons for future incidents,
opportunities for legislation to limit further chemical
disasters, and, most importantly, shine a light on the plight
of the folks on the ground in East Palestine, Ohio.
And I don't want my disappointment over Norfolk Southern's
absence to take away from how pleased I am with the work being
done by the witnesses who did make the time to come today. I
think the work between our Federal, State, and local agencies
is a good example for how to put politics aside for the good of
our communities facing unforeseen tragedies.
EPA has been on the ground since the derailment, arriving
at the site hours after the accident. The agency has provided
robust air and water testing and opened a community center and
hotline to share critical information with residents. As a
long-time supporter of Superfund, I am pleased to see EPA's--
EPA using all of its authority to hold Norfolk Southern
accountable in every way they can. And I also appreciate their
work to reassure the residents of East Palestine that the air
and water are safe, and for the continued oversight over
Norfolk Southern's cleanup work to ensure the community is made
whole.
EPA, Ohio EPA, and local agencies like the Columbiana
Health Department have been working in tandem to provide
critical testing data and to dispel misinformation, giving
residents peace of mind as they navigate this cleanup process.
The tragic train derailment is a sharp reminder of how
important it is to have serious, robust environmental laws in
place to protect communities across the Nation from dangerous
pollution in the air, water, and soil. Republicans' calls for
the Federal Government to step in and respond to this disaster
are proof that the government plays a critical role in
protecting public health and safety. But rather than join us--
joining us in strengthening the EPA for the future, Republicans
are attempting to further undermine it. This week, House
Republicans are proceeding with their what I call polluters-
over-people legislation, H.R. 1, that will tear down
fundamental environmental and public-health protections that
protect communities like East Palestine.
So I will end my opening statement where I began: We must
finally hear from Norfolk Southern soon, so we can finally get
answers to important questions that simply cannot be answered
today. I appreciate that Chair Rodgers said that there will be
more hearings, and I believe she specifically said that we will
hear from Norfolk Southern at those future hearings.
So I appreciate that, Chair Rodgers. Norfolk Southern has
to be held accountable for this tragedy.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Pallone follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Pallone. And with that I yield back the remainder of my
time. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Johnson. The gentleman yields back, and let me
reiterate the commitment that Chair Rodgers mentioned. We will
hear from Norfolk Southern at the right time. I would encourage
all of our Members, though, to go take a look at that rail
safety bill that we have introduced that is now working its way
through the T&I Committee process. That will begin to bring
some relief to other communities, perhaps, around the country.
Let's go to our witnesses now for their opening statements.
Again, Honorable Deborah Shore, the Region 5 administrator for
the EPA.
Thank you very much for being here. We will now go to you
for your 5-minutes opening statement.

STATEMENTS OF DEBRA SHORE, REGIONAL ADMINISTRATOR, REGION 5,
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY; ANNE M. VOGEL, DIRECTOR, OHIO
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY; AND WESLEY J. VINS, DPA,
HEALTH COMMISSIONER, COLUMBIANA COUNTY (OHIO) GENERAL HEALTH
DISTRICT

STATEMENT OF DEBRA SHORE

Ms. Shore. Good morning, Chair Johnson, Ranking Member
Tonko, Chair McMorris Rodgers, Ranking Member Pallone, and
members of the committee. Thank you for inviting me here today
and for the opportunity to address your questions.
I want to start by affirming EPA's mission to protect human
health and the environment so that all communities across
America have clean air, clean land, and clean water. The health
and safety of those who have been affected by the Norfolk
Southern train derailment is a top priority for me and for EPA.
As soon as EPA was notified of the derailment on February
3rd, EPA personnel were on site within hours to support our
partners who were in the lead for the emergency response
efforts. Every day since, EPA has been boots on the ground,
working with our Federal, State, and local partners in a
bipartisan manner to help this community.
I have been in East Palestine listening to residents and
have heard how devastating this derailment has been. They are
understandably worried, and some are scared. And every time a
train horn blows, they are reminded of the trauma inflicted
upon them by Norfolk Southern. That is why we have used one of
EPA's most powerful enforcement tools to hold Norfolk Southern
accountable and to require the company to clean up the mess it
made.
Let me be clear: The residents of the greater East
Palestine community are not alone. EPA will continue to be with
them for as long as it takes to ensure their health and safety.
Working within the Unified Command, EPA has more than 80
personnel on site.
Since the derailment, EPA has been leading robust,
multilayered air quality testing using state-of-the-art
technology in and around East Palestine. And that extensive
monitoring has continued daily at 23 stations throughout the
community. Since the fire was extinguished on February 8th, EPA
monitors have not detected any volatile organic compounds above
established levels of health concerns.
EPA has also been assisting with indoor air screenings in
homes through a voluntary program to keep residents informed.
As of March 21st, more than 600 homes have been screened, and
no sustained or elevated detections of chemicals have been
identified.
While EPA is encouraged by the scientific data, we
recognize that the people of East Palestine may still question
the health and safety of their community. We have been
listening to these concerns, and that is why we required
Norfolk Southern to expand its testing.
On the water side, EPA is providing support as needed to
Ohio EPA, the lead for water sampling efforts, in partnership
with Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection, local
health agencies, and public water systems. EPA has been
engaging with the community to make sure people get the
information they need. We opened a community welcome center,
established a resident phone hotline, participated in several
town hall meetings, and hosted resource fairs. We also started
distributing a newsletter to households and businesses to
preview the work ahead.
We continue to look for ways to provide information to the
public. There has been tremendous progress in cleaning up and
moving the waste out of the community safely and quickly,
including the removal of more than 9 million gallons of liquid
waste and over 10,000 tons of soil. And mind you, 70 percent of
the solid waste shipped off site has occurred in the last 2
weeks. The pace is picking up, and the job is getting done.
Nearly half of the total excavation under the train tracks is
now complete.
Here is how EPA is holding Norfolk Southern accountable. On
February 21st, EPA issued a unilateral administrative order to
Norfolk Southern, including a number of directives to identify
and clean up contaminated soil and water resources, to attend
and participate in public meetings at EPA's request, and to
post information online, and ordering the company to pay EPA's
costs for work performed under the order. All Norfolk
Southern's work plans must be reviewed and approved by EPA and
must outline all steps necessary to address the environmental
damage caused by the derailment.
If the company fails to complete any of EPA's ordered
actions, the agency will immediately step in, conduct the
necessary work, and then seek punitive damages at up to three
times the cost.
Throughout my weeks in East Palestine, I have seen that
this is a proud and resilient community. East Palestine is
going to be the greatest comeback story in American history,
and EPA will be there with them every step of the way.
Again, thank you for inviting me here today.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Shore follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Johnson. Thank you, ma'am.
And now we will go to the Honorable Anne Vogel, the
director of Ohio EPA, for your opening comments.

STATEMENT OF ANNE M. VOGEL

Ms. Vogel. Good morning, Chairman Johnson, Ranking Member
Tonko, and members of the committee. Thank you for the
opportunity to appear before you today to share the State of
Ohio's work to make sure that East Palestine can get back to
life as it was before the traumatic days of early February.
This is a goal that Governor DeWine laid out before the U.S.
Senate Commerce, Science, and Transportation Committee last
Wednesday.
It has been more than 6 weeks now since Governor DeWine
asked me to represent him overseeing Ohio EPA's response to
East Palestine following the February 3rd train derailment.
Ohio EPA's priority continues to be overseeing the removal of
contaminated soil and water from East Palestine. We expect this
work to continue for at least 2 more months, as the railroad
removes contaminated soil from under the tracks and works to
restore the creeks.
The investigation phase is also underway, which will
continue to guide long-term remediation plans.
To be fully protective of human health and the environment
now and into the future, we are doing the following.
Testing the municipal water supply on a weekly basis. In
fact, today we will be taking our eighth round of weekly
samples. We also test for sentinel wells that are located
between the contaminated creeks and the municipal well fields,
and additional sentinel wells are being strategically placed
around town. Those test results have not shown any
contamination related to the derailment. We are installing and
sampling monitoring wells at the site of the derailment, where
chemicals were spilled, to test for any contamination to
groundwater.
Ohio EPA, together with our Federal response partners, have
been overseeing removal of the soil from beneath the tracks,
and we do not allow the railroad to rebuild the tracks until we
confirm through multiple rounds of confirmation sampling that
contaminated soil has been removed.
U.S. EPA has brought the most sophisticated technology
available to continually monitor and ensure that the air we are
all breathing in East Palestine is safe.
In direct response to community feedback, we have
undertaken a robust soil sampling effort. U.S. EPA recently
announced that soil samples collected at the park in the
village did not show concerning levels of contamination.
We are making progress in the removal of chemicals from
Sulphur Run and Leslie Run. We know those creeks are
contaminated, but we were encouraged that earlier this month we
found sensitive aquatic life such as hellbender salamanders
downstream of the derailment.
To provide assurance to farmers and to customers of farms
in the area, the Ohio Department of Agriculture will be testing
forage crops, grasses, and other agricultural products.
The Departments of Agriculture and Natural Resources in
Ohio have found no evidence of any chemical-related deaths in
any terrestrial animals.
The steps that we are taking right now to remove the
contamination from East Palestine are designed to ensure that
there will be no prolonged chemical exposure to anyone in the
village.
A secondary but equally important function of the
Governor's team in East Palestine is to be a reliable source of
scientifically verifiable facts and information for the
community. I am very proud that a large group of experts from
the Ohio EPA has voluntarily attended a town hall or open house
every Thursday night for the past month, where we are able to
talk with people one on one, look at maps, share data, and
answer their good questions.
Wes and I attended a meeting in East Palestine High School
last week to hear the concerns of athletic directors and
coaches from neighboring schools. They shared that confusion
about the condition of the air, the water, and the soil in East
Palestine has presented challenges in getting teams to
participate in sporting events at East Palestine.
We also hear concerns from businesses and farmers about
canceled orders and lost sales. In response to this, we point
people to the many excellent resources and data available on
websites such as the Ohio EPA, Ohio EMA, the U.S. EPA, the
Columbiana County Health Department where you can find current
testing data, answers to frequently asked questions, and
regular updates about community events and more.
One theme of this committee hearing today is transparency.
As a key function of the State's response to the derailment, I
can commit to East Palestine that Governor DeWine and his
cabinet will always tell you exactly what we know, what we
don't know yet, and what we are doing to find answers for the
village of East Palestine.
I thank you for the opportunity to share my thoughts today.
I look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Vogel follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Johnson. Thank you very much. We will now go to Dr. Wes
Vins for your opening statement.

STATEMENT OF WESLEY J. VINS, DPA

Dr. Vins. Congressman Johnson, Vice Chairman Joyce, Ranking
Member Tonko, and members of the Environment, Manufacturing,
and Critical Materials Subcommittee, I am Dr. Wesley Vins, and
I am the health commissioner of the Columbiana County General
Health District.
I thank you for the opportunity to speak about the East
Palestine train derailment on behalf of the residents of
Columbiana County and the Board of Health. I have served the
local community for 14 years as health commissioner, and I am
very familiar with the local perspectives, community concerns,
and family needs relating to the February 3rd Norfolk Southern
train derailment.
Thankfully, the derailed train fire is out and the smoke
has cleared. But the ongoing concerns for health effects and
environmental impacts to drinking water remain within the
community. In addition to requesting their private wells to be
tested, residents have expressed concerns about immediate
health issues of sore throats, headaches, and anxiety, as well
as unknown long-term health conditions, including the
development of cancer.
To address some of the most immediate health concerns of
the residents, our agency has partnered with the Ohio
Department of Health and the East Liverpool City Hospital to
establish a health assessment clinic at the well-known First
Church of Christ near downtown East Palestine that also
includes a 38-foot mobile clinic unit from the local Federally
Qualified Health Center. The temporary services include a
completion of an Assessment of Chemical Exposure, or ACE,
survey with a registered nurse during a 1-hour evaluation prior
to a physical exam conducted by a physician. Toxicology and
stress counseling are also available. To date, 322 residents
have been evaluated, with some being referred to a primary care
physician or mental health counselor for followup.
To respond to the residents' drinking water concerns,
private wells in the priority areas of East Palestine and south
along the streams can voluntarily be tested. So far,
approximately 175 residential wells have been tested in the
initial round of sampling, with dozens currently being sampled
a second time to ensure drinking water continues to meet
standards. The sampling effort is conducted by the local health
district staff, using an independent laboratory. At the same
time, the Norfolk Southern contractor also collects a water
sample for comparison. All water sample results are
transparently shared with the homeowner.
As we move forward with the recovery of the residents of
the East Palestine area, I believe we need to implement some
key initiatives to protect the community and improve public
trust.
The first and most obvious initiative is to improve rail
safety, which I realize may be outside the scope of this
committee. But as we see, improved rail safety is necessary to
protect the public's health across the country and to prevent
families from experiencing this trauma again. When rail safety
legislation is presented, I ask that you seriously consider the
issue by relying on industry experts and good common sense to
prevent such a disaster from happening to another community.
The second initiative that I would consider in addition to
medical reimbursement model would be the establishment of a
health and wellness center in the village of East Palestine for
area residents to utilize to address their long-term physical
health concerns, anxiety, stress, as well as a central location
for local resources and information. Families that have health
concerns due to potential or unknown exposures related to the
February 3rd derailment should have a local medical provider
made available to them at no cost.
The final initiative creates a long-term, private well
sampling program for ensuring safe drinking water at homes in
the priority areas where municipal water is not available. I am
requesting that the local health district be funded to operate
this program with an independent laboratory and local agency
staff. The deployment of local personnel instead of a corporate
contractor will provide the highest level of confidence and
transparency to the community, where maintaining trust in the
water that families consume on a daily basis is paramount.
In conclusion, I must recognize that it is a shared
responsibility of Federal, State, and local government
officials like you and I to ensure that the residents of East
Palestine area are not forgotten, overlooked, or minimized, but
are instead made whole by holding Norfolk Southern accountable
to make it right. This was not East Palestine's fault.
Thank you again for the opportunity to present today. I
would be pleased to answer any questions you may have.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Vins follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3961.018

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3961.019

Mr. Johnson. Thank you for your opening statements. We will
now go to Member questions, and the Chair recognizes himself
for 5 minutes.
As of last night, according to the--Governor DeWine's
public East Palestine update, there's still 23,300 tons of
excavated soil in East Palestine awaiting removal and disposal
at the proper hazardous waste facilities. Administrator Shore
and Director Vogel, are the State and Federal EPAs doing
everything they can to protect residents from potential
contaminants in the excavated soil during this process?
Administrator Shore, you can go first.
Ms. Shore. Thank you, Chairman Johnson. Yes, we are, and
that is why EPA sent a letter to both Norfolk Southern and to
State directors of environmental agencies, every single State,
to remind them, remind Norfolk Southern of its obligation----
Mr. Johnson. OK.
Ms. Shore [continuing]. Under the administrative order, to
find acceptable disposal facilities that have the capacity to
take the waste, to enter into contracts with them, and to move
waste off site.
They have been adding a number of disposal sites----
Mr. Johnson. Yes.
Ms. Shore [continuing]. And we understand they are still
entering into negotiations with others. But----
Mr. Johnson. OK. There is--the question, though, is
protecting residents from potential contaminants in the
excavated soil, the soil that is still sitting there.
Director Vogel, do you have a----
Ms. Vogel. Congressman Johnson, thank you for the question.
The steps that we are taking to protect any soil from
contaminating the town is--are fairly extensive. These are very
carefully controlled areas that have been built just to store
contaminated soil. They are layered carefully. They are
covered.
In terms of transport, I know you have been there, you have
seen the stations. The trucks that roll out are covered
carefully. The tires are washed. There's street sweepers. We
are doing everything we can to contain even the water that
washes the tires of the trucks. We are vacuuming that out and
storing that water because it is contaminated.
So, yes, sir, we are doing everything we can.
Mr. Johnson. OK, all right. Thank you.
Administrator Shore, your boss, EPA Administrator Regan,
who--he and I have very frequent conversations, by the way,
about the issues there--recently sent letters to the States, as
you mentioned, to remind them that it is unlawful to refuse the
disposal of out-of-State waste based upon origin.
Why did the EPA believe it needed to send those letters to
tell them that they cannot interfere in interstate commerce?
Because, for instance, in one case trucks were actually turned
around at the gate of a proper certified disposal facility and
sent back to East Palestine to sit practically in my
constituents' back yard. Why did the EPA believe that it needed
to send those letters?
Ms. Shore. Chairman Johnson, the instance you cite occurred
before EPA assumed responsibility for the unilateral--under the
unilateral administrative order for the cleanup. We don't know
who told those trucks to turn around, whether it was the
disposal facility itself or someone else.
But the reason that Administrator----
Mr. Johnson. Administrator Shore, I don't mean to interrupt
you, but I was there when that order was given, and it was a
couple of weeks later before those trucks were turned around.
So I am not sure I understand the timing, but that is OK. Go
ahead with your answer.
Ms. Shore. Administrator Regan and the agency were
compelled to send the letters to the States and to Norfolk
Southern because there was another instance in which Norfolk
Southern had entered into a contract with a licensed permitted
disposal facility that was on the approval list for offsite
disposal of hazardous waste. And the Governor of that State let
it be known that he had told the company not to accept the
waste.
Mr. Johnson. But that was illegal for them to do that under
the law, right? I mean, that is--we know that.
So it is my understanding that the EPA issued the order to
stop shipments of that contaminated soil at the outset of the
cleanup when the Governor of Michigan raised an objection. Is
there any statutory authority you can point to that is grounds
for such an action?
We know that facility was permitted and equipped to dispose
of the waste. So who at EPA made the decision to turn the
trucks around?
Ms. Shore. Chairman Johnson, no one at EPA issued an order
to stop shipments, nor did anyone at EPA order that trucks be--
--
Mr. Johnson. Why were they turned around?
Ms. Shore. This occurred during the transition period
between Ohio EPA and U.S. EPA assuming the lead for the
emergency response. As such, under the unilateral
administrative order, all disposal facilities are required to
be on the CERCLA-approved offsite disposal list. So we took--we
needed a few days to review what had occurred and ensure that
those facilities that Norfolk Southern had contracts with were
on that approved list.
Once we determined which ones were on the approved list, it
is up to Norfolk Southern to ship waste off the site.
Mr. Johnson. OK. Well, I have some additional questions.
Hopefully, my fellow Members will yield me some additional
time, a little bit. But my time has expired for now.
I will now turn to our ranking member of the subcommittee,
Mr. Tonko, for his questions.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you, and thank you to each of you for your
testimony.
I appreciate that intergovernmental coordination and
cooperation is never easy, and I am certain we will discover
ways that events could have been handled more effectively. I
have no doubt that the agencies before us today will continue
to work hard to protect the public health of the communities
affected by the derailment and to hold Norfolk Southern
accountable.
Regional Administrator Shore, I would like to try to
establish some basic facts around the multigovernmental
response to the derailment so that we have a common
understanding of what had happened and who was responsible for
which of the aspects of the response efforts.
So how soon after the derailment was--were EPA personnel on
the scene?
Ms. Shore. I am sorry----
Mr. Tonko. How soon after the derailment were EPA personnel
on the scene?
Ms. Shore. We had several of our on-scene coordinators on
scene and establishing air monitoring equipment within hours,
approximately 2:00 a.m. on the morning following the
derailment.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you. And how soon after the derailment did
air monitoring begin?
Ms. Shore. As soon as those personnel were on site they
began establishing an array of monitors.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you. And what was EPA's role in ensuring
adequate air monitoring of the area?
Ms. Shore. It has been EPA's role since the--shortly after
the derailment, since on-scene coordinators, those--that is
what we call our emergency responders--arrived on the site,
both from region 5 and region 3, because this incident affected
Pennsylvania as well as Ohio.
Setting up monitors, they have been conducting monitoring
and expanding the suite of tools that were used to conduct a
multilayered monitoring and sampling approach and have since
established 23 sites around the community where we have
installed a variety of monitors, and then later brought a
highly sophisticated mobile monitoring bus.
Mr. Tonko. And how has----
Ms. Shore. And it has continued 24/7 since we arrived.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you. And how soon after the derailment did
surface water and groundwater begin to be monitored and sampled
for potential contamination?
Ms. Shore. I would defer to Director Vogel, whose agency
had the lead for the water monitoring piece.
Mr. Tonko. So what would that response be, Commissioner?
Ms. Vogel. Congressman Tonko, thank you for your question.
Surface water began being sampled immediately, because we
knew that the creeks were contaminated. And the village began
testing its municipal water on the 8th of February.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you.
And back to Administrator Shore, can you discuss EPA's role
in water testing, the role of the agency in water testing?
Ms. Shore. I am sorry, sir. I am a bit hearing challenged.
So----
Mr. Tonko. Oh, can you discuss EPA's role in water testing?
Ms. Shore. Discuss the EPA's role in water testing? Yes,
sir.
We did support Ohio EPA and conduct some surface water
tests, and also provided support to the Columbiana County
Health District in its role in testing private well waters, as
requested.
Mr. Tonko. And when did EPA begin to use its Superfund
authority to compel Norfolk Southern to remediate the given
site?
Ms. Shore. EPA issued the unilateral administrative order
under CERCLA on February 21st. It went into effect on February
27th.
Mr. Tonko. And I--am I right in stating that the
company's--the remediation is happening at the company's
expense?
Ms. Shore. Yes.
Mr. Tonko. And can you discuss EPA's role in overseeing and
approving the company's work plan?
Ms. Shore. So under the Unified Command, which was
established as a result of the unilateral order, Norfolk
Southern has been required to submit extensive and
comprehensive work plans, portions of which have already been
approved for soil sampling, for instance, and the rest is being
reviewed by the representatives of local, State, and other
Federal agencies that comprise the Unified Command. And Norfolk
Southern is being compelled to follow those work plans under
the oversight of EPA.
Mr. Tonko. And then finally, if Director Vogel and
Commissioner Vins could respond to the question as though--as
if you have received the assistance you require from U.S. EPA
to carry out your responsibilities.
Ms. Vogel. Congressman Tonko, yes, I believe we have been
very happy with the--our response partners on the Federal
level. Thank you.
Mr. Tonko. And Commissioner?
Dr. Vins. Yes, thank you for the question, Representative.
Yes, we have been pleased. We received--in fact, today--support
from the U.S. EPA in our private water sampling program with
teams in the field.
Mr. Tonko. That is terrific.
With that, I yield back, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Johnson. The gentleman yields back. The Chair now
recognizes the chairwoman of the full committee, Cathy McMorris
Rodgers, for her questions.
Mrs. Rodgers. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And to all our
witnesses, thank you for being here, and for your attention and
response to this tragedy.
I wanted to focus on risk communication, which is so
important in an emergency. In 2013 a National Academies of
Science manual stated, ``It is important that communication
strategies include plans to collect information that might
reduce uncertainties, or plans to revisit the decision once
more data are gathered.'' The National Academies specifically
emphasized reporting uncertainties when fright factors are
involved or intended audience distrust--outcomes that suggest
low risk, but the public is convinced the risks are serious.
So to all of you, I just would like to ask you a few
questions. When it comes to the environment or the health risk
posed by air, water, and soil contamination in East Palestine,
how much scientific uncertainty exists where people should not
draw conclusions about the results just yet?
And we will start with Administrator Shore, and work
across.
Ms. Shore. Chairman McMorris Rodgers, science is our
agency's lodestar, and we base our work and decisions on the
data we have and on the best scientific knowledge available to
us at the time.
Mrs. Rodgers. Would--are you able to speak to the
uncertainty that may exist today regarding some of the
conclusions that have been drawn about the chemicals that were
spilled in this tragedy?
Ms. Shore. We have, in the air monitoring realm, relied on
a multilayered approach of sophisticated equipment that has
both sampling and monitoring, including a--what is called a
TAGA bus, a Trace Atmospheric Gas Analyzer bus, that can take
samples, analyze them in real time, and that has for 10 hours a
day been circling the community and, more particularly, the
worksite. Based on the data we have, we have seen no sustained
elevated levels of any compound that would have--be of health
concerns.
I understand that people are concerned. And that is why, if
they have concerns about their own health, we urge them to
seek, as Dr. Vins described, to go to the clinic or consult
with their primary healthcare provider.
Mrs. Rodgers. OK, thank you.
Director Vogel?
Ms. Vogel. Chairwoman, thank you for the question.
I can't speak to the level of uncertainty out there. I can
tell you how we address uncertainty. What we continue to do is
test on a regular basis. It is the reason for the sentinel
wells and the monitoring wells, so that when--first of all, we
are transparent in all of our test results. They are all
published on the website in all their gory detail, right, every
tick, everything is there. And so if we do find something, that
will inform the next step.
So it is a very carefully phased approach where, again, as
Administrator Shore says, we are following the science so that
if we do find anything, we will know it, we will know it before
it is a public health concern, and we will be able to address
it accordingly.
Mrs. Rodgers. OK, thank you.
Dr. Vins?
Dr. Vins. Yes, thank you for the question, Chairwoman. As
far as--our agency is--we are very fortunate. Technically in my
agency we are very strong. We are a small agency of only 17,
but technically, I feel, we are very, very strong. But we are
not experts. And so we rely heavily on experts in any industry
and any field when it comes to water quality, certainly air
monitoring, and stream monitoring. We have some of our local--
our experts here that we rely on.
When it comes to healthcare, we rely on our partners, as we
have talked about, with the health assessment clinic that we
have got. We have online a direct line to the toxicologist at
the Poison Control Center. So those experts are what really
help us address that uncertainty. But to take that information
and communicate that directly to the resident is the most
important part.
We find that we are most effective one-on-one with the
resident. Certainly, we have got the ability to do press
releases and we, you know, exercised that a lot during our
recent pandemic. However, we find that the--in this instance,
to have that conversation one-on-one with the resident is most
important. So gain good information from an expert, and then
actually have a conversation to translate that. Use our
technical folks, use our partners, use Poison Control, use
physicians, translate that information into a usable form so
that the resident has a higher level of confidence.
Mrs. Rodgers. Is there----
Dr. Vins. That helps to reduce the uncertainty.
Mrs. Rodgers. Thank you. Is there anything that we could
have done better, or more data that we need in this situation?
To each of you.
Dr. Vins. I guess I will respond to that and say it is very
important to continue the ongoing monitoring. I think more
information and ongoing information--things change. Certainly,
when we talk about groundwater, we talk about activities at the
site, to continue to monitor the air, to continue to monitor
groundwater, to continue to monitor the streams, these are all
very, very important issues, as well as monitoring our health
of the residents going forward. So I think monitoring is the
key.
Mrs. Rodgers. OK, thank you. My time has expired, and I
will yield back.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Johnson. The chairwoman yields back, and the Chair now
recognizes the gentlelady from Colorado, Ms. DeGette, for 5
minutes.
Ms. DeGette. Thank you so much, Mr. Chairman, and I am
really happy the witnesses are here today to give us an update
onto the--into the ongoing remediation. And I am also pleased,
Mr. Chairman, that you have announced that you are going to
have an additional hearing with Norfolk Southern, because I
think it is really going to be important to hear the second
half of the story.
But one thing I have been thinking about--I represent an
urban community of Denver, and in Denver and around the area we
have had a number of environmental contamination events. And
people don't really think about the need for rapid response and
for quick action and effective action until there is an
emergency like this. Then they are really happy--they think,
oh, what is the EPA--but then, when this happens, they are
really happy to see there is an agency with the expertise and
ability to come in and do a quick turnaround.
And so we have heard from everybody about the robust, swift
response that we have been having. What I want to ask about is,
now that we are--and I think, Administrator Shore, you have
talked about how, just in the last few weeks, you have been
really ramping up the efforts. But what I am wondering is what
type of long-term monitoring is EPA going to put in place to
ensure that there is continued health of the environment in
East Palestine?
Ms. Shore. Thank you, Congresswoman. And as you noted, our
focus at the moment is to compel Norfolk Southern to do the job
of cleaning up the mess it made. The best way to reduce any
long-term effects is to get the waste moved off of the site and
into safe liquid and solid disposal sites. Then there will be
far less long-term exposure.
However, it is EPA's role and mission to protect public
health and the environment. And we can establish long-term air,
water, and soil monitoring programs to continue looking at the
remediation and the results for years to come. We have done
that in other sites. We will do that in East Palestine and the
surrounding community.
Ms. DeGette. So that is your intention, once you deal with
the immediate crisis, to then put that kind of a plan into
place?
Ms. Shore. It is.
Ms. DeGette. Now, is it--is the EPA intending to use the
unilateral administrative order to ensure that Norfolk Southern
establishes a health and environmental screening program beyond
this initial cleanup period?
Ms. Shore. Right now the focus of the unilateral order and
our work with Norfolk Southern is to make sure the site is
cleaned up.
I think the responsibility for that longer-term health
effort--I support what Dr. Vins recommended, and that may have
to be negotiations with Norfolk Southern going forward.
Ms. DeGette. Obviously, that hasn't started yet.
Ms. Shore. Not to my knowledge.
Ms. DeGette. OK. Do you have any idea what the--well, I am
sure you do. Can you tell me what the authorities that the EPA
has to require Norfolk Southern to continue to provide to the
community after this initial cleanup?
Ms. Shore. The order does give EPA the authority to compel
Norfolk Southern to pay for and conduct all the necessary
cleanup activities for soil, water, and so forth, and that will
endure until we are sure that it is cleaned up.
Ms. DeGette. So just beyond these initial efforts.
Ms. Shore. I don't know the answer to that.
Ms. DeGette. OK. Do you have all the tools that you need
from Congress to properly and effectively respond to this
crisis?
Ms. Shore. Thanks for that question. I certainly would urge
Congress to support the agency's budget proposal, because that
gives us the resources we need to provide the kind of emergency
response that you noted is so welcome in urban and suburban and
rural communities across the Nation.
Ms. DeGette. Great, thank you.
Thank you so much, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Johnson. The gentlewoman yields back. The Chair now
recognizes the gentleman from Georgia, Mr. Carter, for 5
minutes.
Mr. Carter. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And before I begin,
let me thank you, Mr. Chairman, for your outstanding work in
representing your constituents during this time. We have all
been in awe of your constant attention to this, and appreciate
it. And I am sure the people of East Palestine appreciate it
even more.
You know--and thank you all. Thank you all for what you all
are doing. This is extremely important, extremely important to
these people. This community has been devastated by this. I can
only imagine what they are going through.
I know in my district in south Georgia, I had--I represent
the entire coast of Georgia, and we have four Superfund sites
in our--in one county, as a matter of fact. And I know how it
can have such a devastating impact on a county.
And help me out here, Administrator Shore, just--and dumb
it down for me, if you will. If it is a Superfund site--how are
they going to decide whether it is going to be a Superfund site
or not? Will it be a certain area? Will it be--you know, does--
because, as I understand it, they are not going to be able to
live in that area if it is deemed to be that, is it?
Ms. Shore. The authority that was granted to the agency
under CERCLA for emergency response and removal, we think, is
sufficient to compel Norfolk Southern to pay for everything and
to get the cleanup done without it being added to the national
priority list.
Mr. Carter. OK. Well, I am glad to know that because--and I
hope you are right, I hope that does come to fruition and
happens, because I will tell you these Superfund sites that I
have had in my district have been that way for decades. I mean,
they are still not resolved. And, you know, and some of them
are prime areas that need to be developed, if we could, and,
you know, prime commercial areas. So it does have a big impact.
And I think you all--I see nodding of heads. I hope that means
you recognize that.
Help me out, Administrator Shore. As I understand it, you
all have moved from the emergency response now to the
remediation process, and--or remediation phase, I should say.
So what did the EPA do during the emergency process, the
emergency response?
Ms. Shore. EPA's role has been severalfold, but immediately
was to conduct the air monitoring, which we established within
hours after the derailment and have continued to do with
personnel on the ground, taking samples and using monitors in a
multilayered, redundant approach.
But also, under the unilateral administrative order, EPA
sits at the top of the Unified Command, coordinating the
response, coordinating the cleanup, and compelling Norfolk
Southern to follow the work plan that it has submitted.
Mr. Carter. OK, so now you are moving to the remediation
phase, is that correct?
Ms. Shore. It will lead to that. But we really--I view it
as still in the removal phase, because we have to get that
contaminated soil and the contaminated water resulting from the
derailment----
Mr. Carter. Right.
Ms. Shore [continuing]. To safe disposal sites.
Mr. Carter. And then what will take place in the
remediation phase? What happens then?
Ms. Shore. Then there will be restoration of stream banks
and the places where the soil was removed from along the
railroad sites, and I think a larger vision for the community
that they are already beginning to work on, such as parks and
streetscapes----
Mr. Carter. Right.
Ms. Shore [continuing]. And so forth.
Mr. Carter. Any idea of what kind of timeframe we are
talking about here?
Ms. Shore. Well----
Mr. Carter. I mean, are we talking, like, in my district,
decades?
Ms. Shore. No. The--we believe the core of the removal of
the contaminated site and the restoration of the tracks will be
several months.
Mr. Carter. OK. The chairman mentioned in his opening
statement--and I think it is extremely important--the
importance of communication. And I hope that we will all keep
that in mind, how important that is. God bless these people for
what they are going through and having to go through by no
blame of their own.
And I want to make sure that we all understand how
important the communication is. Regardless of whether the news
is good or bad, we need to know. And it needs to be truthful.
You need to tell them, and straight up, what is happening, what
is going to happen, what has got to happen. That is going to be
extremely important.
So thank you again. Thank you all. This is not an easy
situation, but it is a situation where we really need to have
some responsible people in charge. So thank you.
And I will yield back.
Mr. Johnson. The gentleman yields back. The Chair now
recognizes the ranking member from New Jersey, Mr. Pallone, for
5 minutes.
Mr. Pallone. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and let me thank our
panelists again.
I appreciate your tireless work on the ground in East
Palestine to swiftly get this community back to normal. And I
appreciate your insights regarding the ongoing response and
cleanup efforts.
Unfortunately, as I mentioned earlier, we are not getting
the full story on the train derailment and cleanup because the
majority did not invite the responsible party, Norfolk
Southern. I had a lot of questions for them, but I will have to
save my questions for when they appear in the future before the
committee.
I wanted to say, as a longtime Superfund advocate, I am
pleased to see EPA use its CERCLA authorities to immediately
hold Norfolk Southern accountable and to start the cleanup
ahead of the unilateral administrative order to the company.
So let me ask the Regional Administrator Shore, when did
cleanup responsibility shift from EPA to Norfolk Southern, and
what protections were put in place to ensure health and safety
of the community during that shift?
Ms. Shore. Thank you, Congressman Pallone. This--the
transition from the State agency, which has the delegated
authority in every State, has an emergency response capability.
And so Ohio was on the ground, working with the local firemen
and other agencies as EPA arrived shortly after the derailment.
It is typical in these kind of emergency responses for the
State agency to take the lead in the early days. And Norfolk
Southern was complying with the directives from the State. They
continue to comply, but have we found over time that it is
important to have all the authority to hold the principal
responsible party--in this case Norfolk Southern--accountable,
which is why, on February 21st, several weeks after the
derailment, EPA issued its unilateral administrative order.
And you may have seen a press conference where
Administrator Regan, announcing that, was joined by Governor
DeWine and Governor Shapiro, by Congressman Johnson and
Congressman Deluzio, and by other officials from both States
and both parties in a unified effort to demonstrate that we are
working together without cease to try to protect and restore
the people of East Palestine and the community.
Mr. Pallone. Now, let me ask you again. I--because I want
to get to Mr. Vogel.
Looking further down the road, if additional contamination
is found after cleanup is complete, will Norfolk Southern be
held legally responsible?
Briefly, if you could, answer that.
Ms. Shore. Yes.
Mr. Pallone. All right. And then let me--thank you.
Director Vogel, in your testimony you state that EPA has
brought in state-of-the-art air monitoring technology to East
Palestine to help reassure the community in their--that their
air is safe. Is it fair to say that EPA and their technical
assistance have been very helpful to you during this cleanup
process?
Ms. Vogel. Congressman, thank you for the question.
Yes, unquestionably, the air monitoring has been critical,
going back to the early days of this incident. And I would also
say the big bat, right, of the CERCLA order has been extremely
valuable to our cleanup efforts.
Mr. Pallone. Thank you. Now, let me just go back to
Regional Administrator Shore.
Last question: How would you characterize the working
relationship between the agencies in Unified Command?
Ms. Shore. I would characterize it as working well
together. Certainly, some of the representatives have strong
opinions, as they are entitled to, but the Unified Command
provides a platform for sharing data, for sharing opinions, for
reviewing work plans, for reaching a common and agreed-upon
approach to solving this.
Mr. Pallone. Well, thank you. I just want to say I am
encouraged to see the EPA, Ohio EPA, and the Columbiana County
General Health District working together to share real-time
information with the community to dispel misinformation and
provide critical services.
There is no question the residents of East Palestine
deserve swift action, and they also deserve answers from
Norfolk Southern, and they deserve a Congress ready and engaged
to hold all parties accountable. So I look forward to
continuing this conversation and future hearings with Norfolk
Southern present. And I know that, as I said before, that Chair
Rodgers has made that commitment.
So thank you, Chairman Johnson, and thank you again, the
witnesses.
I yield back.
Mr. Johnson. The gentleman yields back. The Chair now
recognizes the vice chairman of the Environment, Manufacturing,
and Critical Materials Subcommittee, Dr. Joyce, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Joyce. Thank you, Chairman Johnson, for holding this
hearing. I want to acknowledge your leadership that you have
shown in face of this crisis in Ohio. It resonates throughout
this committee, and it resonates throughout Congress. Thank
you, sir.
My district also is no stranger to the rail industry.
Numerous towns were founded and grew up around railroad
stations and repair shops. My own hometown of Altoona owes its
creation to the Pennsylvania Railroad. Both of my grandfathers
worked for the railroad. My wife's grandmother worked for the
railroad. Realize that railroading is an integral part of the
DNA of many of my constituents.
The rails right now, they run past churches, they run past
schools, soccer and baseball fields, and many homes. For many
small towns--not just my own--for many small towns within
Pennsylvania's 13th congressional district, this rail accident
is a sum of many fears: 11 of the 12 counties that I represent
have significant rail traffic that transport the same chemicals
that were leaked and burned in the derailment in East
Palestine. My constituents are not just concerned about what
has happened, but they are worried about what could happen.
They need to know that the railroads are operating safely. They
need to know that, should the worst happen, the Federal
Government, and specifically the EPA, will prioritize their
well-being over everything else.
Residents on both sides of the Ohio and Pennsylvania border
have been repeatedly told that their air is safe to breathe and
that their water is safe to drink. As I talk to my
constituents, there is a perception that there was a rush to
judgment to determine that chemical levels were safe. I am
concerned that our environmental protection agencies have lost
credibility in many of these communities.
My first question is for Administrator Shore.
Can you please explain how the U.S. EPA, the OEPA, and the
Columbiana County reached this conclusion for the air and water
quality?
Ms. Shore. Thank you, Congressman Joyce. EPA's on-scene
coordinators, once they learned which chemicals and
constituents were on the train and had spilled as part of the
derailment, consulted with our toxicologists and
representatives from the CDC and ATSDR to identify those
chemicals of greatest concern, and made those the focus of our
initial monitoring efforts.
We continue to consult with health agencies about screening
levels and adjusted our monitoring accordingly as the response
continued. But EPA has deployed a comprehensive network of
tools to monitor the air quality and to understand as much as
we can about potential risks, so we can reduce those risks and
protect the health of community members.
Now we have collected hundreds of laboratory-analyzed air
samples that show levels of a wide range of chemicals have
remained below screening levels in the community since the
derailment.
Mr. Joyce. Administrator Shore, even though the EPA's
district 5 does not include Pennsylvania, can you speak to how
EPA assessed the inhalation risk that these chemical mixtures
posed to people who are downwind in the State of Pennsylvania?
Ms. Shore. Yes, Congressman, excellent question. Region 3
is the region that includes Pennsylvania, and region 3 also had
on-scene coordinators on the scene within hours after the
derailment. We--in the subsequent soil sampling that is being
conducted, we looked at the information about the direction of
the plume from the vent-and-burn event and focused that
primarily where there might have been aerial deposition of soot
or particulate matter. And that is--those soil samples have
been collected in Pennsylvania----
Mr. Joyce. And today, what soil, air, and water tests are
continuing to occur in Pennsylvania?
Ms. Shore. Additional soil samples will be collected, in
collaboration, principally, with the Pennsylvania Department of
Agriculture, the local Farm Bureau, and the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection.
Mr. Joyce. And I think that is so important, with
agriculture being such a large component of Pennsylvania's
industry.
How long into the State is this testing going to continue?
Ms. Shore. Long in time duration----
Mr. Joyce. In duration.
Ms. Shore [continuing]. Or distance?
Mr. Joyce. Yes.
Ms. Shore. Oh----
Mr. Joyce. Well, I will take both. Let's talk about the
radius and distance, and let's talk about time duration.
Ms. Shore. EPA has conducted--or directed Norfolk Southern
to conduct tests in the area where it was principally
determined there might be deposition. But if others wish to
have soil tested, call us. We will work with them.
Mr. Joyce. Thank you. I appreciate you being here. And
again, I thank the chairman for holding this.
Mr. Johnson. The gentleman yields back. The Chair now
recognizes the gentlelady from Illinois, Ms. Schakowsky, for 5
minutes.
Ms. Schakowsky. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I just want to
begin by saying I think you hear from this committee that all
of us on both sides of the aisle are totally committed to
working with you and helping you address the crisis in your
community, which could have happened in any one of our
communities. And I do want to thank you for beginning this
hearing with recognizing the dedication of the representatives
of the Environmental Protection Agency.
And as a moment of personal privilege, let me just say
about my long-time and dear friend Debra Shore, who has really
dedicated her entire life well before this to environmental
protection, for about 15 years she was on the board of the
Metropolitan Water Reclamation District and transformed that
agency in Cook County into really an environmental organization
protecting our water, our great lake.
And I agree with you that the work of the EPA getting on
the ground within hours was really an example of the work that
they can do, and that they are still there and have been there
the whole time. And I know that Administrator Shore was
personally there for 14 days on the ground, and representatives
are still there. And I know the local EPA, the State EPA, has
also been there.
But I do want to--and with all due respect to the
chairman--express my frustration that Norfolk Southern is not
here. And I do look forward to seeing them. As the responsible
party, the one that is responsible for the cleanup, we do need
to really understand exactly what they have done, what they are
going to be doing as quickly as possible. You talked about,
down the road, legislation. But frankly, we have to have
immediate answers.
So what I--I have a question for our region 5
administrator. So I want to know what the EPA has done not only
for the community. I mean, not only for the things that you
have said that have been done, but what kinds of things have
you done directly for the community to make sure that they are
being informed, and engaged, and involvement--involved, and
notified?
Ms. Shore. Thanks, Congressman Schakowsky. I never thought
I would be here at a committee hearing speaking to my own
congresswoman.
EPA has been involved with the community in a number of
ways. I first met Chairman Johnson at a town--the first town
hall meeting about--less than 2 weeks after the derailment,
where I and then representatives from our agency were there to
answer questions and explain to the community how our equipment
worked, and so on.
And I have been at subsequent town meetings and community
meetings. I have met with local business leaders. We opened a
welcome center in town, where more than 400 people have stopped
by to have their questions answered. As noted, we have just
started sending out--this is the second week of a newsletter
mailed to 5,000 residences and businesses in Ohio and
Pennsylvania and dropped at the library and the banks and
Circle K and other places for people to pick this up, which
includes top questions of the week, as well as information
about the work plan, what can people in the community expect to
happen, and who to call if they have questions----
Ms. Schakowsky. Let me ask one final thing. I know that you
testified before the Senate, and you mentioned here this
morning--tell me what you need for the Environmental Protection
Agency to be able to do its job. You mentioned about the
budget. So if you could, just conclude with that.
Ms. Shore. Well, the budget includes not only the resources
we need for our emergency responders and for cleanup work but
for the water and wastewater infrastructure needs that are seen
throughout the Nation, both rural and urban, and the
congressionally directed spending that we wish to implement and
oversee.
So it really helps the agency do its aspirational and
important mission of protecting public health and the
environment.
Ms. Schakowsky. Thank you so much for your service. I
appreciate it.
I yield back.
Mr. Johnson. The gentlelady yields back. The Chair now
recognizes my colleague from Ohio, Mr. Balderson, for 5
minutes.
Mr. Balderson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you all
for being here today.
I also want to thank Chairman Johnson for holding this
important hearing and for the work he has done on the ground in
Ohio to help his constituents after the aftermath of this
disaster. Since the disaster occurred on February 3rd,
Congressman Johnson has been a tireless advocate. I have even
called to check on him a couple of times, and he is hanging
right in there. And he was there every day, nonstop.
And I was proud to partner with him when he introduced the
Bipartisan RAIL Act, which provides meaningful reforms to rail
safety. And I encourage my colleagues to support the chairman's
legislation.
I also want to say congrats, but also for the phenomenal
job that--it is hard to even say this--Director Vogel has done
as the new director of the Ohio EPA, and something that, as a
friend, that you have--it is an honor to watch you and what you
have done. And that is--my first question is to you, Director.
Do you believe that this derailment has caused any threats
to human health in the communities' treating--treated drinking
water?
Ms. Vogel. Congressman Balderson, thank you for the
question. If I can show my visual aid that I used with the
community, I would like to.
I want to acknowledge that this has been, obviously, a
traumatic event for the community. And what we are doing is
everything we can, as Ms. Shore said, to remove any
contamination so it never does. But we will keep testing.
[Chart shown.]
Ms. Vogel. And I want to say that the reason that we have
been able to say that the municipal drinking water is safe is
based on an Ohio EPA map that pre-exists the derailment. This
is the source water protection map. So the municipal well field
is right here, if folks can see that, that big well in the
blue. So the derailment happened way over here, a mile and a
half away from the well field. And we know how the water flows
down this way, down this way, down the creeks. So it--the
derailment would not have affected the municipal water source,
and we knew that very quickly after the derailment.
So thank you for letting me bring my visual aid. And, you
know--I want to be clear, though, that we are not going to stop
testing to make sure that there will be no effects in the long
term.
Mr. Balderson. OK. Thank you, Director.
Administrator Shore, do you and the U.S. EPA agree with
what Director Vogel just presented?
Ms. Shore. Congressman, I do. I wish I had been able to
bring a bottle of East Palestine municipal water with me today,
because I drink it whenever I am there.
Mr. Balderson. OK, thank you.
Dr. Vins, it was a pleasure to meet you this morning. Are
the testing results of the private wells in alignment with the
results from the water systems?
Dr. Vins. Yes, they are. Thank you for the question.
Mr. Balderson. OK. Under the Safe Drinking Water Act, Ohio
EPA has primary Federal enforcement responsibility for treated
drinking water standards. Director Vogel, how many community
water systems serve the affected community?
Ms. Vogel. Congressman, there is the municipal well field,
which has five wells providing--to the village drinking water
treatment plant. There is one well at the State Line Tavern
that is also a public water system.
Mr. Balderson. OK. How many community water systems serve--
is there more than one source of drinking water used? Is
there----
Ms. Vogel. It is just wells----
Mr. Balderson. Just wells?
Ms. Vogel. Yes, sir.
Mr. Balderson. All right. Has the Ohio EPA tested all
relevant sources for contamination?
Ms. Vogel. Congressman, we have tested the raw water and
the finished water.
Mr. Balderson. Could you please provide the results of
those tests for the record?
Ms. Vogel. We can, and they are also posted on Ohio EPA's
website.
Mr. Balderson. Perfect, thank you. What specifically are
you testing for, Director?
Ms. Vogel. Congressman, we are testing for a--we took a
very broad approach to testing municipal water. It is about 190
compounds, volatile organic compounds, semivolatile. Also,
any--of course, the compounds of concern from the derailment.
It is a very long list, and again, it is--all of that is on the
website.
Mr. Balderson. OK, I appreciate it. And again, thank you
for your great work and coming into something like that very
quickly.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back my remaining time.
Mr. Johnson. Will the gentleman yield?
Mr. Balderson. Yes, sir.
Mr. Johnson. A couple of quick questions--I will take
advantage of my colleague's remaining time. This may, in fact,
be the most important question that I will ask today.
A lot has been said in the last month about how dedicated
everyone is to cleaning up East Palestine and helping its
residents. Moving the dirt pile is the concern now, but we all
know this isn't over. So, Administrator Shore, can you state
for the record in this committee, do you concur with
Administrator Regan that, even after the cameras turn off and
the news cycle moves on, when said--when he said the EPA will
be working to make things right in this community ``for the
long haul,'' or--do you agree with that, you are going to
continue to work to make things right?
Ms. Shore. Yes, Congressman Johnson.
Mr. Johnson. What does the long-haul finished job look like
to you? What does that mean?
Ms. Shore. It means a variety of things. We will establish
a long-term monitoring plan for soils throughout the community,
for water systems, surface water streams, and continue doing
air monitoring as warranted.
I personally expect to be visiting East Palestine and
picnicking, instead of having press conferences with neighbors
and residents, for months and possibly years to come.
Mr. Johnson. I thank you for that. I yield back to Mr.
Balderson.
You--the gentleman yields. The Chair now recognizes the
gentleman from Maryland, Mr. Sarbanes, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Sarbanes. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I
appreciate you setting a substantive tone for the hearing at
the outset. I want to thank our witnesses for being here.
As we have all been saying, the health and environmental
consequences that have been visited upon the East Palestine
community are inexcusable. Norfolk Southern must be held
accountable for causing the incident, and I know that ongoing
inquiry into accountability is going to continue.
When polluters are jeopardizing our safety and harmful
incidents like this occur, we turn to the EPA and we turn to
State and local partners for protection and remediation. And I
wholeheartedly believe Americans deserve to be safeguarded from
hazardous chemicals. And when contamination occurs, we have to
have access to thorough and expedient cleanup opportunities.
I do have to make the observation that there is on the
floor this week a bill from our Republican colleagues, their
H.R. 1 bill, which would actually limit some of EPA's
regulatory authorities like the ones that are being used right
now to ensure proper handling of the disaster. And it is wrong
to put the interests of polluters over the safety and security
of communities across the country.
In East Palestine, EPA deployed within hours, as you have
described, to provide on-site support of State and local
responders, including monitoring the air and water quality so
critical. EPA has also exercised its authorities to oversee
Norfolk Southern's cleanup obligations. We appreciate that.
As part of its EPA-mandated cleanup activity, Norfolk
Southern contracted with an industrial wastewater treatment
company in Baltimore, where I am from, to process liquid
wastewater from the derailment. It was initially announced that
this treated wastewater would then be discharged through the
Back River Wastewater Treatment Plant, which, for those who are
not aware, has had its own significant challenges recently,
some of which have required Maryland's Department of the
Environment to intercede.
While it seems based on an announcement just this morning
from that Baltimore company that the wastewater might
ultimately be treated elsewhere, this is kind of an evolving
story. We are still working with others in the Federal, State,
and local delegation to get the specifics of that new plan. And
regardless of where the wastewater is ultimately treated, I am
very concerned about making sure--and I am sure you can
understand this--that these efforts do not jeopardize the
health and safety of Marylanders, Chesapeake Bay, or other
communities.
Since Norfolk Southern is missing from this hearing today,
I can't ask them directly how they intend to ensure that this
wastewater treatment will not pose a threat to the communities
and environments it is discharged in. So instead I will ask
you, Administrator Shore. How exactly will EPA ensure that this
remediation will not impact the health, safety, and security of
the communities where the remediation will take place?
In other words, you have spoken a lot about what is
happening in East Palestine, but could you speak a little bit
about this issue of where the discharge is going for treatment?
Ms. Shore. Thank you, Congressman Sarbanes, and I certainly
respect and appreciate your concern and care for your
constituents. I encourage, as Congressman Johnson did, everyone
to extend that care and concern to the people in East Palestine
and the surrounding communities.
EPA has a list of disposal sites that can accept solid or
liquid waste--hazardous waste--and they must apply to be on
that list, and EPA conducts a thorough review of their capacity
and treatment processes. And only when they have passed this
rigorous application and review are they added to the CERCLA
list of approved facilities for offsite disposal. We have made
that list available in Norfolk Southern, and they are now
required--and have been since the start of this emergency
response, but certainly under the unilateral administrative
order--to identify and enter into contracts only with disposal
sites that meet those rigorous standards.
And we have additional safeguards, as Director Vogel
mentioned, during the loading, the transport, and the unloading
of hazardous wastes.
Mr. Sarbanes. Thank you very much.
And I yield back.
Mr. Johnson. The gentleman yields back. The Chair now
recognizes the gentleman from Texas, Mr. Weber, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Weber. Thank you, Chairman.
Director Vogel, the status of the pile of excavated waste
is a major concern. You have heard that, and it is nothing new.
What precautions are being taken to prevent blowing or drifting
of contaminated soils from that pile into the community?
And how long should we expect to have to kind of monitor
that?
Ms. Vogel. Congressman, thank you for your question. The
piles are managed by professionals. They were careful--they
were built, they were designed to hold the contaminated soil.
They are--I know Congressman Johnson has been out there--they
are lined, and they are covered in layers, and carefully
compacted to make sure that there isn't drifting or blowing.
Mr. Weber. Do they----
Ms. Vogel. How long----
Mr. Weber. Go ahead.
Ms. Vogel. It may take several more months to get all of
the soil out.
Mr. Weber. So when they transport that contaminated soil,
closed container, a container with some kind of lid on it, or
do you know?
Ms. Vogel. Yes, Congressman. They--it is being trucked out
of East Palestine, so loaded and trucked. The trucks go through
a wash station that--it is inspected to make sure that it is
covered completely and sealed. And then the tires are washed to
make sure that no contaminated soil is getting onto the roads.
Mr. Weber. And I know this is way down in the weeds--or
maybe way down in the drainage system, however you want to look
at it--but when they wash those tires and wheels, is that water
captured and treated or checked?
Ms. Vogel. Congressman, yes. Yes, sir, it is. It is in a
pad, and so that water is vacuumed and stored in those blue
frack tanks.
Mr. Weber. OK.
Ms. Vogel. For disposal.
Mr. Weber. Well, I am glad to hear the term ``tanks,''
because I have seen a lot of 18-wheelers on the highway. Some
of them have a cover like a tarp, but I am holding that this is
a completely--hoping this is a completely enclosed tank.
Ms. Vogel. For the liquids? It is tanks.
Mr. Weber. Well, and dirt too, for that matter.
Ms. Vogel. The soil is in trucks that are covered and
sealed.
Mr. Weber. OK. And I think she might have answered this
earlier. What steps are being taken to keep the community safe
as contaminated soil is excavated?
I guess the really question--the real question there is, is
there an air monitoring process? If there is an accident, is
there a system set up to notify everybody?
Ms. Vogel. Congressman, I would defer to U.S. EPA. But as
Administrator Shore has explained, the TAGA bus, that real-time
air monitoring bus, drives a route around----
Mr. Weber. OK. Well, I apologize. I was in another
committee hearing----
Ms. Vogel. No--yes, I am happy----
Mr. Weber. Yes.
Ms. Vogel [continuing]. To talk about it again. And as far
as notifying people if there are any detections, we haven't had
any health-concerning detections. However, there is a process
in place. I believe whenever there is a--any sort of concern,
the work would be stopped immediately would be the plan.
Mr. Weber. And Administrator Shore, I go to you.
Contaminated from air deposition has been an issue of concern
in the community, and what these exposures may mean. And, of
course, the $64 question, the loaded question--I am guessing
you are concerned about people's health in their homes, and I
know you are.
Can you elaborate on exactly what precautions are being
taken to protect them in their homes, and how quick that notice
would go out if there was a problem?
Ms. Shore. Thank you, Congressman. As I noted previously,
EPA has deployed a comprehensive network of air monitoring and
testing equipment, a multilayered approach. There are 23 sites
where these Summa canisters and sorbent tubes are installed
around the community.
We have this TAGA bus both monitoring the fence line of the
work site and driving through the community. It can produce
real-time analysis of air samples so that if there were any
spikes seen, notification can be made through the Unified
Command and through the local emergency management agency.
EPA and Norfolk Southern have safety officers on site at
the excavation site that meet every morning and discuss the
work plan and what safety precautions are in place. And they
are there on site, should anything occur at the work site.
Mr. Weber. And I know that one of our questions was, of
course, EPA--this Comprehensive Environmental Response
Compensation and Liability Act, CERCLA, authority to order
Norfolk Southern to clean people's houses. What should we tell
them--in the last 10 seconds, my time--they are cleaning out of
houses?
Ms. Shore. That was a plan that is still being negotiated
with the railroad to--what the specifics of that cleaning
program will be. We expect it will be rolled out in several
weeks. That was done out of an abundance of caution,
understanding that people had concerns. But because we aren't
detecting any elevated levels of chemicals of concern outside
of people's homes, we have a very high confidence that they are
not inside people's homes.
Mr. Weber. All right, thank you.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Johnson. The gentleman yields back.
Director Shore--or, I am sorry, Administrator Shore--Mr.
Sarbanes asked about the list of approved disposal sites. Would
you provide that list for the record to our committee?
Ms. Shore. Yes, Congressman, I believe we can.
Mr. Johnson. OK, thank you. The Chair now recognizes the
gentleman from Georgia, Mr. Allen, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Allen. Thank you, Chairman Johnson, for holding this
important hearing today to discuss the government response to
Norfolk Southern's train derailment in East Palestine, Ohio.
I certainly want to express my continued thoughts and
prayers to the people impacted by this tragic accident. We
don't want any community in America to have to endure what the
people of East Palestine have had to endure the past month.
Their lives have been disrupted, and it is a tragedy.
I know this impacted your district directly, Mr. Chair, and
I thank you for all the work you have done being on the ground
and working directly with the government entities, and
communicating to this committee and to your colleagues here in
Congress the urgency of an investigation to prevent these in
the future. As we continue to investigate this, government
response is critical, and ensuring all entities have a clear
understanding of their roles and responsibilities are crucial.
Director Vogel, you have been on the ground and know
firsthand all government entities are working to respond to the
derailment. Could you discuss Ohio's EPA working relationship
with other government agencies, whether Federal or local, in
responding to the train derailment?
Ms. Vogel. Congressman, thank you for your question. Ohio
EPA, of course, our emergency response team was on the ground
at 12:25 a.m. They were the first to arrive. U.S. EPA followed
shortly thereafter. And we have a very clear delineation of
duties on the ground. I think we have been working very
closely.
Ohio EPA is part of Unified Command, so in terms of
reviewing the work plans of Norfolk Southern, reviewing the
work that is ongoing on the track, we both have on-scene
coordinators there every single day, out looking around the
site, making sure that the work is being done according to
plan. So it is a very collaborative effort with our Federal
response partners.
Mr. Allen. And have there been challenging--has it been a
challenge to coordinate Federal and State efforts in regard to
trying to get to the bottom and the--bottom of the issue, the
cleanup and the investigation?
Ms. Vogel. Congressman, I can't think of a challenge that
we have had with our Federal response partners. I think we have
been very coordinated in doing our best to get information from
the railroad at times and making sure that they are doing the
work plans appropriately. But in terms of coordinating with our
Federal and local partners, it has been a very good working
relationship.
Mr. Allen. Administrator Shore, it is your turn. What do
you consider--or how would you consider the relationship should
look like, and how did it look in this incidence between local,
State, and Federal government?
Ms. Shore. Like Director Vogel, Congressman, I think this
has been an example of close coordination, close collaboration,
respectful partnership. Director Vogel is on my speed dial, and
we talk frequently, and I have been with her at numerous
meetings in East Palestine, and that will continue.
Mr. Allen. Well, thank you for your response and the
coordination and how you are working together.
As far as just a followup, as far as overprescribed
agencies, can you describe what enforcement authorities U.S.
EPA has under the Comprehensive Environmental Response
Compensation and Liability Act, and what is it using for the
cleanup?
Ms. Shore. Under CERCLA, as you note, that grants EPA the
authority to hold a principal responsible party--in this case,
Norfolk Southern--responsible and accountable so that they will
be required to pay for all the costs of the cleanup, not only
their own costs but those of EPA and the other responding
agencies.
Mr. Allen. In your opinion--and I have got just 30 seconds
left--how is the recovery going, and how are we doing as far as
getting this right? How is the process going? Fast enough, not
fast enough? What can we do to help?
Ms. Shore. As Chairman Johnson and Chairman McMorris
Rodgers noted, Norfolk Southern has encountered some
difficulties in finding and establishing contracts with sites
to accept both liquid and solid waste. And I think we could
accelerate the cleanup if they were able to fulfill that
obligation more expeditiously.
Mr. Allen. Great. Thank you so much for your testimony this
morning.
And I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Johnson. The gentleman yields back. The Chair now
recognizes my colleague and head trauma physician, personal
head trauma physician, Dr. Ruiz from California, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Ruiz. I hope the wound is getting better.
Mr. Johnson. It is all better, thank you.
Mr. Ruiz. Good. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Access to clean air and clean drinking water is a human
right and a common good for all. As a physician and a public
health expert--and the chairman's personal trauma physician--I
have seen firsthand how important these are for our communities
and our children. The residents of East Palestine deserve to
know that their air--the air they breathe, and the water they
drink are clean, and Congress has an important role in ensuring
that the Federal, State, and local government responses protect
the health of the local community. That is why I am very happy
we are definitely having this hearing today.
So, Dr. Vins, can you talk to us about some of the health
concerns folks are coming into your office with?
Dr. Vins. Yes, certainly. So we have--thank you for the
question, Congressman Ruiz. We have two avenues, really, where
we are receiving feedback from the community.
So we have the Community Health Assessment Clinic, which we
have established, as I had in my testimony, at the First Church
of Christ. The clinic, as residents come in--keep in mind it is
not a treatment or a diagnosis clinic, but it is more about a
navigation clinic. And so we invite the residents to come in to
talk about and kind of capture their experience, and try to
summarize and help them quantify what their concerns are.
As you can imagine, it is extremely traumatic, being
displaced from your home. And so sometimes residents----
Mr. Ruiz. What are some of the health concerns they have?
Dr. Vins. So the health concerns that we are seeing largely
are headaches--through the health assessment clinic, as well as
our ACE survey--headaches and anxiety, where more than half of
our residents are experiencing those two----
Mr. Ruiz. And what are some of the long-term health
concerns that residents and your providers have?
Dr. Vins. We have heard a whole wide range of concerns,
long term. Certainly, cancer is first and foremost, because of
much of the information that the residents see online and hear,
as well as reproductive concerns, growth concerns, hormonal
concerns for their children.
Mr. Ruiz. Do you think there is a potential with the
carcinogens or any of the toxins that it could lead to ailments
4 or 5 years from now?
Dr. Vins. Yes, I understand your question. Yes. So the--
some of the constituents that we have related to this response,
obviously, are carcinogenic. However, we are seeing low levels,
is really the initial response. So I think the long question is
we don't know.
Mr. Ruiz. We don't know.
Dr. Vins. And that is my----
Mr. Ruiz. And that adds to the anxiety.
Dr. Vins. I am sorry?
Mr. Ruiz. And that adds to the anxiety that people have----
Dr. Vins. Yes, sir.
Mr. Ruiz [continuing]. Because we don't know.
Dr. Vins. Yes, sir.
Mr. Ruiz. While we may still be in the cleanup phase, I
want to make sure we are thinking about the health impacts this
community is potentially facing in the long term.
So Regional Administrator Shore and Director Vogel, what
are your respective agencies doing to make sure that the health
and well being of the communities are taken care of?
And looking to the future, what infrastructure are you
putting in place to make sure that the cost burden of future
health impacts isn't falling on the residents of East
Palestine?
Ms. Vogel. Congressman, thank you for your question.
On the municipal water side, two things. We are testing the
sentinel wells to make sure that, if there is any contamination
in the creeks, it is not getting into the groundwater. And if
it is, we will know long before it gets to the well field.
But also, the railroad has--is paying for a secondary and
advanced treatment system at the water treatment plant so that
if there is any detection found--this is an abundance-of-
caution step for the future, just as you said--we have put an
order in for the granular activated carbon system. I can
announce that the village approved that last night.
Mr. Ruiz. Great. Administrator Shore?
Ms. Shore. Thank you, Congressman. As I stated, EPA will be
there as long as it takes----
Mr. Ruiz. Good.
Ms. Shore [continuing]. For the residents of East Palestine
to feel that they are----
Mr. Ruiz. Good. You know who else needs to be there?
Norfolk. Norfolk Southern needs to be there. So I do want to
add that I think this committee needs to hear from Norfolk
Southern directly, and Norfolk Southern needs to commit to
long-term financial assistance for healthcare costs, for
impacts stemming from the toxic derailments. They also need to
commit to long-term engagement on the ground should any further
contamination be found. And they need to provide assurances
that other communities won't find themselves in the position
that East Palestine is in today.
My district is home to another major freight operations,
and trains go through many cities in my district.
Unfortunately, we have seen the local freight railroad, Union
Pacific, repeatedly stop in the middle of Beaumont City. This
turns the town into a parking lot, and endangers lives by
blocking emergency services from reaching their destinations in
a timely manner, another health risk.
I think a lot of people, including local leaders in my
district, want to know how a railroad can properly prevent a
hazardous chemical spill if that railroad can't even ensure
that the trains won't block essential traffic.
To that end, Norfolk Southern should be here today to
account for what caused the derailment in the first place,
discuss their current and future cleanup efforts and how they
will prevent this from happening again.
Thank you, and I yield back.
Mr. Johnson. The gentleman yields back. The Chair now
recognizes Mr. Palmer for 5 minutes.
Mr. Palmer. Thank you, Chairman Johnson. Just a couple of
questions.
Is the EPA looking at using the unilateral administrative
order in regard to the railroad and the cleanup operations?
Ms. Shore. Congressman, I am not sure I heard your--
properly.
Mr. Palmer. I am sorry.
Ms. Shore. I am a bit hearing challenged. But if I did--EPA
did issue a unilateral administrative order on February 21st.
It went into effect on the 27th precisely to hold Norfolk
Southern accountable and to ensure that they will pay all the
costs of the cleanup.
Mr. Palmer. Thank you. In regard to what happened
immediately after the derailment and the burning of the resins
that was involved there, obviously those are not generally
considered hazardous. But when you burn things like that, you
have releases that otherwise wouldn't have been a problem had
you not burned them. Is that part of the air quality evaluation
that you are doing, aside from the toxic chemicals that were
released as a result of the derailment?
Ms. Shore. Could you rephrase your question? I am sorry. I
have trouble hearing you.
Mr. Palmer. I understand that immediately afterwards, one
of the ways that--one of the things that was done to clean up
the chemical spill was to burn the resin. There were pellets
that, as I understand, were part of what was on that train that
derailed. And those were set on fire to try to, obviously, burn
them up but also to burn up the chemicals.
And obviously, when you involve heat and something like
that, there are other problems that are created. You may
incinerate all of the chemicals, but you are also releasing
perhaps PCBs and other things like that into the atmosphere.
Was that part of the air quality criteria that you looked into
post the derailment?
Ms. Shore. Congressman, yes, it was. We continued to assess
what was happening on the ground and adjust our response, and
identified a suite of what we call indicator chemicals that
may--were likely to be produced by the burning of various
compounds and so on and included those in our suite of things
we were measuring for.
Mr. Palmer. Thank you. That is part of what Chairman
Johnson and I discussed immediately after the derailment of--
what they were doing in that regard for trying to contain the
chemicals.
With that, I would be happy to yield the balance of my time
to the chairman.
Mr. Johnson. I thank the gentleman for yielding.
Director Vogel, I want to ask you the same question that I
asked Administrator Shore a little bit ago. Governor DeWine, in
a recent Senate hearing, said that the State of Ohio will not
abandon East Palestine. I believe the Governor is sincere in
that comment. But for the record here today, do we have the
commitment from you that your agency and our State government
will not abandon the people of East Palestine?
And to that end, in your view, what does it look like to
fulfill this commitment now and into the future?
Ms. Vogel. Congressman, thank you for the question. Of
course, we are Ohio. We live there. We are not going anywhere.
My entire staff on the ground is from northeast Ohio. It is
their home. So we will be in--you know, as long as it takes, in
terms of the cleanup.
But also, as Dr. Vins has said and the Governor has
announced, this long-term health clinic, there is a mental
health grant that has been made available to the village, as
well. So it is not only the environmental cleanup, but to--rest
assured that the Governor's entire cabinet is committed to
that.
Mr. Johnson. OK, all right. Thank you.
Administrator Shore, I want to go back to something that
came up just a little bit ago. You made the statement that we
could accelerate the cleanup, that Norfolk Southern could
accelerate the cleanup. Is there any evidence--even after the
letter that the EPA sent out, is there any evidence that any of
these States that have certified, licensed, capable disposal
sites are yielding to pressures from within their State, from
State officials and others, to--either through price gouging
perhaps, or capacity excuses, denying the capability for
Norfolk Southern to get those disposal sites so that they can
more quickly remove that soil?
Because we are going to dig into this issue more, because I
am really concerned about how that has been handled, overall.
But any evidence that Norfolk Southern is suffering because of
that?
Ms. Shore. Chairman Johnson, I respectfully suggest that
that question is best directed to Norfolk Southern.
The unilateral order requires----
Mr. Johnson. Yes, but EPA oversees CERCLA, and you have
that list. That legal precedent, that legal requirement for
States to not interfere in interstate commerce, that is
overseen by the EPA. So do you have any evidence that there has
been any additional roadblocks to Norfolk Southern getting the
access that they need to get this material moved?
And if you don't have an answer to that, you can look into
it and get back to us.
Ms. Shore. Let me do that, sir. Thank you.
Mr. Johnson. OK. All right, thank you.
With that, the Chair now recognizes the gentlelady, Ms.
Barragan, for her 5 minutes.
Ms. Barragan. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Director Vogel, in your testimony you said soil testing
does not show any unsafe levels of contamination in lawns. For
dioxins, this is measured in toxicity equivalents. And the
contamination level for EPA that triggers a cleanup in
residential areas is 1,000 parts per trillion or above. What
level of toxin is the testing looking for to determine whether
the soil toxicity is unsafe?
Ms. Vogel. Congressman, I would defer to U.S. EPA on the
dioxin testing. It is a work plan that is underway for soils in
the area.
There are--there were dioxins tested for in Indiana, as
well from some of the waste. And those results are publicly
available. And I am aware that there are some preliminary lab
tests back that have not shown any concerning health levels of
contamination in the soil in the park, for example, that I
mentioned today. But I would defer to Debra Shore for any other
followup on that.
Ms. Shore. Congressman Barragan, let me add that the soil
samples are still being--going through quality assurance
through the laboratory, but the preliminary reports are that
there are nothing above what might be considered normal
background levels in the places where these soil samples have
been taken.
Ms. Barragan. So is there, like, a level that is considered
unsafe?
I am just trying to--if this testing has been done and they
have determined that there is nothing unsafe, there's not
unsafe levels, can you tell us what they are looking for that
would determine that something is unsafe?
Ms. Shore. I would have to refer you to our toxicologist. I
would be happy to arrange a conversation with them and you and
your staff.
Ms. Barragan. OK. For many States the contamination level
is lower than the Federal standard. In California it is 50
parts per trillion. In Michigan it is 90 parts per trillion. In
2010 EPA scientists recommended to lower the Federal cleanup
trigger to 72 parts per trillion, but it did not move forward.
In 2012 an EPA assessment found the safe level children can be
in a regular contact with dioxins is 50 parts per trillion or
less.
Does anybody know if any of the soil tested in East
Palestine have toxicity above 50 parts per trillion?
Ms. Shore. I have not seen the qualified results, but I am
happy to share them with you once we get them.
Ms. Barragan. OK. And I am assuming, Director Vogel, you
don't have anything either.
Ms. Vogel. I don't. And I would just echo that, once we do
have tests, we do publish them and we make them publicly
available.
Ms. Barragan. Commissioner Vins, anything on this?
Dr. Vins. I have nothing additional, thank you.
Ms. Barragan. OK. Administrator Shore, one concern my
office has heard is that relocation costs are not being covered
by Norfolk Southern for everyone in East Palestine. How is it
determined whether a resident is eligible to have their
relocation costs paid for?
Ms. Shore. I am sorry to hear that. My understanding was
that Norfolk Southern was covering temporary relocation costs
for any resident who sought that. And I would direct you to
Norfolk Southern to ask why they are being turned down.
Ms. Barragan. Can the EPA require that Norfolk Southern
cover relocation costs for anyone in East Palestine?
Ms. Shore. I will find out.
Ms. Barragan. OK, Dr. Vins, the testing of drinking water,
air, and soils have been found to be within safe levels.
However, your testimony cites examples of residents complaining
of sore throats and headaches. The Ohio Department of Health
announced last week it has surveyed 450 residents, and three
quarters suffered from headaches and half had skin irritation,
pain, or burning. Many had anxiety, coughs, or fatigue.
Should we be alarmed by this discrepancy? And do you think
it is safe now to be a resident in East Palestine?
Dr. Vins. Yes, thank you for the question, Congresswoman.
At this point we don't have any evidence of contamination
associated with the derailment. However, we do continue to hear
these concerns. I am familiar with some of this information as
it comes out of our health assessment clinic, in addition to
the ACE survey. And these are the reasons that we continue to
do the ACE survey and stand up the health clinic, in addition
to the ongoing monitoring of the groundwater relative to the
private wells and our State and Federal partners to monitor air
and municipal water, as well.
Ms. Barragan. Well, thank you for that. I want to just--you
know, my hearts go out to your constituents, Mr. Chairman. And
as we have heard today, we really need Norfolk Southern here.
Some of the questions they were not able to answer or defer to
them. And if I am a resident--and you said this hearing is
about the residents--if I am a resident, the first question I
am asking is, ``What happened? How did this happen?'' And that
requires somebody to be here to be able to also respond to
that.
With that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Johnson. I thank the gentlewoman for yielding back. And
as I have stated repeatedly, we will have our day to ask those
questions with the railroad. But it is not today.
With that, the Chair recognizes the gentlelady from Iowa,
Mrs. Miller-Meeks, for 5 minutes.
Mrs. Miller-Meeks. Thank you, Mr. Chair, and I thank all of
our witnesses for being here today to both provide testimony
and answer questions.
Administrator Shore, I first want to thank you for being on
the ground in the East Palestine community and making outreach
to those affected by the derailment. Certainly, that is the
utmost and foremost thing that we should be doing.
One aspect of EPA's activities in East Palestine that has
come up a few times is confusion between monitoring and
sampling. And let me just say I am a physician and a former
director of the Iowa Department of Public Health. I am hoping
that we can have a discussion about that.
Is EPA using monitoring to measure the levels of chemicals
in people's homes, or is EPA using sampling, and why?
Ms. Shore. Congresswoman, my understanding is that EPA has
been using monitoring devices inside homes because our suite of
highly sophisticated measuring, monitoring, and sampling
devices outside homes has provided us with information showing
that there aren't elevated levels outside, so we had no
expectation we would see them inside.
Mrs. Miller-Meeks. So your thought is that the equipment is
capable of determining if the chemical is below the safe
exposure level.
Ms. Shore. I am sorry. Could you repeat the question?
Mrs. Miller-Meeks. So then you are--from that I infer that
you think the equipment itself is capable of determining that
the chemical is below the safe exposure level.
Ms. Shore. We think so, yes.
Mrs. Miller-Meeks. OK. And what about a mixture of
chemicals? So is the detection equipment able to determine if
exposure to the mixture of chemicals is below the safe exposure
level, rather than just an individual chemical?
Ms. Shore. As I understand it, these--this equipment can
test for a suite of volatile organic compounds up to 59.
Mrs. Miller-Meeks. Thank you.
Director Vogel, in your testimony you referenced that the
removal of contaminated soil and water from East Palestine will
likely take another 2 months. Does that timeline assume that
the current pace of waste removal will continue?
Ms. Vogel. Congressman, yes. We are seeing as many as 40,
45 trucks a day taking soil out of East Palestine this week. So
if that pace continues, yes.
Mrs. Miller-Meeks. And do you foresee any challenges to
achieving full removal of soil and water waste in 2 months?
Ms. Vogel. As Administrator Shore has said, contingent on
finding--Norfolk Southern finding additional contracts with
places to take the soil--I am not going to predict that there
will be no more challenges, but things are on pace as of today.
Mrs. Miller-Meeks. And how is the Ohio EPA working with the
U.S. EPA, the Columbiana County General Health District, and
Norfolk Southern to meet that goal?
Ms. Vogel. I think we are working very closely together.
Again, as all part of Unified Command, we--there are morning
meetings, but there are also meetings, operational meetings,
throughout the day, public health meetings that all of our--the
State, the Feds, and the locals are represented on. So I think
that is a very close collaboration.
Mrs. Miller-Meeks. Thank you. And I am going to go back to
the sampling data and discuss the quality assurance of the
sampling data.
So Director Shore, has EPA sampling data been quality
assured?
Ms. Shore. Congresswoman, I believe that the samples from
the Summa canister sent for laboratory analysis have gone
through that quality assurance. I need to learn more about the
real-time sampling that is done by the TAGA bus.
Mrs. Miller-Meeks. So the reason I ask, the EPA's website
says it is not. So Director Vogel, do you have any information
on that?
Ms. Vogel. The U.S. EPA website, or--OK. I can't speak to
that. Ohio EPA's website posts the sampling data for the
municipal wells from----
Mrs. Miller-Meeks. OK.
Ms. Vogel. Directly from the labs.
Mrs. Miller-Meeks. So I guess my concern is if the EPA's
website says that the sampling data hasn't been quality
assured, how did the EPA make the determination that the air is
safe to breathe, when it appears that the sampling data has not
been quality assured?
Ms. Shore. Congresswoman, I am going to ask our staff to
get back to you with an answer for that.
Mrs. Miller-Meeks. Thank you very much. We would appreciate
having that submitted to us after the committee.
Thank you so much, Mr. Chair----
Mr. Johnson. Well, the gentlelady yield the remaining time?
Mrs. Miller-Meeks. Yes, sir. I will yield the remaining
time.
Mr. Johnson. Dr. Vins, in your testimony you call for a
long-term private well sampling program. Has Norfolk Southern
engaged with you on creating and funding this program?
Dr. Vins. We have not had that conversation. Thank you.
Mr. Johnson. OK. Has the Ohio Department of Health provided
any additional support to do that?
Dr. Vins. For the long-term program, sir?
Mr. Johnson. Right, right.
Dr. Vins. At this point we have not had that long-term
conversation.
Mr. Johnson. Any progress that you can report on that
front?
Dr. Vins. Well, at this point our sampling program is an
ongoing monitoring effort. The frequency of that program has
not been established as to what the long-term needs might be,
and that is why the monitoring at this point is very important.
Mr. Johnson. OK. And Director Vogel, has the Ohio EPA been
involved in any of these discussions?
Ms. Vogel. We would be happy to, Congressman. Ohio EPA is
responsible for the public water systems, and defer to the
county on the private wells.
Mr. Johnson. OK.
Ms. Vogel. We would be happy----
Mr. Johnson. All right, thank you.
Ms. Vogel [continuing]. To be part of a conversation.
Mr. Johnson. With that, the Chair now recognizes--now that
all members of the subcommittee have had a chance to ask their
questions, we now go to Mrs. Dingell, from the full committee,
from Michigan for 5 minutes.
Mrs. Dingell. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and for all the work
that you have done. No community in America should ever have to
endure the level of devastation and concern to both public
health and the environment that resulted in the aftermath of
this derailment in your district.
This is an important hearing for this committee to hold,
and I want to thank the EPA Administrator Shore, as well as
Ohio EPA and Columbiana County for agreeing to be here today,
because we can learn from what you are saying. Your testimony
and experience will be valuable for understanding the
successful efforts that have gone into this Federal, State, and
local response to protect the health and safety of the people
of East Palestine. It is our shared duty.
Unfortunately, I have gotten--or fortunately gotten--to
know the EPA region 5 administrator fairly well because, while
we haven't had anything quite as bad as you had, we have had
hexavalent chromium spills, gas leaks into sewer systems. We
know the TAGA bus well, and so I know what these issues are.
Mr. Chairman, I know everybody says this, but I got to say
it again: I find it deeply confounding that the responsible
party for this disaster is not here. How can we possibly get a
full understanding of what happened at East Palestine and the
cleanup effort that continues if the company responsible is not
here?
Norfolk Southern should have been invited as a witness here
today, and I want to say that for the record, and I don't think
that anybody understands the critical role that they are still
playing to make any of them able to do their job.
But one of the reasons I am here is, following the Norfolk
Southern derailment, the controlled burn of the hazardous
materials and the unilateral administrative order issued by EPA
under CERCLA to Norfolk Southern to clean up the site.
On Friday, February 24th I learned about--from a press
release from the Governor that was posted that some of the
hazardous materials were--actually, were already there by the
time that we learned about it, one in my district and one close
by.
And I think there has been a lot of misinformation about
what happened that night, as well. Some of the initial disposal
shipments made it to their destinations; 300,000 gallons of
hazardous liquid were accepted and disposed at the Romulus
injection well site, and 360 tons of soil were accepted and
disposed of in Van Buren.
What most people don't understand is that the CERCLA--the
Romulus injection well, which I happen to know very well
because it has been the site of--look, I opposed it when it was
first built; it has been shut down, and I knew it was not
CERCLA-certified, so I started asking questions immediately.
Most people didn't even understand what I was asking. EPA did,
and I want to thank them for working with us to prevent further
material from going to a noncertified site.
And I want to thank all of you for going above and beyond
to try to do community outreach, which is really important in
these situations.
Administrator Shore, could you explain in more detail for
this committee why it took so long for EPA to be designated as
the lead oversight agency, and what role Norfolk Southern
played in sending those materials to Michigan? It was they that
made the decision, not you at first, correct?
Ms. Shore. Thank you, Congresswoman Dingell, and I
appreciate your support and engagement.
It--I am told it is typical in these emergency response
situations where the lead agency in the initial days of the
response is the State, which has delegated authority from
Federal EPA. And Ohio EPA was serving in that role quite ably,
and we were working together in that capacity.
Norfolk Southern made the decisions about where it was
going to transport the liquid and solid waste, and we were--we
don't make that choice, even now under CERCLA. We just provide
them with a list of approved sites.
Mrs. Dingell. So as I listen to Ohio EPA talk about your
confidence--Norfolk Southern is not here, but I have sure had a
lot of conversations, and I think there are sites that, if
Norfolk Southern would pay a little more money, that could be
sent to--now. And I think, Mr. Chairman, we should be asking
that question.
But right now, Administrator Shore, now that the
administrative order is in place, I just want assurances that
you are certifying and confirming all waste sites are approved
to accept hazardous waste being sent to them, correct?
Ms. Shore. Yes, under CERCLA it is required. And we made
sure that the disposal site has to be on that off-site approval
list. They have to have the capacity, and they need to have a
binding agreement, either a letter of intent or a contract with
Norfolk Southern.
Mrs. Dingell. Mr. Chairman, I am out of time, but I would
like your permission to put more questions in the record,
because I have, unfortunately, learned too much in the last
couple of years about the importance of Federal, State, and
local governments working together, what they can do, what they
can't do. And maybe there's some things we could work on
together to improve.
Mr. Johnson. OK, thank you. The gentlelady's time has
expired.
Since no one else is seeking time, I would ask unanimous
consent that two----
Mr. Tonko. Mr. Chairman?
Mr. Johnson. I yield to the ranking member.
Mr. Tonko. No, you are entering----
Mr. Johnson. Yes.
Mr. Tonko [continuing]. To the record. I will let you----
Mr. Johnson. Yes, I ask unanimous consent that two letters
be added for the record: a letter from the Association of
American Railroads and comments from the National Safety
Council.
[The information appears at the conclusion of the hearing.]
Mr. Johnson. And for what purpose does the ranking member--
--
Mr. Tonko. I just wanted to share that I believe that--I am
encouraged by the cooperative, collaborative efforts being made
in that partnership with Federal and State government--and
local government, I should include. And so that is encouraging.
And again, I commit myself to help however possible in this
situation.
I do caution, though, if we go to 2022 levels of
appropriations, it puts this situation at risk. I would hope
that the majority would not do that, because it would perhaps
put pressure on EPA to get this work done correctly, especially
if Norfolk Southern should abandon its responsibilities to move
in its corporate responsible way.
So let's make certain that we have these budget items so--
down so correctly that they will be a strong force in getting
this work done.
With that, I yield back.
Mr. Johnson. I thank the gentleman for yielding back. Let
it be said, for anybody that is looking, who wonder if
Republicans and Democrats can ever agree with each other, I
agree with what my ranking member just said, and I too am
pleased with the collaborative efforts of the U.S. EPA, the
State EPA, and the local county health officials, and others
that have been so involved in this.
We have got a long way to go before this is finished. I can
assure you that I am definitely here for the long haul, and I
have restated that, and I will restate it for this committee.
The long haul is when the people of East Palestine say, ``We
are done.'' That is when it is done. Not until.
With that I remind Members that they have 10 business days
to submit questions for the record, and I ask the witnesses to
respond to the questions promptly. Members should submit their
questions by the close of business on April 11th.
Without objection, the committee is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 12:18 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]
[Material submitted for inclusion in the record follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
