- LEGISLATIVE SOLUTIONS TO BOLSTER PREPAREDNESS AND RESPONSE FOR ALL HAZARDS AND PUBLIC HEALTH SECURITY THREATS

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

LEGISLATIVE SOLUTIONS TO BOLSTER PREPAREDNESS AND RESPONSE FOR ALL
HAZARDS AND PUBLIC HEALTH SECURITY THREATS

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON HEALTH

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

JUNE 13, 2023

__________

Serial No. 118-46

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Published for the use of the Committee on Energy and Commerce

govinfo.gov/committee/house-energy
energycommerce.house.gov

_______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

54-718 PDF                   WASHINGTON : 2024

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE

CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington
Chair
MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas            FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey
ROBERT E. LATTA, Ohio                  Ranking Member
BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky              ANNA G. ESHOO, California
H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia         DIANA DeGETTE, Colorado
GUS M. BILIRAKIS, Florida            JAN SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois
BILL JOHNSON, Ohio                   DORIS O. MATSUI, California
LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana               KATHY CASTOR, Florida
RICHARD HUDSON, North Carolina       JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland
TIM WALBERG, Michigan                PAUL TONKO, New York
EARL L. ``BUDDY'' CARTER, Georgia    YVETTE D. CLARKE, New York
JEFF DUNCAN, South Carolina          TONY CARDENAS, California
GARY J. PALMER, Alabama              RAUL RUIZ, California
NEAL P. DUNN, Florida                SCOTT H. PETERS, California
JOHN R. CURTIS, Utah                 DEBBIE DINGELL, Michigan
DEBBBIE LESKO, Arizona               MARC A. VEASEY, Texas
GREG PENCE, Indiana                  ANN M. KUSTER, New Hampshire
DAN CRENSHAW, Texas                  ROBIN L. KELLY, Illinois
JOHN JOYCE, Pennsylvania             NANETTE DIAZ BARRAGAN, California
KELLY ARMSTRONG, North Dakota, Vice  LISA BLUNT ROCHESTER, Delaware
Chair                            DARREN SOTO, Florida
RANDY K. WEBER, Sr., Texas           ANGIE CRAIG, Minnesota
RICK W. ALLEN, Georgia               KIM SCHRIER, Washington
TROY BALDERSON, Ohio                 LORI TRAHAN, Massachusetts
RUSS FULCHER, Idaho                  LIZZIE FLETCHER, Texas
AUGUST PFLUGER, Texas
DIANA HARSHBARGER, Tennessee
MARIANNETTE MILLER-MEEKS, Iowa
KAT CAMMACK, Florida
JAY OBERNOLTE, California
------

Professional Staff

NATE HODSON, Staff Director
SARAH BURKE, Deputy Staff Director
TIFFANY GUARASCIO, Minority Staff Director
Subcommittee on Health

BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky
Chairman
MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas            ANNA G. ESHOO, California
ROBERT E. LATTA, Ohio                  Ranking Member
H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia         JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland
GUS M. BILIRAKIS, Florida            TONY CARDENAS, California
BILL JOHNSON, Ohio                   RAUL RUIZ, California
LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana, Vice Chair   DEBBIE DINGELL, Michigan
RICHARD HUDSON, North Carolina       ANN M. KUSTER, New Hampshire
EARL L. ``BUDDY'' CARTER, Georgia    ROBIN L. KELLY, Illinois
NEAL P. DUNN, Florida                NANETTE DIAZ BARRAGAN, California
GREG PENCE, Indiana                  LISA BLUNT ROCHESTER, Delaware
DAN CRENSHAW, Texas                  ANGIE CRAIG, Minnesota
JOHN JOYCE, Pennsylvania             KIM SCHRIER, Washington
DIANA HARSHBARGER, Tennessee         LORI TRAHAN, Massachusetts
MARIANNETTE MILLER-MEEKS, Iowa       FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey (ex
JAY OBERNOLTE, California                officio)
CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington
(ex officio)

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hon. Brett Guthrie, a Representative in Congress from the
Commonwealth of Kentucky, opening statement....................     2
Prepared statement...........................................     4
Hon. Anna G. Eshoo, a Representative in Congress from the State
of California, opening statement...............................     6
Prepared statement...........................................     8
Hon. Cathy McMorris Rodgers, a Representative in Congress from
the State of Washington, opening statement.....................    10
Prepared statement...........................................    11
Hon. Frank Pallone, Jr., a Representative in Congress from the
State of New Jersey, opening statement.........................    14
Prepared statement...........................................    17

Witnesses

Gerald W. Parker, Jr., DVM, Ph.D., Associate Dean for Global One
Health and Director, Pandemic and Biosecurity Policy Program,
Texas A&M University...........................................    19
Prepared statement...........................................    22
Submitted questions for the record\1\........................   159
Raynard Washington, Ph.D., Director, Public Health Department,
Mecklenburg County, North Carolina.............................    52
Prepared statement...........................................    55
Phyllis Arthur, Senior Vice President, Infectious Disease and
Emerging Science Policy, Biotechnology Innovation Organization.    62
Prepared statement...........................................    64
Answers to submitted questions...............................   161
Julie R. Gralow, M.D., Chief Medical Officer and Executive Vice
President, American Society of Clinical Oncology...............    76
Prepared statement...........................................    78
Ted Okon, Executive Director, Community Oncology Alliance........    86
Prepared statement...........................................    88
Answers to submitted questions...............................   165

Legislation\2\

H.R. ___, To reauthorize certain programs under the Public Health
Service Act
H.R. ___, the Public Health Guidance Transparency and
Accountability Act
H.R. ___, the PHEMCE Advisory Committee Act
H.R. ___, the PHE Congressional Review Act of 2023
H.R. ___, the Improving Contract Transparency for the SNS Act
H.R. ___, the Improving Contract Transparency at BARDA Act
H.R. ___, the Biosecurity Infrastructure for Operational (BIO)
Early Warning Act
H.R. 3813, the CDC Leadership Accountability Act
H.R. 3631, the State Strategic Stockpile Act of 2023

----------

\1\ Dr. Parker did not answer submitted questions for the record by the
time of publication. Replies received after publication will be
retained in committee files and made available at https://
docs.house.gov/Committee/Calendar/ByEvent.aspx?EventID=116116.
\2\ The legislation has been retained in committee files and is
available at https://docs.house.gov/Committee/Calendar/
ByEvent.aspx?EventID=116116.
H.R. 3577, the Medical and Health Stockpile Accountability Act of
2023\2\
H.R. 3837, the Improving Public Health Preparedness Act\2\
H.R. 3832, the Disease X Act of 2023\2\
H.R. 3613, the Doctors at the Ready Act\2\
H.R. 2416, To amend the Public Health Service Act to reauthorize
a military and civilian partnership for trauma readiness grant
program\2\
H.R. 3840, the Ensuring Sufficient Supply of Testing Act\2\
H.R. 3795, To amend the Public Health Service Act\2\
H.R. 3703, the Helping Evaluate Appropriate Logistical
Infrastructure for National Government (HEALING) Response Act
of 2023\2\
H.R. 3742, To direct the Comptroller General of the United States
to evaluate the Federal Government's collection and sharing of
public health data to respond to public health emergencies\2\
H.R. 3820, To amend the Public Health Service Act to strike the
requirement that the Director of the Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention be appointed by and with the advice and
consent of the Senate\2\
H.R. 3794, the Fast-Track Logistics for Acquiring Supplies in a
Hurry (FLASH) Act of 2023\2\
H.R. 3791, the Improving Data Accessibility Through Advancements
(DATA) in Public Health Act\2\

Submitted Material

Inclusion of the following was approved by unanimous consent.
List of documents submitted for the record.......................   149
Statement of the American Cancer Society Cancer Action Network,
June 13, 2023..................................................   150
Letter of June 12, 2023, from Andrew Hu, Director, Bipartisan
Policy Center Action, to Mrs. Rodgers, et al...................   153
Statement of the American Clinical Laboratory Association, June
11, 2023.......................................................   158

----------

\2\ The legislation has been retained in committee files and is
available at https://docs.house.gov/Committee/Calendar/
ByEvent.aspx?EventID=116116.

LEGISLATIVE SOLUTIONS TO BOLSTER PREPAREDNESS AND RESPONSE FOR ALL
HAZARDS AND PUBLIC HEALTH SECURITY THREATS

----------

TUESDAY, JUNE 13, 2023

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Health,
Committee on Energy and Commerce,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 10:30 a.m. in
room 2322, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Brett Guthrie
(chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Members present: Representatives Guthrie, Burgess, Latta,
Griffith, Bilirakis, Johnson, Bucshon, Hudson, Carter, Dunn,
Pence, Crenshaw, Joyce, Harshbarger, Miller-Meeks, Obernolte,
Rodgers (ex officio), Eshoo (subcommittee ranking member),
Sarbanes, Cardenas, Ruiz, Dingell, Kuster, Kelly, Barragan,
Craig, Schrier, Trahan, and Pallone (ex officio).
Also present: Representatives Balderson and Castor.
Staff present: Jolie Brochin, Clerk, Health; Sarah Burke,
Deputy Staff Director; Seth Gold, Professional Staff Member,
Health; Grace Graham, Chief Counsel, Health; Sydney Greene,
Director of Operations; Nate Hodson, Staff Director; Tara
Hupman, Chief Counsel; Peter Kielty, General Counsel; Emily
King, Member Services Director; Chris Krepich, Press Secretary;
Molly Lolli, Counsel, Health; Clare Paoletta, Professional
Staff Member, Health; Carla Rafael, Senior Staff Assistant;
Emma Schultheis, Staff Assistant; Michael Taggart, Policy
Director; Lydia Abma, Minority Policy Analyst; Jacquelyn Bolen,
Minority Health Counsel; Anthony Choi, Minority Intern; Waverly
Gordon, Minority Deputy Staff Director and General Counsel;
Tiffany Guarascio, Minority Staff Director; Stephen Holland,
Minority Senior Health Counsel; Una Lee, Minority Chief Health
Counsel; Andrew Souvall, Minority Director of Communications,
Outreach, and Member Services; and Tristen Tellman, Minority
Health Fellow.
Mr. Guthrie. The subcommittee will come to order.
And for when we ask questions and so forth, I just would--
the clock in the back of the room is not working, so there is a
clock that is facing us that you will see on the table for
everybody. Pay attention as we look to try to keep order as we
move forward, so we can get to everybody's questions.
But the subcommittee is now in order, and the Chair
recognizes himself for 5 minutes for an opening statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. BRETT GUTHRIE, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE COMMONWEALTH OF KENTUCKY

This is the fourth hearing the Energy and Commerce
Committee has held in the 118th Congress related to our
response framework. I want to express, you know, concern and
disappointment today that the bill before us, PAHPA, is not
bipartisan as we now speak. I know that we have worked hard to
try to make it that way. Hopefully, we will, as we move
forward. And I look forward to engaging my colleagues on
systematic CDC reforms and comprehensive effort to examine the
root causes of the drug shortage that we are now facing, which
is serious, absolutely serious.
I am grateful to Representative Miller-Meeks for taking the
lead on CDC reform by publicly issuing a request for
information on this issue. I look forward to hearing from her
about the responses she receives from her RFI and addressing
the many issues highlighted in a future CDC reform effort. We
will start these conversations today, and we will have to--work
to do across the Health Subcommittee's jurisdiction that
necessitates a separate process and larger conversation outside
the scope of this authorization.
So hopefully we can go back to focusing on this
authorization, and I look forward to working together on the
other issues that have arisen the last few days.
The legislation before us today is designed to generate
broad consensus around streamlining improvements to our
preparedness and response infrastructure at the Administration
for Strategic Preparedness and Response, or ASPR. We are
continuing our efforts to prepare for and respond more
effectively to future public health security threats. These
threats include chemical, biological, radiological, nuclear, or
cyber attacks or any infectious disease outbreak.
Many of the bills today are bipartisan. This includes
legislation focused on evaluating and shoring up our diagnostic
testing infrastructure and domestic manufacturing capacity for
medical countermeasures during a public health emergency. These
two components hampered our initial response to the COVID-19
pandemic.
We also have several pieces of legislation focused on
improvements to our National Strategic Stockpile. This includes
reaffirming our commitment to supporting States' efforts,
working to ensure streamlined insight into our stockpile supply
chain, and clarifying ASPR's responsibility over the Strategic
National Stockpile.
We are considering legislation to improve transparency and
communication between our Federal agencies and private-sector
partners. For example, we are examining the benefits of
establishing an advisory committee to provide a forum for
private-sector input into our medical countermeasures
procurement.
We must also demand proper accountability and communication
from our public health agencies to our constituents. That is
why I am pleased to see Chair Rodgers' discussion draft to
require CDC to issue good guidance practices included in the
hearing today. This would establish public participation
requirements prior to finalization or implementation of major
guidance pushed out by the CDC.
It also clarifies that these guidances are nonbinding and
do not create, restrict, or revoke any person's rights or
responsibility. This also does not have the force or effect of
law, which is a standard that other public health agencies
already must meet.
The public deserves to have visibility and a seat at the
table to allow them to make decisions best for themselves and
their families.
To build on the importance of accountability and improved
processes, I am to partner with Representative Peters on
bipartisan legislation to examine the Department of Health and
Human Services' existing data authorities and data collection
efforts. This includes the Federal funds used for such
purposes.
Local authorities don't need new, top-down, heavy-handed
data-sharing mandates that won't help them respond to their
local needs, nor should the American people's sensitive
information be collected and potentially used in a punitive
fashion. This bill will ensure the agency is held accountable
for any overutilization of such authorities, including any
redundancies. We have already heard from stakeholders on how
important this review is, and hopefully we can move forward--
hopefully move it forward as part of this process.
In closing, I would like to extend my sincere thanks to
Representative Hudson, his staff, and our dedicated committee
staff for their work over the past several months to deliver
this strong discussion draft. We must ensure these critical
preparedness and response activities are authorized in a timely
manner.
I am happy to get to work on other topics, as shown by a
number of hearings and bills we have already moved through this
subcommittee. However, trying to attach other issues into this
reauthorization with broader topics will undermine its ultimate
passage.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Guthrie follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Guthrie. I thank you, and I yield back.
The Chair now recognizes the ranking member for 5 minutes
for questions--for an opening statement, sorry.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. ANNA G. ESHOO, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA

Ms. Eshoo. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and good morning,
colleagues and our witnesses that are here today. Thank you for
being with us.
During my floor speech on the passage of the original
Pandemic and All-Hazards Preparedness Act in 2006, I said,
``This bill demonstrates the good that can come out of
bipartisan teamwork.'' Today, as the only original author of
PAHPA still serving in Congress, I ask that Members recommit to
bipartisan teamwork so that we can pass a reauthorization bill
to ensure our country is doing its best to prepare for the
worst.
The 2023 PAHPA reauthorization must meet the challenges we
witnessed during the COVID pandemic, and anticipate the
challenges of the future. There is clear demand from
stakeholders for improvements to the legislation. Over 250
organizations replied to the request for information on PAHPA
that Representative Hudson and I published.
One critical area where our country is unprepared is our
medical supply chain. During the pandemic, we saw that our
medical supply chain is broken in three devastating ways:
shortages of lifesaving supplies, especially when met with high
demand during an emergency; subpar manufacturing; and an
overreliance on foreign production.
It is in the DNA of PAHPA to address gaps in supply.
Project BioShield, the Biomedical Advanced Research and
Development Authority, and the Strategic National Stockpile are
authorized in PAHPA with the express purpose of ensuring access
to medical countermeasures in times of emergency.
This year's PAHPA reauthorization is another opportunity to
fix the vulnerabilities of our drug and device supply chains.
For example, as Dr. Califf of the FDA testified to during our
topical hearing last month, the Federal Government does not
have the information it needs to identify the sources of active
pharmaceutical ingredients--we all shorthand it API--leaving
who supplies many critical drug elements a mystery. My
legislation, the Drug Origin Transparency Act, fills these gaps
in knowledge so we can move more secure in our ability to
respond to a health threat.
To help prevent shortages, the FDA also needs notifications
of supply interruptions for medical devices or unanticipated
spikes in demand for drugs. If a drug goes into shortage, the
FDA should be able to use data from the drug manufacturers to
safely extend the shelf-life date.
Finally, the FDA should be able to recall drugs that are
either maliciously or accidentally contaminated in the same way
it can recall biologics, devices, and food.
I also support policy that would create a buffer stock for
critical oncology drugs that are often in shortage due to
quality problems for sterile injectable drugs, and I look
forward to hearing from the oncologists on today's panel about
this issue. Currently, we don't have a bipartisan agreement to
include these policies in the bill, and I think it is critical.
Let me just say this again: I think it is critical that we
commit to move these policies forward in PAHPA. Chair Rodgers,
Chair Guthrie, Representative Hudson, I hope you will work with
me. I am asking you, I am really begging you to work with me to
find a bipartisan path forward. That is how serious these
issues are.
I am pleased that today we will consider important
legislation to improve CDC's public health data, create a
diagnostic preparedness plan, and provide BARDA with many of
the important contract authorities that Assistant Secretary
O'Connell described during our last hearing.
I am hopeful we can include these commonsense policies as
well as address concerns about the medical supply chains in the
final reauthorization. Our Nation's health and our Nation's
security depend on it.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Eshoo follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Ms. Eshoo. I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Guthrie. The gentlelady yields back. The Chair now
recognizes the Chair of the full committee, Chair McMorris
Rodgers, for 5 minutes for her opening statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, A
REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF WASHINGTON

Mrs. Rodgers. Today we are considering several pieces of
legislation critical to our national public security--public
health security. This conversation could not come at a more
pressing or relevant time. America is facing public health
security threats on many fronts.
For example, a recent State Department report confirmed
North Korea continues to develop genetically engineered
biological weapons, including bacteria, viruses, and toxins.
According to one report, nearly 60 million patient records were
compromised last year through over 900 data breach incidences.
And we continue to learn lessons from the unprecedented
COVID-19 worldwide pandemic. We must be prepared for and ready
to respond to these threats--chemical, biological,
radiological, nuclear, or cyber attacks--by taking an all-
hazards and threat-agnostic approach. That is the focus of the
solutions we are considering today that Mr. Guthrie discussed
in detail.
I understand that some of my Democratic colleagues are
upset that we are not considering legislation related to drug
shortages and larger supply chain issues. I will say to them I
welcome that discussion. Just last week, the FDA announced that
more than 130 drugs were in short supply, 14 of which are
cancer treatments. Clearly, this must be addressed.
A few weeks ago, the Oversight Subcommittee held a hearing
on this exact topic. And just yesterday, Senate Finance Ranking
Member Crapo and I released a public request for information to
solicit information and ideas on the underlying economic causes
of drug shortages, the potential role of Federal programs in
contributing to drug shortage, and possible solutions.
Finding solutions for drug shortages are broader than this
reauthorization and FDA, and outside the scope of this
preparedness reauthorization. I welcome my colleagues,
Democratic colleagues and Republican, to work together on this
effort. And I remind them that the focus of today's legislative
hearing is on ensuring we reauthorize immediate preparedness
and response programs.
For many of these threats, from catastrophic natural
disaster to a biological threat to cyber attack, the question
is not if, but when. And I thank many Members for their hard
work on the reforms we are considering today.
I especially want to express appreciation to Congressman
Richard Hudson for his leadership to provide the framework for
these discussions, and commend him and his team for their hard
work.
[The prepared statement of Mrs. Rodgers follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mrs. Rodgers. I am going to yield now to Congressman Hudson
to further speak to these efforts and what happens if we fail
to come together to pass this reauthorization on time.
Mr. Hudson. Well, I thank the chairwoman. You know, after
years of preparing for this reauthorization, I have been proud
to work with my Republican and Democrat colleagues to ensure
that our Nation is best prepared and able to respond to any
future public health security threat.
At the beginning of this year, I put out a request for
information along with my colleague, Ranking Member Anna Eshoo,
to solicit important stakeholder feedback on this
reauthorization. I am honored to work with the Ranking Member
Eshoo, a four-time champion of PAHPA, someone who knows the
critical importance of getting this bill across the finish
line.
With that being said, I worry that my colleagues are losing
sight of the need to pass this bill this year. From the
beginning, I have worked in good faith with the Democrats on
negotiating a bill that can pass the House, particularly
considering the current dynamics of this Congress. I have been
clear since the start of my priorities and the confines we are
working under. It is disappointing to me that the Democrats
have recently decided to walk away from this conversation and
force a 1-year extension of PAHPA.
We are running out the clock debating issues that, while
absolutely needing to be addressed, have never been included
before in this reauthorization. And I have made the unequivocal
commitment to Ranking Member Eshoo to work on these issues.
We admittedly saw countless mistakes in the response to
COVID. However, it is important to remember that, without these
key authorities and programs and the foresight of the previous
champions of this bill--Representatives Eshoo, Burr, Rodgers,
Brooks, and others--it terrifies me to think of what could have
happened: no Operation Warp Speed, no public-private
partnerships to rush test and therapeutics and PPE procurement
and acquisition. This reauthorization is absolutely critical to
prepare for the next disaster, as the chairwoman laid out very
eloquently in her remarks.
I want to see this bill continue to move forward in a
bipartisan manner, and I would ask my Democrat colleagues to
return to the table, and let's continue to negotiate in good
faith.
I also want to say I appreciate--I look forward to hearing
from our witnesses, particularly Dr. Washington from
Mecklenburg County, North Carolina, and Mr. Okon, who happens
to be my constituent. Thank you all for being here today.
And with that, I yield back.
Mr. Guthrie. The gentlelady yields back?
Mrs. Rodgers. I yield back.
Mr. Guthrie. The Chair now recognizes the ranking member of
the full committee, Mr. Pallone, for 5 minutes for an opening
statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. FRANK PALLONE, Jr., A REPRESENTATIVE
IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF NEW JERSEY

Mr. Pallone. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
When COVID-19 hit, the Federal Government was not
adequately prepared, and we have not done enough to prepare for
the next threat. Unfortunately, the legislation the Republican
majority has noticed for today continues to leave us vulnerable
to future threats. It fails to make any significant new
investments in our pandemic preparedness. It further
politicizes public health by overriding the scientific decision
making of our public health agencies. And Republicans have
refused to include any legislation at this hearing to
strengthen the resilience of the supply chain.
Now, throughout the public health emergency, healthcare
providers, States, and emergency responders faced supply
shortages of ventilators, PPE, critical medication, and testing
supplies. And now we are seeing shortages of chemotherapy drugs
that are threatening the path to recovery for so many patients
battling cancer. Weeks ago, Democrats introduced five bills
that would help us strengthen the supply chain, and none of
these bills were included in today's hearing.
Ranking Member Eshoo introduced a bill that would bring
transparency to drug manufacturing. The United States is
overreliant on foreign suppliers for critical drugs, and
unfortunately we don't even know how bad the problem is or
what--or which drugs rely on foreign suppliers. And Ranking
Member Eshoo's legislation would help the FDA understand the
entirety of the drug supply chain, which would be beneficial if
there is manufacturing--or a manufacturing or quality issue
that could lead to a shortage. FDA would then know what
suppliers drug manufacturers are relying on, so that it could
quickly address the problem.
When drug shortages happen, FDA can work with sponsors to
extend the shelf life of the drugs available in the market to
the latest possible date without losing drug quality,
effectiveness, or safety. However, obtaining scientific
information from drug sponsors to support an expiration date
change can sometimes take weeks or months. That is time
patients may not have. The Ensuring Access to Lifesaving Drugs
Act, introduced by Representative Slotkin, would streamline
this process.
Additionally, we know that there are times when FDA is not
even aware that a shortage of a product is coming. When there
are unforeseen demand spikes, FDA has little insight into these
issues until the problem is already impacting patients.
Bipartisan legislation from Representative Jacobs and Mills
would ensure manufacturers notify FDA when these demand spikes
occur. Right now, there is also no requirement in place for
medical device manufacturers to notify FDA of supply problems.
Representative Castor has introduced a bill to fix that.
We also requested that the Republican majority finally take
on the glaring drug safety risk that exists when a dangerous or
contaminated drug must be recalled but FDA has no power to
put--to take it from the shelves. And this committee has worked
to fix this problem before on a bipartisan basis, and it is
time we finally get this done.
I honestly think that the Republican majority's refusal to
include these bills at today's legislative hearing is
irresponsible. You know, I have heard the arguments. Mr. Hudson
said--sort of suggested that the disarray on the floor makes
this impossible for us to move ahead with a lot of things, or
to do much at one time.
I don't want to put words in your mouth, but that is how I
interpreted what you say. And, you know, I am sorry, but the
Republican disarray on the floor should not be the basis for us
not to act because, I don't know, at any given day--I mean, we
had 4 days pass without voting on anything. So what does that
mean, I am just supposed to not introduce bills or try to act
on anything because, you know, some people on the right are
going to take down the Speaker?
I mean, we can't act on that. I mean, we can't proceed
based on that. And PAHPA is a must-pass bill. So if we don't
include legislation addressing drug shortages now, it is just
not going to happen. There is not going to be enough time. So
that is why we continue to insist that these bills dealing with
the shortages be included.
Now, while the majority was not willing to include drug and
device policies, a few bills noticed for today's hearing would
make strides toward improving our public health response.
A bill introduced by Representative Underwood would
strengthen real-time, standardized data availability of
emerging public health threats at the CDC. As Dr. Walensky and
others have testified, during the COVID-19 and Mpox public
health emergencies CDC was often left with incomplete,
inconsistent, and out-of-date data that hindered our response.
And this legislation would clarify their authorities, helping
us to prepare for emerging threats going forward.
We are also considering my bill to remove the requirement
that the Senate confirm the CDC Director, a misguided change
that the Senate insisted on, including in our omnibus package
at the end of last year. When President Biden took office, it
was important that he was able to immediately appoint a CDC
Director to lead the agency during the COVID pandemic. And it
is critical to have an expert CDC Director in place right away
to respond to the public health threats with speed, focus, and
foresight and without furthering the politicization of public
health that has become too commonplace. And we all know that
the Senate doesn't do anything quickly.
So, again, I have serious concerns about policies that
would allow congressional interference in the termination of a
public health emergency, new and unworkable requirements for
CDC guidance, and industry decision making of the PHEMCE. While
it concerns me that the Republican majority doesn't seem to
appreciate the full scope of the challenges we face, I hope we
can find a way to move forward in a comprehensive, bipartisan
way, because it is important that we come together to learn the
lessons of COVID-19 and reauthorize PAHPA on time.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Pallone follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Pallone. And with that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Guthrie. Thank you. The gentleman yields back. That
concludes our opening statements, and we will now turn to the
panel for 5 minutes for their opening statements.
I will introduce you all, then call on you one at a time.
You will notice the clock system. You have 5 minutes. It
will be green. I think with a minute to go it turns yellow, and
then that will kind of give you a hint that your time is
approaching. And then, if it turns red, begin to wrap up. I
appreciate your being here. And I will introduce all the
witnesses first.
We are going to have--before us today will be Dr. Gerald
Parker, the associate dean for Global One Health and director
of the Pandemic and Biosecurity Policy Program at Texas A&M
University.
Next is Dr. Raynard Washington, director of the Public
Health Department in Mecklenburg County, North Carolina, as has
already been noted by our favorite Tar Heel here today. And I
mean that as a citizen of the State, not as a graduate.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Guthrie. I know his college.
Our next witness is Ms. Phyllis Arthur, senior vice
president of infectious disease and emerging science policy at
Biotechnology Innovation Organization.
Our witnesses will follow with Dr. Julie Gralow, chief
medical officer and executive vice president of the American
Society of Clinical Oncology.
And then our final witness this morning will be Ted Okon,
executive director of Community Oncology Alliance.
I will begin--we will begin to recognize our first witness,
Dr. Parker.
You are recognized for 5 minutes for an opening statement.

STATEMENT OF GERALD W. PARKER, Jr., DVM, Ph.D., ASSOCIATE DEAN
FOR GLOBAL ONE HEALTH AND DIRECTOR, PANDEMIC AND BIOSECURITY
POLICY PROGRAM, TEXAS A&M UNIVERSITY; RAYNARD WASHINGTON,
Ph.D., DIRECTOR, PUBLIC HEALTH DEPARTMENT, MECKLENBURG COUNTY,
NORTH CAROLINA; PHYLLIS ARTHUR, SENIOR VICE PRESIDENT,
INFECTIOUS DISEASE AND EMERGING SCIENCE POLICY, BIOTECHNOLOGY
INNOVATION ORGANIZATION; JULIE R. GRALOW, M.D., CHIEF MEDICAL
OFFICER AND EXECUTIVE VICE PRESIDENT, AMERICAN SOCIETY OF
CLINICAL ONCOLOGY; AND TED OKON, EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR, COMMUNITY
ONCOLOGY ALLIANCE

STATEMENT OF GERALD W. PARKER, Jr., DVM, Ph.D.

Dr. Parker. Well, thank you, Chairman Guthrie and Ranking
Members--Ranking Member Eshoo, for the opportunity to come
before you today. I am Dr. Gerald Parker.
Today--but today--I am from Texas A&M University, but today
the views and opinions I offer are my own but are informed by
serving in career executive leadership positions in the
military and the Federal Government. I appreciate the
opportunity to come here today, because you are working on one
of the most important bills in Congress this year: the
reauthorization to PAHPA.
We live in a dangerous world. The threats we face range
from terrorism, chemical, biological, radiological, nuclear,
cyber, natural disasters, climate change, pandemics, and more
that we do not even yet grasp their understanding. These are
hard problems, and we must have the right tools to confront an
ever-expanding list of potentially catastrophic threats,
whether natural, accidental, or deliberate. And in this new,
dangerous era of global power rivalry, we were--conflict,
economic conflict, war, and even the threat of an adversarial
nation state's use of weapons of mass destruction cannot be
discounted.
You have the opportunity to meet this moment. Don't waste
it. The risk we face certainly won't wait for us to be
prepared.
Now, with that dire warning, I have four central
recommendations for your consideration.
First, ASPR's relationships with State, local, Tribal, and
territorial emergency response, hospital, healthcare, and
public health departments must be strengthened. Any successful
response requires a close working relationship between the
Federal Government and State and local partners who are on the
front line.
Second, it will be critical for PAHPA to address the supply
chain control tower capacity and concept by encouraging a warm-
base and a surgical situational awareness supply chain and
early warning capability that can be immediately activated when
the next health security crisis starts. ASPR must be able to
anticipate the needs of State and local partners, hospitals,
and the healthcare system and fulfill their requirements,
especially when resources are scarce.
Third, the importance of leadership cannot be overstated.
And when I say leadership, I mean an organizational structure
authorized by Congress that empowers an individual with the ear
of the President and the OMB Director. Without an effective
leadership structure that bridges the seams in the Federal
bureaucracy, even the best of leaders will not be effective.
I commend Congress for taking a major step toward these
goals through authorization to the White House Office of
Pandemic Preparedness and Response Policy. This is a good
starting point but should be expanded to include biodefense and
global health security.
And to share a recommendation from a colleague of mine, Dr.
Ken Bernard, this office should be led by a full-time
equivalent of a combatant commander, a Deputy Assistant to the
President for BSiosecurity at the White House to lead and
prepare to battle our next national security health crisis.
Fourth, in regard to ASPR, I would like to direct the
committee's attention to the 12 findings and recommendations in
the National Science Advisory Board for Biosecurity's 2023
report regarding dual-use research concern and enhanced
potential pandemic research. We need to take a more active
approach to harmonize biosafety and biosecurity standards
worldwide and keeping sound practices at home. Other countries
look to us, and Congress and the administration have an
opportunity to lead.
In conclusion, we can not only prepare for risks like SARS-
CoV-2, we must prepare for advanced dual-use technologies and
emerging infectious diseases with properties that could make
existing preparedness efforts useless if they are based on only
our latest response to the latest pandemic.
As the Office of the Director of National Intelligence 2023
Annual Threat Assessment plainly states, ``Rapid advances in
dual-use technology, including bioinformatics, synthetic
biology, nanotechnology, and genomic editing could enable the
development of novel biological weapons that complicate
detection, attribution, and treatment.'' And I will add the
likelihood of misuse or accidents are increasing, as
laboratories expand worldwide with ready access to dual-use
technologies and without adequate international standards.
We have entered an extremely dangerous era. There is one
thing we can be assured of in the future: We will be surprised.
We must avoid fighting the last war, and we must avoid
complacency.
Thank you for the opportunity to appear before the
committee. I would be glad to answer any of your questions.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Parker follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Guthrie. Thank you, Dr. Parker. I appreciate your
testimony.
Dr. Washington, you are now recognized for 5 minutes for an
opening statement.

STATEMENT OF RAYNARD WASHINGTON, Ph.D.

Dr. Washington. Perfect. Good morning. Thank you, Chairman
Guthrie, Ranking Member Eshoo, and members of the Health
Subcommittee. Thank you for having me today to discuss the
reauthorization of PAHPA. I am Dr. Raynard Washington, the
public health director in Mecklenburg County, which serves the
City of Charlotte and the surrounding county in the great State
of North Carolina.
I also have the pleasure of serving as vice chair of the
Big Cities Health Coalition, an organization of health
officials who lead 35 of the Nation's largest metropolitan
health departments. Together we serve more than 61 million
Americans and nearly 20 percent of the country.
I am an epidemiologist by training and bring with me more
than 15 years of experience in public health at both the
Federal and local levels. Prior to Charlotte, I served as the
health--deputy health commissioner and chief epidemiologist for
the City of Philadelphia.
My health department is responsible for protecting and
promoting health for more than 1.1 million North Carolinians in
our diverse and rapidly growing community, and our health
department team has grown to close to 900 over the last few
years.
Local public health departments are on the front lines of
preparing for, responding to, and supporting residents during
emergencies. There are very few, if any, emergencies that don't
have some impact on the public's health. And maintaining
coordinated networks and preparing partners on the ground for
emergencies before they happen is the only way we can respond
quickly. This is a very unique role of local public health.
Just last week there was an acute public health response to
the Canadian fire smoke traveling across this region. Public
health departments at the State and local level were able to
respond because of the work they had put into maintaining a
true all-hazards response, which is critical to our Nation's
health.
As we see the resurgence of infectious diseases like
measles and polio in pockets across the country, it is clear
that all-hazards preparedness must be at the forefront of our
Nation's public health system. And as we move out of the COVID-
19 pandemic, it is a timely opportunity to take steps to
improve the system using what we have learned over the last few
years. To that end, I firmly believe that the reauthorization
of PAHPA is a critical component for preparing for the next
emergency in this country.
It is essential that Federal agencies have clear
preparedness and response roles well in advance of an
emergency. At the same time, while Federal leadership and
resources are vital, a top-down approach to public health is
simply not sufficient. To truly function as a system, public
health leaders must be involved at every level of government--
local, State, and Federal--and information, data, and resources
must flow quickly and efficiently to and from each of those
levels. Unless and until that happens, we will remain
underprepared for the health and health security challenges we
face.
A few highlights on various PAHPA components.
First, the public health preparedness program that was
created after 9/11 to support preparedness infrastructure is
critical to having a response-ready workforce at the local
level. However, despite the increase in emerging and reemerging
infectious diseases, it has been cut by nearly 30 percent over
the last 20 years.
In Mecklenburg, we have had to increase our public health
preparedness staff from one FTE to three since the start of the
pandemic to meet our needs. These vital human resources, which
may sound small, allow us to train clinical and nonclinical
staff and maintain and implement when necessary local response
plans for every type of hazard.
Likewise, the Hospital Preparedness Program, which has also
been cut by more than half over the last 20 years, prepares the
Nation's healthcare system to save lives during emergencies and
disasters. HPP supports regional healthcare coalitions like the
Metrolina Healthcare Preparedness Coalition in our region in
North Carolina. They are responsible for assessing risk and
needs, providing training, and maintaining preparedness among
organizations who might otherwise see themselves as
competitors. Or, for example, like during the pandemic,
deploying mobile hospitals due to the crushing demand on acute-
care facilities.
Additionally, now is the time to authorize an adult vaccine
program akin to the Vaccines for Children program. As we
learned from the pandemic, a comprehensive vaccine
infrastructure is needed to protect Americans against both
known and emerging infectious disease. During the Mpox
response, we received no Federal support at the local level for
vaccine administration, but our department successfully, like
others, mobilized partnerships with LGBT+ community and social
organizations to contain the situation.
On the other hand, our progress during COVID was only
possible because vaccine cost was not a barrier for our
residents.
Finally, and most importantly, as an epidemiologist it is
critical that we have timely, accurate, and actionable data at
the local, State, and Federal level. Our systems for early
detection and surveillance need upgrading and modernizing. CDC
must have--collaborate with other HHS divisions and partners
across all levels of government to strengthen our public health
data systems with better technologies and leveraging both the
private-sector knowledge and expertise.
From the perspective of local health departments, CDC
absolutely must have the authority to effectively collect and
coordinate public health data necessary to serve its mission.
We are collectively tasked to make million-, billion-, and even
trillion-dollar decisions with the current framework for
collecting and sharing public health data that results in
fragmented and inconsistent reporting to CDC and to the State
and local agencies. Expanded data authority for CDC will allow
for more complete and timely data sharing to support decision
making at the Federal, State, and local levels.
In closing, I want to emphasize that a well-functioning
public health system is a--is pandemic preparedness and must be
well-resourced at all levels of government before, during, and
after emergencies. Diseases and disasters don't recognize city,
county, or State boundaries, and across the Nation each
community is only as prepared as its weakest neighboring
community.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Washington follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Guthrie. Thank you, Dr. Washington. Thank you for your
testimony.
Ms. Arthur, you are now recognized for 5 minutes for an
opening statement.

STATEMENT OF PHYLLIS ARTHUR

Ms. Arthur. Thank you. Chairman Guthrie, Ranking Member
Eshoo, and members of the subcommittee, thank you so much for
inviting me to testify today. My name again is Phyllis Arthur.
I am the senior vice president for infectious diseases and
emerging science policy at BIO, the Biotechnology Innovation
Organization.
This is an important moment for our Nation as we emerge
from a multiyear global pandemic. We have an opportunity to use
what we have learned to ensure we are better prepared in the
future. While we hope that the COVID pandemic is a once-in-a-
generation occurrence, that is not certain. Over the past
decade, we have faced near-miss pandemics, from SARS to Zika to
avian flu.
While our response to the pandemic was incredible in scale
and successful in its aims to rapidly and safely develop
vaccines and therapeutics for a novel pathogen, there is no
guarantee that we could replicate that success again without
making permanent the pieces of the response that led to that
success. In fact, during the pandemic we had to respond to
monkeypox, Ebola, and Marburg outbreaks and provide support to
our allies for chem, bio, rad, and nuke threats.
Now is not the time to rest. Now is the time to improve our
systems and commit to public-private partnerships that will
continuously usher in innovation that can help keep us safe. It
is not only critical that we reauthorize PAHPA but that we
strengthen the law as well.
Following the terror attacks of September 11th, our
Government acted swiftly and comprehensively to protect our
citizens. Similarly, following the 2001 anthrax attacks,
Congress acted to create Project BioShield and later BARDA,
which are foundational to our protection from biological
threats. These laws built the important structural and
financial changes needed to develop medical countermeasures for
an expanding set of natural, accidental, and deliberate
threats.
However, BARDA and the Strategic National Stockpile remain
underfunded, and our surveillance tools are underdeveloped. To
better respond to the next inevitable threat, we must use the
PAHPA reauthorization action to make substantive improvements
in the PHEMCE.
First, BIO strongly recommends that Congress increase
funding for key ASPR programs to the levels of the PHEMCE
multiyear budget. The BARDA Advanced Research and Development,
the Project BioShield Special Reserve Fund, and the Strategic
National Stockpile should all be authorized at over $1.5
billion each to ensure that there are ample funds for the
development, procurement, lifecycle management, and
manufacturing support for a broad array of medical
countermeasures.
Separate funding of at least $330 million is needed to
support continued development and sustainment of pandemic
influenza vaccines, antivirals, and diagnostics, as pandemic
flu remains one of our most persistent global threats.
Lastly, BIO recommends that funding be allocated to BARDA
to enable a pathogen-agnostic viral family approach to R&D and
manufacturing. This approach will help us better prepare for a
broad set of emerging pathogens of pandemic potential by
leveraging novel platform technologies and novel mechanisms for
new vaccines, monoclonal antibodies, and oral antivirals.
Second, BIO recommends several policies that will help
incentivize industry and strengthen the partnership between the
Government and developers. We recommend increasing the
transparency of the SNS by encouraging the sharing of MCM
requirements. This should be done with private-sector partners
on a regular basis.
We also strongly recommend that Congress eliminate the
sunset of the MCM Priority Review Voucher Program, as this
program is an important incentive for the development of novel
MCMs.
And lastly, we strongly encourage the inclusion of the
PASTEUR Act to spur the development of much-needed novel
antimicrobials.
Third, BIO recommends that ASPR be granted new authorities
that expand their use of the other transactions authority, that
they have authorities to enable domestic manufacturing
investment, and allow for rapid procurement and acquisition.
Fourth, given the vital role of a strong public health
infrastructure to our national response, BIO recommends
increased funding for surveillance capabilities at the CDC to
better detect, monitor, and respond to outbreaks and emerging
pathogens around the world.
We also support funding CDC's ability to partner with
States to expand and strengthen State immunization
infrastructure, especially for adult immunization.
In reauthorizing PAHPA, Congress must continue to send a
strong signal that it is committed to prioritizing national
health security by providing the resources and authorities
needed to fully prepare for and defend against biological
threats. Investments in preparedness and medical countermeasure
development will enhance our response efforts, save lives, and
be more cost effective to our economy in an emergency.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Arthur follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Guthrie. Thank you, I appreciate it, Ms. Arthur, your
testimony.
The Chair now recognizes Dr. Gralow for 5 minutes for your
opening statement.

STATEMENT OF JULIE R. GRALOW, M.D.

Dr. Gralow. Chairman Guthrie, Ranking Member Eshoo, and
members of the subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to
discuss the Pandemic and All-Hazards Preparedness Act and its
potential to help address the cancer drug shortages crisis.
I am Dr. Julie Gralow, chief medical officer and executive
vice president of the Association for Clinical Oncology. Prior
to joining ASCO, I was a practicing medical oncologist and
professor in Washington State for three decades.
ASCO represents over 45,000 oncology professionals who are
dedicated to improving cancer care. We appreciate the
subcommittee's efforts to improve the programs in PAHPA to
better prepare the U.S. for future public health crises.
The pandemic exacerbated longstanding issues that threaten
the resilience of our healthcare supply chain. While the
Strategic National Stockpile and other programs authorized
under PAHPA aided the healthcare community during the public
health emergency, more must be done. Drug shortages will worsen
without intervention. This is especially true for sterile
injectables, many of which are oncology drugs.
These drugs are expensive to make, they have a low profit
margin, and they lead manufacturers to reduce or discontinue
production. Active pharmaceutical ingredient sourcing is a weak
point. Many manufacturers use the same API source. If that
source experiences quality issues causing a production shutdown
or runs out of critical components, drug shortages are a likely
outcome.
Visibility into the supply chain regarding APIs is lacking.
The FDA does not have authority to require manufacturers to
provide API sourcing information. This means shortages can
emerge without warning. Today's shortages are the worst that I
have seen in my 30-year career.
I am in regular communication with colleagues at the
University of Washington and Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research
Center in Seattle. Initially, they were optimistic that, with
dose modifications and substitutions, they had enough supply of
these platinum agents to ride the shortage out. Then, however,
many of the State's smaller cancer centers began running out of
the drug and sending their patients to the UW, depleting their
supply.
I spoke to a patient diagnosed with endometrial cancer,
whose team recommended a chemotherapy course that included a
platinum agent. She studied the drugs and their side effects.
She had a game plan, and she did well through her first cycle
of treatment, much to her relief. Then, when arriving for her
second dose, one of the agents was no longer available. You can
imagine the anxiety this caused. Even when there are acceptable
and proven alternatives, switching a planned course of
treatment adds fear and stress to that already caused by a
cancer diagnosis.
Eleven oncology drugs, maybe 14, are currently in shortage.
Four of these--cisplatin, carboplatin, methotrexate, and
fludarabine--are commonly used to treat cancer in adults and
children. In 2022, 100,000 Americans were diagnosed with
ovarian, bladder, and testicular cancers, cancers for which
cisplatin and carboplatin are recommended. These drugs are also
commonly used in cervical, endometrial, lung, head and neck,
esophageal, gastric, and breast cancers. The number of U.S.
patients at risk could be as high as 500,000 a year.
Drug shortage risks also extend to pediatric patients. From
2010 to 2020, 8 of the 10 most frequently used drugs to treat
acute lymphoblastic leukemia, the most common childhood cancer,
were at some point unavailable.
Beyond drugs, we have experienced essential supply
shortages, including glass vials, IV tubing, saline bags, and
more. Shortages place providers in a moral dilemma,
prioritizing drug use for patients who are curable versus those
who are not. Patients worry about whether they will receive
their next treatment or if switching to another treatment will
shorten their lives.
The PAHPA reauthorization is an opportunity to advance
solutions to improve the supply chain, especially during public
health crises. ASCO makes the following recommendations
detailed in my written statement: improve the function and
composition of the National Strategic Stockpile; enhance
multinational collaboration on supply chain resilience;
incentivize manufacturers to improve quality and transparency;
reduce reliance on other countries for critical ingredients;
analyze domestic drug and device manufacturing capability and
capacity for critical products to avert national security
threats.
I appreciate the subcommittee's efforts to enhance the
supply chain to protect our national security and our patients'
health. ASCO stands ready to collaborate with you to ensure
individuals with cancer receive the lifesaving and life-
prolonging treatments they require. This is a crisis. Cancer
patients' lives are on the line.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Gralow follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Guthrie. Thank you, Dr. Gralow. I appreciate your
testimony.
We now--the Chair now recognizes Mr. Okon for 5 minutes for
an opening statement.

STATEMENT OF TED OKON

Mr. Okon. Chairman Guthrie, Ranking Member Eshoo, and
members of the Energy and Commerce Health Subcommittee, I am
the executive director of the Community Oncology Alliance, a
nonprofit organization dedicated to cancer patients and their
independent oncology providers.
My wife, Susan, practiced as an oncology nurse for 10
years, and we have family and friends with cancer, living with
it and dying from the disease. I want to make it very clear
that my overriding goal is to ensure that every American with
cancer--regardless of demographic, financial, or any other
status--has access to the highest quality, most affordable
cancer care close to home.
Let me get right to the point. There is a growing crisis of
a severe shortage of low-cost generic drugs used to treat
cancer, including carboplatinum, cisplatin, and 5-FU. Although
decades old, these are mainstay treatments for many types of
cancers, including curable cancers. As a result of these drug
shortages, Americans with cancer are facing treatment delays,
potentially receiving inferior treatments, and even having
their treatments stopped. What is heartbreaking is that
Americans with potentially curable cancers may miss treatments
and even a cure because of these shortages.
Our inaction in fundamentally solving the cancer drug
shortage problem, which has existed for years but is now the
most severe we have ever faced, has already likely signed a
death sentence for some Americans. Frustration and outright
anger do not begin to describe how I feel in reading heartbreak
stories of patients with cancer not being able to receive
treatment due to shortages of decades-old, low-cost generic
drugs.
I testified to Congress 12 years ago--nearly 12 years ago--
of the then-cancer-drug shortage. I said then, and I repeat
today, ``The fundamental root cause of cancer drug shortages is
financial.''
Unfortunately, recent solutions deal with symptoms of the
problem, but none address the underlying financial cause of
shortages. Imagine being very diligent about staying out of the
sun and getting regular skin checkups. If you had a suspicious-
looking mole, had it biopsied, and found that you had melanoma,
you would not be in denial and simply put a Band-Aid on it. You
would have the underlying cancer treated.
The problem is that many of the solutions being advanced--
is that they involve tracking early warning signs of shortages
and placing even more regulations on generic drug
manufacturers, which can actually have unintended consequences
of exacerbating the problem. At best, these are mere Band-Aids.
Denial of the financial cause of these shortages is once
again costing Americans hope and even lives. Understanding the
underlying problem does not require a Ph.D. in economics. If a
generic drug manufacturer cannot make a profit on a drug, it
will simply stop making the drug. If a manufacturer makes a
small margin on the drug, it will cut manufacturing costs,
which makes it more prone to the types of problems that result
in FDA inspections shutting down plants. Unfortunately, given
that many of the drugs in short supply are money losers, we
have seen more manufacturers leave the market. Today, not only
is there no manufacturing redundancy at the manufacturing
level, but there is little or no redundancy in the market as a
whole.
These cancer drugs are injectables administered
intravenously or by similar means. These are not pills or
tablets. The manufacturing involved in producing sterile
injectable drugs is far more involved and exacting--as well as
capital intensive--than making pills or tablets.
As I explained in my written testimony, the fundamental
financial problems for generic drug manufacturers are the
Medicare Part B drug reimbursement system based on average
sales price, which is also used by commercial payers, caps drug
prices.
Additionally, mandatory 340B drug pricing discounts and
Medicaid rebates erode drug prices, and the Inflation Reduction
Act price inflation caps further put downward pressure on
injectable generic drug prices. These products are, at best, so
unprofitable that there is little to no margin to invest in
manufacturing upgrades. At worst, there is little manufacturing
redundancy as manufacturers leave the market.
We need to face the reality that price caps, discounts,
rebates, and regulation need to be stripped from the market, or
shortages will worsen. Congress needs to stop Band-Aiding the
problem and fix the fundamental financial problem, as well as
bring manufacturing back to the United States.
The stories I am hearing from oncologists about these
shortages are beyond heartbreaking. We owe it to the 32-year-
old mother with aggressive breast cancer and her 3 children to
get her the treatment she needs now but is blocked from because
of these shortages.
It is tough enough dealing with cancer. Americans should
not lose hope or, worse, their lives fighting this terrible
disease. We all need to work together to fix the fundamental
financial cause of drug shortages. Every American with cancer
is counting on us.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify, and I welcome
your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Okon follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Guthrie. Thank you, Mr. Okon, for your testimony.
That completes witnesses' opening statements, and we will
begin the questioning period for a 5-minute round of--5 minutes
for questions. And I will recognize myself for 5 minutes.
So, Ms. Arthur, would you talk about how important the
impact of Operation Warp Speed was at the beginning of COVID?
And what do you believe is the correct role for the private
sector to play in our Nation's preparedness and response?
And do you believe the proposed PHEMCE Advisory Committee
Act will help us address gaps in our preparation for and
response to--future responses?
Ms. Arthur. Thank you, Chairman Guthrie, for that question.
Operation Warp Speed was actually an excellent example of
what we would like to see happen with the law in PAHPA. The
work that was done between the Federal Government and industry
partners was exceptional. Government actually drove the
activities of industry in a collaborative way. We were
partners, we weren't vendors.
We actually worked very closely with the FDA, with the CDC,
with Operation Warp Speed leadership in DoD and ASPR, and
actually came up with the strategy for driving very increased
scalability of manufacturing. Clinical trial guidance from the
FDA actually helped us deliver safe vaccines that had diversity
in the clinical trials that allowed us to tell people they were
getting something safe in record time, and that led to vaccines
being available in 300 days. This is incredible.
So that kind of partnership, where the expertise and
experience of industry for manufacturing, clinical trial
development, knowing how to manufacture products well was
really coupled well with the Government's leadership in
facilitating that process. And this is the kind of partnership
that we need in the interpandemic period, so that we are
actually ready to go in less time than 1 year, with the next
time we have to respond to a pandemic. Operation Warp Speed is
a really good example of that.
Mr. Guthrie. OK. Thank you, thank you for that. I want to
move on to Dr. Parker.
The Government Accountability Office reported that the CDC
never established contracts with private-sector vendors to
quickly roll out a testing regime, and that left us hamstrung.
I have legislation before us today. How do you believe
the--so the legislation before us today--clinical labs' ability
to enter into certain contracts and cooperative agreements. So
how do you believe this legislation will help us more
effectively respond to future threats?
Dr. Parker. Well, I think, actually, it is in line with
what Phyllis just said about the public-private partnerships
and involving private industry, the sooner the better. And so I
think we need to do the same thing in our diagnostic world and
our diagnostic enterprise.
We cannot just rely on our Federal Government or State
government public health laboratories to take care of the whole
job, and so we need to have our private-sector engagement in
these laboratory and diagnostics from the start.
And it is most important--also, it is in the interepidemic
period that we need to do this. We cannot wait until there is a
crisis to do this. So I support the effort to try to get the
private sector engaged during the interepidemic period in these
efforts.
Mr. Guthrie. OK, thanks. I have been concerned about--Dr.
Parker, this for you, as well--I have been concerned about just
the executive authority declaring emergencies and having kind
of unlimited time moving forward. Some States--I know my home
State went in and put a limit on what the Governor could do. We
had emergencies, and so we can't just govern by fiat. And we
had an emergency with record flooding in Appalachia, we called
the General Assembly together. Instead of one person choosing
to spend hundreds of millions of dollars, they came together as
a group and said--and rose to the occasion.
You know, some people want to dismiss Congress and just
turn everything over to the experts. We know the experts got a
lot wrong. They got a lot right and they got a lot wrong that
is going to have a lasting impact. And I do believe that the
legislative authority shouldn't just be dismissed and say,
well, let's just turn it over because it is too difficult to
bring everybody together. Well, that is what our Founding
Fathers wanted to do.
So one of my bills would allow Congress to vote to extend
the public health emergency for 6 months after it has been
declared. Would you talk about the role for Congress in this,
and what you see in that bill?
Dr. Parker. Yes. Well, certainly, maybe I am not a
constitutional expert, but certainly there is a definite role
for all three branches of government, including congressional
oversight. It is absolutely essential. And I would say,
actually, there is a role for investigative journalism, as
well, to keep us all honest too, in the--and I am talking as a
former government employee.
But I think maybe one thing that perhaps may have been
lacking that--I think back to the H5N1 influenza preparedness
days between 2006 and 2009--there were kind of like clear
triggers and metrics of the phases of the pandemic that--I
think we kind of lost that, you know, before COVID-19. And I
think maybe one way to exercise the congressional oversight is
to make sure our pandemic plans and strategies have clear
triggers and metrics of, one, when a crisis and a public health
emergency should be declared, and then what are the clear
metrics and triggers of when it ends, when the public health
emergency declaration ends. So I think that would help a lot.
You know, I probably should stay out of the political thing
and that.
Mr. Guthrie. OK, thanks.
Dr. Parker. But I think--but certainly, there is a place
for congressional oversight, and I think our plans ought to
have clear triggers and metrics of when it starts and when it
ends.
Mr. Guthrie. Well, thank you. I appreciate that. And my
time has expired, so I will yield back, and the Chair now
recognizes the Ranking Member Eshoo for 5 minutes for
questions.
Ms. Eshoo. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you to each
one of the witnesses.
To Dr. Gralow: On drug origin transparency, information on
the supply chain for prescription drug products in New
Zealand--I am really fascinated by this--is publicly disclosed
and transparent.
New Zealand collects and makes public the name and location
of the API and the finished drug manufacturers. The data on the
New Zealand Medsafe Public Access website can be analyzed to
quickly determine which ones have the highest dependance on a
certain geographic location, such as Wuhan, China. Within hours
of the news of a plant closure, New Zealand could know which
drug products will be affected and can look for other producers
of the same drug to supplement the country's drug supply.
How would your ability to treat your patients be impacted
if the United States adopted a similar transparency policy
where the FDA, hospitals, doctors, public policy analysts could
monitor the U.S. upstream pharmaceutical supply chain to
identify potential trigger points that could lead to supply
chain vulnerability and to predict drug products that may face
shortages?
Dr. Gralow. Thank you for that question. I think that level
of transparency to all, the ability to know where manufacturers
are getting their raw materials from for everyone to know,
would give us much more lead time when a problem exists. We
would have much more time to be able to ramp up again, to look
for alternative sources, to start to look toward importation--
the expanded shelf life, for example. It just would give us a
much bigger time period to adjust and, hopefully, avert a
crisis in that setting.
Ms. Eshoo. Right.
Dr. Gralow. We don't have that kind of information
available at the raw materials level, the API level.
Ms. Eshoo. Right. About achieving a stable supply of
oncology drugs, in your testimony you propose the Government
contract with manufacturers to create a buffer stock to achieve
a short-term supply of oncology drugs. Can you speak to how
that buffer stock would help address the acute shortages we are
seeing now in oncology drugs?
Dr. Gralow. Having, for example, a 6-month supply--whatever
we would agree to--on board, whether it is at the manufacturer
level or the Government or the buyer level, that constantly
rotates--it would have to keep rotating because these agents
have short half-lives--having 6 months would, again, give us
much more time to ramp up and deal with the shortage.
So on the one hand, having greater visibility when the
problem first occurs, and then on the other hand having at
least 6 months to gear up again would be a great help and
likely avert many of these crises.
Ms. Eshoo. Well, I appreciate each one of--the testimony of
each one of the witnesses.
I have never extracted my authorship or support before.
This is major, major legislation. But colleagues, this is
affecting--this drug shortage supply is affecting every single
one of our congressional districts. This is not a Democratic
idea. This is a national need, and it is a national crisis.
This is, as Mr. Hudson said--and I have loved working with
him--this is a must-pass bill, PAHPA is.
I think addressing these shortages--I mean, it is just jaw-
dropping to me when you say a shortage of pediatric oncology
drugs. We can do this. I just--it is--it really is a must.
So thank you again to the witnesses.
I will work with anyone on this committee to get this over
the finish line. I am not suggesting that we have a section
relative to the FDA in this legislation that is larger than the
rest of the PAHPA legislation. But this is a crisis that needs
to be addressed, and we need to answer to all of our
constituents on it.
And with that, I yield back the balance of my time.
Mr. Guthrie. Thank you. The gentlelady yields back. The
Chair now recognizes Chair Rodgers for 5 minutes for questions.
Mrs. Rodgers. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. [Audio malfunction]
and we will continue to work with you on that. I think it is a
question of what is in this bill before us today, and how we go
about doing it. So we will keep those conversations going.
Dr. Parker, during your time as Principal Deputy Assistant
Secretary for Preparedness and Response, can you explain your
interaction with the National Council Advisory Committee on
Individuals with Disabilities and Disasters, or any of the
other national advisory committees?
Dr. Parker. Sure, and I--actually, I think my experience
when I was the ASPR--and before ASPR was formed, in the Office
of Public Health Emergency Preparedness, was actually during
Hurricane Katrina, Rita, Wilma, and that may have preceded the
actual establishment of the NAC Advisory Committee.
But the experience of Hurricane Katrina certainly formed
our need of how we better take care of special needs, special
medical needs population, and it was just really a horrible
situation in New Orleans when prestorm, poststorm, local
authorities really didn't know where some of these special
needs people lived, and how do we evacuate those that need to
be taken and taken care of that just need special help. And so
I think that really helped to form why we need outside advisory
bodies that have the expertise to--that maybe those in
government do not, and to help us, you know, think about
whether--new policies and programs that we need to do that.
So in general, from my perspective, having outside Federal
advisory boards was always very beneficial to me when I was in
government. And since I have been out of government, I have
served on several advisory boards, and I know the people who
were asked to serve on advisory boards very much like the
opportunity to be able to share their expertise with the
Federal Government.
One cautionary note I would say, though, as you consider
any kind of further legislation, it is important how the
executive branch uses advisory boards. And I have seen examples
of some advisory boards being taken very seriously and run very
well, where there's clear findings and recommendations, and the
Government acts on them.
Mrs. Rodgers. Thank you.
Dr. Parker. So it is just how----
Mrs. Rodgers. Yes, thank you. I appreciate those insights,
and I am pleased--I have some other questions I want to get to,
but I am really pleased that, in Congressman Richard Hudson's
draft, there's several changes to better incorporate non-
Federal expert stakeholder input and perspectives, and it
includes people with disabilities as well as healthcare
professionals with expertise.
This question is for Dr. Parker and Ms. Arthur. You know,
as I mentioned in my opening statement, our goal is to ensure
America is prepared for everything, from a hurricane to a cyber
attack to a chemical attack by an adversary. And it is critical
that we take an all-hazards approach as we consider this
reauthorization. Would you speak briefly as to what if these
authorizations were allowed to lapse?
Ms. Arthur. Thank you, Chair Rodgers, for that question.
I think three really important things would happen if we do
not pass PAHPA. We will not be better prepared. We will not
have the incentives that we need to make medical
countermeasures for the next inevitable pandemic. I think it is
really, really important to note that we will not--we will lose
some of the incentives that would be reauthorized. And
literally, we will miss an opportunity to really instill the
lessons we learned from COVID into our better laws.
Mrs. Rodgers. OK, thank you. Actually, I am going to move
on because I want to get to Mr. Okon too, and give him a chance
to talk a little bit about the drug shortages, because this is
not a new issue, and I know that it is worse now than from the
last time you testified over 10 years ago.
Your testimony indicates that the economics of the sterile
generic drug market is at the heart of this issue. And I just
wanted to ask if you would speak some more to that issue and
how we can help patients afford healthcare while making sure
that companies invest in manufacturing and get this back into
the United States.
Mr. Okon. Well, I will read you a quote from the FDA
Commissioner, Chair Rodgers, who testified in front of Energy
and Commerce last month: ``If I offered you the chance to
produce a drug and guaranteed you would lose money on every
pill you made, it is unlikely you would go into that business,
and you might also skimp on your quality systems and
manufacturing, which then leads, when we do inspections, to
find problems.''
I am not saying that some of the solutions advanced in
terms of early warning and signs and things like that aren't
important to know. But I believe very strongly--and 11 years
ago, Scott Gottlieb, Dr. Scott Gottlieb, who testified next to
me, we didn't know each other--came to the same conclusions. If
you listen to Dr. Gottlieb on different news shows lately, he
is saying the same thing: the root cause of this is financial.
Mrs. Rodgers. Thank you.
Mr. Okon. And we need to bring manufacturing back to the
United States.
Mrs. Rodgers. More to come, for sure, but I just want to
end by saying that I am troubled that less than half of the
FDA-registered facilities are complying with existing
requirements to report the volume of what is made in each
facility. Companies need to be complying with current law, and
FDA needs to be enforcing before we consider new requirements
and authorities.
I yield back.
Mr. Guthrie. Thank you. The Chair yields back. The Chair
now recognizes the ranking member of the full committee for 5
minutes for questions.
Mr. Pallone. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I just want to
repeat that I do not agree with my Republican colleagues that
PAHPA reauthorization legislation isn't the place to address
our vulnerable supply chain. And unfortunately, they have
instead focused on this partisan request-for-information
process that I think kicks the can down the road and refuses to
address the challenges with any urgency. Unfortunately, they
don't seem to appreciate the security threat that is posed by
having a constant rotation of critical drugs and medical
devices in short supply.
So, Dr. Gralow--quickly, because I have other questions--
can you explain why the American Society of Clinical Oncology
views drug shortages as a matter of national security and why
we should address it through the PAHPA reauthorization?
Dr. Gralow. We have viewed this as a matter of national
security for years and years now, actually had a summit with
all stakeholders back in 2018, where we called this a matter of
national security. Not having the drugs we need available to
our patients, to the American public, is a matter of national
security.
Mr. Pallone. And did the drug shortage get worse during the
COVID-19 pandemic?
And how did that affect patient care? Again, quickly, if
you could.
Dr. Gralow. There are some very specific drugs that were
made worse during the pandemic, not to the degree that we have
right now with these two drugs, cisplatin and carboplatin. But
the pandemic disrupted supply chains, et cetera, and we were
very vulnerable. It is actually amazing we didn't do worse with
many of our drugs, getting them into our country during the
pandemic.
Mr. Pallone. Well, thank you.
You know, I have to say, Mr. Okon, I am not going to ask
you a question, but it just seems like you just, you know,
blame everything in this drug shortage on financial problems
that the drug companies face. And, you know, at one point you
said that, you know, they are not making enough money, they--
you know, we shouldn't have price caps, we shouldn't have
rebates.
You know, if the suggestion here--maybe it is not--is that
we should just give them all the money they need and we should
just keep paying them more and more, I mean, I just
categorically reject that.
And keep in mind, I mean, you said that this is a financial
problem, and I agree it is, but it is not a financial problem
for the drug companies, it is a financial problem for the
people who can't afford the drugs. And if--the fact of the
matter is, if drugs are not affordable, people aren't going to
have access to them, and they are not going to be able to do--
to have that medication.
So, you know, it is--and I know you didn't say this, but it
does bother me that in the last week now we have had two
companies--one, Merck, which is actually very close to my
district, and then the Chamber of Commerce--sue over the IRA
provision that provides for negotiated prices. It just seems
like there is this constant effort by drug companies and their
supporters--the Chamber of Commerce and others--to simply say
that there shouldn't be any restrictions, no rebates, no caps,
no negotiated prices. And I just categorically reject that,
because if we don't do those things, then these drugs are not
going to be affordable to the people. It is very nice to say
the drug companies need more money, but as they continue to
raise their prices, people just can't afford the drugs and they
go without.
But in any case, I probably took up too much time. But I
just wanted to say that I think it is--well, let me just say
that, even with their current authorities, FDA has reported
that in 2021 the agency worked with manufacturers to prevent
more than 300 shortages. But the agency recognizes they can do
more if processes were streamlined and the agency could access
better information.
So let me just ask you, Dr. Gralow, do you think it is
overly burdensome to ask drug manufacturers to report, disclose
the foreign suppliers they rely on to make their drugs, or to
require drug manufacturers to notify the agency if there is an
unexpected uptick in demand that could lead to a shortage?
Dr. Gralow. No, I don't think that is overly burdensome. I
think it is critical. I think we need transparency, and we need
to know whether we have redundancy in where we get the raw
ingredients from. We know we have four or five manufacturers of
a drug, but if they all get it from the same basic place and
that one plant goes down, we don't know that. We need that
transparency, and that is not overly burdensome to know that.
Mr. Pallone. And--thank you. And, you know, I would just
tell--say to our Republican leadership on the committee, we
came together on price transparency provisions a couple of
weeks ago dealing with hospitals, dealing with PBMs, dealing
with so many things. I don't think it is--that asking to deal
with the transparency in this case is really any different, and
should be something that is done now.
But thank you, and I yield back.
Mr. Guthrie. The ranking member yields back. The Chair now
recognizes Mr. Burgess for 5 minutes for questions.
Mr. Burgess. Thank you, so much to get to--and I will
probably run out of time, so I will just warn you in advance I
will be submitting significant questions for written responses.
You know, as I sit here and listen to this discussion--and
I get some deja vu--in 2017 and 2018 we actually worked on the
Pandemic All-Hazard Preparedness Act. Because of a hold by a
Senator who will be--remain nameless, it didn't actually pass
that Congress, it passed immediately in the next Congress. It
was signed into law. And then 6 months later, we have the
pandemic, and this committee never did an implementation
hearing of the last version of the Pandemic All-Hazard
Preparedness Act. So I certainly welcome this discussion today.
It is long overdue. Heaven help us if we don't learn some of
the lessons from last time.
Dr. Parker, thank you for being here today. As always, you
provide very insightful testimony. I noted in your written
testimony you talked about the appropriation that was made--I
think it was the Department of Defense appropriation in 2005--
to provide the migration from egg-based flu vaccine to cell-
based flu vaccine. I am still waiting. I appreciate your work
on that, but it has--that has been slow in development. But it
just underscores how important these issues are and why we need
to focus on them, and we can't let them out of our sight.
Now, one of the bills that we have got in front of us--the
so-called Disease X bill, providing some countermeasures for
emerging viral pathogens and viral families--how would this
authority have affected our ability to respond during this last
coronavirus pandemic?
Dr. Parker. Well, I think, had we had Disease X 5 years
before the pandemic, we would have been better prepared. You
know, nonetheless, Operation Warp Speed was--I think history
will show--it was a tremendous success. But having the ability
to think about being--we will be surprised in the future, and
that is why we need Disease X authorization appropriations.
That is the bottom line.
Mr. Burgess. Yes, I--the thing that keeps me up at night is
I don't know how many emergency use authorizations it took from
the FDA to keep us alive in the last pandemic. If we need,
what, 250 relaxations of the regulations in order to not die
during a pandemic, maybe we ought to emulate the Operation Warp
Speed model that you continually address. And I couldn't agree
more with you about that.
On the pandemic itself--and staying with you, Dr. Parker--
the--one of the problems in lack of preparedness was diagnostic
testing. Are we in a position to do better if something happens
in the future?
Dr. Parker. Well, that is a good question. Thank you. And I
don't have the confidence to say we would do better. I think I
think the community, the diagnostic community, is--certainly
those lessons observed are fresh on everybody's mind, so we
probably will. But I think anything you can do in the PAHPA
reauthorizations to more guarantee that we will do better and
engage the private sector very early in the diagnostics--but,
you know, before we have a crisis--will help us.
Mr. Burgess. It is just hard to prepare for that when the
CDC's test absolutely failed first crack out of the box, and we
really weren't given any information on that for the first
month of the pandemic, and we lost a lot of time that South
Korea didn't lose, Japan didn't lose, and then we were always
compared unfavorably with the response of other countries.
Mr. Okon, thank you for being here today, and I do remember
your testimony from 12 years ago, and I think we talked about
Doxil during that, and now we have got--Doxil is an anticancer
drug that, because of a manufacturing problem, the manufacturer
just said, ``I am sorry, I am out,'' and so it wasn't available
to your patients in this country. And we do need to do better
on that.
But many of the drugs that you went through in your
testimony, these are infused drugs. These are what I call part
B drugs. They are generally given in a doctor's office. And I
was really concerned we did the Inflation Reduction Act and the
movement from average sales price to the maximum fair price,
which is actually just a made-up number by the Secretary of
Health, and how this would impact not just the availability of
drugs themselves but the availability of providers to provide
those drugs. Was I correct to be concerned about that?
Mr. Okon. You were, but especially on the side of creating
a different reimbursement rate, but especially related to the
sterile, low-cost injectable generics. We have taken the
pricing power. These are not brands, these are not the Merck
brands and the other brands, as you know, Dr. Burgess. These
are very low-cost, sterile drugs that have been around for
decades.
Mr. Burgess. Thanks, Mr. Chairman. I will submit my further
questions for the record. Thank you.
Mr. Guthrie. Thank you. The gentleman yields back. The
Chair recognizes Mr. Sarbanes for 5 minutes for questions.
Mr. Sarbanes. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Thank all
of you.
As we have all made very clear, the PAHPA reauthorization
provides the perfect opportunity to take a good, hard look at
the lessons learned from the pandemic and leverage them to
ensure we are all the more prepared to effectively,
efficiently, and nimbly respond to the next public health
crisis.
Public health departments are often the first line of
defense against emerging outbreaks. We saw this during the
pandemic and other public health threats, yet they have been
severely underresourced for decades. I mean, this is an old
narrative. And it took significant effort to build them up
during the pandemic. We were not starting from a strong
baseline, and it was a very uneven baseline across the country.
We lost a lot of time as a result of that.
But similarly, data collection and sharing efforts are a
very--and I think most--effective way of spotting trends,
understanding where we need public health resources, and when
we need them. Public and private entities expanded significant
energy to create these new systems during the pandemic that
allowed us to track the spread of COVID-19 vaccines and other
resources across communities, the country, and the world. There
were some very effective dashboards built in that regard, as
you know.
While we all recognize we are in a very different place now
than we were just 3 years ago today, it is critical that we not
let our guard down--this is much of the theme of today's
hearing--as we draw down our emergency postures. If we are
going to be ready for the next public health crisis, we need to
ensure that we maintain a base level infrastructure of the
public health workforce data and other capacities that we built
up during the pandemic.
Dr. Washington, as an epidemiologist and the vice chair of
the Big Cities Health Coalition, you, of course, are acutely
aware of the challenges that have faced public health
departments during the pandemic and those that will face them
in the future. In your testimony you said it is best: ``A well-
functioning public health system is pandemic preparedness, and
must be well resourced at all levels of government before,
during, and after emergencies.'' As I say, I think you said
that best.
What does it look like to strike the necessary balance
between a return to normalcy, which we all seek--crave,
really--and maintaining adequate preparedness for the next
public health crisis? And how can we achieve this in PAHPA
reauthorization?
Dr. Washington. Certainly. So I think we are--the most
important thing is we have learned a ton of lessons in COVID,
and we made a lot of investments in COVID. Many of those
investments are short term and term limited, and many of them
come in various mechanisms, and they are fragmented a lot of
different ways. And so it is really important for us to
recognize that we did all that for a reason: because the
emergency required us to do it, and we needed those things to
respond. And so shame on us to not have a system in place
already for the next emergency, which could come next month or
later this year. And so we need to--us in public health, we
must maintain that emergency posture, we must have preparedness
plans, we must be in place.
Currently, we don't receive direct funding for many of our
preparedness initiatives. Much of that goes directly to the
State and then eventually comes to us from the State. As you
can imagine, that is tons of administrative burden that it
takes to get funding from the Feds to the State to us. And we--
if we are not prepared, I fear that the next pandemic will have
a similar kind of response.
Mr. Sarbanes. I appreciate that. And the pandemic made
clear that we have to work hand in glove with our State and
local partners to truly adopt a systemwide, whole-of-government
approach to public health preparedness.
Dr. Gralow, why is it so important that we capitalize on
the opportunity we have before us with PAHPA reauthorization to
fully address both supply- and demand-side lessons learned from
the pandemic?
If we do one without the other, we will be sacrificing the
overall efficacy of our public health preparedness efforts.
Isn't that correct?
Dr. Gralow. I would agree. I think this is a crisis. It is
a different kind of crisis. It is definitely intertwined with
pandemic-related issues. The vulnerabilities, the transparency
that we are asking for are--were exacerbated by the pandemic.
I think this is a national security issue. I think it ties
into many of the issues that we have been dealing with
throughout the whole pandemic and the authorizations that have
been provided.
Mr. Sarbanes. I mean, really, it is shame on us if we don't
maximize our learning opportunity here from what we just went
through to make sure, again, we create a new floor or
foundation baseline in terms of how we build the public health
and response infrastructure across the country, so that when
the next challenge comes we are not going from a deficit up to
where we need to be, we are starting from a strong baseline.
Thank you all for your testimony. I yield back.
Mr. Griffith [presiding]. I now recognize the gentleman
from Ohio, Mr. Latta, for 5 minutes of questioning.
Mr. Latta. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thanks for--
our witnesses, for your testimony today. We all appreciate you
being here.
I have been a member of this committee the last two
reauthorizations of PAHPA, and look forward to supporting the
much-needed provisions to improve the legislation so Americans
are safer and our Nation is better prepared to respond to any
future public health emergencies.
To that end, I am proud that my legislation, the Healing
Response Act, that I am coleading with my good friend from
Illinois, was included in today's hearing. It is crucial that
Congress has a formal review examining HHS's efforts to ensure
that the U.S. is prepared to rapidly produce medical
countermeasures in the event of a public health emergency, and
better understand risks and challenges associated with advanced
development.
I also appreciate the committee's longstanding bipartisan
work and our ability to work together for the American people.
I also believe there are some critical improvements to
ensure BARDA and SNS obtain feedback from all sectors in
responding to threats through my colleague Mr. Hudson's PHEMCE
Advisory Committee Act.
However, although great steps are being made in PAHPA to
address future emergencies, I am concerned that HHS isn't
funding programs that improve oral antivirals or next-
generation antivirals. Over $5 billion was pumped into the
Biden administration's next-gen program. They are spending vast
amounts of taxpayer dollars to reinforce existing programs like
vaccine antibodies that contain limitations we have all seen
clearly over the last 5 years. The--it is imperative that
taxpayer dollars are spent appropriately, and we must ensure
that we have access to more therapies and treatments now, not
at some point down the road.
And Dr. Parker and Ms. Arthur, if I could ask you both the
same question, and I will start with Ms. Arthur. What is the
role Congress should play to invite private-sector solutions
and new advancements in treating rare diseases into the
decision making today, and ensure our tax dollars are spent
more wisely?
Ms. Arthur. Thank you for that question. I am not a rare
disease expert, but I think that incentives are always
important with regard to encouraging the development of novel
products. Many of our companies are very committed to this
space, and find that it is important to have those incentives
at the FDA and also with other parts of the U.S. Government to
help development of rare disease products.
Mr. Latta. Dr. Parker?
Dr. Parker. Yes, the same thing. I think you have to have
the clear incentives to bring industry in. But I think, from
the Government side, you also have to have effective leadership
that is going to establish what are the priorities, what are
the milestones, what are the metrics, and hold the executive
branch accountable for delivering.
Mr. Latta. Well, let me follow up with what you just said,
because this is going to lead into my next question, because
when you look at the regulatory issues or legislative barriers
that are hindering private-sector innovations, how does the
private sector communicating with the Federal Government and
the Federal agencies make sure that those barriers are
overcome?
Dr. Parker. Well, you know, I am not going to--there are
actually--there are opportunities for the private sector and,
say, BARD to communicate. They have mechanisms to do that. I
think we always have to work on how we can make those better,
and how does our Federal funding agencies--are they listening
to industry when they express their concerns and barriers that
they have to face?
So we are--always have to push and make our communication
channels better.
Mr. Latta. Ms. Arthur, would you like to follow up on that?
Ms. Arthur. Yes, thank you. I think, first, I very much
support what Representative Hudson has put forward as far as
the PHEMCE Advisory group. I think that is an example of the
kind of work we can do as industry, where we actually, through
our trade associations and--directly, actually, can give
guidance to the Federal Government on those things that would
make it easier, or facilitate the development of products that
have an unmet medical need.
This is really what we like to do. We respond to guidance
from the FDA, we work closely with those advisory groups in
order to say this will help us deliver on the need that has
been expressed.
Mr. Latta. Well, thank you very much.
And Mr. Chairman, I yield back the balance of my time.
Mr. Guthrie [presiding]. The gentleman yields back. The
Chair recognizes Mr. Cardenas for 5 minutes for questions.
Mr. Cardenas. Thank you very much, Chairman Guthrie, and
also I want to thank Ranking Member Eshoo for holding this
hearing, and to all of our witnesses for sharing your
perspectives and expertise on hazard preparedness.
I spoke in the last hearing about the vulnerabilities of
pediatric populations during emergencies. I remain concerned
that our healthcare infrastructure is not equipped to handle
surges when hazards impact children--especially children.
Since this past winter, when we saw skyrocketing cases of
RSV flu and COVID-19, little investment has been made in
building capacity to address these needs in the future. And
looking at existing programs and resources, I want to ask about
some creative ways that we might be able to leverage our
current systems and better address the needs of our kids.
Dr. Washington, you have been on the front lines of COVID-
19 responses in your community. In your experience responding
to the needs of children during these public health
emergencies, how critical is it to have trained healthcare
professionals to address the unique needs of kids?
And what challenges have you witnessed in recruiting and
retaining a workforce with pediatric-specific knowledge?
Dr. Washington. Great, thank you for the question. I think
it is certainly important that we have folks with experience to
be able to care for children.
And I know one real opportunity for us is on the pediatric
infectious disease doctor front. It is really important to have
those available to us. We are fortunate to have some in our
community, but I know that is not the case for many communities
in the country, and it remains really important.
The most important workforce issue, though, as it relates
to our response, really, is our nursing and clinical support
and having nursing available. As you know, we are experiencing
a national shortage of nurses. We have the same experience in
Mecklenburg in the State of North Carolina. And having nurses
available to deliver vaccines, to work in shelters, to provide
care to families, to work in schools--all really critical,
important, and must be addressed as we think about preparing
our workforce.
Mr. Cardenas. Thank you. To what extent would something
like pediatric toolkits, which would include, for example,
equipment, training modules, and pediatric dosages of
therapeutics, help to handle a surge capacity for children
during a crisis?
Dr. Washington. I think those are really--toolkits are
really important guidance documents to help clinicians and
nonclinician settings to be able to provide care for children
during emergencies.
I think back to COVID, where we had to have guidance
documents for child care facilities, for example, where you
have nonclinical staff working to serve and care for kids every
day. Having appropriate guidance for those individuals to be
able to care for those kids while experiencing a pandemic is so
critical to our response.
Mr. Cardenas. Thank you. I was also--I wanted to discuss
the need to improve reliability of our drug supply chains. It
is a glaring, missed opportunity that the Republican majority
is leaving the FDA out of the process. Partisan RFI is not the
same as taking action, especially not when the FDA has proposed
a number of improvements to help them deal with drug shortages.
Over the course of the pandemic, we saw how quickly
critical supplies and over-the-counter medications could become
scarce. Now we are confronting a shortage of oncology drugs so
serious physicians are rationing drugs or delaying care to
patients in dire need.
It is undeniable that FDA could have more of a role to play
in preventing these types of shortages in the future, and the
omission of FDA-related authority is stunning, which leads me
to a question to you, Dr. Gralow.
What kind of FDA authorities would have been most helpful
in avoiding the existing shortage, and what could help FDA
mitigate the current shortage?
Dr. Gralow. Again, I think most helpful would be to have
the authority to know where manufacturers source their active
pharmaceutical ingredients and being able to view whether we
actually have redundancy in our system or not. Knowing at the
first time point that a plant has gone down, and then
understanding that it impacts five of the manufacturers or one
of the manufacturers is critical. And that is what we are
hoping FDA will get authority to do.
Mr. Cardenas. Yes, one of the things that, unfortunately, I
think most Americans see as a bad term is redundancy. Like, why
would you want to duplicate something? But in this context it
is critical, and it would be lifesaving, and it is something
that systems in general are required to do. Unfortunately, we
can do a better job in this country. Hopefully, we will get
there.
You note, Dr. Gralow, that shortages today are the worst
you have seen in over 30 years--in your 30-year career. Without
congressional action, how likely or frequent would we expect
these shortages to be in the future?
Dr. Gralow. They are increasing regularly. And, you know,
the rest of world does not have a shortage of these two primary
drugs that we are dealing with right now, and it is because of
many of the other systems' better redundancy, et cetera, that
they don't. This is--cisplatin, carboplatin, this is a U.S.
problem.
Mr. Cardenas. Thank you very much.
My time having expired, I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Guthrie. The gentleman yields back. The Chair now
recognizes Mr. Griffith for 5 minutes for questions.
Mr. Griffith. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I beg your
forgiveness and the forgiveness of the witnesses because I am
going to go on a little bit of a tirade for just a minute.
One of my colleagues on the other side of the aisle seemed
somewhat surprised, chagrined that Merck has filed suit against
the so-called negotiation process that they set up. When that
bill first came into this body, into this committee, this
subcommittee 3 years ago, on first blush I raised the issue
that when you take between 65 and 95 percent of the total sales
of a medication, it is, on its face, unconstitutional and would
likely face a challenge in the courts. I raised it again in
full committee. I raised it on the floor. And for 3 years,
every time it came up, I raised it, and it was included in the
IRA. And to say today that you are somehow surprised took me by
surprise, because my thought is of course Merck sued, and every
drug manufacturer probably ought to sue because it is, on its
face, an unconstitutional taking.
All right. Now the questions I actually had prepared. Thank
you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you, witnesses.
In my district, a company had a contract facilitated by HHS
to produce nitrile, butadiene, rubber--the main ingredient in
disposable gloves--as well as the finished gloves. They were
directed by the Federal Government officials to submit two
separate proposals to both the Department of Defense and the
Assistant Secretary for Preparedness and Response, or ASPR.
They were assured that this was for process reasons, and funds
would be available for them to complete the contract, which
included new construction to expand their production
capabilities.
So the county donated hundreds of acres of land valued at
over 17 million, and the Commonwealth of Virginia provided tens
of millions of dollars' worth of incentives. Since then the
company has only received partial funding and has had to halt
construction, and my district is left with hundreds of acres
unused, and half--and a half-built manufacturing facility. This
was largely due, in part, to a lack communications between ASPR
and the Department of Defense, and a lack--and a lapse and a
lack of transparency.
Now, in the flowchart--this is mostly for folks back home;
I know you all know this--but in the flowchart of
responsibility, both the Biomedical Advanced Research and
Development Authority, BARDA, and the Strategic National
Stockpile, SNS, are directly under ASPR. Accordingly, I have
two bills in front of us this hearing that will provide
structure around contract duration, as well as require 90-day
notification requirement to vendors in the case of any
modifications, renewals, extensions, or terminations of
contracts with the Biomedical Advanced Research and Development
Authority and the Strategic National Stockpile. It is my
understanding this contract notice requirement is already
required for contracts under the SNS's Special Reserve Fund.
Dr. Parker, can you please explain what processes are in
place currently within ASPR to notify companies of any
modification or changes to their existing contracts?
Dr. Parker. Well, I am not currently in ASPR or----
Mr. Griffith. I understand.
Dr. Parker [continuing]. Or Federal Government, it has been
a while.
But what you just described sounds like a reasonable thing
to have in place that, you know, it just--increasing the
transparency with the private sector, with those who are doing
business with the Government, it is a two-way street between
the private sector and the Federal funding agency.
Mr. Griffith. And it is along the same line, but can you
explain why providing more stability and certainty for
companies when contracting with ASPR, BARDA, SNS would be
beneficial for both taxpayers and also the company who
initially receives the contract?
And I probably already answered it in my description of
what is happening in my district, but go ahead.
Dr. Parker. Yes, and I am not familiar with the case in
your district, but that sounds very, very unfortunate, and it
sounds like a huge communication issue. But I do think that
speaks to the issue of the fragmentation between the Federal
interagency--you know, the interagency and, you know, in this
case DoD and HHS. So that needs to be fixed.
Mr. Griffith. Yes, and I appreciate that, and we are going
to try to fix that.
And to go back and harp some more, it wasn't just me, there
were others who came forward on the situation with the drug
pricing so-called negotiations. When you put a gun to
somebody's head, it is not really a negotiation. And even the
Congressional Research Service came out with a statement that
they thought it was not only an unconstitutional taking--was
possibly, because they are never going to commit to the final
result of the court--but not only was it possibly an unlawful
taking, but it was also probably in violation of the excessive
prohibitions that are found elsewhere in the first 10
amendments of the United States Constitution.
And interestingly, Merck has also sued because there--
apparently, there is a regulation or a rule that has come out
you are not supposed to talk about how unfair it is, and you
could even lose your rights to sell other medicines to the
Federal Government, all of which seems atrocious, and I expect
the courts to knock it down, and I am shocked that anybody
would not understand there is at least a huge argument to be
made in the courts.
And I yield back.
Mr. Guthrie. The gentleman yields back. The Chair
recognizes the gentlelady from Michigan, Mrs. Dingell, for 5
minutes.
Mrs. Dingell. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and Ranking Member
Eshoo. This is an important hearing, and I thank all the
witnesses.
The reauthorization of the Pandemic and All-Hazards
Preparedness Act, or PAHPA, comes at a very critical moment.
Our Nation is emerging from a 3-year public health emergency,
the worst healthcare crisis we have experienced in a century.
And it is our obligation to improve our Nation's preparedness
and response capabilities to ensure we are ready for future
pandemics.
We have to learn from our shortcomings, address the gaps in
our Nation's health security, and remain entirely focused on
mitigating the effects of the next possible threat. That is not
a matter of if, it is a matter of when. And that is why I am so
very disappointed that this markup is not considering any
legislation to address the FDA.
I remain seriously troubled about the fragility of the
pharmaceutical supply chain. It is not only compromising our
response to future pandemics but, as we all know, it is harming
Americans now. We are in the midst of an oncology drug shortage
that is jeopardizing the health of cancer patients across the
Nation. And in Michigan we are experiencing it very seriously.
A number of our hospitals have already canceled appointments
for cancer patients because there isn't even a substitute
medicine. They are being switched to alternative medications
that aren't effective either.
Dr. Gralow, in the wake of a drug shortage, what are the
implications of switching an oncology patient to a new
medication?
Dr. Gralow. In some cases the agents that are in shortage
or out, they not on the shelves right now, are critical to
getting cures.
Testicular cancer is an example. Even metastatic testicular
cancer, when it spread to other parts of the body, can be
cured. But a critical component of that cure is cisplatin. So
at this point, not having that drug--we have no substitutes for
that drug in this particular case, in testicular cancer, a
chance where--a cancer where, if we do have this drug, you can
be cured even when it has spread, you know, beyond the origin.
So this is critical, impacting maybe as many as half a
million Americans with just these two drugs. And there are many
other drugs that are vulnerable right now that are on the list
of impending shortage or problems brewing.
Mrs. Dingell. Thank you. Unfortunately, many patients don't
have weeks or months to wait for these lifesaving drugs, and we
are passing up a critical opportunity to address this problem
in earnest today.
A crucial piece of this puzzle is examining the FDA's role
in mitigating drug shortages, and I urge my colleagues in a
bipartisan way for us to seriously consider improvements to the
FDA in the weeks ahead.
But now let me turn to another issue: our Nation's testing
capacity. Getting swift test results was vital in our pandemic
response and keeping our loved ones safe. But during the peaks
of the pandemic, we all heard these alarming reports of it
taking up for 2 weeks to patients to receive their test
results, indicating whether they had tested positive for COVID-
19.
Dr. Parker, in your testimony you mentioned the need for
improved surgical situational awareness and supply chain
resiliency that can be activated immediately. This has to
include our lab testing capabilities. Dr. Parker, are our
country's public labs designed to process a large volume of
tests?
And were they able to handle the testing surges we
experienced throughout the public health emergency?
Dr. Parker. Well, I think, clearly, at the beginning of the
pandemic, that was--the answer was no.
I think we have to prepare our--in the future that they
will be, and they have to be able to surge into the private
sector to help that. I think the example earlier, South Korea
was better prepared, but I think they also had a pretty good
integration between their public health laboratories and the
private sector that helped them out. We need to do something
very similar.
Mrs. Dingell. Thank you, Dr. Parker.
The Secretary is permitted to enter into contracts or
cooperative agreements with vendors to maintain the Strategic
National Stockpile and ensure it is ready to handle surges.
However, clinical laboratories are not directly included, which
is alarming, since we need robust lab capacity to process these
important tests. That is why I am glad a bill I am leading with
Representative Dunn was included as part of this hearing: the
Ensuring Sufficient Supply of Testing Act.
And thank you, Rep. Dunn, for your partnership on this
important effort.
This bill will expressly clarify that the Secretary can
enter into contracts with clinical labs to strengthen our
testing capacity.
I am almost out of time, but Dr. Parker, some estimates say
private labs handled up to 85 percent of U.S. COVID-19 tests.
Can we better leverage their capabilities to improve testing
capacity during surges?
Dr. Parker. Well, the answer is yes, and the answer is we
have to. And we also--there is a lot of university hospital
laboratories that need to be considered into this--into that
equation too.
Mrs. Dingell. Thank you, Dr. Parker.
I yield back, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Guthrie. Thank you. The gentlelady yields back. The
Chair recognizes the gentleman from Florida, Mr. Bilirakis, for
5 minutes for questions.
Mr. Bilirakis. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, I appreciate it.
Ms. Arthur, your testimony brought up a sobering question:
As a nation, are we more prepared to do--are we more prepared
than we were in 2019?
And that, unfortunately, I don't think we are. I think part
of this reason is due to the administration's red tape and
reliance on bureaucracy. What we should be doing is replicating
one of our COVID successes through public-private sector
partnerships, in my opinion.
Could you elaborate on the agile nature of the private
sector, and specifically your members? What does their
nimbleness mean in the testing and diagnostics space?
Ms. Arthur. I think--thank you very much for that question.
I think, across the board, industry actually does several
things really well. They analyze what they can do to solve a
problem. They understand what the--what they need to do to
bring the best product to market that is going to serve the
need, that unmet medical need, being met. And more importantly,
they move really swiftly to make go/no-go decisions.
So you build a test, you see if it works, you understand if
there's safety issues, and you move on to the next step clearly
and swiftly. And I think that is what we saw with Operation
Warp Speed, was there was that facilitated environment by the
U.S. Government and then expertise brought to bear by industry
on how to make those very rapid go/no-go decisions, all within
the confines of very clear guidance for manufacturers of
vaccines, tests, and therapeutics, such that companies were
delivering products swiftly but still very safely and
manufactured at high quality.
Mr. Bilirakis. Excellent. Dr. Parker, you similarly speak
to the role that coordination plays in responding to novel
threats that could catch us flat-footed and unprepared, God
forbid, specifically the importance of relationships not only
between the Federal Government and the private sector but also
with State and local governments.
The Countermeasures Advisory Committee bill also requires
the Public Health Emergency Medical Countermeasures Enterprise
to solicit State and local feedback as part of its decision
making. Can you discuss the role of State and local feedback in
addressing a community's specific needs during the acute
emergent situations such as natural disasters or disease
outbreaks?
Dr. Parker. Sure, and Dr. Washington is on the front line,
and it is absolutely essential that the Federal Government
include input from those that are on the front line in State,
local public health, particularly Tribal and--Territorial and
Tribal communities as well. It is just absolutely essential,
and we need to have that input. Essentially, they are setting
the requirements.
I always think of things in the requirements space, and
that drives what our funding should do. So they should be
helping us drive those requirements.
Mr. Bilirakis. Thank you.
Mr. Okon, on the topic of preparedness and prevention of
supply chain disruptions, you talk in your testimony about the
need to incentivize--and we went over this, but I want to ask
you--again, the need to incentivize generic drug injectable
manufacturing, reshoring here in the United States through
value-based incentives. Can you elaborate more on this idea,
sir?
Mr. Okon. Well, value-based, Mr. Bilirakis, value-based is
the name in healthcare now.
And basically, over 75 percent of these drugs are
manufactured overseas. We need to bring it back in the United
States, and we need to basically have acceptable quality
measures which are agreed upon. And when a manufacturer hits
those quality measures, keeps the products going, keeps the
production lines going, then they would basically get an
incentive there.
Let me just make this very clear. This is not about big-
name, expensive, brand drugs. This is about low-cost, sterile
injectables. It is a very different animal. And the people and
the companies that are making this are very different than some
of the large manufacturers out there. These come from China,
India, and whatnot.
So I think, if we thought creatively in terms of value-
based arrangements, we would be able to bring manufacturing
back in the United States. But the fact of the matter is,
again, the FDA Commissioner said it: If no one is going to make
money on these drugs, they are not going to produce them. It is
as simple as that.
And I am not against any of the warning signals, the things
that the FDA should be doing and whatnot, but the problem is,
until we realize the fact that there is a basic financial issue
here, we are going to have more shortages.
Mr. Bilirakis. OK, thank you very much. I appreciate that
answer.
And I should probably yield back the balance of my time in
the interest of time. Thank you.
Mr. Guthrie. Thank you. The gentleman's time has expired.
The gentleman yields back. The Chair now recognizes the
gentlelady from Illinois, Ms. Kelly, for 5 minutes for
questions.
Ms. Kelly. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
The COVID-19 pandemic really highlighted the need to
support and protect our public health infrastructure. COVID-19
was, hopefully, a once-in-100-year phenomenon, but we continue
to see that there is always a public health threat looming,
from the yearly flu season to the continued threat of Mpox.
Just last week there was the air quality threat in the
northeastern part of the country. Regardless of what and where
it is, our public health infrastructure stands ready to
confront the situation and ensure that Americans say stay safe
and healthy.
Dr. Washington, in your testimony you speak about the need
to build a more robust, interoperable data and analytic public
health system. How can the Federal Government support the
efforts to build out a national data infrastructure for all
hazards--hurricanes, wildfires, tornadoes, not just pandemics--
that is capable of efficiently sharing important public health
information among providers and Federal, State, and local
agencies?
Dr. Washington. Thank you for that question.
It is so essential that we have a reliable data system. I
akin it to being a pilot or without data on wind or weather,
right, in trying to fly a plane. I don't think any of us would
get on a plane without the pilot having that information to
make decisions. And so I feel like our public health system has
got to have the same kind of infrastructure in place to be able
to make decisions not just at the Federal level but also at the
State and local levels.
And we have got to make intentional investments in those
systems that exist both at the Federal level, State, and at the
local level, and it has to happen at all three levels. We can't
just have a Federal system, we can't just have data systems at
the State level. We have got to all have access to information
that can flow very quickly so that we are not making decisions
a month later from the information that we have in front of us.
And so I think it is so vital.
And I do think it is important, though, as it has been
highlighted in this hearing today, that we also partner with
the private sector. There is a lot of analytic capability,
technology solutions that the private sector has to offer, and
we should leverage that for the good of government and to
protect our people.
Ms. Kelly. And would--can you also speak a bit on what
additional cybersecurity enhancements need to happen currently
while we are building out the national data infrastructure?
Dr. Washington. Yes, I think any national data
infrastructure has got to have, as a priority, as part of its
requirements, appropriate guardrails for cybersecurity. Living
in a jurisdiction that has had a hack before, it is so
important that we prioritize, just like we prioritize any other
healthcare information, data security. And so it is essential
that those systems that are built address cybersecurity and
protect that information, just like we would any other
information, both health, financial, or otherwise.
Ms. Kelly. Thank you.
As we take this moment to reflect on what this country
experienced, the lingering question is if we are prepared to
address another pandemic. This is one of the many reasons that
I am proud to cosponsor, as my colleague said, H.R. 3703, the
Healing Act of 2023, with Rep. Bob Latta, which would direct
the U.S. Comptroller General to review and issue
recommendations regarding the current status of existing
efforts and programs rapidly to produce medical countermeasures
domestically.
Dr. Parker, in your testimony you speak about the need for
near-real-time situational awareness in the countermeasure
resiliency efforts. Can you expand on the current gaps of our
public health structure to have the near-real-time situational
awareness?
And what additional authorities does Congress need to give
it to ensure that we have better visibility into our system?
Dr. Parker. Well, sure, and it is very similar to Dr.
Washington. You know, the need to have modern data systems that
can protect intellectual property and competitive information,
but when the need comes can be turned on to share the
appropriate information for the entire response enterprise.
And I want to just share something during COVID-19 that few
people saw. You know, it took about 6 months to set up, but
within HHS and the whole family of HHS and the interagency, the
data systems were remarkable. And many of us were calling that
the heartbeat of the response because of the visibility and the
control tower concept that we could almost begin to anticipate
where needs were before the request even came in. And we need
that kind of system, the control tower system. We need to
protect intellectual property and competitive information, but
we have done it, we can do this again in the future, and make
this institutionalized.
Ms. Kelly. Thank you so much.
And with that, I yield back.
Mr. Guthrie. The gentlelady yields back. The Chair now
recognizes Mr. Johnson from Ohio for 5 minutes.
Mr. Johnson. Well, thank you, Chairman Guthrie. I
appreciate it for this very important hearing.
You know, it is with the power of hindsight that we are
here today talking about how we can be better prepared for the
next disaster, be it a hurricane, a tornado, or another
pandemic. The last time the Energy and Commerce Committee
looked at the Pandemic and All-Hazards Preparedness Act, it was
2018. And nobody in this room now or then could have predicted
what was to come: COVID-19.
Now that we have the coronavirus squarely in our rearview
mirror, we must take lessons learned. We got to consider what
those are, both good and bad, and ensure that we are in a
stronger position to fight the next natural disaster or health
crisis. But if there is one silver lining, it is the National
Disaster Medical System, NDMS, or, as I like to think of them,
the National Guard of medical professionals. When disaster
strikes and the need for urgent medical care is required, the
men and women of NDMS are called to action.
And it is easy to forget that disaster response personnel
from NDMS respond to all kinds of disasters, not just
pandemics. For example, just last month those volunteer medical
professionals were dispatched to Guam in response to a typhoon
that hit the island. Over 45 NDMS health and medical task force
and incident management team personnel were deployed to support
emergency response efforts and ease the burden on local health
systems, inevitably saving lives.
The NDMS represents a network of intermittent Federal
employees who are medical professionals serving within their
communities, while jumping into action to serve our Nation by
deploying during natural or man-made disasters. In their
everyday life, they are the doctors and nurses each of us see
in our local health systems in our communities.
Under the last reauthorization, Congress provided direct
hiring authority to the Administration for Strategic
Preparedness and Response for the NDMS workforce through
September 2021. To allow for the most flexibility during COVID-
19 and to combat the dire workforce needs, we have continuously
extended this authority through one-off, must-pass bills since
then.
Jumping from short-term extension to short-term extension
is not sustainable. We need some certainty. And it hurts their
overarching recruitment and retainment efforts. So it is for
these reasons Representative Schrier and I have introduced the
Doctors at the Ready Act, which will provide for stability and
certainty at ASPR to ensure this program has the flexibility
needed to provide for a properly staffed NDMS in the case of an
emergency.
So question number one goes to Dr. Parker.
You know, Dr. Parker, like you I served for 26 years in the
United States military in the Air Force. So thank you, first
and foremost, for your service to our country.
But based on your experience as Principal Deputy Assistant
Secretary for Preparedness and Response, could you further
elaborate on the challenges posed by this intermittent hiring
cycle and its impact on the continuity of our preparedness and
response framework and operations?
The legislation that Representative Schrier and I have
introduced would eliminate the sunset permanently, thereby
providing more stability and flexibility for the program. The
goal would be to ensure we have civil servants ready to deploy
when we need them. So can you respond to that----
Dr. Parker. Sure.
Mr. Johnson. [continuing]. The challenges?
Dr. Parker. Sure, and thank you for the question and for
your--and I commend you for the bill to do this, to strengthen
NDMS. It is absolutely essential that we do that.
The NDMS--what makes NDMS work is the health professionals
across our United States that are volunteering to become
intermittent civil servants to deploy to help our Nation in
need. So this is needed, and I would commend any other things
that would strengthen NDMS. NDMS is a unique national asset
that the public is not aware of. And we need to strengthen it,
and we need to think about what does NDMS 2.0 look like.
Mr. Johnson. OK. Do you think it is going to help? I mean,
is it going to have the impact that we are hoping it does,
particularly around recruitment?
Dr. Parker. Anything you can do to make it more long-term
and to incentivize the volunteers of our health professionals
to sign up and participate will be helpful. I think we need to
think about what other incentives--and I don't know what they
are right now, off the top of my head, but we need to think
about other incentives as well, to make sure that we have a
robust, diverse workforce that will volunteer for NDMS service
in the future.
Mr. Johnson. All right. Well, great. Well, thank you very
much.
And Mr. Chairman, I urge support for H.R. 3613, the Doctors
at the Ready Act. And with that, I yield back. Thank you.
Mr. Guthrie. The gentleman yields back, and the Chair
recognizes Ms. Barragan from California for 5 minutes.
Ms. Barragan. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Antimicrobial resistance is costing patients their lives
and significantly increasing our healthcare costs, with an
estimated $4.6 billion spent annually on treating just 6 of the
most common, multidrug-resistant pathogens in the United
States. For all Americans, and especially those who face
chronic infections, like individuals living with cystic
fibrosis, this is a public health crisis that Congress can no
longer ignore.
As we consider the reauthorization of the Pandemic and All-
Hazards Preparedness Act, or PAHPA, I think this is a missed
opportunity for the committee to not include the PASTEUR Act,
or at least certain parts of it. Innovation is urgently needed
to address the shortage of effective antimicrobials to treat a
range of resistant infections.
For example, in California, Valley fever is a growing
fungal threat and lacks appropriate antifungal treatment. From
the perspective of these patients, some of whom are my
constituents, we are unprepared to meet their treatment needs.
Dr. Arthur, thank you for your testimony. Thank you for
including this as part of your testimony, your written
testimony. You provide in it that you believe that we should be
including the PASTEUR Act in the reauthorization of the
Pandemic and All-Hazards Preparedness Act. I would just ask
that you elaborate on why it is important that we do that.
Ms. Arthur. Thank you so much for the question.
The antimicrobials market is a broken market. And having
antibiotics available to us is not just pivotal to our public
health, everyday delivery of public health and surgeries, it is
also vital in our all-hazards response. When people are injured
in a fire or other--they can often suffer from opportunistic
infections. So having antibiotics and antifungals to actually
treat people in a rapid way is really important.
What the PASTEUR Act does that is unique is it actually
enables a marketplace for these products that are being
developed by industry, sometimes in partnership with BARDA and
the Government. And so we need to have these products not just
get developed but go into a place where they can actually be
sustained and be available to us.
But that also has to be coupled with very important
stewardship. We don't want to overuse these. It will drive
resistance. So you need to actually have both the stewardship
component and a marketplace that actually helps these products
be available to us. So it is really important to do something
like PASTEUR as a policy that will help drive that.
Ms. Barragan. Well, thank you. And I understand that this
legislation has broad support of over 230 stakeholder
organizations representing healthcare providers, public health
professionals, scientists, patients, and pharmaceutical and
diagnostics industries per your testimony, is that correct?
Ms. Arthur. That is actually correct. There are many
different diseases where antimicrobial infections can cause
death. So it is really important to support these products.
Ms. Barragan. Yes, and I also saw at the end of 2022 that
this bill had over 60 bipartisan cosponsors, which makes it, I
think, ripe for us to really take a look at and making sure it
is included. Thank you for that.
Dr. Washington, in your written testimony you stated that--
and I am quoting--the Hospital Preparedness Program ``has been
cut by more than 50 percent over the last 20 years and remains
stretched due to prolonged emergency responses, increased
preparedness and response requirements, and annual
discretionary funding not keeping pace with inflation.''
As the only source of Federal funding for healthcare system
readiness, I am concerned that the stagnant funding will
decrease the ability of local hospitals to serve all the
patients who need care during emergency or disaster. What are
the practical implications and/or limitations of stagnant
funding for the Hospital Preparedness Program, and is there
more Congress can do to help?
Dr. Washington. So I think there are tons of implications
specifically for being ready to go. What--as we saw during
COVID, our healthcare--our acute care facilities were literally
crushed with demand. Our emergency departments had waits that
were extending well beyond 10 to 12 hours. And the ability to
be able to care for people in a timely fashion was almost
impossible.
One of the things that our Preparedness Coalition did that
is funded by HPP in Mecklenburg and our region was to mobilize
a mobile hospital. We can't just purchase a mobile hospital in
real time for an emergency. We have to have those things ready
to go, they have to be well-maintained, and they have to be
ready to activate as quickly as we need to to be able to
respond and provide care to folks.
And so increasing investments in the preparedness of our
healthcare systems is really, really important. And we haven't
kept up, and so we need to catch up in order to be able to make
sure we stay prepared.
Ms. Barragan. Great. Thank you.
With that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Burgess [presiding]. The Chair thanks the gentlelady,
the gentlelady yields back. The Chair now recognizes Chairman
Hudson for 5 minutes.
Mr. Hudson. Thank you very much, and thank you to the
witnesses. Outstanding testimony today. I think it has been a
great discussion. I appreciate your time being here today.
If it wasn't obvious before, COVID has shown us that public
health security is national security, and all of us in Congress
owe it to our constituents to get this reauthorization of PAHPA
done on time this year.
Ms. Arthur was asked what happens if we don't, and I
thought you gave a great answer: number one, we will not be
better prepared for the next pandemic; number two, private
industry will not have the incentives necessary to produce the
next generation of countermeasures; and number three, we lose
the opportunity to implement lessons learned from COVID. I
think those options are factual, and I think they are totally
unacceptable.
We have a responsibility to move this legislation forward,
and I appreciate the partnership I have had with Ranking Member
Eshoo. We have worked very hard to make this a bipartisan
process. There are a lot of factors that I would like to take
in a different direction, and I am frankly just baffled at the
place we are now.
You know, drug shortages is a critical issue. It is an
issue that Republicans have been addressing, we will continue
to address. The PREVENTS Act just passed about 6 months ago had
provisions dealing with drug shortages. It was a bipartisan
bill led by Richard Burr from the Senate, our ranking member at
the time, chairman--chairwoman now, Cathy McMorris Rodgers,
worked very hard on that, working together with Democrats. We
have had hearings on this issue. We will continue to have
hearings on this issue. I have personally given assurances that
I will make this a priority, and we will work together.
But I think being given a list of bills that we have to
include or else when I think testimony today showed we are not
really dealing with the root causes, we--I think we need to
examine this further to really, truly address this in a
comprehensive and bipartisan way. I am committed to doing that.
But loading PAHPA up with this issue that has never been
part of PAHPA reauthorization is the wrong way to go. Because
if we open up PAHPA, there is a whole lot of other important
issues that Members of Congress would like to include,
including bans to gain-of-function research, including dealing
with the politicization at CDC that happened during the
pandemic, including discussing mask mandates and other
mandates. These are all important issues that a lot of my
colleagues want to discuss and would love to include in PAHPA.
But this is not the proper place. PAHPA is too important. We
have to stay narrowly focused on reauthorization to get this
thing through the House.
And it is going to be tough. This is not going to be an
easy path. These are not easy issues. But if we stick together
and we do this in a bipartisan way, we can do this, and we owe
it to our constituents to do that. And so I just ask Ranking
Member Eshoo and my colleagues on the other side, please work
with us. Please keep the process moving. We will work together
on drug shortages and a whole lot of other issues this year,
and I believe this committee has a long track record of getting
things done. I think we can do both things, and I think we
will.
You know, I have worked very hard to solicit feedback from
the private sector, from Federal, State, and local partners,
constituents on the necessary changes that we need in this
reauthorization language as we look at the entire preparedness
enterprise. And I have emphasized in the past that involving
the private sector is almost always the best way to get things
done. Private-public partnerships flourished in North Carolina
during COVID, and to me it is--the best way to replicate these
is to continue to strengthen these kind of partnerships. In the
dozens of RFI responses, public-private partnerships are
mentioned with the goal of enhancing them and improving the
transparency for the administration for these relationships.
One of my bills noticed for this hearing would establish a
PHEMCE advisory committee to receive input from industry and
improve communications and transparency from PHEMCE to private
industry. I would welcome a Democrat that would like to
cosponsor this with us to make sure this is bipartisan going
forward. I think there has been a lot of support expressed
today for it.
Another issue that I think is really important is
cybersecurity in our health systems. This is a bigger problem
that surpasses PAHPA, but as it relates to our Nation's
preparedness I think it is something we can build out.
I have used up a lot of my time, but Dr. Parker, are there
any specific actions we should look towards to address
cybersecurity as it relates to our health preparedness?
Dr. Parker. Sure. I mean, you--I will simply just say we
have got to hard-wire cybersecurity security protection into
our information systems as we think about health security
preparedness. That is the simplest way to say it.
Mr. Hudson. Well, I think it is well said, and I appreciate
that, and we do have--we do address that in this PAHPA
reauthorization, and we will--that is something we are going to
have to continue to work together on to--I like what you say,
we have got to hard-wire it into the process.
So with that Mr. Chair, I will yield back.
Mr. Burgess. The gentleman yields back. The Chair thanks
the gentleman. The Chair now recognizes Dr. Schrier for 5
minutes for questions.
Ms. Schrier. Thank you, Dr. Burgess, and thank you very
much to the witnesses for being here today.
Many of my colleagues have already highlighted lessons
learned from the pandemic and how that should really inform our
reauthorization of the preparedness programs.
One lesson that we learned is we can't take our healthcare
workforce for granted, and our providers on the front lines
have been highly impacted by this pandemic, leading to burnout,
resignations, early retirements. And we don't ever want to find
ourselves unprepared to rise to the needs of our patients in
the next disaster or the next catastrophe. That is why I was
proud to introduce the Doctors at the Ready Act with
Representative Johnson, which you just heard about, to prevent
lags in hiring medical providers that could render the country
underresourced at a time of need.
And this bipartisan legislation will allow ASPR, the
Assistant Secretary for Preparedness and Response, to directly
hire healthcare professionals into the National Disaster
Medical System. This means talent can be retained and they can
move through the process with a faster timeline, and there will
be more providers when we need them.
Dr. Parker, you already answered the questions that I had
in how important this is, so I just want to thank you for your
responses, and I will move on to another topic, which is
testing. This was another important lesson learned in the
pandemic.
For years, many of the colleagues in this room have heard
me talk about the importance of rapid testing, and I could not
wait to get this rolled out and into the hands of people as
quickly as possible. There was a lot of frustration there.
But we also remember how frustrating it was right at the
start of the pandemic, when the U.S. was doing fewer than 100
tests a day, everything had to get shipped to the CDC, and
meanwhile, in Korea, they had drive-through testing sites and
were doing 10,000 tests per day, which was key to containing
the disease.
And so, you know, at each stage it seemed like there were
all kinds of barriers--running out of reagent, not having the
right supplies--and barriers that, with the right panel of
public health and industry advisors, could have been resolved
quickly. So I wanted to just highlight the bipartisan
Diagnostic Testing Preparedness Plan Act with Representatives
Pence, Carson, and Bucshon. It directs HHS and related agencies
to develop a plan for rapid development and scaling up of
testing in a public health emergency.
Dr. Washington, as a public health director, can you talk
about having--how having rapid access to labs, rapid tests
ready to go would help with future disaster response?
Dr. Washington. I mean, it is absolutely critical. As you
have already outlined, testing at the beginning of COVID
pandemic was almost virtually impossible. And so we struggled.
And again, it is one of those things where you are kind of
flying blind. If you don't have information about who has a
condition of any kind, you can't contact trace, you can't
isolate individuals, and you can't do what we need to do to be
able to disrupt transmission. And so it is absolutely vital.
And it is important to be able to activate it quickly, as
you have already described. And I think having mechanisms in
place with both public and private laboratories is really
essential.
And the last piece I will say before I am quiet about this
is the workforce. Beyond the laboratory workforce, it is
absolutely essential to have the workforce in the community
that can actually do the testing, which was a huge challenge
for us during the pandemic, because we didn't have folks who
could do swabbing, and we had to extend capacity for different
types, different levels of medical providers to do that. And I
think all those things are really essential for us to prepare
for now.
Ms. Schrier. Amen. Thank you.
The last issue--I have just a bit over a minute--we have
recently been--have had highlighted for us the shortage of
oncology drugs. And cancer drug shortages are at an all-time
high. There are many causes. The Seattle Times earlier this
month ran an article citing that hospitals across Washington
State and the country are seeing these shortages, and the
changes that they are having to make, like, to reduce people's
dosing, which could compromise their care. This is happening at
Seattle Children's Hospital, it is happening at other
hospitals.
And as a provider, this is alarming as, potentially, a
patient one day--I hope not, but that is incredibly alarming,
and we need these treatments to be available.
Dr. Gralow, it is wonderful to see you again in this
capacity. I was wondering if you could talk a little bit about
how the Federal Government can help in response to these cancer
drug and other drug--we could even go to ADHD medications,
these shortages. Thank you.
Dr. Gralow. Well, we in the oncology community do believe
we are in the midst of a severe health crisis. Right now it is
cancer drugs. Previously, it has been asthma drugs and diabetes
drugs. It could be infectious disease drugs tomorrow. The kinds
of things that we are asking for relate to drugs to treat every
kind of disease. It is just cancer right now.
We are asking--not a lot more regulation, but a little more
regulation. There are a few legislative fixes.
We agree that this is a market failure, first and foremost,
and we need to work together to get high-quality manufacturers
in the United States. We need to figure out the incentives. So
it is a mix of legislative, regulatory, market issues that are
going to solve this problem, not just for cancer but for every
disease.
Ms. Schrier. Thank you.
Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Burgess. The gentlelady yields back. The Chair thanks
the gentlelady. The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from
Georgia, Mr. Carter, for 5 minutes for questions.
Mr. Carter. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank all of you
for being here. This is extremely important.
You know, I like to say that there is a difference in
knowing something and realizing something. We have known for
many years that we are too dependent on other countries,
particularly adversarial countries, for our PPE, for our drugs
and medical needs. But we realized it during the pandemic, when
it became real.
In fact, as a member of the Doctors Caucus, I was disturbed
to learn--and I learned about it during a time that we were
talking with the ASPR at that time, and he told us that, even
though we didn't know about the virus until about February of
2020, they saw a downtick in the amount of PPE and drugs that
were coming from China as far back as the fall of 2019. That
shows us that they were hoarding that, and they were going to
use it for their own selves and not send it to us. That should
be a lesson that we should learn and not to let happen again.
And as we know, each State has certain needs. Some States
may have needed ventilators, some States may have needed PPE.
Every State is different, and that is why I have introduced the
State stockpile bill. Obviously, we need a robust Federal
stockpile, and this is not to replace that, and instead this is
to supplement it. And certain parts of that were passed last
year. But I have still got another bill this year that--H.R.
3631, the State Strategic Stockpile Act, and it is being
considered today, and it would extend the matching program
through the--what was approved last year was a 2-year program,
but this would extend it through 2028, and it would coincide
with the timeframe of PAHPA reauthorization.
Dr. Parker, I want to ask you, would you agree that States
need to be better prepared for the next public health
emergency, in terms of having access to critical medical
countermeasures such as diagnostics, PPE, treatments, et
cetera?
Dr. Parker. Well, some States are doing it already. My
State is taking those kind of actions. So I think, one, we
absolutely need to make sure and bolster the Strategic National
Stockpile that is managed by ASPR, no doubt about that, and
improve that.
But, you know, I think if a State feels that they need to
also have--to not be completely dependent upon the SNS, that
they need to take the actions that they need to do.
And I just remember during the H5N1 pandemic exercise
preparedness in 2006 to 2009, one of the policy activities that
Secretary Leavitt at the time was stockpiling antivirals was--
the concept was skin in the game.
Mr. Carter. Absolutely.
Dr. Parker. So the Federal Government, you know, paid three
quarters of the stockpile, and the States paid 25 percent. So
there was this policy of skin in the game for the stockpile of
antivirals.
Mr. Carter. Right.
Dr. Parker. That was something you can go back and look at
history.
Mr. Carter. Well, again, my bill, parts of it were adopted
last year in a 2-year extension, so this will just be another
extension to get us through 2028.
Ms. Arthur, I wanted to ask you, what are--what do you
think the benefits are of States having the ability to
stockpile products like this?
Ms. Arthur. Well, thank you, Mr. Carter. Actually, this is
an important opportunity for States.
All the States don't have the same necessary risks and
exposures. So there are States that actually could be exposed
to very different emerging infectious diseases that come to
their region from areas that are close to them. This would
allow those States to, for example, stockpile certain vaccines
or antivirals specific to their needs for their population,
where they may face different epidemiological risks than in
other States.
Mr. Carter. Good, thank you for that. Now, very quickly, I
want to turn my attention to drug shortages.
And Mr. Okon, I wanted to ask you, can you talk about the
recently passed so-called Inflation Reduction Act, and how it
could impact drug shortages further?
Mr. Okon. So the idea, Mr. Carter, of having a rebate on
the inflation side of a brand-name drug and a very expensive
brand-name drug, fine, that makes sense. We supported that. But
the idea of a low-cost generic, where a generic manufacturer
now is going to have no price control at all, that is a bad
thing.
And the problem here is we call a drug a drug. And as a
Member of the Congress who is a pharmacist, you understand it
is very different in terms of these generic drugs, especially
the injectable drugs, than these, you know, brand-name drugs.
And I think we need to realize that, and we need to change our
view here, because when you simply add and you price-control
these manufacturers, they are handcuffed, they are not going to
do anything.
And let me just say one other fast thing. I will give you
an early warning sign right now. I had a pharmacist from
Dayton, Ohio, this morning--who is here, up on the Hill,
talking about PBMs--talk to the largest generic drug
manufacturer out there. And this manufacturer says, ``I am
going to give you the list of the drugs that we are going to
stop making,'' and those are cancer drugs. So this is a crisis.
It is absolutely a crisis.
Mr. Carter. OK.
Mr. Okon. We have to realize these are low-cost products
that we are making literally not profitable at all.
Mr. Carter. Absolutely. Well, thank you, and thank all of
you again. This is extremely important, and we appreciate you
being here.
And I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Burgess. The gentleman yields back. The Chair thanks
the gentleman, and the Chair recognizes the gentlelady from
Massachusetts for 5 minutes for questions.
Mrs. Trahan. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
As a cofounder and cochair of the bipartisan Pandemic
Preparedness Caucus, I have taken every opportunity in hearings
like this one to highlight the unique opportunity that we have
before us to take the lessons learned through the COVID-19
pandemic and apply them in a way that better prepares our
healthcare system to respond to future unknown threats to our
public health. So I am glad to see that the committee noticed
some bipartisan policies for this hearing today, including my
bill, the Disease X Act.
But I am disappointed that the majority has decided to move
forward with flat funding for the preparedness programs that
sit within PAHPA as well as exclude numerous FDA supply chain
policies.
Mr. Chairman, I am concerned with static funding that falls
well short of what frontline health workers, public health
experts, and infectious disease specialists have said is
necessary to prevent another COVID-level pandemic.
How many times did the predicted death toll change over the
course of the pandemic? First it was 50-to-60,000 deaths, then
it was 100,000. Every month the projection went higher while we
heard countless cases of nurses and doctors reusing masks and
wearing trash bags to protect themselves as States raced
against each other and the Federal Government for shipments of
PPE, as hospitals begged ventilator companies for just one more
machine to help keep patients alive.
Now, 3\1/2\ years later, after the first COVID case was
discovered in the United States, more than 1 million Americans
have tragically lost their lives to the virus. We can and we
should be looking for ways to do better, moving forward, to
ensure that we are never caught flat-footed again.
I am grateful to my colleagues on both sides of the aisle
who recognize the importance and the urgency in achieving that
goal. Last week I introduced the Disease X Act alongside Dr.
Burgess, Congressman Crenshaw, and Congresswoman Lee to
establish a Disease X medical countermeasures program at BARDA
for unknown viral threats with pandemic potential.
Current funding constraints at BARDA only allow the agency
to go so far. With much of BARDA's MCM development work focused
on a defined list of chemicals, biological, radiological, and
nuclear threat agents, as well as influenza, we may not be
prepared to develop and manufacture at scale future drugs and
vaccines against unknown viral threats that can lead to
devastating pandemics. The Disease X Act will help BARDA to
fully focus on their full list of priorities, including an
increased emphasis on emerging infectious diseases with
pandemic potential.
Ms. Arthur, BIO supported the introduction of the
bipartisan Disease X Act, and I am hoping you can explain the
importance of this bill, given the difference in the threat
landscape now compared with the last PAHPA reauthorization.
Ms. Arthur. Well, thank you, Congresswoman Trahan, for
introducing that bill.
This is actually an opportunity to do activities in R&D and
manufacturing scale-up during the interpandemic period that
could make us better prepared in the future. We actually
learned this lesson, even if you look at our response to
monkeypox. The great investments made by the partnership
between industry and BARDA and the NIH to make the smallpox
antivirals and the smallpox vaccines actually allowed us,
because of that viral family, to have the products for Mpox
that we needed.
So taking that same approach here, we would actually work
on platform technologies, monoclonal antibodies, and mechanisms
for new oral antivirals, and put those to work against a host
of known pandemic threats. And then those particular products
might result in products for known threats but actually would
allow us to respond maybe within 100 days to an unknown threat.
Mrs. Trahan. And just continuing on with the proposed
Disease X program at BARDA, how important do you think it will
be to have dedicated funding authorized for this program,
rather than just pulling funding from BARDA's general medical
countermeasures pot?
Ms. Arthur. We think it is actually very important that
this have its own dedicated funding line. If that is not
possible, although I think that is the right approach, really
scaling up BARDA's overall number to more like what is in the
PHEMCE multiyear budget, 1.5 to $1.6 billion, would give them
the flexibility to work on what we know is already part of
their strategy, which is to do platform-agnostic work around
viral families. So a separate line item would be optimal, but
scaling up the budget would also be important.
Mrs. Trahan. Thank you, Ms. Arthur.
Everyone here today represents a family who lost a loved
one to COVID-19. And each of us represents a small business
owner who was forced to close their doors, some for good,
because of the emergency. We represent children who lost out on
a valuable in-person learning so that they could keep
themselves and their families safe when we knew next to nothing
about the virus. So as members of this committee, we have an
obligation to take lessons learned from the past 3 years and
make investments now to prevent another catastrophic pandemic.
And the Disease Act will help us get there.
So I look forward to working with members of the committee
to pass this legislation with the funding it requires. Thank
you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Burgess. The gentlelady yields back. The Chair thanks
the gentlelady. The Chair recognizes Dr. Joyce for 5 minutes
for questions.
Mr. Joyce. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thanks to our panel
for appearing here today.
It is disappointing that we are not meeting today to
examine a bipartisan reauthorization of PAHPA. As our Nation
emerges from one of the largest and worst global pandemics in
recorded history, we need to be moving together on this.
With that said, Mr. Okon, thank you for your testimony,
because I believe it adds important context to the drugs and
the issues that we are facing today. I have heard from health
providers in my district in Pennsylvania from as large as the
University of Pittsburgh Medical Center, which is the largest
healthcare provider in Pennsylvania, to small individual
practices about the acute shortages of both carboplatin and
cisplatin. This is a serious issue, as you alluded to
previously in your testimony, with potential to cause delays in
cares for patients, which are detrimental to outcomes when it
comes to treating cancer.
These shortages, they are not a new phenomenon, and they
have been known to occur because of poor policy decisions that
have hollowed out the generic manufacturing capacity right here
in the United States.
Mr. Okon, can you please elaborate on the impact of both
the 340B drug pricing program and the IRA, and what they are
having on the economics of generic manufacturing?
And do you feel that Congress needs to address these
matters holistically to avoid these shortfalls continuing?
Mr. Okon. Dr. Joyce, let me state for the record, because I
always get misquoted on this, the 340B drug discount program is
an essential program to help communities and, basically,
patients in need.
Mr. Joyce. I concur with that.
Mr. Okon. And I know you do. And the problem is, though,
when you take discounts and rebates and you apply them to what
is a very low-priced drug to begin with, in many cases these
drugs are underwater.
Likewise, on the Inflation Reduction Act, which I just told
Mr. Carter--on the brand name, the inflation reduction piece of
that on brand names, that may be a good policy. But the problem
is on the generic side you take away the pricing power. So if
you have a generic manufacturer that has to literally invest
more in their facilities and do the things the FDA is telling
them to do, you have taken away their pricing power because,
again, we are talking about very low-cost drugs.
So you don't want to constrain them. And in fact, the
reimbursement system, the--literally, that provision of the
Inflation Reduction Act and these mandatory discounts and
rebates are pushing these products all overseas, and even
overseas you have manufacturers that are stopping their
capacity.
Mr. Joyce. Thank you. And I want to finally ask you to
address the wholesale overhaul of generic drug manufacturing
and reimbursement. And is that appropriately done in
legislation that is supposedly narrowly targeted on emergency
preparedness?
Mr. Okon. We need comprehensive legislation to literally
address the drug shortages. And if we don't, they are going to
get worse, and Americans are going to die, even more than the
half-million Americans that Dr. Gralow said.
So we need to literally strip away the denial, we need to
realize that, yes, there are warning signs, there are definite
things that Dr. Gralow talked about that are important, but we
need to address this root financial cause, and that should be
in comprehensive legislation and should be a top priority of
this committee.
Mr. Joyce. Thank you, Mr. Okon.
The Pandemic All-Hazards Preparedness Act is not just about
preparing for emerging infectious diseases but ensuring that
our country is prepared to respond to a myriad of threats,
including nuclear, chemical, and bioterrorism.
According to the unclassified version of the Annual Threat
Assessment of the U.S. intelligence community released by the
Director of National Intelligence this year, the lack of
preparedness and response in questions around COVID origins--
and I quote--``may inspire some adversaries to consider options
related to the development of biologic weapons.'' This
unclassified report specifically calls out China, Iran, North
Korea, and Russia.
Dr. Parker, given your background and work with both DoD
and the U.S. Army Medical Research Institute of Infectious
Diseases, how well-equipped are ASPR and BARDA to prepare for
and respond to a myriad of threats, including biological
weapons? And if not, what should be done?
Dr. Parker. Well, first, we are much better prepared than
we used to be going back, say, 20 years ago, before the
administration and Congress began to provide new authorities
and appropriations, things like Project BioShield and so forth.
So we are better prepared than we were 20 years ago, but we
still have a long way to go.
I have been studying the biological threat, either the
intentional, whether bioterrorism, biological warfare, for
quite some time. And there is no doubt that, unfortunately, our
experience with COVID probably has increased our risk to
biological threat from an unnatural cause.
And so we have to take--the work that you are doing in this
committee is absolutely essential to help give ASPR, BARDA the
additional tools and appropriations so we can be better
prepared, because we will be surprised.
Mr. Joyce. My time has expired, but I would like to agree
with you that those additional tools need to come through this
committee.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and I yield.
Mr. Burgess. The gentleman's time has expired. The Chair
thanks the gentleman. The Chair now recognizes Dr. Ruiz for 5
minutes for questions, please.
Mr. Ruiz. Thank you.
As an emergency medicine physician trained in humanitarian
disaster aid, I have seen firsthand how critical preparedness
is to mobilizing an effective emergency response. And as we
have talked about numerous times in this committee, COVID has
taught us numerous lessons about how to better be prepared for
the next public health emergency.
Leading up to the COVID-19 pandemic, funding for public
health programs had declined significantly over time. We saw
the consequences of that underinvestment when the pandemic hit
and public health departments across the country did not have
the staff or resources to respond.
Now, I am not suggesting that we need the same level of
funding on an annual basis than we do in the throes of a
pandemic. I do, however, feel that it is important to our
conversation here today that--discuss the implication of years
of underfunding that landed us in a place where we were not as
prepared as we could and should have been. We would be foolish
not to course correct now.
And if now, on the heels of the largest pandemic in 100
years, during which over a million Americans have lost their
lives and countless others continue to suffer from long COVID,
if we can't make smart, robust investments into our public
health systems, did we really learn our lesson at all?
So I urge the majority, as we move forward in this
reauthorization process, to help ensure that history doesn't
repeat itself and that the next time we have a robust--that we
have a robust, well-funded system to meet challenges as they
arrive.
Of course, I am not suggesting that we simply throw money
at the problem. Our investments must be smart and strategic,
and investment goes beyond funding. It is also about investing
in smart policies that make our public health systems more
efficient and effective. Included in that bucket is addressing
our policies surrounding data sharing, both from State and
local health systems to the Federal Government and the other
way around.
Science is guided by data, and public health decisions are
guided by science. Guidelines and recommendations and next-step
decisions are more effective when they use scientific data to
inform them. And we saw how barriers to data sharing really
hurt our public health officials throughout all levels, from
the head of the CDC to the local health departments.
Dr. Washington, in your written testimony you talk about
the importance of giving CDC the authority to collect and
coordinate public health data necessary to serve its mission,
and state that, ``The current framework for collecting and
sharing public health data has resulted in fragmented and
inconsistent reporting to CDC and to State and local
partners.'' Can you tell us how the Data and Public Health Act
under consideration today would address those problems?
Dr. Washington. Certainly. So I will say--and I agree with
a lot of what you just said, and I appreciate the comments. We
must have an ability to collect information, and we have to
have the ability to collect it in a timely fashion. And having
the authority to collect that information without having to
negotiate agreements with every single institution, every
single State, every single local jurisdiction to be able to
share information is a huge administrative and highly
inefficient way for us to be able to achieve our goals and to
actually have a system where data flows freely between those
institutions.
I am not saying it should just flow. It, obviously, should
be as needed. But we have got to have the connectivity, we have
got to have the authority that allows us to then move as
quickly as possible.
When COVID happened, we had to authorize that data about
COVID could be collected. It was not a known condition, and so
it wasn't reportable. So we had to go through the regulatory
process to make it reportable, which takes time.
Mr. Ruiz. You know, we often talk about the importance of
the CDC being able to collect data from State and local health
officials. But often lost in that discussion is the importance
of two-way data sharing, not simply CDC collecting the data but
also being able to share data to the folks on the ground.
Dr. Washington, can you tell us how this kind of data
sharing for you at the city level can help public health
officials navigate through the various stages of a public
health emergency like COVID or Mpox?
Dr. Washington. It is absolutely essential. So I will take
Mpox as an example.
So CDC allocates--allocated vaccines to jurisdictions based
on the disease burden in their communities. If the data that
they are making those decisions on is not real-time and up to
date--for example, we had a couple of cases, but within a
matter of a few weeks that went from a couple of cases to
almost 100. And so the decision--and we didn't get enough
vaccine to be able to respond on the ground, because they were
using data that was out of date. And so it is really important
for us to have access----
Mr. Ruiz. One last question. You know, I spoke about the
importance of adequate investment in public health and updating
our public health data system. What barriers did you face that
would be addressed simply by investing in new data system
technologies?
Dr. Washington. So the reporting to the public, for one,
was a great example where people were not receiving
information. We had three different numbers from local, State,
and Federal partners in terms of what the disease burden was.
And that is why we have to have that chain that flows up and
down between us all at the same time.
Mr. Ruiz. Thank you.
I yield back.
Mr. Burgess. The Chair thanks the gentleman. The gentleman
yields back. The Chair now recognizes the gentlelady from
Tennessee, Mrs. Harshbarger, for 5 minutes for questions.
Mrs. Harshbarger. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you all
for being here because I got a lot of questions, but I will
have to submit a lot for the record.
I want to start by talking about emerging infectious
diseases, and the primary purpose and mission of ASPR is to
ensure our Nation in preparing for all hazards, including those
posed by deliberate chemical, biological, nuclear, and
radiological, or CBRN, threats. And, you know, the escalating
actions by Russia--you know, invading Ukraine--and threats of
chemical warfare are--you know, that is on everybody's mind.
And I have been a compounding pharmacists for 36 years, and I
remember after 9/11 I had people lining up at my door for
iodine tablets because they were afraid of nuclear fallout.
So I guess my question is, what are your thoughts on how
BARDA should best be engaging with the private-sector partners
to prioritize America's stockpile of critical CBRN vaccines,
treatments, PPE, and ensuring they are well-maintained, and
also to ensure there is no disruption in the availability of
these supplies?
And I guess I could ask you, Dr. Parker, and then I will go
to you, Ms. Arthur.
Dr. Parker. Sure, and BARDA has focused on the CBRN threat
for quite some time. In fact, I recall my time in ASPR even
before it was ASPR--it was called OPHEP--but we were very
concerned about the nuclear threat.
Mrs. Harshbarger. Yes.
Dr. Parker. And the radiation threat. And actually, some of
the acquisition programs started back then for stockpiling some
drugs that are now in the SNS for the nuclear threat.
And I think, you know, the current day--we cannot discount
the nuclear threat, weapons of mass destruction, and chem and
bio. So we cannot be complacent about that. BARDA has programs
to interface with the private sector and those kind of
programs, and Project BioShield was originally enacted very
specifically for the biological threat, but all weapons of mass
destruction.
So we just need to--we need to keep emphasizing those
programs, and emphasizing that is a problem. And States and
locals also have to exercise because it is a huge, huge problem
when you think about what happens if there is a nuclear
detonation in one of our communities. It is huge. And I have
been in several national exercises, and it is--we not--we
should not be complacent.
Mrs. Harshbarger. No, we can't be complacent.
Ms. Arthur?
Ms. Arthur. No, of course, I agree with Dr. Parker. Thanks
for that question.
I think industry actually really wants to bring some novel
technologies to bear in this space. They are working on
products that could help, like wearables, to help notice that
you have been exposed to chemical agents or nerve agents,
working both with the DoD and BARDA together. And I think this
is a place, in particular, where DoD, in partnership with
industry, actually could give us products that could help us,
the warfighter as well as national security defense.
Mrs. Harshbarger. Yes, I have talked to some innovative
companies that work on oral medications too, to help with some
of that.
Mr. Okon, you know, I have talked to you many, many times.
And Dr. Gralow, listen, we know the FDA. Even the drug
shortage list is not comprehensive. They don't keep a
comprehensive list. I have compounded sterile products for many
years. At any given time there's 300 drug shortages on a list,
OK?
We need to reform some of the things with the FDA, and
especially with, you know, the--just like you said, Ted, it is
about the reimbursement. Nobody is going to make a product if
they lose money. That is just not going to happen. And we need
to reform that and, you know, get an updated list. There's
many, many things we can work on--340B programs, things like
that.
You know, one of the things--Ms. Arthur, I have the only
plant in the country, a penicillin-producing plant in the
country, and I had to go through the designation of getting
that designated as critical infrastructure. That is another
thing we may look at doing for different facilities--antibiotic
resistance, like Representative Barragan was talking about.
There is--and I talked to someone in the Biden administration
about having 20 antibiotics on a list that we have to have for
330 million Americans.
There is a lot of things we need to do, Ted. And I just
read an article--and it was dated June 2nd--that the FDA is
going to allow an unapproved cisplatin to be used in this
country. They haven't even been inspected since 2019 in that
facility. That is what we are coming up to. And we have 503(b)
facilities, compounding facilities that are FDA registered,
that can fill that gap. But the price is going to be enormous.
We can be on the front lines as compounding pharmacists
and, you know, take care of those patients, but they have to
allow us to do that, and some of the reduced regulations. So I
will talk to you all about that later. There is a lot we have
to think about.
And thank you all for your time. And with that, I will
yield back.
Mr. Guthrie [presiding]. The gentlelady yields back. The
Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Indiana, Mr. Pence, for
5 minutes for questions.
Mr. Pence. Thank you, Chairman Guthrie and everyone
appearing here today.
I am proud to lead the Diagnostic Testing Preparedness Plan
Act with my colleagues Congressman Bucshon, Congressman Carson,
and Congresswoman Schrier.
Diagnostic testing capabilities are crucial for the
successful disease outbreak containment during a public health
emergency. Our country relies on diagnostic testing as a
critical component of our medical countermeasures response
strategy. Innovators in the Hoosier State such as Roche
Diagnostics have been leading the charge to ensure the Nation
has safe and reliable diagnostics.
It is important for HHS have a blueprint that would
facilitate the innovation and development of diagnostics during
a PHE. This bill would direct HHS to develop a plan describing
the process of rapid development, approval, scaling,
procurement, and distribution of diagnostics.
In addition, my legislation would ensure HHS is prepared to
communicate and collaborate with the private and public sectors
to ensure diagnostics are readily available.
I look forward to working with my colleagues on the Energy
and Commerce Committee to get this legislation across the
finish line.
Dr. Parker, based on your time as Principal Deputy
Assistant Secretary for Preparedness and Response, can you
explain the importance of ASPR coordinating with the private
sector to meet the demand for diagnostic testing during public
health emergencies?
Dr. Parker. Yes, absolutely, and it is absolutely essential
that we have these, and we have talked about this a lot today,
about the importance of the private sector and the importance
of public-private partnerships. And I think ASPR and BARDA over
the years have done a lot to improve their ability to interact
with the private sector, but we can always do better.
And this is a--the diagnostics is one that is--they are all
important, but this is certainly essential, because this really
guides a lot of our decision making early in a pandemic, early
in an outbreak, and to rapidly surge and to make sure that we
have distributed diagnostics and point-of-need diagnostics and
home diagnostics is essential.
So the plan is well-warranted. I support the initiative,
and we just do everything we can to improve those public-
private partnerships, make them functional.
Mr. Pence. OK, thank you.
Ms. Arthur, I heard you state earlier the--that you think
increased coordination and collaboration with the private
sector would improve the country's response during future
public health emergencies. How would the United States benefit
from a preapproved diagnostic testing preparedness plan?
Ms. Arthur. Thank you for that question. It is actually
really important to have a plan. It actually guides industry in
what can be developed and actually allows industry to work on
some of those things during peacetime. And I think this is one
of the advantages.
Now that we have had innovation in diagnostics and tests
and tooling, including home tests, which we never had before,
that actually can springboard into even more investment in
actually technologies like that. So having that public-private
partnership where the Government sets out what they are trying
to achieve in a pandemic allows industry to work towards that
goal in partnership with them.
Mr. Pence. OK, thank you.
And with that, I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Guthrie. The gentleman yields back. The Chair now
recognizes Dr. Dunn for 5 minutes for the purpose of questions.
Mr. Dunn. Sorry, I didn't know I was next.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Dunn. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate the
opportunity to analyze the legislation that may accompany the
reauthorization of the Pandemic Preparedness Act. The
expiration of this important bill comes at a time when we have
learned many valuable lessons about enduring a pandemic, and
now we have an opportunity to put those lessons into practice.
It is important to ensure the Strategic National Stockpile,
BARDA, Project BioShield, other programs designed to assist in
Federal response, that they are all retuned for a more timely,
coordinated, and successful response next time, because,
unfortunately, there will be a next time.
I appreciate the transparency measures put forth by Chair
Rodgers, which will ensure that the CDC guidance has integrity
and does not jeopardize the well-being of American citizens. We
have learned of undue influences over the agency during the
COVID-19 pandemic and the grave dangers and damage associated
with extended lockdowns. We must never allow a Federal agency
to issue such sweeping, binding, and inaccurate guidance in an
emergency again.
Other important measures included in the discussion drafts
before us today will ensure proper congressional oversight and
shed light on the decision making of health agency bureaucrats.
I appreciate my colleague, Congresswoman Dingell, for working
with me on the Ensuring Sufficient Supply of Testing Act, which
will ensure that key diagnostic testing supplies and equipment
needed to develop and run testing at scale are available and
accessible to clinical laboratories in times of emergency.
This bill will ensure that clinical laboratories will be
able to enter the Strategic National Stockpile contracts.
It is also critically important that the Strategic National
Stockpile include test kits, reagents, precision plastics, and
other tools that labs rely on to rapidly scale their responses.
Labs played a critical role in response to the SARS-CoV-2
pandemic. In the early days of the spread of COVID-19, testing
was one of the few tools at our disposal to understand the
nature of the pathogen.
Testing is also an important aspect of surveillance, which
is an area where improvement and increased coordination is
greatly needed. I would also like to thank my colleagues
Representative Crenshaw and Peters for putting on a discussion
draft on this very topic, the Bio Early Warning Plan.
We need better coordination between public health agencies
and the intelligence community. We may have avoided the entire
pandemic had the intel community had more visibility into the
grants that NIH was funding. A more coordinated effort is
needed for a whole-of-government defense and response to future
pandemics.
Dr. Washington, you have discussed at length today the
problems that your department had accessing testing early in
the pandemic. I hope that the bills that you--have been
proposed by myself, Representative Dingell, Representative
Pence, and others, I hope that these bills will prevent that in
your--happening to you in the future. I certainly feel your
pain.
Dr. Parker, it is always good to see you, a fellow USAMRIID
staffer from the old days. I appreciate your written testimony
in some detail. I have read that and reviewed it. Thank you for
that input. Your emphasis on the national security
considerations and the need for coordination between DoD and
health agencies is very well outlined. And you also outlined
many gaps in the coordination and made some smart
recommendations that can truly help us be prepared for the next
pandemic.
Let me ask you, what would your recommendations be to
encourage more coordination before--before--a pandemic breaks
out? Clearly, we had a blind spot when it came to the Wuhan
Institute of Virology.
Dr. Parker. Well, I mean, that is the issue, I think,
across the whole preparedness enterprise, whatever component we
are thinking about, is how do we make progress during the
intercrisis period, if it is all hazards or emerging infectious
diseases. That is where we have been challenged over the years.
We cannot sustain our efforts after a crisis is over, and so
that--we have to figure that out. We just really have to figure
that out, taking actions during the--between crises.
Now, there is--the health community and the intelligence
community and the law enforcement community, we absolutely have
to figure out how to better coordinate. Now, there has been
coordination over the years. I know my career, I--that is why I
call myself--I have worked in health security, because I
spanned those--that gap pretty well during my career. But we
have to span that gap.
And I would say that some of our science agencies, our
health agencies, we need to make sure that some of the leaders
actually are pretty aware of some of the more detailed
information that may be in the DNI's annual threat assessments
that is on the classified side. So I think our health agencies
need to be more aware of some of the security concerns and need
to be more security aware and have more of a security culture.
Mr. Dunn. Well, we are both familiar with some routine
surveillance technologies that were in place, even back when I
was at USAMRIID. So thank you very much for your information,
your insights.
I thank all the panel for your comments today, a terrific
panel, really outstanding.
Mr. Chair, I yield back.
Mr. Guthrie. The gentleman yields back. The Chair now
recognizes the gentleman from Texas, Mr. Crenshaw, for 5
minutes.
Mr. Crenshaw. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
I think every American should be concerned about the next
pandemic because of how terribly our Government handled the
last one. Not only did the Government lock down schools and
businesses and mislead the public, but we were caught flat-
footed at the outset of the pandemic. We were unable to
identify the threat we were facing and where that threat was
coming from, and that had pretty severe consequences for the
way we responded to COVID. And I think this committee should
aim to fix that.
Moving forward, the American Government must be able to
quickly identify the source and severity of an emerging public
health threat. That capability is required under law right now
that we are still falling short of where we need to be. In
fact, the Government Accountability Office found that ``more
than 15 years after the law initially mandated it, the Federal
Government does not yet have this needed situational awareness
capability'' to identify and respond to these threats.
Moreover, the Government Accountability Office says we need
a ``lead operational division to address this deficiency in our
response capabilities,'' and I will be filing this report for
the record.
So, you know, to sum it up, there is no one in charge, and
that is a problem.
For Dr. Parker, I have this question: Should the
Administration for Strategic Preparedness and Response create a
strategy and implementation plan to aid our preparedness and
attribute future threats?
Dr. Parker. Well, yes, we absolutely need a strategy for
attribution, and we need--an attribution is important, whether
it is natural or unnatural. Kind of, the attribution kind of
gets more in the unnatural. And I think about national command
authority authorities. So whether ASPR, at the end of the day,
is in charge of the unnatural attribution, I am not sure about
that. But nonetheless, this committee could certainly require
that HHS, DHS, DoD, DNI, DOE--who has actually some very good
laboratory capabilities--develop a strategy for attribution.
Mr. Crenshaw. Attribution and a kind of a single point of
action and coordination as well, would you agree with that?
Dr. Parker. I think that strategy would have to identify
that. You would--you should identify that they need to develop
a strategy, and develop then who will be in charge.
Mr. Crenshaw. Right. Well, and for that reason I am working
on legislation called the Bio Early Warning Act with
Representative Peters from California.
And our bill is really simple. It does create an
operational strategy and supports private-sector technology
that helps us identify every aspect of an emerging threat:
where is it coming from, how serious is it, what should our
response be. And we do this by, one, making sure the Department
of Health and Human Services and the intelligence community are
actually working together and sharing information rather than
working in silos; two, creating a government strategy for
attributing threats; and three, having the Administration for
Strategic Preparedness and Response work with the private
sector to create and deploy defenses that might be needed to
respond to whatever threat we face. And this could be anything
from advancements in genetic sequencing to diagnostic testing
to wastewater surveillance.
It should be clear--because there has been some
misinformation put out by one three-letter agency--that this
bill does not take away authority from the agencies that are
currently doing this work. We just need a singular point of
action and accountability to coordinate this work, and that is
what the bill does. It is what GAO has called for.
You know, we can't afford to have the same information
failures we had with COVID, so we have to work to identify and
respond to the dangerous threat landscape that is always
evolving.
And another way to think of this is a joint operating
environment in the military. It is confusing. You had Army,
Navy, Marines, Air Force there sometimes--not sure why----
[Laughter.]
Mr. Crenshaw. But you always have a joint operating
environment, and you have what is called combatant commands who
is in charge of everyone in that operating environment working
together. And you need--you absolutely need something along
those lines when you are talking about a pandemic or a chemical
attack or a biological attack.
And of course, so I asked for my friend, Representative
Richard--also known as the admiral from Texas, also known as
Dan Crenshaw's biggest fan--Hudson, asked for his commitment to
work with me to ensure that this is addressed in this year's
PAHPA.
And with that, I yield back.
Mr. Guthrie. The gentleman yields back. The Chair now
recognizes the gentlelady from Iowa, Dr. Miller-Meeks, for 5
minutes for questions.
Mrs. Miller-Meeks. Thank you, Mr. Chair, and I want to
thank all the witnesses for testifying before the committee
today. And----
[Pause.]
Mrs. Miller-Meeks. The light's on.
[Pause.]
Mrs. Miller-Meeks. This is a jerry-rigged system. No.
[Laughter.]
Mrs. Miller-Meeks. From my time in the Army.
I am a physician, a former director of a department of
public health, and I know how--both how serious, how
predictable another pandemic is--not when, but we know it will
occur. And I also was, I think, the only Member of Congress,
when we were passing the ARRP, or the second COVID bill in
March of 2021, that spoke numerous times, both on the floor of
Congress and in committee, about the necessity of funding the
noncompetitive grants that go directly to local public
healthcare agencies, not to the CDC, not to some other, you
know, three-letter Government agency, but noncompetitive grants
directly to local public healthcare.
And I am glad to see that my bill, H.R. 3837, the Improving
Public Health Preparedness Act, is included in the hearing. And
I thank my colleagues, Congressman Buddy Carter and Congressman
Balderson, for cosponsoring the bill.
H.R. 3837 requires the HHS Secretary to delegate the
maintenance and administration of the Strategic National
Stockpile to the Administration for Strategic Preparedness and
Response, which further enhances ASPR's authority over the SNS.
SNS had a few homes since it was established in 1999--CDC,
DHS, back to CDC, and then to ASPR in 2013--and operates most
effectively under ASPR's jurisdiction, which is why their
authority was expanded in 2018 under the last Pandemic and All-
Hazards Preparedness Act, or PAHPA. This legislation is a clean
codification of SNS's current authority, which would bring
welcomed stability and clarity.
Furthermore, it seeks to demonstrate ASPR's leadership as
the lead agency for our Nation's preparedness and response to
public health security threats, as we just heard through the
last question and response.
Dr. Parker, in your written testimony you say the SNS along
with other offices belong together under ASPR, and that they
are each better served in this structure. Can you please
explain why you believe this?
Dr. Parker. Sure. I mean, I think it is very--and I am
really happy to see this legislation. It makes a lot of sense
to have BARDA, the Strategic National Stockpile, the industrial
base supply management components of ASPR consolidated under
the ASPR.
And I think, you know, then how is the ASPR also going to
manage and integrate--make sure that there is an integrated,
seamless flow between the development of medical
countermeasures, the acquisition, the procurement, the
stockpiling, and also ensuring that the industrial supply
chains are more resilient?
So it makes--it is just logical that they are together. And
it is also logical--we talked about in NDMS and the support of
the healthcare system also--they are just logical that they are
together.
Mrs. Miller-Meeks. Yes, I couldn't agree more. I had a bill
in the last term on medical countermeasures that went through
Homeland Security, as I was a member of Homeland Security. So
having this--efforts that are helping to coordinate
coordinated, I think, would be beneficial.
Ms. Arthur, in your testimony you state that the SNS needs
adequate resources to allow ASPR to manage the full lifecycle
of all medical countermeasures developed under BARDA. Using
existing funding and resources, do you believe that SNS is most
equipped to manage medical countermeasures while under ASPR's
authority?
And what changes in SNS's structure would Congress consider
to ensure we are stockpiling the most modern and effective
MCMs?
Ms. Arthur. Thank you so much for the question.
I agree with Dr. Parker. This is an extremely important
aspect of the role of ASPR. They actually work closely with
their industry partners to manage the lifecycle of particularly
those medical countermeasures that are going to be stockpiled
in the SNS. And so having that end-to-end view of how those
products will be used, how they are stockpiled, sharing the
requirements, doing replenishment is a core role of ASPR. And
anything that can strengthen their ability to share those
requirements with their industry partners and do active
replenishment with the right funding for the SNS will be a
support for pandemic preparedness.
Mrs. Miller-Meeks. Thank you.
I yield back and thank you, Chair, for this important
hearing.
Mr. Guthrie. Thank you. The gentlelady yields back. The
Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Indiana, Dr. Bucshon,
for 5 minutes.
Mr. Bucshon. Thank you very much, a lot going on today.
Thank you for being here, I appreciate it. And thanks,
Chairman, and again, thanks for all the witnesses being here.
I think it--you know, as we go through today's hearing
and--we keep our focus on the topic of preparedness and
understand that the types of threats that we are preparing for
are the types that we hope we never actually have to respond
to.
However, having just lived through the worst global
pandemic in over a century, we have all seen just how important
it is that we not only get this bill right but that we keep it
tightly focused on the real threats we face and need to prepare
for. Ultimately, I believe that, here, that less is more. The
less we turn our preparedness efforts into the usual
Washington, DC--what we call the Christmas tree of policies
that result in the Government doing a bunch of things, and some
of which we won't do well.
So first, Ms. Arthur, BARDA has historically been very
successful partnering with industry on medical countermeasures,
leading to 77 FDA approvals. During the COVID-19 pandemic we
saw how--just how critical innovation was to saving lives and
getting us back to normal.
And some of this you may have already answered, I
apologize, but how would changes to BARDA and the SNS, or the
Strategic National Stockpile, contracts to include reasonable
pricing, or IP, march-in provisions impact how private sector
industry works with ASPR, BARDA, and the SNS in the future?
Ms. Arthur. Thank you very much for this question. It is
very important.
So policies on reasonable pricing and march-in rights have
actually been tried in other programs, other public and private
programs, and they have actually had a huge dampening effect on
innovation, very negative effect.
In the medical countermeasures space, this could actually
be even worse, because these are products that already have a
high risk to their development and, in general, have a limited
marketplace that--and a major buyer, which is the U.S.
Government. So if suddenly companies that wanted to bring their
novel technologies to bear on an unmet medical need identified
for the Government for national security purposes faced IP risk
or challenges to their pricing for products that generally did
not have a guaranteed commercial market, you would see
companies have a very hard time deciding to work on these key
products.
Mr. Bucshon. Yes, it would stifle innovation and that type
of thing. Thank you for that.
And Mr. Okon, the COVID-19 pandemic demonstrated that--the
critical need to have the supply chain and manufacturing
capacity in place to be able to quickly respond to a future
threat. I think we all know that. Unfortunately, the supply
chain and the manufacturing capacity challenges were
longstanding prior to COVID-19. We all know that. And while a
lot of the focus will be spent on incentives in this space, I
think we also need to look at how existing Federal policies can
negatively impact the supply chain and manufacturing capacity.
You mentioned 340B drug discounts are contributing to
cancer drug shortages. Can you walk me through why this is the
case?
Mr. Okon. You know, I said for--and I will repeat it again,
because it is on the record, Dr. Bucshon, as I know you do,
believe that the 340B is a valuable program. And the problem
is, when you take a low-cost drug to begin with, and you demand
other rebates and discounts like 340B discounts on top of it,
you are going to produce a product that, in many cases, has a
negative return for these generic manufacturers. It is not
worth them producing it.
And I think it was Dr. Gralow actually said this is a U.S.
problem, what we are seeing. The problem is nowhere in the
world do you see the discounts and the rebates that we end up
having here. And we have to realize that 340B Medicaid
rebates--valuable, I mean, valuable programs, but pushed down
these very low-cost products to such a level that they are
simply unprofitable to make.
Mr. Bucshon. Yes, I mean, I understand that. As I think
most of the people know in Washington, I am working on a level
of transparency in the 340B program that just lets us all know,
you know, how it is functioning and how the congressional
intent of the original creation of the program is being
followed. And there is some evidence that that is not the case,
and it may be challenging the program's future.
And again, I am a huge supporter of 340B. My smaller, rural
hospitals absolutely have to have this program. So I think--I
just want to make it clear again on the record that I am a big
supporter. But we do need a level of transparency, I think. And
you know who else said that? Secretary Becerra. And who else
said that? President Biden, in his budget. So, you know, drug
shortages is one area, but also formulary access to lower-cost
drugs, where generics can't get on formulas because there is
not a big enough rebate and the list price isn't high enough.
So thank you for that answer.
And with that, Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Guthrie. Dr. Bucshon yields back. We have now completed
members of the subcommittee, and we have one member of the full
committee waiving on, and that is Mr. Balderson of Ohio.
You are recognized for 5 minutes for questions.
Mr. Balderson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I didn't know you
called me out like that.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Balderson. I am waived on, so thank you for allowing me
the opportunity to do this. My first question is for Dr.
Parker. Thank you all for being here, though.
But I want to thank Richard Hudson for his leadership on
this issue and for introducing the Medical and Health Stockpile
Accountability Act. I was proud to cosponsor this bill along
with Mr. Gottheimer and my fellow cochair of the Pandemic
Preparedness Caucus, Mrs. Trahan. This important bill will
provide real-time updates of medical and health supply
inventories nationwide. This will eliminate the delays and
errors we saw during the COVID pandemic and ensure that our
local healthcare providers have the supplies they need when
they need them.
Dr. Parker, I agree with you on your assessment that our
pandemic response lacks a central authority to set the agenda
and provide direction across multiple departments and agencies.
I am concerned, though, that President Biden has not--still not
appointed a Director for the White House Office of Pandemic
Preparedness and Response.
Dr. Parker, how can Congress differentiate and prevent
duplicative work between ASPR and this new White House officer?
Dr. Parker. Well, yes, and I have some comments in my
written testimony about that, and I think, one, you know, I do
think it is a great idea that at least we have authorized a
pandemic preparedness and response policy office in the White
House. It is unclear, though, how it is going to be
implemented. And I think that now is the opportunity to
consider how can biodefense and global health security and
pandemic preparedness be consolidated under a leadership
structure at the National Security Council Office of Science
and--Policy, however that is going to be done.
It is the opportunity now to consolidate it and appoint a
person that--I am going to use the analogy--a combatant
commander-type person that can focus on what are the policies,
what are the budgetary priorities, and what are the plans and
strategies that are going to be needed and an implementation
plan across this space of biodefense and pandemic preparedness
and global health security that can then drive better milestone
outcomes, provide the guidance that is needed for industry, and
align medical countermeasure--in the case of medical
countermeasures, the DoD programs, the HHS programs into a more
singular focus.
You still need to allow, though, for decentralized
execution at the department agency levels. You don't want to
micromanage from the White House. But you can do this. You need
the combatant commander that will provide the vision, the
strategy, and an implementation plan, and hold the Department
and agencies accountable. And Congress can also hold the
Department and agencies accountable for meeting their
milestones and metrics.
Mr. Balderson. Thank you. Follow up. I appreciate and agree
with your statements on the better integrating and training
State and local staff. Are there current examples of
preparedness exercises or programs between State and local
officials that we can look at as to a model?
Dr. Parker. Well, I think over the years there has been a
lot of, you know, like, national exercise, you know, and FEMA
runs a national exercise program, and that usually involves
State and local communities. And so we just need to do more of
that. We don't do enough of it. And I think we need to be
thinking about what are the scenarios that we might face, and--
because we might face some of these scenarios that I have
talked about in my testimony, and we have done these--our
Nation has done these in the past. But I think we need to go
back and look at what are some of the truly catastrophic
scenarios that we may face in the dangerous era that we find
ourselves in now.
Mr. Balderson. OK, thank you.
Ms. Arthur, since I am the waiver-on guy, I don't want to
be over my timeframe, so I am going to be pretty brief with
you. I see that you chair the Healthcare Ready, which works
with government, nonprofit, and medical supply chains to
strengthen healthcare systems before, during, and after
disasters.
We all know that it is the private sector, not the
Government, that leads, innovates, and advances. Can you
explain when public-private partnerships are essential for
resiliency versus times when Federal Government is in a way
that is distracting?
Ms. Arthur. Absolutely. So really, the healthcare system in
America and the healthcare supply chain, in particular, is a
private-sector endeavor. And that is what Healthcare Ready
supports. It is extremely important, actually, therefore, that
all the aspects, end to end, of the supply chain integrate with
the Federal Government, State, and local governments as well,
in terms of making sure we can have all hands on deck when we
need to respond to an emergency situation.
Mr. Balderson. Thank you very much, and thank you all for
being here today.
Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Guthrie. Thank you. There is nothing you would have to
apologize for waiving on. It is certainly within the right of
the committee. I just want to make sure everybody knew we have
asked--let everybody ask questions moving forward. So thanks,
thanks, Mr.--Troy, for being here today.
And so we have concluded Members' questions. Thank you so
much for your answers that have been very informative and been
very helpful.
But first, a couple of things for business.
I ask unanimous consent to insert in the record the
documents included on the staff hearing documents list, the
list I just shared with you.
Without objection, that will be in order.
[The information appears at the conclusion of the hearing.]
Ms. Eshoo. So ordered.
Mr. Guthrie. And I want to remind Members that they have 10
business days to submit for the record questions for the
record, and so that you could still receive questions even
after the hearing. And so we just ask that you respond to any
questions in writing promptly. Members should submit their
questions by the close of business on the 27th of June.
Again, thank you so much. I know it takes a lot of time and
a lot of effort to be here to testify. It is very valuable. It
really informs our decision making, and it means a lot to--for
you to take the time and the effort that you may. Some of you
travel some good distances to be here, and we appreciate it
very much.
And without objection, the subcommittee is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 1:39 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]
[Material submitted for inclusion in the record follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
