- ADDRESSING THE OPIOID CRISIS: EXAMINING THE SUPPORT ACT 5 YEARS LATER

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

ADDRESSING THE OPIOID CRISIS: EXAMINING THE
SUPPORT ACT 5 YEARS LATER

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON HEALTH

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

JUNE 9, 2023

__________

Serial No. 118-44

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Published for the use of the Committee on Energy and Commerce

govinfo.gov/committee/house-energy
energycommerce.house.gov

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
56-571 PDF                  WASHINGTON : 2024

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE

CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington
Chair
MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas            FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey
ROBERT E. LATTA, Ohio                  Ranking Member
BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky              ANNA G. ESHOO, California
H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia         DIANA DeGETTE, Colorado
GUS M. BILIRAKIS, Florida            JAN SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois
BILL JOHNSON, Ohio                   DORIS O. MATSUI, California
LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana               KATHY CASTOR, Florida
RICHARD HUDSON, North Carolina       JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland
TIM WALBERG, Michigan                PAUL TONKO, New York
EARL L. ``BUDDY'' CARTER, Georgia    YVETTE D. CLARKE, New York
JEFF DUNCAN, South Carolina          TONY CARDENAS, California
GARY J. PALMER, Alabama              RAUL RUIZ, California
NEAL P. DUNN, Florida                SCOTT H. PETERS, California
JOHN R. CURTIS, Utah                 DEBBIE DINGELL, Michigan
DEBBBIE LESKO, Arizona               MARC A. VEASEY, Texas
GREG PENCE, Indiana                  ANN M. KUSTER, New Hampshire
DAN CRENSHAW, Texas                  ROBIN L. KELLY, Illinois
JOHN JOYCE, Pennsylvania             NANETTE DIAZ BARRAGAN, California
KELLY ARMSTRONG, North Dakota, Vice  LISA BLUNT ROCHESTER, Delaware
Chair                            DARREN SOTO, Florida
RANDY K. WEBER, Sr., Texas           ANGIE CRAIG, Minnesota
RICK W. ALLEN, Georgia               KIM SCHRIER, Washington
TROY BALDERSON, Ohio                 LORI TRAHAN, Massachusetts
RUSS FULCHER, Idaho                  LIZZIE FLETCHER, Texas
AUGUST PFLUGER, Texas
DIANA HARSHBARGER, Tennessee
MARIANNETTE MILLER-MEEKS, Iowa
KAT CAMMACK, Florida
JAY OBERNOLTE, California
------

Professional Staff

NATE HODSON, Staff Director
SARAH BURKE, Deputy Staff Director
TIFFANY GUARASCIO, Minority Staff Director
Subcommittee on Health

BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky
Chairman
MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas            ANNA G. ESHOO, California
ROBERT E. LATTA, Ohio                  Ranking Member
H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia         JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland
GUS M. BILIRAKIS, Florida            TONY CARDENAS, California
BILL JOHNSON, Ohio                   RAUL RUIZ, California
LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana, Vice Chair   DEBBIE DINGELL, Michigan
RICHARD HUDSON, North Carolina       ANN M. KUSTER, New Hampshire
EARL L. ``BUDDY'' CARTER, Georgia    ROBIN L. KELLY, Illinois
NEAL P. DUNN, Florida                NANETTE DIAZ BARRAGAN, California
GREG PENCE, Indiana                  LISA BLUNT ROCHESTER, Delaware
DAN CRENSHAW, Texas                  ANGIE CRAIG, Minnesota
JOHN JOYCE, Pennsylvania             KIM SCHRIER, Washington
DIANA HARSHBARGER, Tennessee         LORI TRAHAN, Massachusetts
MARIANNETTE MILLER-MEEKS, Iowa       FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey (ex
JAY OBERNOLTE, California                officio)
CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington
(ex officio)

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hon. Brett Guthrie, a Representative in Congress from the
Commonwealth of Kentucky, opening statement....................     1
Prepared statement...........................................     2
Hon. Paul Tonko, a Representative in Congress from the State of
New York, opening statement....................................     4
Prepared statement...........................................     7

Witnesses

Emily Keller, Special Secretary of Opioid Response, Opioid
Operational Command Center, Office of the Governor, State of
Maryland.......................................................    11
Prepared statement...........................................    13
Michael L. Straley, Founder, Leah's Legacy Foundation............    19
Prepared statement...........................................    21
Mitchell Crawford, D.O., Medical Director, Specialized Treatment
and Recovery Team, and Director, Addiction Services, WellSpan
Health.........................................................    24
Prepared statement...........................................    26
William Ceravola, Chief, Reading Township Police Department......    32
Prepared statement...........................................    34

Submitted Material

Inclusion of the following was approved by unanimous consent.
List of documents submitted for the record.......................    59
Statement of the U.S. Pain Foundation............................    60
Letter of June 8, 2023, from Megan Noland, Executive Director,
Major County Sheriffs of America, et al., to Mr. Guthrie, et
al.............................................................    62

ADDRESSING THE OPIOID CRISIS: EXAMINING THE SUPPORT ACT 5 YEARS LATER

----------

FRIDAY, JUNE 9, 2023

House of Representatives
Subcommittee on Health
Committee on Energy and Commerce
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 9:30 a.m., at
the Gettysburg National Park Visitor Center, 1195 Baltimore
Pike, Gettysburg, Pennsylvania, Hon. Brett Guthrie (chairman of
the subcommittee) presiding.
Members present: Representatives Guthrie, Bucshon,
Griffith, Joyce, Obernolte, and Tonko.
Mr. Guthrie. Good morning. The committee will come to
order.
Hey, thanks, everybody, for being here. It is such a great
opportunity for us to be together. And I will recognize myself
for 5 minutes for an opening statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. BRETT GUTHRIE, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE COMMONWEALTH OF KENTUCKY

And I just want to say how important it is we are here
today, and I know a lot of times it is nice for us to get out
of Washington to come to a place such as this. And a lot of
people see, on television, there is a lot of, sometimes,
fighting back and forth between the two different parties. But
I will tell you, as we looked at what is going on in recovery,
addiction, and overdoses, we have worked together, and in 2015
we did the SUPPORT Act together. And so Representative Tonko
here, all of us, are here to work together to move forward. And
now we are up for reauthorization of the SUPPORT Act.
A lot of us got here last night and had the chance for a
very sobering walk around this battlefield, and standing where
Pickett's Charge was. And John Hoptak, I think was his name,
was our interpreter, who said 51,000 people over the course of
3 days were wounded, injured, or killed. You know, over 100,000
people every year die of overdoses. And you sit there and try
to absorb those numbers as you are watching and trying to
imagine what happened here. I mean, the numbers are staggering
in this area, to a horrible degree, as well. And we all work
together to try to move forward.
And I have a formal opening statement, and I am actually
not going to give it. I will submit it for the record.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Guthrie follows;]
[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Guthrie. And I want to recognize my good friend, Dr.
John Joyce, who represents this area, for the remainder of my
time. I yield to Dr. John Joyce.
Mr. Joyce. Thank you for yielding, Chairman Guthrie. And I
would also like to thank Chair Rodgers, Ranking Member Tonko
for coming to Pennsylvania's 13th Congressional District. The
poignancy of being at Gettysburg is not lost on the Members of
Congress. The battles that we face when we deal with addiction
and the battles that families face is an important message to
bring home with the great panels that we have assembled here
today.
As we approach the 160th anniversary of the Battle of
Gettysburg, we do recognize the over 7,000 Americans who lost
their lives at this site and remember that sacrifice as we meet
on another incredibly devastating issue, and that is the issue
of addiction.
That is the scourge upon America, and drug overdoses, which
in recent years, as Chair Guthrie just pointed out, have taken
over 100,000 American lives annually, leaving behind the
devastation to families, to friends, to coworkers.
As we look as a committee and as a Congress to address
these matters, we have to look to the communities, and that is
what we are here today to do. We want to hear what
recommendations, what impact, how the SUPPORT Act can be
enhanced, how it can be extended.
So far this year, we have made progress by passing the Halt
Fentanyl Act, which will permanently schedule fentanyl
analogues that have been flooding our communities with a deadly
substance, leaving death and tragedy in its wake.
In 2022 alone, DEA seized almost 379 million deadly doses
of fentanyl, which is enough to kill every man, woman, and
child in the United States. And that was just what was seized.
That is what we were able to capture. That is not what came
through and ended up on the streets throughout the United
States.
And I am hopeful this bill will pass the Senate and be
signed into law, but there is a lot more work that needs to be
done in supporting local law enforcement, healthcare providers,
and patients who are facing these issues every day, with those
in the throes of addiction.
In 2018, President Trump signed the SUPPORT Act into law,
which is a comprehensive measure aimed at combating addiction
and helping treatment for those facing the disease. Yet despite
these efforts and the exacerbated response by COVID-19, we are
still seeing those increased deaths, and we must examine how
the SUPPORT Act can be enhanced, improved, and address the
issues that you bring for us today.
We must also be examining what policies need to be
addressed to ensure that all patients have access to crisis and
recovery services and the ability to receive the treatment that
they so desperately need. Some of these barriers include
looking at the impact of the IMD Exclusion, which has
restricted access to residential and inpatient care, and
whether this can be modernized to ensure the availability for
the treatment of patients.
The SUPPORT Act also recognizes that to ultimately be
successful in combating the opioid misuse crisis, we must do a
better job helping the 50 million Americans who suffer from
chronic pain. Pain is a serious and growing disease which is
more prevalent in older adults, women, veterans, blue-collar
workers and people living right here in Pennsylvania's rural
13th Congressional District.
The SUPPORT Act contains numerous pain-related provisions
directing the Federal Government to promote patient awareness
and access to nonopioid therapies. I would like to request that
the statement from the U.S. Pain Foundation be entered into the
record.
[The information appears at the conclusion of the hearing.]
Mr. Joyce. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Guthrie. The gentleman yields back. And I know we are a
couple of minutes over, 50 seconds over. I just want to say
what I should have said, how much we appreciate the National
Park Service for hosting us. You see the men and women and law
enforcement here making sure we are safe and secure. I know you
do not deal with these kinds of things every day, I know, but
every day you deal with what we are here to talk about, and we
appreciate what you guys do.
I will now recognize my good friend from New York,
Representative Tonko, for 5 minutes for an opening.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. PAUL TONKO, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF NEW YORK

Mr. Tonko. Thank you, Chair, and good morning, everyone,
and thank you to everyone for joining here for this very
important topic in this special way, and welcome to our
panelists.
This is a vital hearing, and I thank Chair Guthrie and my
colleagues for hosting it. As a co-Chair of the bipartisan
Addiction, Treatment, and Recovery Caucus I am all too familiar
with the devastating impact of the disease of addiction. This
is a loss many of us know all too well--the loss of a daughter,
a son, father, mother, a sister, or a brother, a neighbor dying
much too young and leaving behind a grieving family.
Communities are being ripped apart by poisons seemingly beyond
our control.
Last year in our Nation, there was an estimated 109,680
overdose deaths. That is 109,680 lives lost that impact far
greater numbers than we can imagine. Think of how many people
that is, every single day needlessly dying and having their
lives cut short. Think of the magnitude of all of those
impacted by those 109,680 loved ones. For each of those
individuals, there is a whole universe of friends, of families,
of communities impacted.
I recognize that many of our brave witnesses today were
brought here by tragedy and by terrible pain. I hope that as a
committee and as colleagues and friends we can learn from their
pain and act together with a sense of urgency.
This year, with the reauthorization of the SUPPORT Act, we
have an opportunity to address the devastating disease of
addiction. I think we can all agree there is a crisis at hand.
Sadly, in 2021, 94 percent of people aged 12 or older with a
substance use disorder did not receive any treatment. It is a
startling statistic but one that makes it clear there is a
massive gap in access to treatment.
Over the last decade, I have recognized this gap and have
made a focus of advocacy in Congress. I am knocking out every
single barrier to addiction treatment so that, when an
individual struggling with the disease of addiction reaches out
for help, we have a medical system ready to welcome them with
open arms. As a committee, I ask that we work together to make
access to affordable and quality addiction treatment our
highest priority. I am heartened that as I look across at the
members here I see a coalition that understands the importance
of that goal. In this moment I feel hopeful that together we
can find common ground and take that immediate action.
During my time in Congress, we have worked together to pass
CARA, the SUPPORT Act, and most recently our bipartisan mental
health package. These policies have provided billions of
dollars to support the American people and combat that overdose
crisis. In particular, we have had a lot of bipartisan success
when we worked to pass the SUPPORT Act into law back in 2018.
Together we made progress forward in access to and coverage for
medications for opioid use disorder. We expanded the providers
who can prescribe MAT, and we also created an innovative new
demonstration program for reentry that has now been put into
action.
But we still have more work to do to protect the most
vulnerable. Five years later, it is clear that there is
widespread support for good reentry policy. I humbly ask, let's
come together and pass the bipartisan Reentry Act, which would
be game-changer for reducing overdose deaths and suicides by
allowing all states to provide prerelease care to Medicaid-
eligible individuals up to 30 days prior to release from
incarceration. Sheriffs across the country are calling for
passage of the Reentry Act. Medical providers and addiction
advocates are calling for passage. Beth Macy, the author of
``Dopesick,'' who has seen this disease firsthand, has called
for passage of this legislation. Let's heed their call.
I also hope we can have a comprehensive discussion on how
to expand access to treatment, including medications for opioid
use disorder such as buprenorphine and methadone. We also
should expand access to naloxone, testing strips, and syringe
services so that lives can be saved. I also hope that we will
take a look at a bill that is called Due Process.
I look forward to discussions over the coming months on how
we can support policies to save lives. Addressing the disease
of addiction must include a compassionate response, bolstered
by the pillars of prevention, of treatment, and of recovery.
I also want to thank everyone for being willing to discuss
addiction. For far too long, the disease of addiction has
carried an awful stigma. Together, by gathering here to openly
discuss this, we help share that addiction is not a moral
failure but a disease, and if we treat it as such we will be
victorious. We can share how recovery is not easy and often not
a linear path, but that a light in recovery can be filled with
so much hope and serve as inspiration to each and every one of
us.
We also make it clear that we will not turn our backs on
those who are suffering from addiction. We recognize their pain
and the barriers that make treatment and recovery difficult.
However, when someone has that moment of clarity and seeks
treatment, we should have systems in place that move heaven and
earth to get people the very best treatment available.
So I look forward to learning more from our witnesses here
today, and I promise you that I will continue my fight, in a
bipartisan manner, to ensure treatment on demand so that all of
those who are suffering from this disease of despair have
access to treatment and, most importantly, hope.
Thank you. With that I yield back.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Tonko follows;]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Guthrie. The gentleman yields back. And now we are
going to go to the witnesses' opening statements. And for those
of you who have not testified before Congress before, you have
opening statements of 5 minutes. You will see a green light,
yellow light, red light. So I guess--1 minute out green, or
yellow, or 30 seconds?--1 minute out yellow. And so when you
see red, start wrapping up.
Now this is important, so I am not going to have a heavy
gavel. If you have a thought you want to get out and it turns
red on you, just feel free not to stop midthought, midsentence,
but begin to start summarizing if you get to that point. But we
are here to learn, so I am not going to have a heavy gavel on
you, because we know we have some stories that we need to hear
and ideas we need to share.
So with doing that, to introduce our witnesses today I am
going to yield to Dr. Joyce, who will introduce you all, and
then I will call on you each time.
Mr. Joyce. Thank you, Chair.
Our first witness is Mr. Mike Straley, founder of Leah's
Legacy Foundation. Mike and his wife Robin tragically lost
their daughter, Leah, to opioid overdose after a long battle
with substance use disorder. He is the author of the ``The
CALLing'' and started, in his daughter's memory, Leah's Legacy
Foundation in an effort to help others who are struggling with
substance use disorder.
Our next witness will be Dr. Mitchell Crawford, who is the
Medical Director for Specialized Treatment and Recovery,
WellSpan Health, and Director of Addiction Services at WellSpan
Health Facilities. Dr. Crawford is a clinical specialist in
treating substance use disorders, such as opioids, alcohol, and
nicotine, and behavioral addictions as well. Dr. Crawford
completed his residency at Harvard South Shore Psychiatric
Residency Training Program.
Next will be Chief Bill Ceravola of the Reading Township
Police Department. Chief Ceravola has been in law enforcement
since 1995, and began his career as a crime scene investigator
for the Kenner City Police Department in Louisiana. Prior to
his time as chief of police for Reading Township, he was chief
and officer in charge for Adams County Police Department.
Our fourth witness is Ms. Emily Keller. Ms. Keller is the
former mayor of Hagerstown, Maryland, and prior to her time as
mayor, she served on the Hagerstown City Council. Currently,
she is the Special Secretary of Opioid Response, Opioid
Operational Command Center, in the Office of the Maryland
Governor, Wes Moore.
Mr. Chairman, I yield.
Mr. Guthrie. Thank you. That concludes witnesses'
introductions. Ms. Keller, we are going to go my left to right,
so I will call on you first for your 5 minutes for an opening
statement.

STATEMENT OF EMILY KELLER, SPECIAL SECRETARY OF OPIOID
RESPONSE, OPIOID OPERATIONAL COMMAND CENTER, OFFICE OF THE
GOVERNOR, STATE OF MARYLAND; MICHAEL L. STRALEY, FOUNDER,
LEAH'S LEGACY FOUNDATION; MITCHELL CRAWFORD, D.O., MEDICAL
DIRECTOR, SPECIALIZED TREATMENT AND RECOVERY TEAM, AND
DIRECTOR, ADDICTION SERVICES, WELLSPAN HEALTH; AND WILLIAM
CERAVOLA, CHIEF, READING TOWNSHIP POLICE DEPARTMENT

STATEMENT OF EMILY KELLER

Ms. Keller. Thank you. Chairman Guthrie and honorable
members of the subcommittee. Thank you for the opportunity to
participate in today's hearing. My name is Emily Keller, and I
am Maryland's Special Secretary of Opioid Response. In this
role, I oversee the Opioid Operational Command Center.
I come before you today as someone who has been directly
affected by the overdose crisis. My life in public service
began after seeing my best friend, Ashley, struggle with a
substance use disorder for many years as she failed to access
the care that she needed. After she lost her battle with her
disease, I dedicated my life's work to doing everything that I
could do to promote access to care for others like her. I made
a promise to her that I would be loud for her, and that is
exactly what I intend to do.
My story, tragically, is not unique. So many Americans have
experienced this same loss as overdose rates skyrocket in our
country. About seven people a day lose their lives to overdose
in Maryland alone. Efforts such as the SUPPORT Act of 2018 have
increased our ability in Maryland to respond to this crisis by
expanding support for treatment and recovery services, by
increasing access to medically assisted treatment, telehealth
opportunities, and advancing public health screening and
prevention.
In 2021, more than 107,000 people lost their lives due to
fatal drug overdose in the United States, an increase of nearly
15 percent from the prior year. In 2020, Maryland ranked sixth-
highest in the Nation for drug overdose death rates.
For those living in rural communities, access to care can
be particularly challenging. For those without a car, that are
living in communities that lack public transportation, this
barrier can be insurmountable. The ability to utilize
telehealth to prescribe MOUD is critical to help reduce
overdose deaths, especially in communities like my own.
One in five incarcerated individuals are currently serving
a sentence related to a drug offense. Also, the leading cause
of death for people leaving prison is overdose. Maryland has
taken steps to try to lessen the risk of overdose for people
who are incarcerated by passing the Opioid Use Disorder
Examination and Treatment Act in 2019, which requires an array
of substance use disorder services be available in jails. While
medical services are available in carceral settings, SUD
services are rare. Substance use disorder is a medical
condition and deserves to be treated as such. We would not deny
someone antibiotics if they were sick, so how is this any
different?
In April of this year, the U.S. Department of Health and
Human Services issued guidance encouraging States to apply for
Medicaid Section 1115 waiver, which allows States to use
Medicaid for medical services, including SUD services for
people otherwise eligible 90 days prerelease. We applaud
Congress and HHS for making this opportunity available to
States. I am excited to share that Maryland is using this
guidance to prepare an 1115 waiver application. Governor Moore
is embracing evidence-based solutions such as harm reduction,
which can be used as a model nationally.
Harm reduction is a set of practices that aims to reduce
the severe health impacts associated with substance use.
Meeting people where they are at is especially important
because all people, despite their circumstances, deserve to be
treated with dignity and respect. Ensuring that every person,
school, and business has naloxone available is an effective way
to fight the overdose crisis. The only thing naloxone enables
is breathing, and having this lifesaving medication available
is key.
Individuals who participate in harm reduction programs are
five times more likely to enter treatment, which is
significantly higher than the 1 in 10 individuals who enter
treatment outside of a harm reduction program.
In addition to providing support services and connections
to treatment, harm reduction also includes syringe service
programs, which greatly reduces the spread of infectious
diseases such as HIV and hepatitis.
As we continue to have these conversations and enact
policies to help combat the overdose crisis, including people
who use drugs in conversation is essential. Taking a ``nothing
is about us without us'' approach will do so much good. We want
to make sure that people who use drugs have a real voice when
it comes to the creation of policies and programs that are
created to help or affect them.
Governor Moore has vowed to lead with love, and that starts
by saving lives. Our priorities include addressing the needs of
the individuals that are most at risk for overdose, taking a
public health approach to substance use solutions, and leading
on evidence-based practices. It also means removing as many
barriers to care as possible so that individuals can access
treatment and recovery services at the critical times when they
decide they are ready to seek help. No one will be left behind.
Thankfully, the SUPPORT Act was groundbreaking in that it
was the first piece of Federal legislation to truly address the
overdose crisis foremost as a public health issue. This
approach is critical to addressing the actual and immediate
needs of people who use drugs and people with substance use
disorder.
As the overdose crisis continues to evolve and the number
of stimulant-related overdoses increases or new drug trends
emerge, such as xylazine, we need to remain nimble in our
response efforts and ensure policy meets the actual needs of
individuals with substance use disorder.
Thank you again for the opportunity to address the
subcommittee today, for your dedication to this issue, and for
the hard work you do on behalf of the American people.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Keller follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Guthrie. Thank you for being here and thank you for
sharing. Hagerstown is a beautiful town.
Ms. Keller. Thank you.
Mr. Guthrie. I get to drive through sometimes when I drive
from Kentucky.
Mr. Straley, you are now recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF MICHAEL L. STRALEY

Mr. Straley. Thank you, Chairman Guthrie and fellow
committee members. My name is Mike Straley.
My wife Robin and I were scheduled to have dinner with our
daughter, Leah Renee Straley, on Thursday, March 1, 2018, at a
Delray Beach, Florida, restaurant. Instead, we had her memorial
service in Hagerstown, Maryland. Leah Renee Straley passed on
Valentine's Day 2018. Her cause of death: fentanyl poisoning.
She is forever 26.
Every day there is grief.
Leah's addiction started when she was 14 years old, much of
it attributed to peer pressure. It started with marijuana, in
her case, the drug of choice and the gateway drug that led to
more potent drugs: cocaine, heroin, painkillers, and ultimately
fentanyl.
We are a middle-class family. She was raised in church and
had a loving family and friends whose parents were business and
shop owners. Addiction does not discriminate.
As parents, we were naive to her addiction at first because
she concealed it well. Then the physical signs became apparent.
As parents, we wanted to fix the problem, but we quickly
learned those who are going through addiction can only help
themselves. In Leah's case, she sought that help.
She entered her first detox center, a local treatment
facility in Franklin County, Pennsylvania. Our insurance did
not cover the cost. We had to self-pay, $14,000 for 2 weeks. We
tapped into our savings and got help from my parents.
We may as well have burned that money because in less than
a week after her discharge, Leah was back into the addiction
cycle.
She graduated high school with honors and received a
college stipend to attend a local 2-year school. Her major:
drug counseling. She never completed that degree. At the time
of her passing, she was a first-semester junior after starting
and stopping her college studies.
She would enter 12 detox centers from age 16 to 26. She
lived in at least eight different sober-living homes, from
California to North Carolina to back here in Pennsylvania. Her
best treatment was in California, where she had 9 months'
sobriety.
I changed jobs and my insurance covered the detox
treatments and sober-living home stints. Our home was not the
answer for her to return to live permanently. As a father, it
was difficult at first to tell her that, but she knew it as
well. When she was in a sober-living environment that
emphasized community, she thrived. Otherwise, she struggled.
When she turned 26, she was no longer on my insurance. She
had to turn to state insurance. She sought out a sober-living
facility in western Pennsylvania. In her words, it was a dump--
bed bugs, unsanitary conditions all throughout the house,
including the kitchen.
She decided she was going to take up an offer to visit a
``friend'' in Delray Beach, Florida. Leah told us her
``friend'' was ``clean.'' They were roommates at the sober-
living home in California. My dad and I drove her to the
airport on February 10, 2018. I hugged and kissed her before
her flight and told her that her biggest fans were at home and
that we believed in her, like I had so many times before. She
said she knew she was loved. It would be my last hug and kiss
from my daughter.
Fast forward to the morning of February 14, 2018. I
received a call at work. I work at Fulton County Medical Center
as the executive director of the foundation. At 9:02 a.m. I
received a call from the front desk that two Pennsylvania State
Police officers were in the lobby, and they wanted to talk with
me. We entered a private room, and it was there they informed
me that my beloved Leah was found dead earlier that morning in
Delray Beach, Florida.
I do not remember much about that conversation but drove
myself to Hagerstown, Maryland, to break the news to my wife. I
ran out of paper napkins in my truck about halfway through the
60-minute drive. We then informed our son, Chris, and then my
parents. My mom, for over a month, kept a dish towel on her
shoulder. It was constantly soaked with tears.
Grief is not the absence of love. It is proof that love is
still there, and it will be always there.
My wife and I started Leah's Legacy Foundation in 2019, a
nonprofit committed to helping women in recovery. We provide
Leah Legacy purple bags filled with over 40 essentials to women
in sober living. We share Leah's journey and ours as grieving
parents. I am a speaker and author with a focus on schools,
civic groups, conferences, and seminars.
To date we have gifted 523 Leah Legacy bags to women in
recovery. We also have Leah's Gathering Place, a small house
that was part of our family's property. We have a houseguest
there that has over 6 years of sobriety. We also have life
skill classes in that house, such as basic banking, Hygiene
101, cooking, and banking for women in recovery.
We have turned misery into a mission, calamity into a
cause. We want to live our life with a purpose and to honor our
beloved Leah Renee Straley.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Straley follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Guthrie. Thank you for that powerful testimony.
Dr. Crawford, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF MITCHELL CRAWFORD, D.O.

Dr. Crawford. America's addiction crisis touches nearly
every American in some way, including those of us in this room,
including me. I lost my sister, who was a great person and whom
I loved dearly, to an overdose in 2015. In the grief for my
sister's loss, much like you have heard, I vowed to focus my
work on addiction treatment.
Fortunately, I have been given an opportunity to do that
work. Unfortunately, I still experience the loss of friends,
colleagues, patients to fatal overdoses.
It is important to note that, sadly, my story is not
unique. However, I have also witnessed countless patients find
long-term recovery, and this continues to provide me with
renewed hope. We have treatment, and treatment works.
My name is Dr. Mitchell Crawford, and I am the Director of
Addiction Services for WellSpan Health. Subcommittee Chairman
Guthrie and members of the House Energy and Commerce
Subcommittee on Health, thank you very much for the opportunity
to testify this morning.
I would also like to particularly thank Dr. John Joyce, our
Congressman here in Adams County, for his all-hands-on-deck
approach to combat this addiction crisis.
For background, WellSpan Health is an integrated delivery
system of more than 20,000 team members serving the communities
of central Pennsylvania, including WellSpan Gettysburg
Hospital. Our behavioral health network, WellSpan Philhaven, is
one of the 20th largest such providers in the Nation.
The 115th Congress and the Trump administration deserve
credit for the passage of the SUPPORT Act, which enabled
hospitals to better coordinate care, expand access to substance
use disorder (SUD) treatment, and offer alternative pain
management treatments. The law reauthorized funding from the
Cures Act, which put $500 million a year toward the opioid
crisis and gave States more flexibility in using the funding.
It expanded access to treatment addiction and increased
penalties from drug manufacturers and distributors related to
the overprescribing of opioids.
The SUPPORT Act was an excellent start, but we have much
more work to do.
The number of adults in central Pennsylvania with
behavioral health and substance use disorders is increasing and
surpassing the capacity of behavioral health and primary care
providers to treat them. Given the urgency of this addiction
crisis, we cannot overstate the need to increase the number of
healthcare providers who can treat individuals with addiction.
Instead of driving people away from doing this work, we need to
encourage them.
We have already taken big steps. The DEA used to require
clinicians who wanted to prescribe buprenorphine for the
treatment of opioid use disorder to undergo an extensive
training and registration process for the so-called ``X-
waiver.'' Although this was a revolutionary step in the right
direction many years ago, in our current era the extra training
and waiver process likely discouraged additional doctors from
prescribing buprenorphine for the treatment of opioid use
disorder.
Last December, Congress eliminated that provision, which we
hope will increase access to treatment and literally prevent
thousands of Americans from dying from opioid overdoses.
Looking forward, as mentioned previously, one important
barrier to eliminate would be the Institutions for Mental
Diseases exclusion, or IMD, which has prohibited Federal
payments to States for services for adult Medicaid
beneficiaries between the ages of 21 and 64 who are treated in
facilities that have more than 16 beds and that provide
inpatient or residential behavioral health treatment.
WellSpan appreciated the recent decision from the Drug
Enforcement Agency and SAMHSA to release a temporary rule
extending COVID-19 telehealth prescribing flexibilities for
buprenorphine and other controlled substances through November
11, 2024.
As part of the SUPPORT for Patients and Communities Act,
Congress directed the DEA to create a special registration
program for telehealth providers. To date, no program has been
established, and Congress should push the agency to meet its
statutory mandate.
On a related topic, Congress should make permanent Medicare
telehealth flexibilities granted during the COVID-19 public
health emergency and extended through 2024 by the Consolidated
Appropriations Act.
Keeping with the theme of flexibility, there is bipartisan
legislation before this committee, Modernizing Opioid Treatment
Access Act, that would increase access to lifesaving care for
people experiencing opioid use disorder by reforming the
outdated regulations governing the prescription and dispensing
of methadone, largely--two crucial changes being that it would
allow for prescription of methadone by physicians who are board
certified in addiction medicine or addiction psychiatry as well
as pharmacies to dispense methadone under Federal oversight. We
appreciate the subcommittee's review and consideration of this
proposal.
Finally, Congress should also double down on the commitment
to fund the Certified Community Behavioral Health Clinic model.
WellSpan's CCBHC, called the START Program, is an innovative,
one-stop behavioral health treatment program for patients with
a focus on rapid access and stabilization, in collaboration
with numerous county agencies and community partners.
I would like to close by bringing us back to what is most
important. We know our friends and neighbors are struggling
with addiction, and importantly, we know that treatment works.
Thank you again to the members of the Subcommittee on
Health for focusing your efforts on this critically important
topic and for the opportunity to be here today. WellSpan looks
forward to working with the committee and the entire Congress
to ensure that all Americans have access to high-quality,
lifesaving addiction healthcare services. Thank you, as well,
for your service to the citizens of your districts, and I look
forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Crawford follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Guthrie. Thank you. That is very powerful testimony as
well.
Chief Ceravola, you are recognized for 5 minutes for your
opening statement.

STATEMENT OF WILLIAM CERAVOLA

Mr. Ceravola. Thank you for the opportunity to be here
today, Dr. Joyce.
My name is William Ceravola. I was born and raised in New
Orleans, Louisiana. I believe I had a normal childhood. Early
on in life, I knew I wanted to get into law enforcement. I
started working at a pizza shop when I was around 15 years old.
Around that time, I started to associate with some coworkers
that would help sneak me into a local bar and get me drinks and
would also introduce me to marijuana.
I had a relative that was a high-ranking trooper with the
Louisiana State Police. I asked him what I needed to do to be a
police officer, and he told me the best thing I could do at my
age would be to join the military. So I did. In 1986, I went in
the U.S. Army, and I loved every minute of serving until 1992,
and probably would have made a career out of that, but my
mission was to be a police officer.
In 1995 I was hired by the Kenner Police Department in
Louisiana. Of course, I started out as a patrolman and
eventually worked to become a crime scene investigator. I
remember when I graduated the police academy, I thought I could
change the world--I might change some people's worlds, not all
of them.
But anyway, as a crime scene investigator I would
investigate all types of crimes between vehicle break-in to
investigating a triple homicide/kidnapping. But it was my job
to collect evidence at death scenes, and I would regularly
attend autopsies at the morgue. I had to collect evidence that
the pathologist would discover, along with photographing and
fingerprinting bodies.
One day I went to the morgue, and I noticed that there was
a pregnant female there. Little did I know at that time they
also performed an autopsy on the fetus. I will never forget
that little boy that never had a chance at life. It turns out
that his mother passed of an overdose.
I know there is a stigma with overdose deaths that it is
their own fault, and it happens to other people, or they have
had a poor upbringing. It cannot happen to smart, well-
educated, wealthy people, can it? Well, the female that day was
a nurse, and she passed in a supply room in a hospital that she
worked at. Think about that for a second. How can that be?
Well, I have also seen police officers that get addicted to
drugs. I personally had to dismiss an officer because he got
addicted to painkillers from an off-duty injury. I wonder why
did he not just come to me and say he had a problem. Well, I
believe it is because he did not want to be labeled. I have
also heard of police officers that are exposed at crime scenes,
and someone has had to administer Narcan to save his or her
life. I have been told that it could take only one time using
some highly addictive drugs to get addicted. I worry that those
officers became addicted that day.
My police career in Louisiana was a very busy one.
Sometimes I wonder how I can sleep at night. In December of
2000, I decided that it would be best to move to East Berlin,
Pennsylvania, and raise children. Reading Township is a farming
community that is just outside of East Berlin here in Adams
County. We have around 6,000 residents. When I started with the
Reading Township Police Department, I was a police officer, and
when the police chief left they selected me to be the officer
in charge.
When I first started here, I remember hearing about drug
overdoses on a weekly event. Back then we did not have the
computers in the cars, so we can't see all the calls. So I was
just hearing what was over the radio when I was at work.
At that time, we did not have Narcan in the cars. The best
we could do was get to the scene and perform CPR, and it
usually is in a hectic environment.
In April 2004, my family had a life-altering event. My
youngest brother, Byron, took his life. This weighed heavily on
my mother, who already had a drinking problem and a failing
marriage. Sadly, one of my other brothers turned to illegally
taking pills to cope with our brother's passing. Later he
started shooting up and eventually started using heroin.
I knew my mother would never survive losing another son. I
saw my mother struggle to assist him, and I was so mad that she
would give him money and provide him a place to be able to use
drugs. He would steal from her, but she said, ``I cannot stand
to think of my son dying underneath a bridge in New Orleans
from a drug overdose.'' He has been in rehab three times, and I
can proudly say that he is doing excellent. He has a very good
job now, take-home car, health benefits. He, of course, is on
medication to help deal with his addiction. But what I worry
about is, what is going to happen when my mother passes? Is
that going to be a triggering event for him?
Over the last 10 years, since I have been carrying Narcan
in the car, I can honestly say that overdose deaths in my area
have gone down. I do not see it on a weekly basis anymore, and
I think being in a rural community, that has helped us a lot. I
do not even know how many overdoses we do not know about, that
the families are saving.
So I pray that we can build on this success and save more
lives. I can attest that we are not just saving the user, we
are saving their family, because I have seen families crushed
by overdose deaths.
So I will wrap it up with, I still wonder about that little
boy. What would he be today, 24 years later? What would he be
doing today if he had a chance?
[The prepared statement of Mr. Ceravola follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Guthrie. Thank you for that powerful testimony as well.
And now we have concluded with witness statements, and we will
begin questioning from members of the panel, and I will begin
by recognizing myself for 5 minutes.
And my first question will be to Chief Ceravola. I actually
had jury duty a few years back. I got called by my local county
and I was home in August, so I got to serve on jury duty. And I
did grand jury, and we would hear 15 to 20 cases a day. And I
just expected going in it was going to be all drugs. And there
was certainly a good number of that, but what really shocked me
is how much was alcohol. I mean, 0.3 with kids in the car, I
mean, those kinds of things, domestic abuse, things of that
nature. It just kind of shocked me how much is moving forward.
Can you comment on the excessive alcohol use and
alcoholism? I know you talked about your mother a little bit.
In your enforcement, is alcohol as prevalent? Because the
issues we get with the SUPPORT Act, you know, we absolutely
have to deal with opioids, but there are other addictions
people have as well, and I am thinking about how we need to
deal with alcohol. Could you just kind of comment on how
alcohol plays into this?
Mr. Ceravola. Yes. I believe that alcohol is definitely a
part of this. Like I said, I started out drinking some alcohol
and it progressed into marijuana, and I am sure it could have
kept going if I did not have that mission in life.
More importantly, I think a lot of the problem is also
mental health. Mental health, I think a lot of people who are
on drugs, you have some mental health issues. Not everyone, of
course. I can tell you that I have zero tolerance when it comes
to alcohol. As a matter of fact, I guess 9, 10 years ago I got
a phone call in the middle of the night, and it was a sheriff's
deputy in Louisiana who said, ``We just arrested your mom for a
DUI. What should we do?'' I said, ``Do your job.''
My mom still gives me a hard time: ``You told them to
arrest me?'' I said, ``No, you were already under arrest. I
told them to do their job, because it was no sense in him
losing his job because you made a mistake.''
I am proud to say that I think that changed my mom's
outlook, when I did not come to her rescue. She does not drink.
Well, I think she will drink a wine here and there. She has
found God again, and she is in a good place now. It took her a
long time to get here.
Mr. Guthrie. Good to hear the successes. And I think all of
you, if we can keep our microphones kind of close. I think this
is kind of a tough room in terms of echoes so please speak into
your microphones. I know we can hear, but people behind you can
hear better.
Mr. Straley, you said your daughter lived in, I think, 14
different--we are trying to figure out what works, and when we
spend taxpayers' dollars how do we do it in the best way that
it works and can help people.
So is there any insight you can share on what your daughter
went through? She had some months of sobriety and some things,
and wraparound services at the end. What do you think worked,
and when you said, ``Boy, this really was not a good option for
my daughter,'' through her different treatments. What kind of
treatment worked and what kind did not?
Mr. Straley. When she was in California she actually
received the best treatment, but I understand that was years
ago. They were sort of ahead of the curve as far as medically
assisted treatment. And, you know, she was out there in sober
living in a group setting. When she was in sober-living homes
where you were basically on your own, she struggled. She
struggled to get to meetings. She struggled to interact. But it
seemed like when they went together in groups, you know, the
peers, the cohorts, that seemed to work.
As far as other treatment, the Suboxone strips certainly
worked for her. Other medically assisted--the shot, and things
like that, I know that Ms. Keller talked about, those were
things that did work for her.
The biggest thing was getting back into the old
surroundings and, you know, breaking that vicious chain. And
once she found new friends in a sober-living environment, she
thrived. But when she was out by herself, I know the chief
talked about the mental health problem, that was an issue.
There were struggles, and it seemed like she felt as though she
was up against the world by herself.
Mr. Guthrie. Dr. Crawford, I only have a few seconds, but
Dr. Crawford and Ms. Keller, what do you see as a couple of
things that are successful, and what we can improve?
Dr. Crawford. Yes, I will be quick so you have an
opportunity to speak as well.
Opportunities, I think, are increasing low-barrier access
to treatment, just making it as easy as possible for folks to
engage in treatment, and to kind of change culture. We have
heard comments about stigma, which I greatly appreciated and
agree with. So making an opportunity for folks to kind of
normalize that conversation, to feel comfortable to have it,
and then being ready to act when they ask for help.
Mr. Guthrie. Ms. Keller?
Ms. Keller. I agree with low-barrier access to treatment,
medically assisted treatment, and also wrapround services. So
we are not putting someone in a 28-day program and saying,
``OK, here you go. Go about your day.'' We need to wrap around
services, make sure they have financial literacy training, they
have access to MOUD when they get out, they have Medicaid or
primary care benefits, just an ability to thrive, and we are
not just expecting someone to be cured in 28 days.
Mr. Guthrie. Thank you. Thank you for testifying. I will
yield back, and I will now recognize Mr. Tonko for 5 minutes
for questions.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you, Chair, and thank you again to all of
our witnesses. We have seen this in many of our family members
and friends and neighbors. Our justice system is a revolving
door for those struggling with addiction and mental health
issues. Over one-half of people in State prisons and two-thirds
of individuals in jails have substance use disorder. The need
for uninterrupted and comprehensive coverage for individuals
prior to release from incarceration has never been more
critical, and the inability of Medicaid to cover otherwise
eligible individuals has unintentionally stood in the way,
creating burdens for law enforcement and obstacles for
individuals who need care. And again, so many of our loved ones
end up in an incarcerated setting.
Currently Federal statute prohibits any form of Federal
health coverage for incarcerated individuals except under very
limited circumstances. In most cases, Medicaid coverage is
immediately terminated when someone is sent to a correctional
setting. This creates a serious coverage gap when individuals
are released, as they often have no access to healthcare or
addiction treatment during a stressful and dangerous time.
Ms. Keller, thank you for your commitment to promoting
access to care in honor of your friend, Ashley, and the many
loved ones we have lost to this disease. You mentioned that in
particular you have seen incarcerated individuals struggle with
a lack of access to care coordination upon their release. Can
you speak more to why the period post-incarceration is such a
critical time to receive treatment and coordination of care?
Ms. Keller. Absolutely. We are actually seeing that people
being released from jail are up to 128 times more likely to die
from an overdose in the 2 weeks following their release. My
friend, Ashley, died from an overdose 6 weeks after her
release. It is a very real thing.
If returning citizens were able to have access to
healthcare immediately, it could be a game changer. Think about
this: You go into jail, you have a substance use disorder, you
are not treated in jail; when you get out, you still have that
substance use disorder. So if you are able to immediately
access healthcare benefits it could really change recidivism
rates and what we are seeing. Overdose deaths are actually the
fastest-growing cause of deaths that are occurring in U.S.
jails as well.
So we need to treat the person. Yes, if they committed a
crime and they are serving a sentence, they are still a human
being and they still have a disease that needs to be treated.
Mr. Tonko. So to clarify: Currently can most incarcerated
individuals access medications for opioid use disorder while
they are incarcerated?
Ms. Keller. No, they cannot.
Mr. Tonko. OK. Thanks to the bipartisan work this committee
did together 5 years ago in the SUPPORT Act, States can now
apply for a demonstration program to use Medicaid for eligible
services for justice-involved individuals returning to their
communities, 90 days prerelease. While this demonstration
program is wonderful, it is just that: a demo. It can be ripped
away at any moment and will require both applications from the
State and approval by CMS. I have made the case to my
colleagues that we should protect and codify this demonstration
program through my Reentry Act. Some are worried about the
Federal costs, but I strongly believe that this is one of the
most effective ways we can save lives through a relatively
small change in policy.
Let me reiterate: I measure success in lives saved and
families kept whole. By allowing inmates to receive addiction
treatment and other services before returning home, my Reentry
Act will bring targeted treatment to those at the highest risk
of overdose.
Ms. Keller, again, do you believe that reentry policy such
as access to prerelease services, including SUD services, for
otherwise eligible individuals is a good use of Federal
funding?
Ms. Keller. Yes, Representative. I do not think you can put
a price tag on a human life, and if our tax dollars are going
to save to allow that person to thrive, then I think that it is
absolutely worth it.
Mr. Tonko. Some of the most vocal advocates for the Reentry
Act that I have authored and the need for prerelease addiction
services and coordination of care are law enforcement, because
they see firsthand how this disease of addiction impacts their
community. I would like to enter for the record a joint letter
in support of my Reentry Act from the National Sheriff's
Association, the Major County Sheriffs of America, the Major
Cities Chiefs Association, and the National Association of
Counties.
Mr. Guthrie. Without objection, so ordered.
[The information appears at the conclusion of the hearing.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you. And Chief Ceravola, some people
believe that justice-involved individuals are not worthy of
treatment or saving or have the mindset that perhaps they do
not deserve treatment or at least a lost cause. Further, they
think of those with addiction as less. I want to personally
thank you for reducing stigma but most of all for seeking
humanity in others.
What would you say to other law enforcement members who may
be considering carrying Narcan?
Mr. Ceravola. I have actually had some law enforcement
officers tell me they are not going to bother, that person did
it to themselves. And I explain to them, ``You need to do that
because, one, it could be your coworker that was affected, but
more importantly, you are saving that person's family, not the
user. You are giving the user another chance, but you are
saving the family.''
Mr. Tonko. Thank you. With that I yield back, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Guthrie. Thank you. The gentleman yields back. The
Chair will recognize Mr. Griffith for 5 minutes, for the
purpose of asking questions.
Mr. Griffith. Thank you very much. I appreciate that.
Mr. Straley, you said that your daughter benefited from
some Suboxone programs, which is buprenorphine. When she was
not in the program, was she able to access Suboxone on the
street, do you know?
Mr. Straley. I do not know. I want to say no.
Mr. Griffith. And I am going to shift. I just wanted that
as a fact point, because in part of my district--I have a large
rural district in Appalachia, and in part of my district
there's a number of Suboxone clinics, and what they have found
is that it has become a street drug that some of the patients
who are there will take some of their dosage and they will sell
some of their dosage.
So Dr. Crawford, have you seen any signs of that with your
patients, where some of them may not be taking the full dosage,
and what do you do to monitor if people are actually taking
what you have prescribed them? I assume you prescribe Suboxone
because you mentioned buprenorphine.
Dr. Crawford. Correct, yes, I do prescribe medications for
the treatment of addiction. And so to more directly answer your
question, yes, I have had patients who I suspected of diverting
the medications that I prescribed. To be very clear, you know,
we take a harm reduction approach and a low-barrier access to
care, but we are also not drug dealers, right, so we have to
keep people safe, and we have to reduce their risk of harm. So
in those circumstances it is very clear from folks like the
Drug Enforcement Agency that we could not continue that
relationship. That was a clear mark that either this treatment
is not effective for them, perhaps they may need a higher level
of care, more support wrapped around them, and so we would not
continue to go just as ----
Mr. Griffith. If you picked it up. And I am going to come
back to that in a second.
Chief, have you seen any--and I will use the doctor's
term--``diversion'' of Suboxone or buprenorphine in your
community?
Mr. Ceravola. I personally have not. I do know that my
brother is on Suboxone and that he has to go through a clinic
to get his dosage. I do not know if they get it all before you
leave or if it--is it a pill you take a day? I do not know how
it really works.
Mr. Griffith. All right. So let's go back to the patients
that are doing what they are supposed to do on this, and one of
the worries that I have, and why I worry about not having some
limitation on how many patients that somebody has on
buprenorphine, is that they may not be paying as close
attention as you are to whether or not there is a diversion.
But let's go to the ones who are not diverting. Do you ever
get them off of the Suboxone? I mean, I know of one case, in
Maryland, where a friend of mine's son had this issue and went
to them and said, ``Start weaning me off.'' It took years, but
he eventually got off and is doing great. But do you see that
in your practice, or do we get them to just where they are
stable and they continue to take the substitute opioid,
Suboxone, or buprenorphine?
Dr. Crawford. Yes. Thank you for the question. And just to
clarify, you know, nothing we do in medicine is perfect,
unfortunately.
Mr. Griffith. Oh definitely, yes.
Dr. Crawford. And so ----
Mr. Griffith. And clearly nothing we do in Congress is
perfect, but you have got a better batting average than we do.
But I do appreciate that, but yes.
Dr. Crawford. Sure. And so, you know, we accept that there
is some risk, and we are always balancing the risk and the
benefit analysis. And so you heard the majority of folks--90,
95 percent of people aged 12 and older, depending on which
dataset you are looking at--do not have access to treatment or
are not engaged. And so that is a risk that we take, that
perhaps some folks, a small minority, may be diverting. We do
not want that to happen, and we act accordingly.
We also know from the literature that the medication that
is diverted is actually going, the majority of the time, to
folks who do not have access. So it should not happen that way,
and we do not want it to happen that way, but that is where we
think the majority of that medication is actually going.
And to more directly answer your question, you know, we are
talking about a chronic medical disease, similar to other
chronic medical diseases like type 2 diabetes or hypertension
or high blood pressure. And these are things that folks have
that they may take medications for for the rest of their life,
or these are things that they may have changes in their life or
changes in their bodies that they may not need to take
medication anymore.
So I always counsel folks and treat my patients accordingly
with we are going to do with what works right now. If that
means we are going to take medication for the rest of our lives
because that is what works and that is what keeps you alive and
healthy, then that is great. If you feel like you want to
taper, we can do so, but very slowly and for the right reasons.
Mr. Griffith. And that is why I said it took years. You
cannot just do it overnight or you get into worse trouble. And
I do appreciate that. So you have had some patients who have
tapered and gotten off of Suboxone or buprenorphine?
Dr. Crawford. Yes. Yes.
Mr. Griffith. OK, good.
Ms. Keller, I am going to switch to you and slightly change
subjects. Part of the SUPPORT Act had a section in it on drug
monitoring. Those were sections that I advocate because, like
the arm of Maryland, my district stretches out and goes from
the Lynchburg/Roanoke area down to an area that is so far west,
it is further west than Detroit, Michigan, and we touch a
number of different States, and you can actually get
prescriptions in five different States. Maryland has a similar
situation with its arm, and I am just curious if you all have
had success with a drug monitoring program. Does that seem to
have stopped the illegal use of getting multiple prescriptions
from different doctors in different States, or even in
Maryland? Have you seen some success with that?
Ms. Keller. We have seen success with the prescription drug
monitoring program, and where I am on the map, where Maryland
gets very small, we had the same issue. So yes, it has been
successful.
Mr. Griffith. And so while everything we do does not work
perfectly, every now and then Congress gets one right, and I
think that SUPPORT Act was one of those.
I yield back. Thank you.
Mr. Guthrie. The gentleman yields back. The Chair now
recognizes Dr. Bucshon for 5 minutes for questions.
Mr. Bucshon. Thank you all for your testimony. I was a
surgeon before I was in Congress, and a healthcare provider. I
do not have any direct experience with substance abuse, but I
have family and friends who have had mental health issues. It
is a different but similar problem--chronic, lifelong problem.
Dr. Crawford, I mean, if there was one thing that we could
do, what would it be?
Dr. Crawford. A great question.
Mr. Bucshon. I mean, you are the professional in this. I
mean, you do this every day. And is there one thing that every
day you go, ``Boy, if we could just do this, that would make a
difference''? Is there such a thing?
Dr. Crawford. It is hard to pin down one thing because the
disease of addiction is multifactorial. I mean, there are so
many causes and there are so many diverse kind of treatment
pathways for folks. But I think continuing to have these
conversations and continuing to have an open mind to what the
experts are sharing with you and where the evidence is leading
you to help make decisions about grant opportunities and
funding pathways and recommendations for alternative payment
methods to encourage us to just be a healthier community rather
than focusing on efforts that are more reactive once harm has
happened.
Mr. Bucshon. Yes. I am interested in the subject about law
enforcement because, obviously, my county jail in Evansville,
Indiana, Vanderburgh County, has a high incidence of both
mental health and substance abuse people who are imprisoned
there. And I talk to my county sheriffs about that, and I am
empathetic to the situation as it relates to the Medicaid
program and figuring out ways to address that so that we do not
have gaps in care.
There is a huge cost to it. We are trying to figure that
out. But I do think--and I will just speak for myself--that we
have to sort that out, particular people, if they were on
Medicaid before, and then they lose it while they are
imprisoned, and then they come out, you know, and I think we
have addressed some of that, the reapplication process and all
that. We are going to sort that out.
Chief, in your area, in this area it is rural America--I
represent rural America--where are the illicit drugs coming
from?
Mr. Ceravola. I hate to name just one city, but in my area
I believe lot of it is coming from Baltimore. I have also been
seeing some coming from the York area. But I think most of that
is coming through Baltimore.
Mr. Bucshon. Yes, and one thing, when we are talking about
substance abuse, I do not want to overlook--and I will talk to
you about this--we are not past the methamphetamine problem,
are we?
Mr. Ceravola. No.
Mr. Bucshon. If you were to look at what is the most common
thing that you find people have problems with in your rural
area, what drug would that be?
Mr. Ceravola. Right now I believe it is heroin.
Mr. Bucshon. Heroin.
Mr. Ceravola. Yes.
Mr. Bucshon. So you are closer to an urban area than I am.
I am about 3 hours from Indianapolis, but we have a huge meth
problem still. You know, we do not make it anymore locally, but
now it comes from primarily Mexico. It comes through Chicago,
down to Indy, down to us.
And Doctor, I am going to ask you this question because I
know with methamphetamine, you know, they have done brain
studies on this, and it shows if you are on methamphetamine
that your brain may not change, even if you get off of it, for
years. I mean, there are scientific studies that show this, and
that is what makes is so hard for people to quit, because their
brain still craves this stuff. It is like nicotine. In the
medical field we call it upregulation of receptors or something
in the tissue, right? Is that type of thing also--I mean, I am
not aware of that type of chronic brain changes when it comes
to things like heroin or cocaine or these other drugs.
Do you know if there is any specific reason why long-term
treatment like somebody pointed out, you cannot expect people
to recover in 90 days, right, and why it is so important to
have long-term followup and long-term care? There are
physiologic changes in people that they cannot overcome just by
thinking about it. Is that true?
Dr. Crawford. That is a great question, and it actually
kind of connects to the question you first asked me about that
kind of silver bullet, which is the recognition that, you know,
we have an addiction epidemic and probably behavioral health
epidemic. And there is a mosaic of what is actually being used
throughout our State and our country. In the west part of our
country, there is a lot more stimulant misuse. In the
northeast, there is a lot more opioid misuse. And we have FDA-
approved medications to treat opioid use disorder. We do not
have FDA-approved medications to treat stimulant use disorder.
And so that is one of the big differences.
To more directly answer your question, yes, we do see brain
changes in folks that are suffering from addiction. A lot of
that is reinforcement of pathways, and I will not bore you with
all the neurobiology.
Mr. Bucshon. I hated neurobiology, by the way, in medical
school. It just was not my thing.
Yes, I mean, I think that is something--and I will finish
up here, Mr. Chairman--that we really need to understand, and
we have talked about this. The stigma needs to go away as much
as possible because there are legitimate medical, physiological
changes in people who become addicted that we have to recognize
and that we have to find medical ways to get them out of it.
And just telling them, ``Hey, it is bad to use drugs'' just
does not help.
I yield.
Mr. Guthrie. The gentleman yields back. The Chair
recognizes Dr. Joyce for 5 minutes.
Mr. Joyce. Thank you again, Chair Guthrie.
Mr. Straley, thanks for appearing here and offering such
incredibly powerful testimony. I offer to you personally, and
to your wife Robin, condolences for your loss. Both you and
Robin are working in our community, and it has been exemplary
work, which allows you to share your experiences in an area
that is so critical. What you have messaged to us today is a
message that we will return to Washington with.
But I want to ask you to address to us, as far as
legislation that would inform us to make better Federal policy
and face those who are in addiction. Specifically you touched
on a point that I think is so important for those of us who
live in rural areas, that those facing addiction in rural
areas, which is why your daughter traveled far from this
beautiful community--for those who face those addiction issues
here, it has to be addressed through a different lens or
perhaps through many different lenses. Do you feel that access
to care in rural areas is sufficient?
Mr. Straley. No, I do not.
Mr. Joyce. Do you feel that we should be more attentive to
understanding how important that access is, and should that be
included in the SUPPORT Act?
Mr. Straley. Absolutely.
Mr. Joyce. Chief Ceravola, opioid overdose reversal
medications like naloxone, you and I recognize, are critical
components to part of the strategy. As you face each and every
day as you are called out on each and every call, often you
might not know if you are going to have to utilize the ability
to reverse an overdose.
According to the Reagan-Udall Foundation, a recent report
on naloxone, of the 17 million doses of naloxone that have been
distributed in the United States in 2021, more than 84 percent
were distributed by local health departments, first responders
like you, schools, and other community organizations.
Can you share how important, once again for us, that law
enforcement and first responders are in having that access to
naloxone in your cruiser?
Mr. Ceravola. I believe it is very important. I make sure
that each one of my police cars has at least one dosage. I
think we should have it readily available to anybody who wants
it. If somebody walks into my station and says, ``I would like
a dose,'' I would be more than happy to give them mine and go
get another one.
Another positive thing I have seen lately is in the last
couple years we have went through a paid EMS in my area. Prior
to that, it was all volunteer. So now we are getting ambulances
to the scene quicker, so that is another avenue for that Narcan
to be administered. Sometimes the ambulance can beat us to the
scene now, which used to not be the case.
Actually, one of the things that I did when my brother
passed is I put my energy into building a street rod. This past
week there was a street rod show in York, and I drove it in the
parade through York. And as I am driving along I see a lady
sitting with a table in a corner, and she has a whole bunch of
boxes of Narcan sitting on that table. It was an outreach
program.
I wanted to pull over and hug her, but I could not stop the
parade, and we ended up taking a different route back. But I
really wanted to stop and talk to that person, but I did not
get a chance to. I think things like that help. And here she is
just sitting out there on a sunny day with a table full of
Narcan for anybody that wants to come get it.
Mr. Joyce. Thank you, Chief, and thank you, Dr. Crawford.
Thank you for bringing your expertise to rural Pennsylvania.
Access to comprehensive treatment for opioid or any drug
addiction, we have recognized from your testimony, is
incredibly challenging. And again, I go back to how challenging
that is in rural areas here in Pennsylvania 13.
So when we are talking about significant barriers that are
driving the lack of access, do you feel that the IMD exclusion
is an important barrier that we need to address in our upcoming
SUPPORT legislation?
Dr. Crawford. I do, yes.
Mr. Joyce. Within your WellSpan facility, how many
inpatients do you treat at different facilities, and locally
and comprehensively in all the facilities where your treatment
is?
Dr. Crawford. Are you referring to strictly for behavioral
health?
Mr. Joyce. Yes, in behavioral health, clearly.
Dr. Crawford. I do not have the exact figures. We have a
number of hospitals. We have a stand-alone behavioral health
hospital in Lebanon County. We have an inpatient unit in
Lancaster County as well as in Franklin County and others. So
at least hundreds, perhaps even low thousands of patients.
Mr. Joyce. Do you feel that physicians having additional
opportunity and not being limited to the number of patients
they can prescribe Suboxone--do you find that is an important
piece of equipment that a physician is going to have as they
are armed appropriately to treat addiction?
Dr. Crawford. I do, yes.
Mr. Joyce. My time has expired, and I yield.
Mr. Guthrie. The gentleman yields back. The Chair
recognizes Mr. Obernolte from California for 5 minutes.
Mr. Obernolte. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you very
much to our witnesses. This has been an incredibly poignant
hearing for me. I represent an extremely rural section of
California. You would not think that my district would be a
district that would have a problem with fentanyl, but we do. In
the last 18 months, my district has experienced an over 600
percent increase in the number of fentanyl-related deaths,
which is incredible.
My most difficult day in 19 years of public office was last
fall when I had a constituent lose both of her sons in the same
afternoon to the same fentanyl poisoning incident. So this is a
problem that has its tentacles in every part of our country,
and it is something that I am convinced that government, and in
particular Congress, needs to play an active role in fixing.
I want to talk about a couple of kind of difficult topics,
and one of them is I wish we would stop using the word
``overdose.'' The vast majority of these incidences, when
someone dies from fentanyl, is not an overdose. It is a
poisoning. They did not intend to take fentanyl--not to defend
the fact that they thought it was oxy or some other opioid--but
this substance was intentionally introduced into a pill that
they took, and they did not have the knowledge of what they
were taking.
As has been discussed here, Narcan has been a godsend, and
it has meaningfully decreased the number of fentanyl-related
deaths in my community as we have gotten it into more schools,
more law enforcement. Unfortunately, we are seeing a new
problem in my district, which is the problem of xylazine.
Xylazine does not respond to Narcan, and we do not have a way
right now of saving someone who is suffering from xylazine
poisoning. That problem is just going to increasingly get
worse.
Chief Ceravola, I would like to ask you, with your law
enforcement experience, there is a fundamental difference here
between preventing opioids like oxycodone from being in our
community, because there is a legitimate prescription path for
that. So a lot of the oxy that we see diverted is diverted from
someone who has a legitimate prescription, or it comes from
overprescription through legitimate channels.
But fentanyl and xylazine, that is a completely different
thing. You would think that if we could get that off the
street, yes, we would still have a problem with substance use
and opioid use, but we would not have nearly as many people
actually dying from it.
So what can we do more to get substances like fentanyl and
xylazine off the street?
Mr. Ceravola. I guess the best thing to do is more
enforcement and get the courts to work with us, because so many
times we see somebody get off on things, and it is like that is
something that the person should pay the price for. You know,
that is a dealer providing these drugs to the community. That
person should not get a light sentence.
Mr. Obernolte. So you are suggesting sentence enhancement
for crimes like intentional incorporation of fentanyl into a
pill.
Mr. Ceravola. Right. One of the things we always try to do
at a death scene is we will try to seize the phone. A lot of
times we can go through that phone and see who the provider
was, and then we can go after that person. In a most recent
case, when I did get to that point, by the time I figured out
who it was, he had also passed away.
I do notice that there must be some bad batches that come
in sometimes, because you will see a spike. Like everybody must
have gotten some of this bad batch of heroin. I do not know.
That is the only way I can figure out how you can have a spike,
like a week, and then it will go right down. It has to be just
a bad batch.
Mr. Obernolte. Right. In speaking with my own local law
enforcement, they have found that often the local dealers are
unaware that fentanyl has been introduced into what they think
they are pressing into oxy pills, and it is actually the
higher-up links in that drug supply chain that have that
knowledge. But I completely agree with you.
Mr. Ceravola. I can believe that.
Mr. Obernolte. Well, I think we are going to do another
round of questioning so I will save my next questions to the
going-over time. But thank you very much for your testimony.
I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Guthrie. Thank you. Mr. Tonko, we have gone pretty
efficient with our time, so we will go around and let everybody
ask an additional question. Everybody does not have to use
their 5 minutes each time, or a closing statement, or just an
additional question. So I will recognize myself for 5 minutes.
And I just want to say that we are going to all work
together. This is going to be a bipartisan issue going forward.
It does not mean we are going to agree on everything, so we are
going to work through those disagreements. We are not going to
disagree to be disagreeable.
And one thing, there are a lot of proposals to expand
Medicaid, and we want people in prison to get the help and the
coverage and assistant they need because it is cheaper on
society as they move forward, as they move out, to not be
recidivism. We did pass a bill last year that allows juveniles
to have access to their Medicaid healthcare, mental health
treatment, because as you said, that is going to be helpful
moving forward.
We just want to be careful that--I used to be in the State
legislature. State legislators have to balance their budgets,
thank goodness, and nothing they would like more than to send
the cost up to Washington, DC. And there is a responsibility
for the States in this. I know that Maryland does a great job
with it. Kentucky does a great job with it. There is a
responsibility for States and local governments. And as we have
to deal with ever-increasing budget deficits, the solution of
sending the bill to Washington is not the best.
And like you said, we make decisions that do things like we
did with mental health in juveniles, because that worked, and
we think it would be effective and save money in the long run.
But we just want to be careful as we move forward on the policy
we move, and we will work through any differences. I have
confidence it will be a strong bill that will be bipartisan and
be able to be supported.
I will yield back and recognize my good friend from New
York, Mr. Tonko.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you, Mr. Chair. Just a couple of
questions.
Ms. Keller, you made reference to evidence-based harm
reduction. What does that look like, and what is the benefit of
using those approaches?
Ms. Keller. So harm reduction is using evidence-based
solutions that can aim to reduce the harm that substance use
causes. So this provides linkages to care. It also gets people
in touch with a peer support specialist. A peer support
specialist is someone who has lived experience, who can talk
the talk and walk the walk. A lot of times it involves a
syringe service program, which provides clean syringes that
lower the spread of things like HIV and hepatitis C, which does
not just help the person with a substance use disorder, it also
helps public health in general.
The interesting thing is some people, there were theories
that harm reduction may enable. But the reality of it is people
who are enrolled in a harm reduction program are five times
more likely to enter treatment, because they have been treated
with dignity and respect, they have a relationship with their
peer support specialist, and when that person says, ``You know
what? I am ready. This is the day that I want to go,'' they
know that they can go to their harm reduction program and be
trusted and access the care that they need.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you. I might just ask, Mr. Straley, in
regard to Leah, and, you know, Dr. Joyce had asked about the
approachability or availability of services in rural areas.
Would the addition of those who can prescribe medication-
assisted treatment been a helpful thing for Leah ----
Mr. Straley. Absolutely.
Mr. Tonko [continuing]. Adding more people to those roles?
Mr. Straley. Yes.
Mr. Tonko. You know, Doctor, you made mention of some of
the reforms that we have done with MAT, and I was proud to
really push that effort. Some people have said to me, ``Well,
getting the bill passed is 50 percent of the journey.'' I think
in this case it might be 10 percent, because implementation
here requires the entire community, from pharmaceutical
companies to pharmacies, doctors, nurses, clinicians, to be
entering into that equation.
How can we best encourage people you are giving work to
enter into that service provider status?
Dr. Crawford. Yes. You are right, it is an opportunity for
us, as healthcare delivery systems and providers, to meet the
communities where they are at is a problem. And I think a lot
of it we have talked about in this committee today about stigma
and making it something that the health systems and local
independent providers and such actually view as a medical
disease and something they feel armed and competent to treat.
So as much as we can do to continue to talk about it, raise
awareness about it, and continue the great work you all are
doing to reduce barriers, to allow people to do it and give
them access to training to feel comfortable and confident.
Mr. Tonko. In DEA's own words, they indicated that today we
have about 135,000 folks that can prescribe under a medication-
assisted treatment scenario. With the bill that we passed in
Congress, they said the potential is there for 1.83 million,
and it is going to take interacting with the communities that
can provide the service. So whatever you can do to advise us
going forward, or whatever encouragement you can provide to
your peers, that would be appreciated.
And with that, I yield back. Thank you.
Mr. Guthrie. Thank you for yielding, the gentleman
yielding. The Chair now recognizes Mr. Griffith for 5 minutes.
Mr. Griffith. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Let me just say I
agree with the Chairman that this problem is so awful with
substance abuse, it affects so many people that we are all
working together. We do not always agree on what the solution
is, but as you can tell from the tenor of our questions today
and our comments here, this is not a politically divided issue.
It is just a question of how can we best do it in the most
appropriate way that we can and figure out what we are doing.
We will stumble along. And as we talked earlier, Dr.
Crawford, we will make mistakes, and the medical community will
make mistakes, and hopefully we will figure out how to fix it
and do the best that we can moving forward.
With all that being said, Dr. Crawford, I am just
wondering, how do you treat differently, or what do you do
differently, and have you seen--I am sure you have--fentanyl,
but also the fentanyl analogs and now xylazine. Have you
treated somebody who been using the xylazine? It is relatively
new. I am just curious.
Dr. Crawford. Yes, absolutely and unfortunately. And so
when you have fentanyl and fentanyl analogs that we see as well
now, that are even more potent or stronger, some things that
change are that you may need more than one treatment with
naloxone, for example. I have had folks where we used all the
naloxone we had on hand, and we actually were waiting for the
code cart to get to us so that we could push the medication
intravenously or intramuscularly. They just were not responding
intranasally.
So when you are dealing with these sorts of new classes of
potency or strength of these substances, it is a new challenge.
We also see a phenomenon like was described previously, where
fentanyl is so deadly not only because of the potency but also
because it has a profound effect on what we call chest wall
rigidity, in that it actually makes your chest tighten and even
harder for you to breathe even if you had a little impulse from
your body to keep breathing.
So there are new things that we see that come with the new
substances. Xylazine, we are seeing really profound wounds all
over the body--it does not have to be at the injection site--
that need to be treated in different ways. We have seen folks
with amputations from these wounds. And as you are describing,
we do not know the best ways to treat these things medically
yet. There is not enough time and evidence to support it, so we
are doing our best to treat it symptomatically and keep folks
alive.
Mr. Griffith. All right. You raised all kinds of questions
for me. One, what is shocking, the wounds from xylazine. Are
they self-inflicted, or is it that they do not feel the pain so
they get injured accidentally, or is it something that they are
doing as a part of the reaction to the drug?
Dr. Crawford. Yes, it is a reaction to the substance. And
we think what is likely happening is that this substance,
xylazine, causes essentially clamping of the blood vessels
throughout the body, and that is why we can see it in places
other than where someone may be injecting. And what happens is
that the tissue will die, and it dies from essentially deeper
levels and then out. So it is different than a wound you may
see that starts as a skin infection and then goes down. So
folks need to be trained to look for this all over the body and
then comfortable in how they actually treat this different type
of wound.
Mr. Griffith. And then the other question that your
previous comment raised, we have all seen the studies and
reports, but when somebody is taking fentanyl or fentanyl
analog and you are trying to do the naloxone or Narcan, which
is another common name for the same substance, and you all are
pushing it in. What that indicates to me is that, when Chief
Ceravola finds this happening on the street, he has got no way
of knowing how much Narcan he should give--or his officers,
they have no way of knowing how much Narcan they should give
without giving them to somebody like you who is an expert. Is
that a fair statement?
Dr. Crawford. It is fair to say that, yes. I think what we
always guide folks, and when we talk with our excellent folks
on the front lines in the first responder field, is do what you
can with what you have and try to stabilize folks. What we can
do is we can breathe for folks. We can do CPR. We can try to
keep them alive and as viable as possible to make it to the
next step, which is where we have all the intensive treatment
where we can intubate and put tubes in to help them breathe and
do all the next-level medical care.
Mr. Griffith. But because these substances are relatively
new, not always predictable, particularly with the analogs or
with the xylazine, both you and the frontline people in many
cases are just having to experiment and hope you get it right.
Is that a fair statement as well? Is that true?
Dr. Crawford. We follow the evidence when it is there.
Mr. Griffith. I understand.
Dr. Crawford. And when it is something new, we treat
symptomatically and do our best to keep them alive.
Mr. Griffith. But if it is not working, you are going to go
a little bit further in hopes that it does work. Correct?
Dr. Crawford. Yes. We would not give up, for sure.
Mr. Griffith. I yield back.
Dr. Crawford. Thank you.
Mr. Guthrie. The gentleman yields back. The Chair
recognizes Dr. Bucshon.
Mr. Bucshon. Thank you. I just want to get on the record on
the fentanyl. It is coming from China, to Mexico, through
cartels, to the United States of America, killing our citizens.
That is not my opinion. That is what is happening. So I am
speaking to the fentanyl itself.
So, you know, all of us at the Federal level not only were
looking at preventing people from using it or the demand for
drugs by helping people get off of illicit drugs and treat
them, but we are also looking on the supply side. I just wanted
to put that on the record.
You know, the question is, how do we address that? We are
trying to address the fentanyl analog situation and making the
current administration scheduling the fentanyl analogs
permanent, because believe it or not, the scientists in China--
primarily China--chemists will literally change one little
molecule on the fentanyl, and then it technically may not be
illegal in the United States, and they can actually bring it
into the United States legally, unless we have fentanyl analogs
scheduled as Schedule I, which means there is no medicinal use.
It would be like heroin and other things. I just wanted to put
that on the record.
Dr. Crawford, this is a chronic disease, right?
Dr. Crawford. Correct.
Mr. Bucshon. And would you say in the majority of cases you
would not use the term ``cured'' in these cases, like you
would, say, for some other mental health?
Dr. Crawford. Correct. We tend to refer to folks as being
in recovery.
Mr. Bucshon. In recovery, yes. I want to point that out.
So I think also, what are your thoughts on not only
medication-assisted treatment, which I am a big supporter of,
by the way, and those things, but ongoing so-called wraparound
therapy, ongoing engagement with people who are in recovery,
and how important that is also. Could you comment on that?
Dr. Crawford. Yes. So first, I am a psychiatrist who then
specialized in the treatment of addictions, so of course I
believe in therapy and support of all of the other services
that wrap around folks.
I think it is important, and I know you are not suggesting
this, but to recognize that the medications themselves, or
certain parts of it themselves, can be very powerful alone as
well.
Mr. Bucshon. Yes.
Dr. Crawford. And so it could be dangerous to suggest that,
you know, it has to be this for a certain person and list all
the components. We recognize that the gold standard for
treatment of opioid use disorder is medication-assisted
treatment, and then we offer everything else and share what the
benefits are. But we should not withhold certain parts of
treatment because the person is not interested in other
elements.
Mr. Bucshon. Agreed. I mean, as a physician I think, I
mean, there is pretty good evidence to show--and my dad had an
alcohol problem for a while, and he ended up kicking it--that
this is a chronic problem and that medication-assisted
treatment, if you are talking about weaning people off of it
and all of these things, I just personally believe that people
have to be, for their lifetime, engaged in some way in the
treatment system, whatever that may be. Otherwise, like you
pointed out, Chief, where what might happen to your mother and
her alcohol problem if her other son died. You know, there can
be triggers that people have in their life, and suddenly, even
though they are doing well and they are in recovery, something
could trigger them, and they could flip back if they do not
have someone to reach out to.
I mean, would you agree with that?
Dr. Crawford. I think that is where the low-barrier access
comes in. So there is always an open door, and there is no
wrong door, is eventually what we would like to get to. So in
that moment, someone may have been in recovery for 10 years,
had not used the substance, and they had a slip, a return to
use. Knowing exactly where to go, or at least who to point them
in the right direction, and then us welcoming them with open
arms, with no judgment, is really what I think would be most
beneficial.
Mr. Bucshon. How do we keep track of those people so we
know? Say they do not come to you for 5 years. I mean, are
there programs where we proactively have reach-out programs,
where we just touch base with people proactively from a
provider perspective?
Dr. Crawford. It is a great idea. I am sure that there are
some community organizations that do that. We also know that
there are great models, like 12-step programs, for example,
that folks stay engaged in for decades, maybe their whole
lives. Medically speaking, with a medical model, I do not see
that very often, but I think there could be value in that.
Mr. Bucshon. And with your indulgence, Mr. Chairman, I want
to ask the Chief one thing. How many people are you seeing that
are getting Narcan three, four times, you have been to their
same house three, four times?
Mr. Ceravola. Oh, I have seen that multiple times.
Mr. Bucshon. I mean, I am a big supporter of Narcan--do not
get me wrong--but one of the challenges that we do have is that
in some areas people can get complacent and feel like they will
just show up and give me Narcan and save me, right? And I have
had local law enforcement that have to use so much Narcan they
run out, and then they cannot save people. Do you think that
attitude prevails amongst the chronic users, that ``Oh well,
they will just show up and give me Narcan''?
Mr. Ceravola. I do know that there have been some
situations where we saved someone and they actually woke up and
fought with us--because here we are trying to save them, and
actually we are trying to save ourselves--because they are mad
that you ruined their high.
Mr. Bucshon. That is a side effect of Narcan. The doctor
can probably talk about that too. Narcan, people can have
tachycardia, fast heart rates, and this type of reaction. So
that is important to understand.
I yield back.
Mr. Guthrie. Thank you. The gentleman yields back, and I
now recognize--Dr. Joyce, I just want to say to all your
constituents that are sitting here what a beautiful area of our
great country, not only historically important. I have Mammoth
Cave National Park, Abraham Lincoln's birthplace. So if you are
doing the national park checkoff, please come to Kentucky. But
I will tell you this is stunningly beautiful. Everybody here
has been wonderful to be around. Saratoga Battlefield. We just
got that from my friend from Saratoga.
But the National Park Service, thanks. I am proud of all
the people that live in my district that work for the Park
Service. They make America's great historic treasures--and even
though the history is not always the grandest, greatest of
history, it is history, and it is important what you guys do,
so thanks a lot.
And Dr. Joyce.
Mr. Joyce. Well, thank you, Chairman. I think it is
important that I echo that sentiment. I am a great-grandson of
a Civil War veteran, and the battles continue. I think that we
all recognize that one of the key battles that we have today is
with opioid addiction, with the drug addiction that continues
to permeate not just here in rural Pennsylvania but throughout
America. I want to thank each and every one of you. I want to
thank the National Park Service for providing us the
opportunity.
Today's hearing is about the SUPPORT Act, and we are going
back to Washington with the great information that you have
provided us with today to discuss how that should be
reauthorized, how it might be altered, how it could be
improved. So for my final question I would like each of you to
address, this is your opportunity to tell Washington, how
should we make the SUPPORT Act better? What Federal component
should be improved?
Ms. Keller, I would like to start with you.
Ms. Keller. Thank you very much. I would suggest extending
care to loved ones, because like we heard from Mr. Straley,
when you lose a loved one you have a hole in your heart, and a
lot of people do not know how to handle that moving forward. Or
when you love someone with a substance use disorder, a lot of
families do not know where to get help. So approaching this
from a whole-family approach and wrapping our arms around not
just the person with a substance use disorder but everyone
around them that is affected by them, providing more resources
for them to go to get help.
And I would also urge you to invest in adolescent care. We
are seeing a significant increase in young people with
substance use disorder, and with the rise in fentanyl we are
seeing a lot of younger people using fentanyl as well. So
investing in adolescent resources so they have access to
treatment, to mental health providers, and there is a severe
lack of that right now.
Mr. Joyce. I think that is a great message to take back. We
certainly saw the isolation that occurred with the lockdowns
during COVID, that individuals, particularly adolescents,
turned to escape, and unfortunately, in some situations, that
involved addictions that occurred.
Mr. Straley, Federal legislation that could be better
improved or altered as we address the reauthorization of the
SUPPORT Act?
Mr. Straley. I would say more funding for treatment centers
and also sober-living homes, and certainly in our rural area in
Franklin County, we have one sober-living facility for women
and one facility for men, and they are constantly at full
capacity. And we need more treatment centers and more sober-
living facilities to support those that are coming out and want
to live a better life.
Mr. Joyce. Dr. Crawford, as a physician I recognize the
importance that this is recognized, that addiction is
recognized as a disease. You made great comparisons talking
about the possibility of weaning people from Suboxone over a
long term. And you alluded to--and I might just ask you to
expound just briefly, you alluded to that someone who suffers
from hypertension, I might even postulate that there could be
people in this room who are on medicines this morning treating
their hypertension. And maybe with alterations to diet and to
weight reduction and to exercise, you could possibly be weaned
from medicines that would treat your hypertension. Similarly
for diabetes, type 2 diabetes. If you are treated with
medicines for type 2 diabetes, if you alter your lifestyle, if
you have weight reduction, you might be able to do that. But in
many cases that is not the case, as you and I recognize as
physicians.
Can you address two things? I am going to put you on the
spot. Can you address two things? I do want to know how to
alter, improve, and extend the SUPPORT Act and what
recommendations you have at the Federal level. But I also want
you to talk about the need for ongoing, long-term therapy as we
recognize that addiction is a disease.
Dr. Crawford. Absolutely. Yes, thank you very much. So I
will try to be quite brief with the first part, and I
appreciate the opportunity to share this. We touched on this
briefly. You know, I believe, frankly, that we are in a
behavioral health epidemic. So, you know, if I had a magic wand
I would say let's do everything we can for behavioral health.
But understanding we do not have that, when we think about
the SUPPORT Act, I think it would be fantastic to continue to
expand, in addition to opioid use disorder, all the other
substance use disorders that we see. And we talked about the
amount of folks who have died from poisonings, and that is not
something we should take lightly, but we lose about three times
as many people per year to alcohol. We lose about five times as
many people to tobacco, still. So there is a tremendous
opportunity for us to do more.
And then to answer your question about the need for
ongoing, long-term care: Absolutely. So there is a very kind of
discussed-about and famous study within academic addiction
circles comparing treatment outcomes and adherence to
treatment, comparing addiction or substance use disorder to
other chronic medical diseases, and there is no statistically
significant difference between those.
Mr. Joyce. Thank you. Chief Ceravola, the message that this
group, on the Health Subcommittee of Energy and Commerce, if
there is an alteration or modification to the SUPPORT Act, from
a law enforcement perspective, what should we take back to
Washington?
Mr. Ceravola. I think some of the things that we need to
improve on is our drug takeback programs. Unfortunately, the
last event I was not able to take part in, but I think getting
some of the prescription drugs that are not being used anymore
out of the medicine cabinets is a big help. I think mental
health, with our mental health situations, making more beds
available to people who need it to recover. And an early
outreach and education, because I have a daughter that is going
to turn 15 next month, and that is when I took my first drink.
And I cannot imagine that she is going to be doing that.
Honestly, she has a little bit of mental health issues as it
is, and I am afraid she is going to go down that road. But I
have to stop that.
Mr. Joyce. Again, thank you Chairman and Ranking Member,
and thank you for coming to Gettysburg, Pennsylvania.
Mr. Guthrie. Thanks for hosting us. We appreciate it.
The gentleman yields back. Mr. Obernolte is recognized for
5 minutes.
Mr. Obernolte. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman. I am
delighted I get an opportunity to ask a second round of
questions, because Dr. Crawford, I had one for you. I found
your testimony very meaningful, and you said something that I
found profound, enough so that I made a note of it. You said,
``We have treatment, and treatment works.'' But I think it is
important that we are very frank on this issue, because I might
respectfully push back a little bit on that. I am not sure I
agree. I would say we have treatment, and sometimes it works.
One recurring theme in people that lose their lives to
addiction is that they, quite often, have been in and out of
treatment their entire lives. That has certainly been true in
my own extended family, where I have people that I love that
have been in and out of treatment programs and just cannot seem
to get the problem solved. Mr. Straley gave some very
incredibly emotional testimony about his daughter, who--the
same thing: in and out of treatment programs until she lost her
life.
So it seems to me when someone comes into treatment and
says, ``I have had enough. I need help. I want this to be over.
I will do anything. Let's go,'' and we put them through
treatment, and it does not work, you know, we have missed that
opportunity. What can we do to reduce that cycle of in and out
of treatment? What can we do to fix that problem that first
time?
Dr. Crawford. I wish I knew the full answer to that
question. What I could share--and I appreciate your comment.
You are absolutely right. So we have treatment, and treatment
works, sometimes. It is probably a good caveat. When I make
that comment I speak medically, and so we have no treatment
that works 100 percent of the time, really, but it is
statistically significantly an improvement over not treating,
for example.
But yes, so what can we do? I think one of the biggest
things is taking an approach of harm reduction, as we have
talked about, and also personalized care approaches. I think
too often we are creating a program that has a structure that
we say, ``OK, this is how you come into it and this is how it
works for everyone.'' And we are all unique individuals with
unique life journeys.
And so I think having more flexibility, really, truly
meeting people where they are at. You know, perhaps when they
engage with us we should be asking them more what is the most
important thing to them instead of assuming we know and trying
to prescribe it to them. And so I think there is a lot of
opportunity in approaches like that.
Mr. Obernolte. Thank you. That is valuable.
Ms. Keller, you said something in your testimony that
really stuck with me also, when you were talking about
telehealth and the need to expand access to telehealth. For my
district, telehealth has been a complete game changer,
particularly during the pandemic. And I actually wish we would
stop calling it ``telehealth,'' because I know that is the
technical term for it, but when I talk about it I call it
``virtual health,'' because telehealth does not encapsulate how
comprehensive our virtual treatment options are now. I mean,
you are not just talking to a doctor on the telephone. Most of
the time you are looking at them through a videoconference.
Sometimes you are on remote sensing instruments that there they
can use to make diagnoses. It is an amazing, game-changing
technology.
And I would say, following onto the discussion we have been
having about trying to--when someone goes into treatment,
trying to make it so that they get treated, that telehealth can
be--see, I did it--virtual health could be really, really
instrumental in this, particularly because we can use it to
treat some of the behavioral health options and epidemics that
exist in our country.
So my question for you is, because you are an expert in
this, how can we, in Congress, expand virtual health and
virtual health treatment options for the people that we
represent?
Ms. Keller. Thank you for that. I agree that virtual health
is going to be ----
Mr. Obernolte. I like where you went there.
Ms. Keller [continuing]. Yes, I mean, it is the way of the
future, especially when it comes to treatment, because you can
be in an opioid treatment program, in an inpatient center, and
still be receiving mental health treatment or substance use
treatment or just primary care treatment, especially in rural
areas where you cannot access a program, you cannot drive to
one or walk into one.
So I think just making sure that insurance does cover it,
that Medicaid covers it, and that every American has access to
that. I think it is going to be a game-changer, especially you
described you are in a very rural area. So I would venture to
guess there are a lot fewer residents who just cannot drive to
a treatment center.
Mr. Obernolte. Right. Well, there were some flexibilities
granted in Medicare treatment for virtual health options during
the pandemic. I know that Congress has been working very hard
to extend those flexibilities in areas where they were working,
which is the vast majority of them. So we are certainly going
to keep up that work. But thank you very much.
Thank you very much to all of our witnesses. I really
enjoyed the hearing today. I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Guthrie. The gentleman yields back, and that concludes
two rounds of Members' questions. It has been an informative
hearing and important work that we have before us to do. So
thank you so much for taking your time and hearing your
stories. We all have family members that have similar
situations.
Now I will ask unanimous consent, we are going to insert
into the record, there is a list of documents that have been
provided to the staff, both Democrat and Republican staffs have
agreed to. I know Mr. Tonko had a list that he submitted for
the record. Of course, my written opening statement. So without
objection, so ordered. Those are submitted for the record.
[The information appears at the conclusion of the hearing.]
Mr. Guthrie. And also you may receive written questions
from Members. So I will remind Members they have 10 days to
submit questions for the record and ask the witnesses if you
could respond promptly to those questions. I really appreciate
that. Members should submit their questions by the close of
business on June 23rd.
So thank you so much. Thanks to our law enforcement
officers here today. Thank you for your service. And without
objection, the subcommittee is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 11:10 a.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]
[Material submitted for inclusion in the record follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
