- INSIGHTS FROM THE HHS INSPECTOR GENERAL ON OVERSIGHT OF UNACCOMPANIED MINORS, GRANT MANAGEMENT, AND CMS

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

INSIGHTS FROM THE HHS INSPECTOR GENERAL
ON OVERSIGHT OF UNACCOMPANIED MINORS,
GRANT MANAGEMENT, AND CMS

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT AND
INVESTIGATIONS

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

APRIL 18, 2023

__________

Serial No. 118-22

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Published for the use of the Committee on Energy and Commerce

govinfo.gov/committee/house-energy
energycommerce.house.gov

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
54-888 PDF                  WASHINGTON : 2024

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE

CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington
Chair
MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas            FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey
ROBERT E. LATTA, Ohio                  Ranking Member
BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky              ANNA G. ESHOO, California
H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia         DIANA DeGETTE, Colorado
GUS M. BILIRAKIS, Florida            JAN SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois
BILL JOHNSON, Ohio                   DORIS O. MATSUI, California
LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana               KATHY CASTOR, Florida
RICHARD HUDSON, North Carolina       JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland
TIM WALBERG, Michigan                PAUL TONKO, New York
EARL L. ``BUDDY'' CARTER, Georgia    YVETTE D. CLARKE, New York
JEFF DUNCAN, South Carolina          TONY CARDENAS, California
GARY J. PALMER, Alabama              RAUL RUIZ, California
NEAL P. DUNN, Florida                SCOTT H. PETERS, California
JOHN R. CURTIS, Utah                 DEBBIE DINGELL, Michigan
DEBBBIE LESKO, Arizona               MARC A. VEASEY, Texas
GREG PENCE, Indiana                  ANN M. KUSTER, New Hampshire
DAN CRENSHAW, Texas                  ROBIN L. KELLY, Illinois
JOHN JOYCE, Pennsylvania             NANETTE DIAZ BARRAGAN, California
KELLY ARMSTRONG, North Dakota, Vice  LISA BLUNT ROCHESTER, Delaware
Chair                            DARREN SOTO, Florida
RANDY K. WEBER, Sr., Texas           ANGIE CRAIG, Minnesota
RICK W. ALLEN, Georgia               KIM SCHRIER, Washington
TROY BALDERSON, Ohio                 LORI TRAHAN, Massachusetts
RUSS FULCHER, Idaho                  LIZZIE FLETCHER, Texas
AUGUST PFLUGER, Texas
DIANA HARSHBARGER, Tennessee
MARIANNETTE MILLER-MEEKS, Iowa
KAT CAMMACK, Florida
JAY OBERNOLTE, California
------

Professional Staff

NATE HODSON, Staff Director
SARAH BURKE, Deputy Staff Director
TIFFANY GUARASCIO, Minority Staff Director
Subcommittee on Oversight and Investigations

H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia
Chairman
MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas            KATHY CASTOR, Florida
BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky                Ranking Member
JEFF DUNCAN, South Carolina          DIANA DeGETTE, Colorado
GARY J. PALMER, Alabama              JAN SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois
DEBBIE LESKO, Arizona, Vice Chair    PAUL TONKO, New York
DAN CRENSHAW, Texas                  RAUL RUIZ, California
KELLY ARMSTRONG, North Dakota        SCOTT H. PETERS, California
KAT CAMMACK, Florida                 FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey (ex
CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington       officio)
(ex officio)

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hon. H. Morgan Griffith, a Representative in Congress from the
Commonwealth of Virginia, opening statement....................     1
Prepared statement...........................................     4
Hon. Kathy Castor, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Florida, opening statement.....................................    10
Prepared statement...........................................    12
Hon. Cathy McMorris Rodgers, a Representative in Congress from
the State of Washington, opening statement.....................    14
Prepared statement...........................................    16
Hon. Frank Pallone, Jr., a Representative in Congress from the
State of New Jersey, opening statement.........................    20
Prepared statement...........................................    22

Witnesses

Christi A. Grimm, Inspector General, Department of Health and
Human Services.................................................    24
Prepared statement...........................................    27

Submitted Material

Inclusion of the following was approved by unanimous consent.
List of documents submitted for the record.......................    65
Statement by Protect the Public's Trust, ``CDC & NIH to the
American People: You Can't Handle the Truth!,'' March 31, 2022.    66
Article of April 17, 2023, ``As Migrant Children Were Put to
Work, U.S. Ignored Warnings,'' by Hannah Dreier, New York Times    68

INSIGHTS FROM THE HHS INSPECTOR GENERAL ON OVERSIGHT OF UNACCOMPANIED
MINORS, GRANT MANAGEMENT, AND CMS

----------

TUESDAY, APRIL 18, 2023

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Oversight and Investigations,
Committee on Energy and Commerce,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 10:30 a.m., in
room 2322, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Morgan Griffith
(chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Members present: Representatives Griffith, Burgess,
Guthrie, Duncan, Palmer, Lesko, Crenshaw, Cammack, Rodgers (ex
officio), Castor (subcommittee ranking member), DeGette, Tonko,
Ruiz, Peters, and Pallone (ex officio).
Staff present: Sean Brebbia, Chief Counsel; Deep
Buddharaju, Senior Counsel; Sarah Burke, Deputy Staff Director;
Lauren Eriksen, Clerk; Tara Hupman, Chief Counsel; Sean Kelly,
Press Secretary; Peter Kielty, General Counsel; Emily King,
Member Services Director; Chris Krepich, Press Secretary; John
Strom, Counsel; Michael Taggart, Policy Director; Joanne
Thomas, Counsel; Austin Flack, Minority Junior Professional
Staff Member; Waverly Gordon, Minority Deputy Staff Director
and General Counsel; Tiffany Guarascio, Minority Staff
Director; Liz Johns, Minority GAO Detailee; Will McAuliffe,
Minority Chief Counsel, Oversight and Investigations; Christina
Parisi, Minority Professional Staff Member; Harry Samuels,
Minority Oversight Counsel; Andrew Souvall, Minority Director
of Communications, Outreach and Member Services; Caroline Wood,
Minority Research Analyst; and C.J. Young, Minority Deputy
Communications Director.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, A REPRESENTATIVE
IN CONGRESS FROM THE COMMONWEALTH OF VIRGINIA

Mr. Griffith. Welcome. Today's hearing is long overdue. It
is my understanding that this is the first time in over 20
years that the HHS Inspector General has appeared before the
Energy and Commerce Oversight and Investigations Subcommittee.
This morning's subcommittee hearing is our second
Inspectors General hearing. As Oversight and Investigations
Subcommittee chair, it is my intent to have Inspectors General
testifying before us on a regular basis.
Today, we will hear from Inspector General Christi Grimm on
her office's ongoing oversight work and investigation
priorities. We will focus on three critical areas that are
plagued with issues and concerns that we must address moving
forward.
First, we will be examining HHS'ss abject failure to
competently manage the record number of unaccompanied minors in
the care of the Office of Refugee Resettlement, abbreviated
ORR. The HHS Inspector General's office has done excellent work
to shed light on this crisis.
Back in February, we held a hearing on the border in Texas,
and as I said at the time, the Biden administration's policies
are the root cause of the border crisis we are experiencing.
This only adds to the inhumane conditions experienced by
unaccompanied children once they enter ORR care.
The surge of unaccompanied children was an entirely
foreseeable event of President Biden's refusal to secure the
border. While running for office, President Biden pledged to
reduce deportations and end Title 42. This encouraged more
migrants, and the number of annual unaccompanied minors
crossing the border during the Biden administration grew to
astronomical numbers.
From fiscal years 2018 through 2020, ORR averaged around
44,500 referrals per year. In fiscal year 2022, ORR received
over 128,900 referrals, almost three times the recent
historical average.
According to a report by CBS News, nearly 130,000 migrant
children entered the U.S. Government's shelter system in fiscal
year 2022. These numbers are staggering and a direct result of
the Biden administration's open border policies.
As the Inspector General has now documented across multiple
reports, somehow HHS was caught unprepared for this surge,
despite it being the natural result of administration policies.
In a desperate attempt to increase capacity, ORR contracted
with organizations with no relevant experience in safely caring
for unaccompanied children. The result was child neglect and
abuse.
In an effort to quickly reduce the number of children in
its care, ORR prioritized fast tracking the release of
unaccompanied children to sponsors instead of taking the time
and effort to thoroughly vet sponsors.
The result was putting children at increased risk of being
trafficked and exploited. We have all seen the news articles
about children working full-time in slaughterhouses or as
roofers or other dangerous and inappropriate professions.
In response to this crisis, HHS continues to keep the
assembly line of unaccompanied children moving as fast as
possible.
When whistleblowers raise concerns about children having
panic attacks, self-harming, or living in unsuitable
conditions, they are retaliated against.
Further, HHS denied media access to emergency intake
shelters.
The priority seems to be to keep this issue out of sight
rather than child welfare. It is unconscionable, and I want to
thank the OIG's office for their work holding HHS accountable.
The second area of focus for our hearing is NIH grant
management. There is an increasing body of evidence suggesting
that NIH fails to conduct routine oversight of grantees.
This failure extends to research done in foreign countries
involving potential pandemic pathogens, those such as the now
infamous grant to EcoHealth Alliance. The Inspector General's
audit found that NIH and EcoHealth Alliance failed to
effectively monitor and document the activities of subgrantees,
including the Wuhan Institute of Virology.
As a result of NIH's failure to secure laboratory notebooks
and other records, the U.S. Government has no adequate
documentation of the coronavirus experiments conducted in Wuhan
during the fall 2019. This is important because this is when
COVID arose.
In light of these oversight failures, it is
incomprehensible to me that the NIH continues to fund EcoHealth
Alliance when they failed to secure the documents required by
their contracts that would have given us a better picture of
COVID's origins.
The final goal is to hear from the Inspector General about
their work on Medicaid and Medicare program integrity.
With the Public Health Emergency now officially over,
returning Medicaid to its congressionally intended role as a
safety net insurer of last resort is critical.
Between fiscal year 2018 and fiscal year 2021, improper
payments grew by over 138 percent.
From reviewing the Inspector General's body of work on CMS
oversight, it is clear that her office takes Medicare and
Medicaid program integrity seriously. What is less clear to me
is whether HHS and CMS are also committed to preventing fraud,
waste, and abuse in these programs, or perhaps it is like the
situation with the children: They would rather keep it out of
sight and hopefully out of the minds of Congress.
Thank you for your work, Ms. Grimm, but I can assure HHS
that this is on the front of the minds of us in Congress who
have oversight over them.
Thank you, and I yield back.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Griffith follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Griffith. I now recognize the ranking member, Ms.
Castor, for her 5 minutes for an opening statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. KATHY CASTOR, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF FLORIDA

Ms. Castor. Well, good morning, and thank you, Mr.
Chairman, and thank you especially for following through on
your commitment after our discussion about keeping eyes on the
unaccompanied children situation especially.
And thank you, Inspector General Grimm, for being here
today.
HHS is a vital agency with enormous responsibilities that
touches the lives of every American, and the agency ensures the
health, safety, and well-being of people across the country.
We recently had the opportunity to hear from Inspectors
General from EPA, Department of Energy, Department of Commerce
about how they are overseeing the deployment of funds from the
bipartisan infrastructure law, the Inflation Reduction Act,
CHIPS and Science Act, all historic legislation that is
lowering cost, creating good jobs, and creating healthier, more
resilient communities.
I am very proud of our committee's leadership in enacting
these landmark laws, but to ensure that they reach their full
potential, we must remain committed to oversight.
That is why the Inspector General is so important. There
are areas of shared concern regarding HHS. In particular,
Members on both sides of the aisle are alarmed over recent
reports of child labor exploitation involving children who
migrated to the U.S. without their parents and were placed with
sponsors through the Office of Refugee Resettlement, ORR.
While the administration has announced an interagency
effort to crack down on exploitative child labor and provide
responsive post-relief services to more children and improve
sponsor vetting, additional reporting as recently as yesterday
raises significant concerns.
So it is important to hear from you, Ms. Grimm, about your
ongoing oversight of HHS ORR. We know that long stays in
Federal facilities are detrimental to the health and well-being
of children.
But HHS must ensure that it balances the need for efficient
placement with the safety and high-quality services for
children under ORR's care.
On a different topic, I appreciate the lessons that have
been learned, thanks to the IG's work with NIH throughout the
pandemic. Federally funded research has led to breakthroughs
that help us fight deadly diseases, make advancements in
treatments and therapeutics, and develop lifesaving vaccines.
NIH funding is a critical investment in our Nation's well-
being, and I am glad that the IG and NIH are working together
to improve the agency's grant oversight.
Oversight of NIH research funding is important, and it is
our job to make sure that these dollars are well spent and well
monitored.
I hope we can move away from the politicization of the
global pandemic that killed more than 1.1 million Americans to
oversight and sensible policy reforms. We need to make sure
that our oversight efforts are focused on improving NIH and the
success of its grant-making work rather than limiting the
ability to do important work, including with global partners.
And I am confident that we can do that without vilifying
individual scientists or tearing down our health institutions.
We are also now less than a month away from another
milestone for our Nation and for HHS. Thanks to the leadership
of President Biden and congressional Democrats, we are on track
to end the public health emergency.
We must ensure that our neighbors who will see a change in
their health coverage under the Medicaid unwinding are not lost
in the shuffle.
Democrats are taking responsibility for prioritizing
efforts that make the Nation's health infrastructure stronger,
protect and strengthen access to healthcare for everyone, and
invest in future pandemic preparedness, while utilizing lessons
learned over the past 3 years.
I sincerely thank your office for the important work that
you do to ensure integrity at HHS and prevent waste, fraud, and
abuse of taxpayer dollars.
Thank you, and I yield back.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Castor follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Griffith. The gentlelady yields back.
I now recognize the chairman--or chairwoman of the full
committee, Mrs. McMorris Rodgers, for her 5 minutes for an
opening statement.
Madam Chair.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, A
REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF WASHINGTON

Mrs. Rodgers. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And welcome to Health and Human Services Inspector General
Christi Grimm.
This is the first time in more than 20 years that the HHS
Inspector General has appeared before the Oversight and
Investigations Subcommittee. It is long overdue, and I am
grateful that you are here.
First, your office has done important work exposing how the
administration has failed to assure the safety and well-being
of unaccompanied children crossing the border. This is a
crisis, and as the ranking member just said, it is alarming to
all of us.
And it has been made worse by President Biden's open border
agenda. From 2019 to 2021, the number of unaccompanied minors
referred to HHS from the Department of Homeland Security
increased by more than 75 percent.
Last year nearly 130,000 migrant children entered the
shelter system, an all-time high.
It is more than just numbers. The New York Times'
investigation has revealed that unaccompanied migrant children
are alone and being exploited. These are young teenagers
without their parents, working long shifts on farms, in
factories, hotels, and on construction sites.
According to this Times investigation, HHS case workers are
under pressure by the Biden administration to quickly process
these children.
As a result, sponsors are not being vetted properly, and
Health and Human Services is not keeping track of these
children. Quote, ``overall, the agency lost immediate contact
with a third of migrant children.''
That is tens of thousands of kids who are at risk of
further exploitation, and we now know that children--people,
were raising the alarm at HHS, including directly to Secretary
Becerra.
HHS and the Biden White House must be held accountable for
how it could have possibly missed or ignored this crisis.
In addition, we will also focus today on how HHS is
spending and managing trillions of taxpayer dollars. This
includes how the National Institutes of Health is failing to
ensure proper oversight of its grants, especially in foreign
countries like in China.
We find the HHS OIG audit report about NIH's ineffective
monitoring of the Wuhan Lab and EcoHealth Alliance very
troubling, especially given the risky nature of this research
and its potential to start a pandemic.
It is unacceptable that today, because NIH failed to
effectively monitor the Wuhan Lab and EcoHealth Alliance, that
key data related to American taxpayer-funded grants is still
under the control of the Chinese Communist Party.
The American people deserve answers to this and also
transparency if this failure to oversee grant funding is
pervasive across HHS.
Finally, we are also asking you to help us provide needed
oversight of the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services, or
CMS.
CMS has an annual budgets of more than a trillion dollars
and oversees or administers health coverage for millions of
Americans.
According to a CNBC report, there is more than $100 billion
in fraud each year in Medicare and Medicaid. One criminal raked
in millions from Medicare fraud, more than a decade, and he
told CNBC, quote, ``I was low profile. Nobody knew me. I had
everything. I had houses. I had cars. I had watches,'' end of
quote.
In addition, your written testimony discusses that, in
fiscal year 2021 alone, improper payments made up for 21
percent of all Medicaid spending. That is one in every five
dollars spent improperly.
These numbers are staggering. Surely, we can all agree that
we need to ensure the integrity of the Federal health programs
that so many people, including seniors, people with
disabilities, mothers, and those most in need, rely on.
With the end of the public health emergency, it is critical
that CMS work to reduce the amount of improper payments by
Medicaid and Medicare, and I hope to hear how the Inspector
General's Office will help CMS restore the financial integrity
of these programs as we return to normal postpandemic life.
I worry not enough is being done by CMS and that the
administration is reluctant to take commonsense actions that
would reduce the instances of waste, fraud, and abuse. We want
to hear more about the recommendations that you have for these
vital programs.
As I said in our hearing with the Inspectors General with
other Federal agencies, responsible stewardship of Federal
funds should not be a partisan issue. As duly elected Members
of the People's House, it is our Article 1 responsibility to
conduct oversight so the Government is responsible to those we
serve.
That is our goal today, especially for how the
administration has made the border and cost-of-living crises
worse.
Again, Inspector Grimm, we are really pleased that you are
here and look forward to your testimony regarding some of these
most serious challenges.
I yield back.
[The prepared statement of Mrs. Rodgers follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Griffith. The gentlelady yields back.
I now recognize the ranking member of the full committee,
Mr. Pallone, for his 5 minutes.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. FRANK PALLONE, Jr., A REPRESENTATIVE
IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF NEW JERSEY

Mr. Pallone. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Today the subcommittee has a real opportunity to conduct
important oversight of the Department of Health and Human
Services, and I just hope we take advantage of this opportunity
to put people over politics.
After all, HHS's work is crucial to the everyday lives of
Americans. It is tasked with ensuring the health of our
families, the safety and development of new drugs, the response
to public health emergencies and pandemics, and much, much
more.
And we are joined today by HHS Inspector General Grimm,
whose office has the tremendous responsibility of overseeing
the agency's critical work, and it is this committee's
responsibility to ensure that HHS has the support it needs to
carry out its work.
Over the last couple of years, congressional Democrats have
worked to provide HHS with the funding and authorities that it
needed to address the pandemic and to make healthcare more
affordable and accessible for American families. The American
Rescue Plan provided HHS the tools and resources necessary to
combat the pandemic by ramping up the distribution and
administration of lifesaving vaccines.
The American Rescue Plan and the Inflation Reduction Act
expanded healthcare coverage and lowered cost through the
Affordable Care Act marketplaces, saving the average family
$2,400 a year in premiums.
The Inflation Reduction Act is also lowering prescription
drug prices for America's seniors, and these laws are making a
real difference in the lives of the American people, and while
we are still losing far too many Americans every day to COVID-
19, we have come a very long way thanks in large part to the
hard-working public servants at HHS.
Now, the key point of conducting congressional oversight is
to examine how best we can improve and support Government
agencies to ensure they work effectively for the American
people. This is particularly important as the public health
emergency ends. Emergency programs and authorizations will wind
down and return to prepandemic operations. It is critical that
during this transition, this committee, the IG, and the staff
at HHS focus on how to support States and localities, as well
as families emerging from the public health crisis.
And while we are talking about HHS oversight, I must take
this opportunity to say that HHS and, in particular, the Food
and Drug Administration, face serious threats from extremist
Republican-appointed judges.
In a case challenging FDA's decades-old approval of the
drug mifepristone, these extreme judges are making
unprecedented decisions that are not grounded in science or in
law. The case is now sitting before the Supreme Court, and on
Friday, 253 Members of Congress filed an amicus brief seeking
to protect the FDA against this unwarranted judicial intrusion.
Two decades of science and FDA analysis have clearly
demonstrated that this drug is safe, and it is imperative that
women have access to medication abortion as some States
implement increasingly draconian restrictions on women's
reproductive healthcare.
But this lawsuit by right-wing extremists seeks to
completely undermine FDA's authority to approve drugs and to
damage FDA's hard-earned reputation as the international gold
standard in drug approval.
Our agencies need to be the ones making the important
decisions based on data and science, not partisan judges, and
doctors must be able to prescribe safe, approved drugs to their
patients without the interference of lawyers.
These decisions attempt to undermine FDA's drug approval
process and restrict access to FDA-approved medication. That is
why all 23 committee Democrats have committed or have requested
an immediate hearing in this committee on the unprecedented
decisions threatening our healthcare institutions.
Scientists are against this radical judicial intervention.
The pharmaceutical industry is against it. Doctors are against
it. And patients are against it.
So while I appreciate today's hearing with Inspector
General Grimm, the Republican Majority should immediately
schedule a hearing on this existential threat to FDA's drug
approval authority. We simply must examine the impacts of these
extreme decisions that place ideology, politics, and judicial
activism above science.
And with that, I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Pallone follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Griffith. The gentleman yields back.
And it now concludes Members' opening statements. The Chair
would like to remind Members that, pursuant to committee rules,
all Members' written opening statements will be made a part of
the record. Please provide those to the Clerk promptly.
All right. Now, we have the opportunity to introduce our
witness today. We want to thank our witness for being here
today and taking the time to testify before the subcommittee.
You will have the opportunity to give an opening statement
followed by a round of questions from Members.
Today's witness is the Honorable Christi Grimm, Inspector
General for the Department of Health and Human Services.
We appreciate you being here today and look forward to
hearing from you. As you are aware, this committee is holding
an oversight hearing, and when doing so, it has been the
practice of this committee to take testimony under oath.
Do you have any objections to testifying under oath?
Ms. Grimm. I do not.
Mr. Griffith. She does not.
Seeing no objection, we will proceed.
The Chair also would advise you that you are entitled to be
advised by counsel, pursuant to House rules. Do you desire to
be advised by counsel during your testimony today?
Ms. Grimm. I do not.
Mr. Griffith. And seeing no request for counsel, please
rise and raise your right hand.
[Witness sworn.]
Mr. Griffith. Seeing the witness answered in the
affirmative, you are now sworn in and under oath, subject to
the penalties set forth in Title 18, Section 1001 of the United
States Code.
With that, I now recognize Inspector General Christi Grimm
for her 5 minutes to give an opening statement.
Ms. Grimm.

STATEMENT OF CHRISTI A. GRIMM, INSPECTOR GENERAL, DEPARTMENT OF
HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES

Ms. Grimm. Good morning, Chairman Griffith, Ranking Member
Castor, Chair McMorris Rodgers, and Ranking Member Pallone,
also distinguished members of the subcommittee.
I am Christi Grimm. I am the Inspector General for the U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services.
Our mission at HHS OIG is to prevent, detect, and combat
fraud, waste, and abuse. Our work helps ensure that HHS
programs better serve the American people and that taxpayer
dollars are not misspent.
Our portfolio is vast, and it is varied. Last year my
office was responsible for oversight of over 100 programs and
more than $2.4 trillion in Department expenditures. We have
only 2 cents for every $100 that the Department spends.
We conduct efficient, consequential, high-impact oversight
work with our limited resources, but much more needs to be done
to thwart fraud, identify misspent funds, and protect people
from harm.
To be candid, without more resources we will be unable to
keep pace with the Department threats. We risk falling behind
and allowing HHS dollars to be diverted to fraud.
I will spend the next few moments briefly addressing the
three specific areas the subcommittee requested.
First, the unaccompanied children program. Ensuring that
children are safe is a top priority for me and my office.
Unfortunately, our oversight work over the past two decades has
raised a variety of concerns about the safety and welfare of
unaccompanied children in HHS'ss care.
Unaccompanied children enter the U.S. with no parent or
guardian to care for them. HHS is completely responsible for
their well-being until being released to an adult sponsor in
the U.S.
A recent report focusing on case management services at the
Fort Bliss Emergency Intake Site demonstrates the child safety
risks our work has uncovered. At this site we found many
caseworkers lacked experience and did not receive adequate
training.
We identified that the case management system was lacking
in basic capabilities, including helping to screen the adults
the children were to be placed with. We found the streamlined
process to expedite children's release from the facility may
have increased risk of release to unsafe adult sponsors.
Finally, we heard from staff that they were reticent to
report problems for fear of retaliation. We are now conducting
a more comprehensive review of the process used to screen
potential adult sponsors.
Next, I will turn to grants management at NIH. We have
found consistent weaknesses in NIH's oversight of grant
recipients. These include fraud, unallowable costs, and
inadequate internal controls and monitoring of grants.
For instance, a recent audit found the NIH and its grant
recipient EcoHealth Alliance did not effectively monitor awards
and subawards.
The report also found that NIH did not exercise rigorous
oversight over potentially high-risk research.
While issues related to the type of research and science
may be complex, our findings involve common failures of routine
grant oversight, like failing to follow up on progress reports.
Last, I will touch on oversight of FEMA. The intricacy and
breadth of the Medicare and Medicaid programs make oversight
complex, challenging, and resource intensive for CMS. We use a
data-driven risk assessment approach to target risks, such as
inflated costs, improper or wasteful payments, and poor quality
of care.
We also deploy sophisticated data analytics and technology
to pinpoint and pursue costly and harmful fraud schemes.
Yet despite extensive reviews and enforcement, our limited
resources do not allow us to provide comprehensive oversight of
Medicare and Medicaid, programs that spend $1.6 trillion
annually. Said simply, we lack a sufficient number of law
enforcement agents, auditors, evaluators, and information
technology specialists to detect and respond to ever-emerging
fraud trends.
OIG is turning down between 300 and 400 viable criminal and
civil healthcare fraud cases annually. These uninvestigated
cases represent unchecked fraud and the potential for patients
to be put in harm's way.
Notwithstanding rigorous efforts by my office, by HHS, and
Congress, serious fraud, waste, and abuse continue to grow and
threaten HHS programs. If enacted, the President's fiscal year
2024 requested resources for OIG would go a long way toward
addressing shortfalls, particularly with respect to combating
fraud.
I thank you for the invitation to appear before you today.
I thank you for underscoring the importance of resources for
program integrity. I thank you for your commitment to improving
HHS programs and protecting the people they serve. And I am
happy to take your questions.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Grimm follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Griffith. Thank you. Thank you for your testimony.
We will now move to the question-and-answer portion. I will
begin the questioning and recognize myself for 5 minutes.
I said this in a hearing recently or in comments: The
opposite sides of the aisle may not agree on the policies that
brought these children to our border, but once they are in our
care and we have taken responsibility for them, I think we all
agree that they ought to be taken care of properly.
They ought to be getting educated. They ought not be just
disbursed as the labor for construction or plants where they
are putting together packages of cups or vegetables, whatever
it might be.
As a background note, at one time in my life I practiced in
domestic relations and did child custody cases, was a guardian
ad litem for children, and I went to Fort Bliss in 2021, and I
started asking questions. And the answers I got were shocking.
So I have been raising this issue since that time, but it does
not seem like it has been doing any good.
You have done a report now and you have indicated that
there are some preliminary things that are happening. What is
HHS doing to make the vetting process of these sponsors better?
Because when I was there, they basically were just checking
on the Internet to see if they had any violent crimes or crimes
against children on their record. They were not looking into
what kind of house they were going to be in, what the sleeping
arrangements were, what school they were going to, all things
which as a guardian ad litem or somebody who was practicing in
domestic relations would have checked into for the safety of
the child before I ever advised the court that I thought the
child should be placed in one home or another home or wherever.
So what are they doing differently now that they were not
doing in 2021?
Because based on the press reports and your report, it does
not look like much has changed.
Ms. Grimm. Thank you, Chairman Griffith, for your question.
We did do a report looking at Fort Bliss. We did an
inspection of that site. We interviewed 66 ORR officials. We
made nine recommendations in that report. We are in receipt of
the Department's response to that report.
If I may----
Mr. Griffith. Yes, ma'am.
Ms. Grimm [continuing]. I will highlight three key areas
that are of utmost importance that the Department, that ORR get
right.
The three themes, and these capture findings across many of
our reports, including Fort Bliss, include hiring, screening,
and retaining qualified facility employees.
The second has to do with A robust, fully functioning
electronic case management system.
The third is communication internally and externally that
prioritizes children's interest and concerns about potential
harm to children.
We are in response of their response from our Fort Bliss
report. They are undertaking action. We consider the
recommendations still open until we can examine the
documentation.
If you were to ask me what the number one thing they need
to be working on and to do to get right, it is to completely
overhaul the ORR portal before the next anticipated surge. It
has not been functional for an incredibly long time, and there
have been starts and stops, and they have begun again, but they
need to get it right.
Mr. Griffith. And when you say ``portals,'' for the folks
watching back home, that is the process they use to take
children who have come to the border unaccompanied and give
them to some kind of a sponsor.
I would hope that they would do a better background vetting
because, according to the latest report from the New York
Times, the administration is taking the position that, once
they have released them, they no longer have any
responsibility.
So we had better be sure we are putting them into good
homes before we release them, because there were too many
reports of kids not being educated and working long hours
overnight.
You know, one child complained that he would really like to
learn how to read but he cannot, and he has been with the
sponsor now for a couple of years. It is outrageous.
Are they moving in that direction?
I know that it is not easy, but are they moving in that
direction based on what you have seen, or is it too early to
tell?
Ms. Grimm. You raise a number of different dimensions----
Mr. Griffith. I do.
Ms. Grimm [continuing]. Of sponsor screening. I am going to
zero in on our Fort Bliss report.
We did find that the case managers, some of them were not
qualified. They did not receive training. They struggled to do
things like vet sponsors.
We found that the case management system and UC Portal,
that it frequently crashed. It did not allow for searches of
things like addresses and prior sponsors that may have had
children before.
They waived certain requirements for sponsor vetting that
included looking at adults that might be in the household for
certain categories of sponsors.
All of these things elevated risks.
Mr. Griffith. Yes.
Ms. Grimm. We had recommendations for all of this. They are
reporting that they are working on it. We need to review
documentation to be sure they are headed in----
Mr. Griffith. And we will probably have another hearing
later this year on this same subject just to follow up--at
least one, maybe two more, because I think we are all very
concerned about it.
And I think we have got to do better because what we are
doing is we are creating a subclass out of these unaccompanied
children who can be exploited, and that is not appropriate.
That is not what this was set up to do, and I do not think
anybody on either side of the aisle is in favor of that.
That being said, I have used up my time. I yield back and
now recognize Ms. Castor, the ranking member, for her 5 minutes
of questioning.
Ms. Castor. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And I would wholeheartedly agree that we need to have a
followup oversight hearing on this topic.
And thank you, Ms. Grimm, for your attention and
recommendations to keeping unaccompanied children safe. These
reports are alarming and disturbing, and we have got to help
you, help the agency repair so children are kept safe.
I have a basic question for you. When does the Office of
Refugee Resettlement responsibility begin and where does it end
when it comes to the well-being of the unaccompanied children?
Ms. Grimm. Typically, when the Department of Homeland
Security moves a child that is considered unaccompanied into
the ORR Program, and they are asked to do that at DHS within 72
hours, they then become where they are in the custody of HHS.
Typically, they would go into a facility, be vetted for a
sponsor. When they are placed with a sponsor, it is the
Department's interpretation of existing legislation that, when
they are transferred to a sponsor, legally their jurisdiction
does end.
However, we have recommended they have committed to do
welfare checks, but it is their legal read that their custody
ends when they are transferred to an adult sponsor here in the
U.S.
Ms. Castor. I see. Because there just seems to be an
overarching responsibility to ensure that those children are,
first and foremost, getting to school and are being kept safe.
So you are saying that HHS, now they are instituting some
of your recommendations for case management in those welfare
checks, but is there something additional in the law where we
need to spell out succinctly a requirement for those ongoing
welfare checks?
At that point, is it a State responsibility under the State
child welfare laws?
Ms. Grimm. So I know that Secretary Becerra recently
testified on this and testified on the jurisdiction. We do not
get in the middle of that interpretation of legal jurisdiction.
I want to clarify something that I said. There are certain
circumstances for certain children where the Department does
work to connect them with certain social services, medical
services. So there is a certain category of children. I do not
know all of the specifics about that.
Ms. Castor. OK. I understand that you are, in addition to
your ongoing analysis here, you have an ongoing study----
Ms. Grimm. Yes.
Ms. Castor [continuing]. Underway. When can we expect your
latest recommendations to be released?
Ms. Grimm. Representative Castor, we have several ongoing
studies. The study that I believe you are most interested in
has to do with the vetting of sponsors.
Ms. Castor. Yes.
Ms. Grimm. We have completed data collection. We are
developing the findings.
I would expect that report to be in draft within the next
couple of months.
Ms. Castor. OK. And I heard you loud and clear: The most
critical piece right now to ensure the appropriate vetting of
sponsors is the overhaul of the ORR Portal. And does the
agency--does HHS have adequate funding right now and
contractors to make that happen?
Ms. Grimm. The question on whether they have adequate
funding, I do think that is a better question for ORR to
respond to.
As far as why it matters, it is the case management system
ORR uses to oversee the well-being and safety of children while
they are in care. It is the tool ORR uses to ensure adequate
sponsor screening to ensure children are not placed with labor
or sex trafficking situations.
It is what they use to track separated children so they can
be reunited with parents when appropriate. It is where they
monitor incidents of potential physical or sexual abuse while
in HHS custody.
And all of our experience as an OIG teaches us that you
need effective data systems to conduct meaningful oversight.
They have responded to us that they have taken, I believe, 70
specific actions for the UC Portal.
I will be candid. We have been here before, and I think the
proof will be in the eating of the pudding. We have to see
whether those outputs translate into better functionality for
the system, better functionality for case managers to vet
sponsors.
Ms. Castor. Thank you. And we are committed to that as
well.
Thank you very much. I yield back.
Mr. Griffith. The gentlelady yields back.
I now recognize the chair of the full committee, Mrs.
McMorris Rodgers, for her 5 minutes of questioning.
Mrs. Rodgers. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Today's New York Times has an article: migrant children
worked as U.S. ignored warnings, whistleblowers say White House
officials were alerted about risk to minors.
Without objection, I would like to have this article
inserted into the record.
Mr. Griffith. Madam Chair, is that the article where Matt
Haygood, Senior Director of Children Services of the U.S.
Committee for Refugees and Immigrants, asked the question,
``We're waiting for the congressional hearing that's like, 'How
did this happen to all these kids?'''?
Mrs. Rodgers. Yes. Yes, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Griffith. All right. Without objection, tender into the
record.
[The information appears at the conclusion of the hearing.]
Mrs. Rodgers. Thank you.
It is a deeply disturbing investigative piece on child
exploitation. It details how the administration ignored
multiple whistleblowers who raised concerns about the loosening
of restrictions on who HHS would release these unaccompanied
minor children to.
The whistleblowers saw that the children were being
exploited and raised concerns to their superiors who, in turn,
raised it up the chain all the way to the White House.
However, the White House denies any knowledge, and I quote,
``Andrew J. Bates, White House Deputy Press Secretary, said,
'Officials there had not known of the increase in child labor
until the Times' February report,''' end of quote.
Mr. Grimm, your office conducted in-depth and rigorous
investigations into the Trump White House's involvement in
ORR's unaccompanied children program.
Is the White House telling the truth about when it knew
there was a rise in child exploitation as a result of ORR's
decision to cut short sponsors' background checks?
Ms. Grimm. Chairwoman Rodgers, I cannot speak to what the
White House knew and when.
Mrs. Rodgers. Ms. Grimm, will you commit to conducting a
full investigation to determine when HHS notified the White
House and how it did so?
Ms. Grimm. As part of our review of potential risks with
sponsor placements, we typically do review correspondence. I
will tell you that some of that information would be protected
by privilege.
But we are reviewing sponsor placement, and we hope that
that report can be illuminating, and I am familiar with the New
York Times' report from yesterday.
Mrs. Rodgers. I look forward to your work and that report.
Medicaid has faced persistent challenges related to
improper payments and enrollment concerns. As you know,
ensuring integrity of this program requires effective
eligibility verification processes and robust collaboration
between your office and States.
And I would like to focus on issues related to verifying
eligibility for Medicaid. One issue that your office has
frequently written about is the prevalence of States paying per
member per month to Medicare managed care organizations for
deceased beneficiaries.
In simple terms, dead people are continuing to participate
in Medicaid at taxpayer expense. I hope I am on safe,
bipartisan footing when I say that we should not be paying for
care of those who have already passed.
And your office seems to agree that we have, as we have
sought to recoup payments for these claims.
Can you speak to what CMS and the States could be doing to
mitigate these issues?
Ms. Grimm. I can. I think in your opening statement,
Chairwoman Rodgers, you had pointed to practical
recommendations, practical things that CMS can be doing.
Our portfolio of CMS oversight is vast and varied. We have
recommendations that are cost savers. We have recommendations
related to patient harm. We have recommendations related to
improper payments.
Is there a specific category you would like me to zero in
on?
Mrs. Rodgers. Yes. Well, I would like to ask, would it be
appropriate to advise States to regularly check databases, like
the Death Master File, DMF, to ensure States are not paying for
deceased beneficiaries?
Ms. Grimm. Yes.
Mrs. Rodgers. OK. And will your office commit to reviewing
current CMS practices and policies for interacting with States
on eligibility determination systems, as well as identifying
any areas for improvement and enhancement?
Ms. Grimm. As part of the public health emergency
unwinding, we are doing work where we are looking at Medicaid
eligibility, where we are looking at errors, and I would need
to look to see if that is already a part of that.
But your requests sound very reasonable, Madam Chairwoman.
Mrs. Rodgers. Thank you.
The OIG audit of EcoHealth Alliance grant found NIH did not
comply with the requirement to contact EcoHealth within 30 days
of the nonprofit's failure to file its year five progress
report.
Who at NIH was specifically responsible for this followup?
And what was the breakdown that led to NIH noncompliance?
Ms. Grimm. So I want to be very clear about what our
EcoHealth report did and did not do. The objectives of that
report were to look at NIH's adherence of our requirements for
grant oversight and for EcoHealth's adherence to Federal
requirements.
At the outset I want to be clear. We did not look at things
like gain of function or the origins of COVID. I just want to
be clear about that.
Mrs. Rodgers. OK.
Ms. Grimm. So who was responsible?
Mrs. Rodgers. Yes.
Ms. Grimm. NIH had responsibilities for monitoring
EcoHealth. EcoHealth had responsibilities for monitoring the
Wuhan Institute of Virology and other----
Mrs. Rodgers. Well, who specifically at NIH is responsible
for this followup?
Ms. Grimm. I don't have at my fingertips the exact title of
the person that would be responsible for followup on----
Mrs. Rodgers. OK. I want to ask you to get back with the
committee on that answer because we need to be looking for
personal accountability and an understanding of what broke down
so we can take the corrective action necessary.
I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Griffith. I thank the gentlelady.
I now recognize the ranking member of the full committee,
Mr. Pallone, for his 5 minutes of questioning.
Mr. Pallone. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
As you highlight in your testimony, the public health
emergency due to COVID-19 will be ending next month, resulting
in a great deal of change across the health landscape. You
particularly noted that there are, quote, ``risks associated
with the termination of waivers and flexibilities that were
permitted under the public health emergency.''
And I share your concern and want to make sure that HHS and
its partners are responsibly making this transition without
Americans in need of healthcare falling through the cracks.
So the question is, could you speak a little more about
what particular risk you see with the unwinding of the public
health emergency and how your office is preparing to assess
those risks?
Ms. Grimm. So one of the key focuses, Representative, that
we are looking at is Medicaid and Medicaid eligibility. We have
reason to be concerned about this. As pointed out, last year
the error rate for Medicaid was over 21 percent. We have a
rolling three-year average of 15 percent in errors.
Our historic work has found issues particularly as it
relates to eligibility. So we are interested in taking a look
in the PHE unwinding, the process for determining whether
enrollees continue to be eligible or not, the accuracy that
those who should have benefits do not lose them and those that
should not have benefits are not enrolled.
Mr. Pallone. All right. Thank you.
Now, it is important that your office be adequately
resourced to conduct oversight. As your testimony notes,
President Biden's budget seeks an increase of $52.5 million for
your office next year.
So if your office were appropriated those additional
resources, where would you focus on enhancing your oversight
capabilities?
Ms. Grimm. We would absolutely be starting with
investigations. We, as I mentioned, are turning down between
three and four hundred cases a year. The budget, if approved,
implemented, would allow us to hire more agents to address some
of that case backload.
Mr. Pallone. OK. Now, you mentioned, of course, that
rooting out healthcare fraud is essential to ensuring that
appropriated dollars are spent where they are actually needed.
And you state in your testimony that, due to a lack of
resources, you, quote, ``turned down 684 CMS cases for
investigation.''
So can you describe the impact on the healthcare system
when you are not adequately resourced to investigate fraud?
Ms. Grimm. So those are significant cases that CMS refers
over to us. We work closely with CMS, the Center for Program
Integrity, and I will note that we have a very positive working
relationship.
So what that means is that there is unchecked fraud. We
triage. I want to assure you that we are not letting, in our
assessment, the highest risk of those that present the most
harm or the most exposure to payment and people go unaddressed,
but we are not able to get to certain very important cases
because of lack of resources.
Mr. Pallone. OK. Now, my last question. You also state in
your testimony that your fraud investigations can, quote,
``return stolen money to the American people.'' Do you have an
estimate of how much money your fraud investigations have
recovered in prior years?
Ms. Grimm. I do, if I could just turn to----
Mr. Pallone. Take your time.
Ms. Grimm. So combined expected recoveries for our audits
and our investigations last year were $4 billion. The return on
investment for expected recoveries is 11 to 1, and that every
$1 invested in us we return or we expect to return $11 to
taxpayers to the Trust Fund.
Mr. Pallone. Well, that is very impressive.
So thank you, and thank you for the important work to
uphold the financial integrity of the programs that I think are
really central to long-term health and well-being of all
Americans.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Griffith. The gentleman yields back.
I now recognize Dr. Burgess of Texas for his 5 minutes of
questioning.
Mr. Burgess. I thank the chairman.
And historically I do want to point out how this
subcommittee really has affected a lot of the positive changes
that have occurred at ORR, going back to 2014. The oversight of
this subcommittee has been important. It is important that it
be ongoing.
Like Chairman Griffith, I am concerned because the ability
to release a child to someone who has not been properly checked
is of great concern.
I adopted a child at one point, and the scrutiny that I was
put under as an adoptive parent I will admit at times felt
intrusive, but at the same time you realize you are placing a
vulnerable individual with the care of a family.
And then Chairwoman Rodgers already put it in the record,
but this New York Times article dated yesterday is one of the
most searing and unfortunate recitations that I have ever seen.
So I guess it just begs the question. Well, you have got in
your written testimony and you mentioned a report entitled
``Operational Challenges within ORR and the ORR Emergency
Intake at Fort Bliss.'' And I appreciate you including that
reference.
I pulled that, and it is apparent from that report that
there were some changes in the guidance, the field guidance
that occurred. Can you tell us a little bit about that, why
that was necessary?
Ms. Grimm. I thank you, Representative Burgess, Dr.
Burgess, and I do remember coming up to talk to you at one
point about unaccompanied children.
The changes to the screening, there were reduced
safeguards. They removed background checks and identity
verification.
So let me just back up. This was during the height of the
surge in 2021 for the emergency intake facility at Fort Bliss.
This guidance did apply more broadly though.
They removed background checks and verification for other
adult household members and alternative----
Mr. Burgess. And let me just stop you there because that is
my concern.
Ms. Grimm. Yes.
Mr. Burgess. I mean, who has the authority? Is it the
agency?
Are you required to follow law as passed by Congress, or
can the Secretary or someone just decide, ``Hey, this is too
much trouble, we want to do things differently''?
I kind of knew this was happening, but like the chairman, I
went to Fort Bliss in 2021. I went again in 2022, where we saw
on the television the numbers were vastly increasing. Their
length of stays was decreasing, and the number of occupants
were decreasing. That told me you are sending kids out there
and you do not know where they are going or who they are going
to.
Was I wrong about that?
Ms. Grimm. Are you asking if the sponsor screening was not
adequate?
I want to make sure I understand the question.
Mr. Burgess. Well, I think I know that it was not, but I
guess the big question is who had the authority.
Page 15 if your report, where ORR issued field guidance
that removed certain steps of the sponsor screening process
across ORR facilities, potentially increasing children's risk
of release to unsafe sponsors.
No kidding. It really did. So who makes that decision?
Ms. Grimm. That would be HHS would have the ability to make
the decision to issue guidance. This was field guidance issued
by HHS, by ACF, by ORR.
Mr. Burgess. But when you start to connect the dots and you
read the New York Times article, it sounds like the domestic
policy advisor, Susan Rice, in the White House was kind of
putting some pressure to let's get the throughput.
And Secretary Becerra himself was quoted in a previous New
York Times article as saying, you know, if Henry Ford was
running this, we would get these kids through a lot faster.
But that is not the correct way to do things, and we all
recognize that. That is why there are rules in place.
I guess my question is, who thought that it was OK to
change the rules without consulting the legislative branch?
Ms. Grimm. I want to underscore the role of an Inspector
General. We are independent. We are objective. We strive for
transparency and accountability. We do not make the rules. We
assess programs according to the rules that exist.
In our Fort Bliss report, we do point out that those waived
requirements in combination with a variety of other factors
increased the risk that children could go to an unsafe sponsor.
We recognize the need for efficient and expeditious transition
to a sponsor, but it needs to be done safely.
Mr. Burgess. Yes, it does need to be done safely.
Ultimately the decision was made by the Executive. People do
need to hold the White House accountable on this. It is
shameful. It should never have occurred.
Mr. Chairman, I have got a bunch of other questions. I will
submit them for the record, but I do want to thank you for
holding this hearing today, and I just support your statement
that you are going to hold additional hearings here.
Mr. Griffith. I thank the gentleman. He yields back.
I now recognize the gentlelady from Colorado, Ms. DeGette.
Ms. DeGette. Thank you so much, Mr. Chairman.
And I agree with Mr. Burgess because this committee has had
a long history of conducting bipartisan oversight of the Office
of Refugee Resettlement because these kids are so vulnerable,
and it is really important that we get this right.
We had a long series of investigations. There was a hearing
in 2021 that I chaired with the administration looking at the
progress that the Biden administration made in reuniting the
thousands of separated children that were actually not
unaccompanied. They actually--well, I guess they were
unaccompanied. They showed up.
But they--no, they were with their families. They were
ripped apart under the Trump administration policies, under the
family separation policies, and so this hearing we had in 2021
was about what was going on with reuniting those kids with
their families.
And I just want to, Inspector General Grimm, I want to ask
you about the current issues, but I want to--I always ask for a
status update of that because a lot of Members of Congress are
shocked to learn there are still many children who were taken
apart from their families who have never been reunited.
So I am wondering if you know how many children who were
separated under that program still have not been reunited with
their families.
Ms. Grimm. Thank you, Representative DeGette. I do not have
the precise figure of reunited. I do want to point out that one
of our reports in the early days identified children who had
been separated from their parents were not categorized as being
separated in the HHS system. Our report led to the
identification of over 2,000 children who were then meant to be
reunited with their parents.
I can look into that figure and get back to you with that.
Ms. DeGette. I would love that, and I do want to thank you
because that was the OIG that helped that happen. But my
understanding is there are still hundreds of kids who were not
reunited with their parents.
Many of the--and, of course, as time goes on, it gets more
and more difficult. Their parents have returned to the home
countries or whatever it is.
So I would appreciate getting that information because I
think it is important that we continue to keep eyes on that
issue to make sure that it is still continuing to happen.
And to that point, I wanted to--you know, one of the
issues--and I think you have alluded to this, because OIG has
produced 27 reports on ORR in the last 6 years highlighting the
challenges and risks caring for, quote, ``fluctuating numbers
of children entering ORR's care.''
And that is part of the problem, which is you might have a
huge surge in kids showing up unaccompanied, and then it might
plummet down. So how you implement and administer consistent
policies, I think, has been a challenge.
So I want to ask you: How many of the recommendations that
you all have made has ORR implemented fully or partially, and
how many remain still open?
Ms. Grimm. Thank you for your question, Representative
DeGette.
We have 57 open recommendations. I believe I do not have
the count of recommendations that have been implemented. I do
not want to give you wrong----
Ms. DeGette. If you can supplement your--also with that,
that would be really helpful.
And do you--what progress would you say HHS has made in
improving the ability to provide for the, quote, ``medical and
mental health needs of children in ORR care'' that you
mentioned in your testimony?
Ms. Grimm. There have been strides that have been made in
connecting children with appropriate mental health services
both when they are within the custody of ORR and, I believe, in
ensuring that they are connected with those services
postrelief.
Ms. DeGette. So would it be your assessment that part of
the problem is a lack of resources that hinder ORR's ability to
care for the minors in its custody, particularly during these
surges?
Ms. Grimm. I cannot comment on the adequacy of resources
that ORR has. I do know that we have recommended that this
program be treated like an emergency with ups and downs in
transfers and census. But I cannot comment on the adequacy of
the resources they have.
I do believe that is a better question for the Department.
Ms. DeGette. Why can't you comment on the adequacy of the
resources?
Ms. Grimm. I do not have those figures in front of me. I
have not done any cost-benefit analysis.
Ms. DeGette. So we would need to ask someone from the
agency?
Ms. Grimm. Yes.
Ms. DeGette. OK. Thank you. We will.
Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Griffith. The gentlelady yields back.
I now recognize the gentleman from Kentucky, Mr. Guthrie,
for his 5 minutes of questions.
Mr. Guthrie. I thank the Chair for the recognition.
And I thank the witness for being here with us today.
And I want to associate myself with the thoughts that have
been expressed by my previous two Members and actually with Dr.
Burgess. We did go to the ORR facility, Fort Bliss, and it is
bipartisan. We want everybody to be treated with respect.
I will just point out the issue that seems to be happening
to the children is, according to the Border Patrols, is what
happened for the cartels is they come up through Northern
Mexico, and that is not the purpose of this hearing, but we
cannot talk about what happens to our children without
mentioning the atrocious thing about the border policy.
What is atrociously happening to them is our border policy
is attracting migrants to the border, is happening to our
children, and it is sad. It really is upsetting.
But I know this is a subject for a hearing with different
reports on different subjects. I am going to change the
subject, but I do want to associate with that before I do so.
On your June 2020 report for the FDA inspection process,
and I will quote from the report. It says, ``According to FDA,
the investigators' supervisors are responsible for ensuring
that the investigators are qualified to conduct inspections.
FDA did not have written policies or procedures that require
the supervisor to verify that investigators that were assigned
met the right training.''
I will get to the question. Are there currently policies in
place at FDA to ensure supervisors are aware and notify their
lead investigators about these important training requirements?
And why did they not exist prior to your investigation?
Ms. Grimm. Thank you for your question, Representative
Guthrie. I do not have the specifics of that FDA inspection
report in front of me.
I would like to get back to you if I could with more
information in response to your question.
Mr. Guthrie. OK. So we will go to warning letters. We will
move to warning letters.
It says, ``The warning letters are issued to achieve
voluntary compliance. Warning letters are issued only for those
violations that may lead to enforcement actions.''
So after FDA's programmatic changes, FDA conducted nine
foreign for-cause drug inspections that resulted in warning
letters. Three of the nine letters, 33 percent, were issued
more than 6 months after the inspection date.
Were these facilities in the United States or within
foreign countries like China?
Ms. Grimm. Representative Guthrie, I do not have that
report in front of me. I apologize. I cannot speak to it
further for that report.
Mr. Guthrie. OK. And so I have some other questions on that
report. I guess I have to submit them for the record.
So I do not know if you have this one or not. So your
report notes that the FDA made programmatic changes, followup
inspections at six OAI facilities that took an average of 460
days versus the average of 329, at 11 OAI facilities.
So you do not have that report in front of you either?
Ms. Grimm. I do not have that report in front of me. I
apologize.
Mr. Guthrie. I thought that was part of the hearing today.
I guess not.
So I guess the question that gets back to the ORR, so the
waivers that sped up that could have come from some of the
sources that my friend--so they put waivers to process more
children through the system.
But those waivers resulted in some of the children getting
to what we reported with slave labor and other types of issues
moving forward. Is that not correct? If it was not for the
waivers, that might not have happened?
Ms. Grimm. The report on Fort Bliss, and I have been down
to the border. I have visited multiple facilities over many
years, and so I have seen firsthand what facilities are like.
That report for Fort Bliss, it raises questions about the
risk, the increased risk by these waived sponsor requirements
and vetting processes. It does not reach a conclusion about
whether any children were placed in unsafe households.
We have an ongoing report that is looking at sponsor
placement, and as I explained earlier, that report, I hope that
that will be out in the next few months.
Mr. Guthrie. So we do know children were placed in bad
situations from ORR. We know that because we see the results of
that happen.
And so your report that you are working on is trying to see
specifically what contributed them to being put in the
situation where they were used for labor?
Ms. Grimm. That report is looking more specifically at
sponsor placement, at what requirements existed, whether those
requirements were followed, and hopefully we will have some
illuminating information on the results of some of those
placements.
Mr. Guthrie. But the requirements to look at, as Dr.
Burgess said, is that their family members or someone, but not
necessarily whether they have the right home, the right place,
the right environment.
I mean, you could find an uncle or an aunt that may not be
the best person for that person to live with even though they
are blood related, correct?
Ms. Grimm. Correct, and that they could be placed with a
family member.
Mr. Guthrie. That is not the best circumstances, and we do
not check those. Sometimes you can do everything. You can check
everything you can check, and some people just do not show up
being not in the best situation.
But if you do not check the situation, you obviously can
put them in a bad situation.
Ms. Grimm. One of the waived requirements was waiving
looking at certain categories of sponsors and the adults that
lived in the household with those sponsors. That is something
that we identified as an increased risk for a child being
placed with an unsafe sponsor and an increased risk for
trafficking issues.
Mr. Guthrie. Thank you. My time has expired.
I will yield back.
Thank you for your answers.
Mr. Griffith. The gentleman yields back.
I now recognize the gentleman from New York, Mr. Tonko, for
5 minutes.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Federal health agencies are on the front lines when it
comes to public health crises like that of the COVID-19
pandemic. They provide crucial guidance and resources, and
maintaining public trust in health agencies is essential, I
believe, to protecting public health.
President Biden and congressional Democrats have
consistently acted to provide adequate resources for pandemic
recovery and bolster government capacity to respond to emerging
public health threats.
The American Rescue Plan made critical investments in
public health measures that provided necessary tools that would
be able to enable us to combat the pandemic.
And the Inflation Reduction Act will help us make real
progress in the fight against climate change and deliver
savings on energy and healthcare costs for our families across
the country.
These laws are also included--have included oversight
provisions to make certain new programs would serve their
missions while protecting against waste, fraud, and abuse. What
is troubling is hearing some of our Republican colleagues sow
confusion and fear that fosters distrust in science and
scientific research. This is counterproductive to the work that
we must do to learn from the past and prepare for future
disease outbreaks.
With that, Ms. Grimm, your office is partly responsible for
making certain that HHS is spending its resources as Congress
intended and implementing programs effectively. How does your
office's oversight work help increase Americans' confidence in
the services upon which they rely?
Ms. Grimm. Well, specific to grants, OIG's review of NIH's
EcoHealth report and OIG's grants oversight work generally is
taking a look at whether or not appropriate controls exist,
expenditures are appropriate, whether controls like reviewing
reports are followed.
Getting those basics right is critically important and
better ensure that funds that are spent through grants for
intramural research, that Americans get the benefit of what
those research grants are intended to do.
Mr. Tonko. Is that information exchanged with the public?
Ms. Grimm. I'm sorry, Representative Tonko. Is what
information?
Mr. Tonko. The quality parameters that you establish to
make certain that the dollars are being effectively invested,
does that get exchanged in building that public confidence?
Ms. Grimm. I believe that information related to grant
expenditures is public. HHS grants in 2022 amounted to $120
billion in grants. Out of NIH, $30 billion were spent on
grants.
Our work really focuses in on things like grant fraud,
unallowable costs, threats to research integrity, and poor
controls in monitoring, and some of these things, while they
sound bureaucratic, are precisely the kinds of things we looked
at in the EcoHealth report and found shortcomings that were
very concerning related to high-risk research.
If basic things like reviewing reports, if basic things
like following up on late reports were done, we would have had
better confidence in the kind of research that was being done.
Mr. Tonko. And as you mentioned in your testimony, we will
soon be in a new phase of recovering from the COVID-19 pandemic
as the public health emergency comes to an end. Based on the
work that your office has done, can you summarize some of the
most important lessons learned that could help Congress and HHS
prepare for future pandemics?
Ms. Grimm. I can. Because this hearing was very wide
ranging, I have a lot of material in front of me.
But there are a lot of things that we have learned from
pandemic spending. There are four lessons that I would zero in
on.
When funds are rushed out to address emergency needs, it
may mean that more needs to be done after the fact to recover
misspent funds and build in additional controls as soon as
possible if that program is ongoing.
For instance, HRSA that administered the Provider Relief
Funds stood up a program very quickly, and we have recommended
now that they go back and that they do more to look at payments
to see if they were appropriate.
They are only looking at 2 percent, which is something they
decided to do deliberately to get money out the door. Even in
emergencies, it is important to begin as many program integrity
safeguards as possible.
Inspectors General can and have provided technical
assistance and insights based on past work for the American
Rescue Program and for other programs.
Broad, governmentwide approach is useful. So the Pandemic
Response Accountability Committee, we know that if somebody is
taking advantage of idle funds, paycheck protection funds, they
are also likely taking advantage, and we have seen this, of
provider relief funds as well.
And improved data analytics. We need to do a better job of
ensuring that data exists and is exchanged across partnerships
so that we can more readily and rapidly detect and respond to
improper payments and fraud.
Mr. Tonko. Mr. Chair, I had other questions that I will get
to the committee and subcommittee, and with that I yield back.
Mr. Griffith. I thank the gentleman.
I now recognize the gentleman from South Carolina, Mr.
Duncan, for his 5 minutes of questions.
Mr. Duncan. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Inspector General, you all are busy.
Ms. Grimm. Yes.
Mr. Duncan. You have got a lot of work to do.
I am going to submit for the record, there are five
requests from the Protect Public's Trust for request for
investigation on a number of things, and I would love for the
IG's Office to respond on how those are progressing and whether
they are even being addressed.
Last month CBS News reported about suspected double billing
concerns within the EcoHealth Alliance, an NIH grantee, related
to its grant from the U.S. Agency for International
Development, USAID. According to this report, it appears the
USAID OIG had opened an investigation.
Has your Investigations Office reached out to USAID's IG
Office on this matter?
Ms. Grimm. I cannot comment, Representative, on any ongoing
investigations. We are aware of----
Mr. Duncan. Are you all also looking into it?
Ms. Grimm [continuing]. We are in contact with USAID.
Mr. Duncan. You all are also looking into it as well?
Ms. Grimm. We are aware and we are in contact with USAID.
Mr. Duncan. So in addition, USAID, you are just letting
them run with it and you are not. You do not have your ongoing
investigation then?
Ms. Grimm. I am not in a position to confirm or deny the
existence of an ongoing investigation, Representative.
Mr. Duncan. Thank you.
According to NIH documents obtained by U.S. Right to Know
under the Freedom of Information Act, the OIG concluded its
investigation into EcoHealth Alliance in January of 2021, about
4 months after it was opened, a 4-month investigation.
Just for my understanding, is this investigation the same
as the audit you recently conducted, or are they two separate
efforts?
Ms. Grimm. Representative, I will bring you through a
process that our organization has. When something is referred
to us, we have our executives that consist of our Deputy for
Investigation's evaluation on it. We meet weekly to discuss
certain referrals and decide where the best placement is for
some of these allegations.
The decision was made to do a grants oversight review of
EcoHealth, and I think that we have found very important gaps
in grants management.
I would not characterize an investigation with----
Mr. Duncan. So let me ask you this: If your investigation
ended in January of 2021, why did you not issue the audit
findings until this January 2023?
Ms. Grimm. I would not characterize--or, I would not agree
with that characterization.
Mr. Duncan. Two years?
Ms. Grimm. I would not agree with that characterization,
Representative. We decided the----
Mr. Duncan. The dates do not lie, ma'am.
Ms. Grimm. I am sorry?
Mr. Duncan. The dates do not lie. You ended your
investigation January of '21, released the audit findings in
January of '23.
Ms. Grimm. We do not comment on ongoing investigative
matters. So I would not----
Mr. Duncan. So this is still ongoing then?
Ms. Grimm. We do not comment on ongoing investigations.
Mr. Duncan. OK. Well, I am going to take that as a yes
because you issued your audit findings in January of 2023, but
you cannot answer my question. So I am going to assume it is
still going on.
Four months is an extremely short time frame for an OIG
investigation. Why did your office close this investigation so
soon when more and more documents were coming out on EcoHealth
grants?
Ms. Grimm. Our EcoHealth report reviewed 7 years' worth of
documentation, grants, guidance, emails. If we were to have
found something that warranted an investigation, we would refer
that over to our Office of Investigation.
Mr. Duncan. OK. But apparently the investigation is still
ongoing because you cannot answer questions about it. So I am
assuming that you found more than 7 years' worth. Would that
not be a good assumption?
Ms. Grimm. Representative, I cannot comment on the
existence----
Mr. Duncan. Last question on this issue.
Ms. Grimm [continuing]. Of an ongoing investigation,
whether it exists or it does not.
Mr. Duncan. With respect to this audit of EcoHealth, is it
true that NIH only permitted your audit teams to review already
produced FOIA documents?
Ms. Grimm. I do not believe that that is accurate. The
access rights for OIGs are incredibly broad. We have access to
materials that are, I believe, beyond what FOIA would allow.
Mr. Duncan. What other documents did your team review as
part of that audit?
Ms. Grimm. For EcoHealth Alliance?
Mr. Duncan. Yes.
Ms. Grimm. We reviewed 7 years' worth of grants information
for EcoHealth grants. We reviewed three grants. One of those
was for the Wuhan Institute of Virology. We reviewed all grants
guidance. We reviewed emails, correspondence----
Mr. Duncan. So there was a grant directly to Wuhan
Institute of Virology?
Ms. Grimm. Not from NIH. They were a subaward of EcoHealth.
Mr. Duncan. OK. Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Griffith. I thank the gentleman.
I now recognize Mrs. Lesko of Arizona for her 5 minutes of
questioning.
Mrs. Lesko. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
And thank you for your work. It is so important that we
identify fraud and waste and U.S. taxpayer dollars being spent.
So thank you and your staff.
I am from a border State, Arizona, and I am on the Border
Security Caucus here in Congress. I have visited the border
multiple times. In my visits and in speaking to Border Patrol
officers and local Arizona elected officials along the border,
they have told me there is no vetting of the adults where
immigrant children are being sent, and that girls are being
placed in homes where they are sold into sex slavery.
This is horrifying. This is horrifying if we are letting
this happen.
There was a memorandum of agreement put in place in 2018
between Department of Homeland Security and HHS that agreed to
have a process for vetting who unaccompanied migrant children
would be released to. I have been told that HHS and DHS changed
the MOA after the Biden administration took over in 2021, and
it removed the vetting requirement.
In addition, according to reports, ORR does not have the
ability to track released children and, I quote, ``could not
reach more than 85,000 children 1 month after they were placed
with an adult.''
This is alarming, I mean really alarming what we are
allowing to happen to young children.
First question is, are you familiar with this change in the
memorandum of agreement between DHS and HHS?
Ms. Grimm. Vice Chair Lesko, I appreciate your question. We
have made recommendations for better MOUs between DHS and with
DOJ. I am not familiar with that A, that specific change. We
are happy to take a look at that and get back to you.
Mrs. Lesko. My next question is, how are sponsors vetted
now?
Ms. Grimm. That is a great question, Vice Chair Lesko. I do
not have at my fingertips the exact guidance that is now being
used to vet sponsors. That would be a better question to ask of
ORR.
I can tell you, though, that our report looking at vetting
of sponsors will illuminate hopefully what risks exist in
placing children with sponsors and what risk exists with the
current processes being used to vet sponsors.
Our reports have consistently recommended rigorous vetting
of sponsors.
Mrs. Lesko. Well, I hope somebody listens to your
recommendations because this is truly alarming. It is truly
alarming if the United States of America is allowing girls to
be sold into sex slavery and not vetting who we are sending
these people to.
So thank you for your investigation on that.
I have a question, changing subjects a bit. The HHS Health
Resources and Service Administration manages the
Countermeasures Injury Compensation Program called CICP. It is
charged with compensating those injured by the COVID-19
vaccinations.
Very few cases, however, have been approved for
compensation, and many cases have been sitting for a couple of
years now.
Has your office looked into the operation and efficiency of
this program?
Ms. Grimm. Representative Lesko, we do have work that looks
at the Provider Relief Fund and the uninsured funds. Both are
programs that are administered by HRSA.
We have work looking across many different audits that are
touching about 50 percent of payments that have gone out from
HRSA. Accuracy of payments in many instances would look at
whether or not they were appropriately approved or
appropriately denied.
I am not familiar with this specific type of claim. Let us
look at what our ongoing work is looking at, and we will get
back to you to see if this is touched on.
Mrs. Lesko. Thank you very much.
My time has expired, and I yield back.
Mr. Griffith. I thank the gentlelady for yielding back.
I now recognize Ms. Cammack of Florida for her 5 minutes of
questioning.
Ms. Cammack. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate it.
Thank you for being here today.
One of the top implemented recommendations in the OIG's
2022 report was ACF and HHS should improve their operational
management and communications systems to better address the
safety and security needs of unaccompanied children.
Has the ACF and HHS implemented this recommendation yet?
Ms. Grimm. Thank you for your question, Representative
Cammack.
We are in receipt--we just got it yesterday--of ACF's
response to our recommendations. I believe that's included in
there.
We are reviewing their response. We need to look at
documentation. We consider it open until we have a chance to
review it, but it looks like what they are providing, if they
can substantiate it, we would clear that recommendation.
Ms. Cammack. So no.
Ms. Grimm. Open right now. It is open right now.
Ms. Cammack. OK. So I think collectively, all of us in this
room, we find this failure, the no, the implementation of the
recommendation frustrating. I am not quite sure why something
like this has not been implemented, but it is good to know that
HHS acknowledges that this is a problem, especially given the
fact that ORR's unaccompanied minor program has received record
funding for the past couple of years.
Your 2022 report on the top unimplemented challenges notes
that ORR is working on a, quote, ``emergency policy development
protocol that provides input from staff with expertise in child
welfare whenever ORR develops and reevaluates existing policies
and field guidance.''
Do you know when this protocol came into effect? And was
this protocol in effect at Fort Bliss and other emergency
intake sites?
Ms. Grimm. I do not know whether it was in place at
emergency intake sites, but it was something that we
recommended. It is something that ACF agreed with. It is
something that they are claiming that they have addressed, and
we are reviewing documentation.
Ms. Cammack. Would you provide feedback to the committee on
getting an answer on this, whether it was or not, because you
said you are not sure?
Ms. Grimm. Well, we need to get their paperwork and review
it, and we will get back to you on whether or not we are
considering it closed.
Ms. Cammack. OK. So looking at the annual report, reading
between the lines of the annual report, it appears that your
office thinks that this protocol is inadequate. Can you explain
why the protocol did not close out the recommendation?
Ms. Grimm. So throughout the course of our ORR work, we
have found challenges with horizontal and lateral
communication. By that I mean communication across other
Departments, with DHS, with DOJ. We found problems with there
being lateral communication within ORR so that concerns that
are raised by field specialists, for instance, are not being
listened to by those higher up.
So there are a number of things that ACF can do to address
this, but it has not been addressed to our satisfaction.
We find that this is a continuing issues across different
administrations, where somebody in the field knows that census
is going up. They do not have that. They are concerned about
mental health issues. They are raising concerns----
Ms. Cammack. I understand.
I'm going to shift gears here because my time is running
out. In the January 2023 HHS OIG report documenting how the NIH
and EcoHealth Alliance failed to supervise the use of taxpayer
funds at the Wuhan Institute of Virology, further the Wuhan Lab
refused to provide lab notebooks and electronic files of a key
experiment to EcoHealth.
The NIH terminated the Wuhan Institute of Virology as a
subgrantee then at that point. The OIG report concluded that
NIH should, quote, ``consider whether it is appropriate to
refer WIV''--Wuhan Institute of Virology--``to HHS for
debarment.''
The HHS OIG could refer the Wuhan Institute for debarment.
That is correct?
Ms. Grimm. That is what we are doing in the report. We are
recommending that they consider whether or not they should be
suspended or debarred.
We do not have that authority. We make referrals over to
the Department.
I will mention we have reports in this area about
suspension and debarment too.
Ms. Cammack. And thank you for that quick answer.
So then with that, has your office followed up to see if
NIH will refer the Wuhan Institute of Virology to HHS for
debarment?
Ms. Grimm. Their response is not due until July on that
report. It is my understanding that they are considering
suspension, debarment.
Ms. Cammack. Thank you.
My time has expired. Mr. Chairman, thank you.
Mr. Griffith. The gentlelady yields back.
I now recognize the gentleman from Texas, Mr. Crenshaw, for
5 minutes of questioning.
Mr. Crenshaw. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thanks for being here.
One of my big concerns is, you know, is if the excessive
and increased funding that we are giving HHS is being spent
wisely. There are a couple of areas I want to focus on.
One is the FDA. Approval time for new cancer treatments is
remarkably long, an average of 7 to 12 years.
HHS's handling of refugee settlement, that is another
problem I want to talk about.
Some of these NIH grants, though, this is a topic near and
dear to me where, you know, we have a major budget increase for
cancer research but not a clear direction from the
administration on how we are speeding up approvals of new cures
and therapies.
So do you know what portion of NIH funding goes to cancer
research?
Ms. Grimm. My understanding is it is $7.6 billion on
cancer-related research out of NIH.
Mr. Crenshaw. Yes. And how in the weeds does your office
get in figuring out how that is spent and then developing
metrics for how effective that money is spent?
Ms. Grimm. We do not have any ongoing, Representative
Crenshaw, work looking at cancer research out of NIH.
Mr. Crenshaw. OK. I would urge you to. I mean, let's look
at childhood cancer drugs, for instance. On average, 6\1/2\
years longer than the approval for adult cancer drugs. You
know, why? That would be a great question to ask. If we are
going to increase funding for NIH and FDA, we should know what
we are getting for it.
But the IG does not have any opinion on this, whether we
are using those funds effectively at all?
Ms. Grimm. We just do not have any ongoing work looking at
it. I would love for my folks to come up and talk to you about
some of your concerns.
We do have work looking at different processes that FDA
has, including the accelerated pathway program, and we had some
findings in that space. But we do not have anything specific to
cancer research.
Mr. Crenshaw. OK. So let's talk more broadly. So findings
in that space, could you tell us about that?
Ms. Grimm. Well, OIG's mission is to ensure that taxpayer
dollars are spent appropriately, and so our work looking at
grants management ensures oversight so that taxpayer dollars on
grants and in the instance you are citing, grants specific to
cancer research----
Mr. Crenshaw. No, no, I said talk more broadly. You said
you had findings in the space of the accelerated approval
program. What were the findings?
Ms. Grimm. Oh, I am sorry. So that report looked at this
process where they can approve drugs, but then they can have
confirmatory trials later.
We looked at the extent to which confirmatory trials were
happening. Now, that does not mean that the safety is
compromised, but the confirmatory trials are meant to look at
the efficacy that is promised by the drug.
We did find, I believe, I believe roughly a third of those
confirmatory trials were late, and a handful of confirmatory
trials were late between 5 and 10 years.
So as a general matter, what OIGs do is take a look at
whether there is adherence to requirements. We do not set
policies. I cannot force FDA, CMS, NIH to take the
recommendations we make. We make recommendations, and they
decide to take them or not.
But in that report, we looked at whether they were or how
they were following their rules and the time that it took for
these confirmatory trials to happen.
Mr. Crenshaw. Yes. There are also many roles surrounding
the extent to which the FDA has to communicate with its
customer, whoever is seeking drug approval. Have you done an
investigation on how effective that communication is and the
quality of communication?
Because that is my number one complaint I hear about. It is
like a black hole. They cannot get answers from the FDA. They
have timelines for their investors for their products, and they
cannot get a single answer from these people.
Is there any investigation ongoing in that regard?
Ms. Grimm. We have work looking at approval of drugs that
would include Aduhelm for Alzheimer's, and we are looking at
the extent to which there was communication with external
partners.
Now, in that instance, we would be looking at whether or
not there was inappropriate types of communication. Would it be
appropriate for us to come up and talk to you about some of
your concerns about communication and see----
Mr. Crenshaw. I'm looking for, you know, their effective
communication, productive communication. That would seem to
fall right in line with handling taxpayer dollars effectively.
If we are going to pay an agency to approve drugs, it
should actually have an effective process for approving drugs
instead of whatever it is doing now. And your office seems well
positioned to maybe focus on that. I would love to talk more
about it.
And I yield back. Thank you.
Mr. Griffith. The gentleman yields back.
I now recognize the gentleman from California, Mr. Ruiz,
for his 5 minutes.
Mr. Ruiz. Thank you.
Thank you for joining us today, Inspector General Grimm. I
appreciate your office's consistent attention to the quality of
the care that that unaccompanied children receive in ORR
facilities.
I remain deeply concerned about the treatment of
unaccompanied minors who are fleeing dangerous situations and
seeking refuge in the United States. These children are often
forced to flee their homes due to violence, poverty, and
persecution, leaving behind everything that they have ever
known.
I have seen firsthand the conditions these children arrive
in. They arrive at our borders with little more than the
clothes on their backs and are often traumatized by their
experiences and their journey.
It is our responsibility to ensure that these children are
treated humanely and provided with the necessities they need to
survive.
I have previously introduced legislation, the Humanitarian
Standards for Individuals in Customs and Border Protection
Custody Act, that would work to ensure that immigrants coming
to the United States to seek asylum are met with basic
humanitarian standards, making sure that they have adequate
food, water, sanitary conditions and health screenings for
survival.
Inspector General Grimm, your office has issued an
extensive report on conditions at one ORR facility, the
emergency intake site at Fort Bliss, where you outlined a
number of necessary improvements.
Could you provide us with an update on whether you have
seen improvements at that facility and other intake sites?
Ms. Grimm. We provided five recommendations for the Fort
Bliss site. We are in receipt of ORR's response to that report.
We are reviewing documentation to determine if the
recommendations related to securing qualified case managers,
that these case managers get comprehensive training and
support, that emergency policy development protocol to allow
for input from staff with expertise in child welfare, for
usability and search capacities within the UC Portals, and for
ORR employees and contractors and grant recipients to be
informed about whistleblower protections.
Mr. Ruiz. And has any of that been implemented?
Ms. Grimm. They are claiming that they have taken steps to
address all of our recommendations.
Mr. Ruiz. But you have not seen the changes?
Ms. Grimm. And we are reviewing the documentation. We just
got it, I believe, yesterday.
Mr. Ruiz. So having examined the Fort Bliss intake site in
such detail, what resources do you think your office or
Congress can provide to ensure that unaccompanied children are
treated humanely while in ORR custody and provided with the
necessary medical services they might need?
Ms. Grimm. Well, we are--I am trying to find--I am sorry--
our request for resources.
We are falling behind, Representative, in our ability to
keep pace with the growing number of programs at HHS. The
President's budget for fiscal year 2025, if implemented, would
provide OIG with much-needed resources.
We have a legislative proposal in there in A19 that would
rebase the Healthcare Fraud and Abuse Control Act. We have a
request in for additional resources to provide oversight for
the over 100 programs outside of Medicare and Medicaid.
We have not kept pace.
Mr. Ruiz. OK.
Ms. Grimm. We have less than 2 cents for every $100----
Mr. Ruiz. So clearly, there's more resources that are
needed.
Ms. Grimm. Yes.
Mr. Ruiz. Now I want to turn to the importance of
postrelease services. Children can require a range of
postrelease services, depending on their individual needs. Many
of these minors have experienced violence, abuse, and neglect
and require specialized care and support to heal from their
trauma.
Recent reports indicated that there is some inconsistency
of services available to children after they have been placed
by ORR with a sponsor.
While I am pleased to see that HHS has committed to the
goal of extending postrelease services to all children after
release from ORR care within 2 years, I want to be sure that
ORR has the proper resources, training, equipment, and staffing
they need to meet these children's needs.
Based on OIG's past or ongoing work, could advancing
efforts to provide postrelease services have a positive impact
on the safety and well-being of the unaccompanied children who
have been placed in the care of a sponsor?
Ms. Grimm. We do not have any ongoing work looking at
postplacement services. We do have some ongoing work looking at
transfers across different ORR types of facilities.
I believe that would include specialized services, mental
health services.
Mr. Ruiz. Well, HHS has committed to the goal of extending
postrelease services, postrelease services to all children
after release from ORR care within 2 years.
So I think that we should go back and sense what that
commitment is, what is necessary to be productive members of
our society, as there's issues that--from trauma that can lead
individuals into behaviors that are harmful to themselves and
to others.
And so that is why we need to address the post-traumatic
stress. We need to address the sense of belonging, the sense of
wellness in early age in order to maximize the wellness and
productivity of those children when they become adults.
Thank you.
And with that, I yield back.
Mr. Griffith. The gentleman yields back.
And now if the witness will be so kind, we are going to
have some wrap-up questions by both the ranking member and
myself.
And I recognize Ms. Castor for her followup questions.
Ms. Castor. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
And thank you, again, to the Inspector General for being
here.
In your testimony to us, you say on protecting healthcare,
``Decades of HHS OIG enforcement and oversight proved the adage
that fraudsters follow the money.''
When looking at a number of the CMS initiatives that are
administered with the States and private insurance companies,
you say ``program risks in Medicare and Medicaid can have huge
impacts on enrollees and their access to necessary care and
potentially result in improper payments that cost taxpayers
hundreds of millions of dollars.
``OIG's oversight of the Medicare Advantage Program is a
key example. Over the past 10 years, Medicare Advantage
enrollment has increased significantly. It now now covers more
than 30 million Medicare enrollees and is expected to cover 50
percent of all enrollees soon.''
But you say this rapid expansion has put program integrity
and highlighted serious issues with compliance weaknesses with
managed care plans: inflated payments to plans, enrollees with
serious medical conditions that may not receive the needed
care. And this kind of tracks with what I hear as a Member of
Congress trying to do constituent service. If they are enrolled
in Medicare Advantage, I do not have as much influence on
rectifying a situation as I do with traditional Medicare.
And you say, ``Our work has also raised concerns regarding
improper denials of Medicare covered services. Our work
demonstrates that the risk of fraud, waste, and abuse in
managed care are real and significant.'' They ``not only
threaten the financial integrity of Medicare, but also
potentially affect enrollees' healthcare.''
So what ongoing work are you doing now to combat fraud and
abuse in Medicare Advantage? There are a number of reports out
there highlighting these issues as well.
What is the ongoing oversight by the IG?
Ms. Grimm. Thank you for this question, Ranking Member
Castor.
When I talk about my priorities, there are two issues that
I always highlight: nursing homes--improving the care in
nursing homes and protecting residents in nursing homes--and
program integrity in Medicare Advantage.
We have completed a number of reports. You just walked
through a few of them, and we see issues with inflated risk
scores. We have concerns that serious conditions, things like
acute stroke, congestive heart failure, serious mental
conditions that include bipolar disorder, plans that are
getting increased risk score payments and we are not seeing
commensurate services flowing from those diagnoses.
It is serious and real because on the Medicare side we are
approaching 50 percent of our Medicare population being served
by Medicare Advantage.
Some of the fraud that we see, in some instances
beneficiaries do not even know that they are involved in
Medicare Advantage. We are seeing improper denials of services,
and when we go in and we take a look at those denials, we are
seeing that they would have been paid for on the Medicare side.
This presents concerns around access because, if your
payments are denied, you have to take extra steps. Providers
do, beneficiaries do. It creates friction in the program.
I just spoke at a RISE Conference out in Colorado Springs
about some of our compliance concerns, and we have a call to
action for Medicare Advantage industry to better policing
themselves.
We are encouraging self-disclosure of inappropriate
conduct. We desperately need more resources to get boots on the
ground to take a look at what we are seeing as concerning,
whether or not it is actually fraud, whether there are
conspiracies on the part of plans to take advantage of
loopholes in programs, whether that is, indeed, fraud.
So that is an area if we were to get increased resources
where we would really like to get to ground on whether or not
these concerns actually result in fraud.
Ms. Castor. And here we have all of the Baby Boomers
retiring. It is stressing Medicare, and we have got a
responsibility--the IG does, HHS does, and the Congress does--
to ensure that the dollars are going appropriately to
healthcare services and not to fraudsters. So I think that is
an area ripe for Oversight and Investigations as well.
So thank you very much.
Mr. Griffith. I thank the gentlelady.
So let's clear up a couple of things. First, one that I do
not know the answer to but I ought to, and I have not heard it
mentioned today. When you were talking with Mr. Ruiz, Dr. Ruiz,
earlier and you were talking about postplacement services and
that kind of thing, one of the questions that entered in my
mind earlier with other questions and with Dr. Ruiz is, Is ORR
notifying the local Department of Social Services that a child
has been placed in their area?
And the reason I ask that is that we see these reports
where kids are not being educated. They are not in school. They
are having to work these long hours. A lot of times your
Department of Social Services will check up on a kid to see,
``OK. We know that Little Johnny arrived here. How come they
did not enter into the West Salem Elementary School? Why are
they not in the middle school?'' And they can follow up on
that.
Are we doing that? Are we notifying them?
Ms. Grimm. Chairman Griffith, I do not know the answer to
that question if ORR is notifying local officials.
Mr. Griffith. Can you find out for me?
Ms. Grimm. I will look into that, yes.
Mr. Griffith. All right. You can look into that, and I will
look into that further as well.
Also, I think there may have been some misunderstanding.
When you were talking to Ms. Cammack, you indicated on Wuhan
Institute of Virology that you had recommended the NIH
disbarment or debarment.
Ms. Grimm. That they consider.
Mr. Griffith. Right. But do you not have the authority to
go directly to HHS's money folks and recommend to them as
opposed to going through NIH? Go straight to HHS and say, ``We
recommend they be debarred.''
Ms. Grimm. We make referrals to the office that handles
suspension and debarment. In fact, we did a report on that.
Mr. Griffith. And did you send Wuhan up to them as well
besides making a recommendation to? Did you make a referral to
HHS as well as a recommendation to NIH?
Ms. Grimm. I do not believe so.
Mr. Griffith. All right. And so the question that then
comes to me is, Have you done that with EcoHealth Alliance?
Ms. Grimm. In our report, we do not recommend suspension
and debarment.
Mr. Griffith. OK. So I have got to ask why because we know
that EcoHealth was delayed on year five. We know that in year
four they delayed reporting in year four excessive virus growth
on their progress report to the NIH.
They violated their contract because they did not get the
information from the Wuhan Institute of Virology--and look, we
will never know now. Because we did not get those reports, we
will never know what they were doing at that point in history
and whether or not something bad was about to happen inside the
lab.
And whether you are a believer that it was a lab leak that
caused COVID-19 or whether you think it was an animal, that
information would be critical in a virus that killed millions
of people around the world to have.
EcoHealth Alliance violated their contract. They were
negligent, they were sloppy, and they did not do their job. Why
in the world would we not debar them?
Ms. Grimm. Our report does not recommend suspension and
debarment.
Mr. Griffith. Why? With all of these violations, not just
they did not do one. They did two or three things that I
consider major violations of their contract. So why are we not
debarring them?
Ms. Grimm. Our auditors that did this work have to adhere
to Yellow Book standards, professional standards. Their
analysis did not, in their view, warrant a recommend----
Mr. Griffith. Are they lawyers or scientists, or do you
have a combination?
Ms. Grimm. They are auditors, and our work is reviewed by
attorneys.
Mr. Griffith. OK. Well, I have just got to tell you I see
this kind of a breach as an attorney. I see this kind of a
breach. I ain't doing business with those people anymore, and
it drives me crazy that we are spending the American taxpayer
dollars with a company--we are currently spending money with a
company that negligently handled the records related to
coronavirus research being done at the Wuhan Institute of
Virology.
And it is a plausible theory. I think it is clear and
convincing evidence that it came out of the lab. I think it was
an accident, but others may have different opinions. It does
not matter.
Either way if we had that information, we would have the
ability to make a better decision on where this virus came from
that killed millions of people in the world, and I do not
understand why we are spending American taxpayer dollars
supporting a company with that kind of a record.
I yield back.
Ms. Grimm. Chairman, can I----
Mr. Griffith. Yes, ma'am. I will give you a minute. I went
on a little tirade there. I will give you a minute to answer.
Ms. Grimm. OK. The report points out a number of issues
that the Department itself could take action and suspend and
debar EcoHealth Alliance. We do not say they should not suspend
and debar.
We have another report that talks about the suspension and
debarment program that was released a couple of years ago, and
we found a number of opportunities.
The majority of referrals come from us for suspension and
debarment. We do not see referrals from CDC, from NIH, from
ACF, from CMS, other grant-making contractor-giving officials,
and we note that in our report.
The Department could make a referral to that entity to look
at whether or not they could be suspended and debarred, and we
do point out in that separate body of work that there are more
opportunities.
We should not be the only ones recommending suspension
and----
Mr. Griffith. So you think we should expand the ability to
make those recommendations.
And do you think that we should have the ability for HHS to
fine bad actors, to have a monetary penalty when they do not
submit the reports that they are supposed to submit in a timely
manner, particularly when you are dealing with deadly
substances, pathogens?
Ms. Grimm. Our work does not have any findings on fines. We
do note that 90,000----
Mr. Griffith. But you would not be against it if we in
Congress decided we wanted to do that.
Ms. Castor, I went over my time. Do you want another
minute?
Ms. Castor. No.
Mr. Griffith. All right. OK. Thank you very much.
Seeing that there are no further Members wishing to ask
questions, I would like to thank our witness again for being
here today.
And pursuant to committee rules, I remind Members that they
have 10 business days to submit additional questions for the
record, and I ask the witness to submit her response within 10
business days upon receipt of these questions.
And without objection, the committee is adjourned.
Thank you very much, ma'am.
[Whereupon, at 12:20 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]
[Material submitted for inclusion in the record follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
