- FISCAL YEAR 2024 FEDERAL TRADE COMMISSION BUDGET

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

FISCAL YEAR 2024 FEDERAL TRADE COMMISSION BUDGET

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON INNOVATION, DATA, AND COMMERCE

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION
__________

APRIL 18, 2023
__________

Serial No. 118-21

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Published for the use of the Committee on Energy and Commerce

govinfo.gov/committee/house-energy
energycommerce.house.gov

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

54-689 PDF                 WASHINGTON : 2024

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE

CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington
Chair
MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas            FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey
ROBERT E. LATTA, Ohio                  Ranking Member
BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky              ANNA G. ESHOO, California
H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia         DIANA DeGETTE, Colorado
GUS M. BILIRAKIS, Florida            JAN SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois
BILL JOHNSON, Ohio                   DORIS O. MATSUI, California
LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana               KATHY CASTOR, Florida
RICHARD HUDSON, North Carolina       JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland
TIM WALBERG, Michigan                PAUL TONKO, New York
EARL L. ``BUDDY'' CARTER, Georgia    YVETTE D. CLARKE, New York
JEFF DUNCAN, South Carolina          TONY CARDENAS, California
GARY J. PALMER, Alabama              RAUL RUIZ, California
NEAL P. DUNN, Florida                SCOTT H. PETERS, California
JOHN R. CURTIS, Utah                 DEBBIE DINGELL, Michigan
DEBBBIE LESKO, Arizona               MARC A. VEASEY, Texas
GREG PENCE, Indiana                  ANN M. KUSTER, New Hampshire
DAN CRENSHAW, Texas                  ROBIN L. KELLY, Illinois
JOHN JOYCE, Pennsylvania             NANETTE DIAZ BARRAGAN, California
KELLY ARMSTRONG, North Dakota, Vice  LISA BLUNT ROCHESTER, Delaware
Chair                            DARREN SOTO, Florida
RANDY K. WEBER, Sr., Texas           ANGIE CRAIG, Minnesota
RICK W. ALLEN, Georgia               KIM SCHRIER, Washington
TROY BALDERSON, Ohio                 LORI TRAHAN, Massachusetts
RUSS FULCHER, Idaho                  LIZZIE FLETCHER, Texas
AUGUST PFLUGER, Texas
DIANA HARSHBARGER, Tennessee
MARIANNETTE MILLER-MEEKS, Iowa
KAT CAMMACK, Florida
JAY OBERNOLTE, California
------

Professional Staff

NATE HODSON, Staff Director
SARAH BURKE, Deputy Staff Director
TIFFANY GUARASCIO, Minority Staff Director
Subcommittee on Innovation, Data, and Commerce

GUS M. BILIRAKIS, Florida
Chairman
LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana               JAN SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois
TIM WALBERG, Michigan, Vice Chair      Ranking Member
JEFF DUNCAN, South Carolina          KATHY CASTOR, Florida
NEAL P. DUNN, Florida                DEBBIE DINGELL, Michigan
DEBBIE LESKO, Arizona                ROBIN L. KELLY, Illinois
GREG PENCE, Indiana                  LISA BLUNT ROCHESTER, Delaware
KELLY ARMSTRONG, North Dakota        DARREN SOTO, Florida
RICK W. ALLEN, Georgia               LORI TRAHAN, Massachusetts
RUSS FULCHER, Idaho                  YVETTE D. CLARKE, New York
DIANA HARSHBARGER, Tennessee         FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey (ex
KAT CAMMACK, Florida                     officio)
CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington
(ex officio)
C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hon. Gus M. Bilirakis, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Florida, opening statement............................     1
Prepared statement...........................................     4
Hon. Jan Schakowsky, a Representative in Congress from the State
of Illinois, opening statement.................................     6
Prepared statement...........................................     8
Hon. Cathy McMorris Rodgers, a Representative in Congress from
the State of Washington, opening statement.....................     9
Prepared statement...........................................    11
Hon. Frank Pallone, Jr., a Representative in Congress from the
State of New Jersey, opening statement.........................    14
Prepared statement...........................................    16

Witnesses

Lina M. Khan, Chair, Federal Trade Commission....................    18
Prepared statement \1\
Answers to submitted questions \2\
Rebecca Kelly Slaughter, Commissioner, Federal Trade Commission..    20
Prepared statement \1\
Answers to submitted questions...............................   139
Alvaro M. Bedoya, Commissioner, Federal Trade Commission.........    21
Prepared statement \1\
Answers to submitted questions...............................   153
Additional responses submitted for the record................   169

Submitted Material

Inclusion of the following was approved by unanimous consent.
List of documents submitted for the record.......................    66
Letter of April 17, 2023, from Engine, to Subcommittee Members...    68
Report of Engine and the University of Michigan Ford School of
Public Policy, ``Privacy Patchwork Problem: Costs, Burdens, and
Barriers Encountered by Startups,'' March 2023\3\
Article of March 16, 2023, ``FTC Lawyers Leave at Fastest Rate in
Years as Khan Sets New Tone,'' Bloomberg Law...................    71
Article of December 15, 2021, ``A Hostile Takeover of the FDIC,''
by Jelena McWilliams, Wall Street Journal......................    74
Article of February 14, 2023, ``Why I'm Resigning as an FTC
Commissioner,'' by Christine Wilson, Wall Street Journal.......    77
Editorial of April 3, 2023, ``The FTC's Unholy Antitrust Grail,''
Wall Street Journal............................................

80----------

\1\ The joint Federal Trade Commission statement of Ms. Khan, Ms.
Slaughter, and Mr. Bedoya has been retained in committee files and is
available at https://docs.house.gov/meetings/IF/IF17/20230418/115716/
HHRG-118-IF17-Wstate-KhanL-20230418.pdf.
\2\ Ms. Khan's responses have been retained in committee files and are
available at https://docs.house.gov/meetings/IF/IF17/20230418/115716/
HHRG-118-IF17-Wstate-KhanL-20230418-SD010.pdf.
\3\ The report, attached to the Engine letter, has been retained in
committee files and is included in the Documents for the Record at
https://docs.house.gov/meetings/IF/IF17/20230418/115716/HHRG-118-IF17-
20230418-SD030.pdf.
Letter of September 28, 2021, from Ms. Khan to Hon. David
Cicilline and Hon. Ken Buck....................................    83
Letter from Andi Search, et al., to Mrs. Rodgers, et al..........    86
Letter of September 21, 2022, from Hon. Chris Pappas, et al., to
Ms. Khan.......................................................    88
Press release of July 19, 2022, ``Federal Trade Commission,
National Labor Relations Board Forge New Partnership to Protect
Workers from Anticompetitive, Unfair, and Deceptive
Practices,'' Federal Trade Commission..........................    92
Press release of September 6, 2022, ``NLRB Issues Notice of
Proposed Rulemaking on Joint-Employer Standard,'' National
Labor Relations Board..........................................    95
Letter of April 12, 2023, from Asheesh Agarwal, et al., to
General Counsel Anisha Dasgupta, Federal Trade Commission......    97
Press release of March 30, 2023, ``FTC, Justice Department, and
European Commission Hold Third U.S.-EU Joint Technology
Competition Policy Dialogue,'' Federal Trade Commission........   101
Letter of March 7, 2023, from Mr. Duncan and Hon. Michael Guest
to Gina Raimondo, Secretary, Department of Commerce and
Katherine C. Tai, U.S. Trade Representative....................   104
Blog post of February 27, 2023, ``Keep your AI claims in check,''
Federal Trade Commission.......................................   107
Letter of October 13, 2022, from Hon. Tom O'Halleran, et al., to
Ms. Khan.......................................................   114
Letter of April 18, 2023, from Neil L. Bradley, Executive Vice
President, U.S. Chamber of Commerce, to Mrs. Rodgers and Mr.
Pallone........................................................   122
Letter of September 20, 2022, from Asheesh Agarwal, et al., to
Ms. Khan, et al................................................   125
Report of the Office of Inspector General, Federal Trade
Commission, ``Audit of the Federal Trade Commission's Unpaid
Consultant and Expert Program,'' August 1, 2022\4\
Letter of April 18, 2023, from Merve Hickok, President, and Marc
Rotenberg, Executive Director, Center for AI and Digital
Policy, to Mrs. Rodgers, et al.................................   130
Letter of April 3, 2023, from Marc Rotenberg, President and
General Counsel, and Merve Hickok, Chair and Research Chair,
Center for AI and Digital Policy, to Ms. Khan, et al...........   133
Complaint submitted by the Center for Artificial Intelligence and
Digital Policy to the Federal Trade Commission in the matter of
OpenAI, Inc., March 30, 2023\4\
Letter to the Editor, ``Regulating A.I.: The U.S. Needs to Act,''
by Marc Rotenberg and Merve Hickok, Center for AI and Digital
Policy, New York Times.........................................   134
Letter of April 13, 2023, from U.S. Senator Kevin Cramer to
Kenichiro Yoshida, Chairman, President, and Chief Executive
Officer, Sony..................................................   136

----------

\4\ The information has been retained in committee files and is
included in the Documents for the Record at https://docs.house.gov/
meetings/IF/IF17/20230418/115716/HHRG-118-IF17-20230418-SD030.pdf.

FISCAL YEAR 2024 FEDERAL TRADE COMMISSION BUDGET

----------

TUESDAY, APRIL 18, 2023

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Innovation, Data, and Commerce,
Committee on Energy and Commerce,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 10:03 a.m. in
the John D. Dingell Room 2123, Rayburn House Office Building,
Hon. Gus Bilirakis (chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Members present: Representatives Bilirakis, Bucshon,
Walberg, Duncan, Dunn, Lesko, Pence, Armstrong, Allen, Fulcher,
Harshbarger, Cammack, Rodgers (ex officio), Schakowsky
(subcommittee ranking member), Castor, Dingell, Kelly, Blunt
Rochester, Soto, Trahan, Clarke, and Pallone (ex officio).
Also present: Representatives Carter and Joyce.
Staff present: Michael Cameron, Professional Staff Member,
Jessica Herron, Clerk; Tara Hupman, Chief Counsel; Peter
Kielty, General Counsel; Emily King, Member Services Director;
Tim Kurth, Chief Counsel; Brannon Rains, Professional Staff
Member; Lacey Strahm, Fellow; Teddy Tanzer, Senior Counsel;
Hannah Anton, Minority Policy Analyst; Ian Barlow, Minority FTC
Detailee; Waverly Gordon, Minority Deputy Staff Director and
General Counsel; Daniel Greene, Minority Professional Staff
Member; Tiffany Guarascio, Minority Staff Director; Lisa Hone,
Minority Chief Counsel, Innovation, Data, and Commerce; Joe
Orlando, Minority Professional Staff Member; and C.J. Young,
Minority Deputy Communications Director.
Mr. Bilirakis. The subcommittee will come to order. The
Chair recognizes himself for an opening statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. GUS M. BILIRAKIS, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF FLORIDA

Good morning, everybody. I want to thank the Chair of the--
and the Commissioners of the FTC for being here today. Thank
you so much for being here.
The last time the FTC Commissioners were before this
committee was for a single combined legislative and oversight
hearing in July of 2021. Given that, there will be no shortage
of questions today I'm sure, from both sides.
Sadly, we have no Republican Commissioners on the panel to
provide balanced views on what the FTC is doing in its current
actions. That's regrettable. I'm sure you are not surprised, of
course, that I would lead into that.
But no FTC watcher can look at what has gone over over the
last 2 years at the Commission and conclude that things are on
the right track. The stretching of authorities and resources
has led some to question what authorities should be stripped or
whether it should even exist.
I am not in that camp. I wanted--I want this to be the most
respected protector of our children, our seniors, and, of
course, the ultimate enforcer of our privacy and data security.
However, it has become clear that these things are on the wrong
course as, again, the priorities are diverted down a path of
progressive pursuits that has led to career employees leaving
the institution. That's unacceptable.
So let me be clear, it is time that you focus on the
authority that Congress has provided you. You have a laundry
list of distractions from this mission with the many new
rulemakings and requests for information, 6(b) studies that
have begun and never concluded, all while continuing to lose
constantly in Federal court.
This is not what success looks like when you are tasked
with protecting consumers from harms, especially at a time when
your Commission released findings showing consumers reportedly
lost almost $9 billion to scams in 2022, a 30 percent increase
from previous--the previous year. That includes over half a
billion in dollars lost in my State alone, the great State of
Florida.
Maybe instead of carrying out President Biden's leftist
crusade, unsuccessfully, you could instead prioritize resources
we give you to help vulnerable Americans.
Sadly, we have raised these concerns before. I have
continually been troubled by the FTC's unwillingness to provide
substantive answers to questions from this committee regarding
its decision-making process on this and other matters. You
attempt to block us out like you did to your former Republican
Commissioners, one of whom resigned in a showing of contempt of
your management and lack of due process.
At the same time, you have asked for a budget increase. How
does one justify this when we hear how staff has been diverted
from mission-critical functions and pulled from bureaus to
focus on merger reviews?
In fact, there has been such a mass exodus of career staff
at the agency, you seem to be squandering away the resources
that we currently give you in favor of pursuing unprecedented
progressive legal theories. I'm submitting for the record an
article from Bloomberg Law on March 16 titled, ``FTC Lawyers
Leave at Fastest Rate in Years as Khan Sets New Tone.''
Without objection, so ordered.
[The information appears at the conclusion of the hearing.]
Mr. Bilirakis. Perhaps the nowhere more--it's nowhere more
evident that there's a drain on the consumer protection mission
is that, of course, the lengths the FTC has gone to block
Illumina's reacquisition of GRAIL. The FTC, in an unprecedented
move, overturned an earlier decision by the agency's chief
administrative law judge which allowed the merger to move
forward. This decision could literally delay new and lifesaving
screening technology from getting to consumer--to cancer
patients. I am submitting for the record an editorial regarding
that decision from the Wall Street Journal on April 3rd titled,
``The FTC's Unholy Grail.''
Without objection, so ordered.
[The information appears at the conclusion of the hearing.]
Mr. Bilirakis. In closing, I implore you to please get back
to what you can do best, which is to support and protect
consumers. That's the goal. That's the mission. To do that, you
must work within the constraints that Congress has set, rather
than abusing the authorities we have provided. I look forward
to our conversation and any followup. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Bilirakis follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Bilirakis. And now I recognize the gentlelady from
Illinois, Ms. Schakowsky, for 5 minutes for her opening
statement, our ranking member.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. JAN SCHAKOWSKY, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF ILLINOIS

Ms. Schakowsky. Thank you so much, Mr. Chairman. I want to
warmly welcome the Federal Trade Commission Chair, Lina Khan,
and the Commissioners Slaughter and Bedoya to be here. I think
we're going to have a very different opinion of what the FTC
has accomplished and the direction that it is going on in. We
know that two of the Republicans--you mentioned that there
weren't any now--both retired before their terms expired.
And we know that the Federal Trade Commission for a hundred
years has been protecting consumers, and that has not stopped
now. The agency has accomplished a number of very important
achievements. In the past 2 years--in the past 2 years alone,
the FTC protected consumers in a number of ways.
One, returned over $670 million to defrauded consumers and
behind the--let me see--defrauded Americans. Began four
sectoral investigations, including into Big Tech, which we know
needs to happen. And every dollar that the--that is returned--
that the FTC was able to get is returned in dividends for
American consumers.
In just one example, the FTC protected millions of app
users by--I'm sorry--by prohibiting the sharing of secret--of
sensitive information. Last year, the FTC--help me out--the--
last year, the FTC fined Epic Games $520 million for violating
the children's privacy laws. We know that the agency returned
more than $64 million to the patients of pharmacy benefit
managers and health companies. So one after another, we're
seeing how the FTC is putting money back into people's pockets.
Consumer privacy rights has been a big issue, of course,
for Americans, and the FTC has taken notice. Last year, the
agency proposed rules to protect consumers' privacy and
security. However, the FTC needs additional authorities and
resources in order to provide the consumers what they actually
need.
We know that, Mr. Chairman, you and I were able to pass the
INFORM Consumer Act, which absolutely was helpful in making--in
giving the FTC a tool to ensure that trustworthy online
marketplaces are thriving. And I plan to reintroduce
legislation, the Online Consumer Protection Act, which will
give the FTC tools to hold tech companies and platforms
accountable, and I'm also going to introduce the FTC
Whistleblower Act, which will protect whistleblowers.
And finally, the 21st Century FTC Act introduced by
Representative Castor and my FTC Autonomy Act will give the
FTC--will give the Commission rulemaking and civil penalty
authorities.
So let me just end with this having reached my time. I just
want to say that Big Tech has been fighting back against
efforts to rein them in, and one of the ways that they've been
doing it is to target with the Chairwoman herself, which I
resent deeply. Chair Khan and the FTC is standing for working
families, for small businesses, and is holding the corporate
wrongdoers accountable. This is exactly what we need, and I
appreciate the work of the current Federal Trade Commission.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Schakowsky follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Ms. Schakowsky. I yield back.
Mr. Bilirakis. The gentlelady yields back. Thank you.
I know recognize the Chair of the full committee, Mrs.
Rodgers, for her 5 minutes. Thank you.
Mrs. Rodgers. Good morning.
Mr. Bilirakis. Good morning.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, A
REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF WASHINGTON

Mrs. Rodgers. I'd like to start by welcoming the
Commissioners. As you all know, the FTC has historically been a
very bipartisan agency for solutions around consumer
protection, data privacy, and antitrust law. Unfortunately,
this tradition is currently under attack.
Chair Khan, under your tenure as Chair, the integrity and
effectiveness of this independent agency has been repeatedly
questioned. You've suffered many losses in court at all Federal
levels of the judiciary branch. You've drastically reduced
transparency and accountability by cutting out key voices at
the agency.
Both Republican Commissioners have resigned during your
tenure. Senior staff have quit in record numbers, with reports
in the New York Post describing you as abusive and a tyrant.
There's been a 34 percent decline in employee confidence in
senior leadership's respect for them and motivation at work.
Former Commissioner Christine Wilson cited your disregard for
the law, for the rule of law, as one of the reasons for her
resignation.
Time and time again you prioritized a personal and
political agenda over the integrity of the FTC and the interest
of Americans. Despite numerous letters of concern from this
committee, you've continued to ignore these in a dangerous and
misguided consolidation of power.
When you appeared before us in July of 2021, I asked about
your decision to remove ``without unduly burdening legitimate
business activity'' from the FTC mission statement. It was a
longstanding bipartisan tradition at the FTC to include this in
the mission to protect Americans and businesses. Eliminating
this guardrail, which prevents Government overreach, was even
more startling given the timing.
People across the country were working to reopen their
businesses after the COVID-19 lockdown. This meant bringing
their employees back to work so that they could make a living
and provide for their families. Instead, they faced
intimidation from the Federal Government. This was not a one-
off situation. The FTC is still sending hundreds of penalty
notice letters to businesses even when they've done nothing
wrong. This violation of due process will not be tolerated.
Regarding the FTC's budget request, the concerns raised by
current and former employees at your agency do not reassure us
that you'll put the American people first. Leadership matters.
Before I even entertain any additional funds or authority for
the FTC, first you need to convince us that the mission of
protecting Americans isn't taking a backseat to the Biden
administration's radical agenda.
We want you to be the preeminent data protection agency in
the world, and that must be your focus, at the direction of
Congress. And given these abuses of power, what is clearly
needed before Congress considers any new authorities or funding
are reforms, more guardrails, and increased transparency to
ensure that you're accountable to the American people.
This includes for how the FTC will protect the privacy and
data security of the American people. The single best way we
can protect Americans in today's digital ecosystem is a
national standard. In August last year, this committee voted
overwhelmingly to advance the American Data Privacy and
Protection Act. Shortly after, your Commission voted on
partisan lines to act unilaterally on your own rules.
I want to be clear. Our goal continues to be for Congress
to enact a national standard with the expectation the FTC, with
guardrails, will play a critical role in this effort.
Establishing a national data privacy and data security standard
is bigger and more important than any one person or any single
agency to act unilaterally and risk losing people's trust. More
than 80 percent of Americans say they're looking for Congress
to act. It is a top priority for their own privacy, for their
kids' privacy, and to rein in Big Tech.
We, the people's representatives, take this responsibility
seriously because we're accountable to them. We're accountable
to the people, and we have no intention of losing sight of
that.
I want to thank former Commissioners Phillips and Wilson
for their service to the country and the American people. I'm
saddened that they're no longer at the Commission. Chair Khan,
Commissioner Slaughter and Bedoya, thank you for being with us
here today. I look forward to your testimony.
[The prepared statement of Mrs. Rodgers follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mrs. Rodgers. And I yield back.
Mr. Bilirakis. The gentlelady yields back. And now I
recognize the ranking member of the full committee for his 5
minutes, opening statement, the gentleman from New Jersey.
You're recognized, sir.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. FRANK PALLONE, Jr., A REPRESENTATIVE
IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF NEW JERSEY

Mr. Pallone. Thank you, Mr. Chair. Let me start by
expressing my support for Chair Khan. I don't agree with Chair
Rodgers' criticism of her. The problem is that the GOP doesn't
like the FTC enforcement role. They would simply gut the FTC at
the expense of consumers.
The Federal Trade Commission has one of the broadest
purviews of any Federal agency: fighting deceptive and unfair
business practices and anticompetitive conduct across the
entire economy. Managing this portfolio with less than 1,400
employees is no small feat. And in order to ensure the FTC can
continue its important work, Congress must approve its
requested budget to further support much-needed staffing.
It's clear the Republicans don't like when the--what the
FTC does. They don't seek to protect consumers. Whenever the
Republicans are in charge in Congress or at the administration
level, they seek to cut the legs of the FTC. And that's
unfortunate because the FTC brings enforcement actions to
prevent companies from misusing consumers' personal
information, failing to properly protect consumer data, and
profiting from deceptive advertising and other telemarketing
schemes. This important work comes at a time when the FTC is
facing coordinated attacks from Big Tech aimed at evading the
FTC's challenges to its business model. For years, Big Tech has
been putting profits ahead of consumer privacy, and the
opportunity to maximize advertising revenue ahead of our
children's safety and well-being.
The FTC is also committed to protecting seniors, veterans,
communities of color, and non-English speakers who have all
historically been targets for fraudsters and deceptive
businesses.
The FTC also protects consumers during some of the most
important times of their lives, often when they are at their
most vulnerable. The Funeral Rule protects grieving family
members form predatory pricing. The Mortgage Assistance Relief
Rule protects consumers who are seeking services to avoid
foreclosure. And the Used Car Rule requires that used car
dealers display essential information on the window of every
car they're selling.
The FTC does all of this with fewer employees than it had
45 years ago when the American economy was smaller and simpler.
Back then, a deceptive advertising case often focused on a
single print or TV ad. Today, the FTC needs even more resources
in a complex economy where targeted advertising presents
consumers with different ads and prices based on personal
characteristics.
In addition to making sure the FTC is properly staffed, we
should restore the FTC's full legal authority. Last Congress,
this subcommittee led legislation that passed the House to
restore the FTC's authority to go to court to seek to have
money returned to consumers. Unfortunately, that legislation
never passed the Senate.
We must also resume our historic work on bipartisan,
comprehensive privacy legislation, as Chair Rodgers mentioned,
which could help the FTC give consumers substantive data
privacy protections beyond the current notice and consent
regime.
And finally, given the frequency of Big Tech's repeat
violations, we should also consider providing the FTC with
additional tools to fight repeat corporate offenders. Just
months after Twitter's second settlement with the FTC for
privacy violations, media reporting suggested that Twitter may
be violating that settlement by having engineers, rather than
high-level officers, certify compliance and privacy controls.
And Twitter isn't the only Big Tech repeat offender. In
2019, the FTC obtained a $5 billion civil penalty from Facebook
for violating a 2012 consent order governing Facebook's privacy
practices. The FTC has also brought five consumer protection
enforcement actions against Google since 2011.
Now based on Big Tech's past performance, we should not do
anything to undermine the FTC's enforcement against Big Tech. I
am concerned by false claims that the FTC's Twitter compliance
investigation is partisan. In truth, it would be a dereliction
of duty if the FTC did not thoroughly investigate Twitter's
compliance.
I also urge skepticism about coordinated partisan calls for
Chair Khan's recusal based on her prior academic views. We
shouldn't forget that this was well known by the 69 Senators,
including 20 Republicans, who voted to confirm her and lauded
her for being tough on social media platforms and other Big
Tech companies.
Unsurprisingly, within weeks of Chair Khan's confirmation,
Amazon and Facebook campaigned to undermine her enforcement
efforts, in part by calling for her recusal. In October, a
Federal judge rejected such a motion, and independently of
Chair Khan, the Commission did the same in February.
So I look forward to hearing from the Chair and the
Commissioners today, but before yielding I want to recognize
that Commission Slaughter has joined us wearing a mask because
she was ill earlier this week. The Republicans pushed a rule
that prevents witnesses from appearing remotely. Rather than
taking advantage of the technological tools that allows us to
engage as Americans wherever they are, this rule requires her
to choose between appearing in person or not appearing at all.
I think this rule should be reconsidered because it limits
participation by witnesses.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Pallone follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Pallone. And with that, I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Bilirakis. The gentleman yields back. So we'll get
started with the witnesses now for their testimony. Our first
witness is the Honorable Lina Khan, Chairman of the FTC. You're
recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF LINA M. KHAN, CHAIR, AND REBECCA KELLY SLAUGHTER
AND ALVARO M. BEDOYA, COMMISSIONERS, FEDERAL TRADE COMMISSION

STATEMENT OF LINA M. KHAN

Ms. Khan. Thank you. Chairman Bilirakis, Ranking Member
Schakowsky, and members of the subcommittee. Thank you for
inviting me to testify. It's an honor to be here with you
alongside my colleagues, Commissioners Slaughter and Bedoya.
I'd like to take a few minutes to share some of the
Commission's accomplishments during this last year. None of
this work would have been possible without the extraordinary
efforts of the FTC staff who day after day fight for the
American people, even when it means taking on some of the most
powerful corporations in our economy. Although this oral
testimony is mine alone, I know I speak for all of us when I
say how lucky we are to work with the talented, dedicated
professionals of the Federal Trade Commission.
The FTC is firing on all cylinders to fully execute on our
mandate to promote fair competition and protect Americans from
unfair or deceptive practices. We are redoubling our efforts in
traditional areas of enforcement like protecting Americans'
privacy and combating fraud while also activating additional
authorities that Congress has given us. In the last year alone,
we've broken ground by bringing actions in a number of areas,
including our first action under the Opioid Addiction Recovery
Fraud Prevention Act, our first action under the Health Breach
Notification Rule, our first action under the Military Lending
Act, and our first action under the Made in USA Rule.
In the meantime, we've also been racking up record monetary
judgments, including the largest-ever judgment to protect kids'
privacy, the largest monetary judgment in a fair-lending case,
and the largest administrative judgment ever.
Privacy and data security remain a major focus for the FTC,
and I applaud this committee's continued efforts to enact
comprehensive Federal privacy legislation. For our part,
Commission staff have brought critical actions to protect
Americans' data, including kids' data and sensitive information
like health data.
We brought an action against Fortnite, the maker of Epic
Games, for undermining children's privacy. We secured a record-
breaking fine for the company's violation of the Childrens
Online Privacy Protection Act while also securing important
changes in the company's privacy practices. We also published a
policy statement to put market participants on notice that we
will vigorously protect children's privacy in the educational
technology world, and we have followed up through our
enforcement work, including through a recent action against
Chegg, an ed tech company.
The Commission also recently brought two seminal health
privacy actions against BetterHelp and GoodRx, two online
healthcare providers that we found had committed to keeping
users' sensitive health information private but ended up making
it available for firms to use for advertising. In the
settlement resolving these actions, staff negotiated outright
bans prohibiting these companies from disclosing health data to
third parties for advertising.
Finally, Commission staff are currently litigating a
privacy case against Kochava, a location data broker that was
selling users' sensitive location data, including information
that could be used to identify whether people were going to
addiction facilities, visiting reproductive health clinics, or
going to religious services.
Another major effort at the Commission this year has been
stopping the scourge of junk fees or the unwanted charges that
can drain Americans' pocketbooks. The FTC brought enforcement
actions against companies that trick consumers into spending
money that they didn't intend or want to spend, including
through manipulative online interfaces. We also sued car
dealers for sneaking on junk fees for made-up or unwanted
services.
And we brought enforcement actions against companies that
have trapped consumers into renewing payment plans through
making cancellation intentionally difficult. Our hundred-
million-dollar settlement with the internet phone provider
Vonage, which we claim was creating obstacles for consumers and
small businesses trying to cancel their services, is a key
example of this work.
Beyond these enforcement actions, the Commission has also
begun several rulemaking proceedings to address these--this
conduct more systematically. This does include through seeking
comment on proposed junk fees rulemaking and proposing our
Click to Cancel rule, which would require that companies make
it as easy to cancel a subscription as they do to sign up for
one.
The FTC has also been working to preserve the integrity of
the Made in USA label by halting companies from making false
Made in USA claims. In 2021, the Commission finalized a rule
that prohibits misuse of the Made in America label triggering
stiff civil penalties, injunctive relief, and other remedies
for those who violate it. The Commission is already taking
action to enforce this rule, and these actions help protect
honest businesses and true domestic manufacturers while
ensuring the consumers can trust the Made in USA label.
Consumers and independent businesses have also benefited
from the Commission staff working to defend Americans' right to
repair. The FTC has targeted unlawful repair restrictions which
could make consumer products more difficult to fix and can
close off the market to independent repair shops. Since issuing
our 2021 policy statement committing the agency to this work,
we've brought three major actions against companies for
imposing unlawful repair restrictions and required them to
eliminate restrictive warranty terms.
Our fraud enforcement efforts also remain a critical part
of our work. Over the last year, we've been particularly
focused on fraud that harms veterans, service members, and
older Americans. For example, our first action under the
Military Lending Act, which we brought together with 18 States,
required a national retailer to pay over $10 million in refunds
for cheating military families with illegal financing and sale
tactics.
We've also been very active in preventing and remediating
fraud against elder Americans, and this remains a core part of
our work. Many of these successes reflect years or work by
Commission staff, and I'm honored to call them colleagues.
Thank you so much for the opportunity to testify, and I
look forward to your questions. 1A\1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ The joint Federal Trade Commission statement of Ms. Khan, Ms.
Slaughter, and Mr. Bedoya has been retained in committee files and is
available at https://docs.house.gov/meetings/IF/IF17/20230418/115716/
HHRG-118-IF17-Wstate-KhanL-20230418.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Mr. Bilirakis. I thank the Chair.
Our next witness is the Honorable Rebecca Slaughter,
Commissioner of the FTC, and we appreciate you appearing today,
and you're recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF REBECCA KELLY SLAUGHTER

Ms. Slaughter. Thank you, Chairman Bilirakis, Ranking
Member Schakowsky, Chair McMorris Rodgers, and Ranking Member
Pallone, and members of the subcommittee. I'm grateful for your
invitation to testify today about the vital work of the Federal
Trade Commission.
As you know, I'm somewhat under the weather, but I'm
committed to being here if I could, because of the value I
place on the oversight work of this committee.
The two themes I will emphasize today are resources and
authorities. Our talented staff have extremely full plates
policing everything from dark patterns and data abuses in novel
digital markets to old-school deceptive advertising and
hardcore fraud across nearly the entire economy.
I meet regularly with our staff, and the top concern I hear
from them is that we lack adequate resources to do the job.
This has been true in each and every year of my service,
especially as we take on the biggest and richest firms on
behalf of the American people. One salient data point: We had
50 percent more employees at the beginning of the Reagan
administration than we do today.
But today, I have a new message about FTC resources: Thank
you. Thank you, Congress, for investing in the Commission's
work, enabling us to retain expert staff, conduct complex
investigations, deepen our market expertise, and even have a
more fair shot in litigation against some of the wealthiest
companies in the world. The appropriation authorized at the end
of last year gave this Commission a significant budget
increase, for which we are deeply grateful. This wise
investment is a crucial downpayment on empowering the FTC to
police modern markets, but yes, more is needed.
Just consider that our Division of Privacy and Identity
Protection has around 50 staff, whereas, for example, the
Information Commissioner's office in the UK boasts a staff of
nearly 1,000. That's about 20 times as many staff in a nation
with about a fifth of our population. So thank you and please
continue to invest in the FTC. Americans deserve no less.
In addition to more resources, more robust authorities are
necessary for the FTC to effectively protect American
consumers. I will touch on two that are well-known to this
subcommittee. The first is the opportunity before you to pass a
comprehensive national privacy law. Thank you for your hard
work on this project, which included passing a bill out of the
full committee on a bipartisan basis during the last Congress.
I continue to believe that the passage of such a bill
represents the best possible path for protecting Americans from
data abuses.
As you know, last year we launched an advanced notice of
proposed rulemaking on commercial surveillance and lax data
security under Section 18 of the FTC Act. The record we develop
in that process may allow us to promulgate rules to address
prevalent practices that violate the FTC Act. This is more than
we've been able to do through one-off enforcement actions but
substantially less than Congress could do with a new bill.
I heartily recommend to you and your staff the large
comment record our rulemaking has already developed as an
important historic purpose in the privacy field. And I know
that, as our work continues, we stand ready and willing to
support your efforts to enact a comprehensive national privacy
law.
Even as we look forward to the day when Americans are
better protected from the novel harms of the 21st century's
data-driven economy, we must not lose sight of the urgent need
to restore one of the 20th century's best tools for protecting
consumers, Section 13(b) of the FTC Act. As you know, for more
than 40 years under bipartisan administrations and with the
blessings of eight circuit courts, the FTC brought actions in
Federal court to return money to consumers from whom it was
unlawfully taken.
Unfortunately, 2 years ago the Supreme Court decided in AMG
Capital Management that Section 13(b) does not authorize
equitable monetary relief. I am grateful to this subcommittee
for your urgent work to fix Section 13(b) to make explicit that
courts can order law violators to return the money they
wrongfully took.
While Congress continues to work on this issue, the
Commission is using every available tool to deliver justice to
harmed consumers. We are partnering wherever possible with
State enforcers who have redress authority. We are exploring
new rulemakings which can enable consumer redress, and we are
bringing actions under Section 19 which allows limited redress.
I applaud these heroic efforts of our aggressive and
creative staff and terrific enforcement partners, but make no
mistake, it is not enough. We need a Section 13(b) fix, so I
implore you to keep at it. Your constituents deserve to be made
whole when they get ripped off.
Thank you, and I look forward to your questions.
Mr. Bilirakis. I thank the Commissioner.
And now our final witness is the Honorable Alvaro Bedoya,
again a Commissioner of the FTC. You're recognized, sir, for 5
minutes.

STATEMENT OF ALVARO M. BEDOYA

Mr. Bedoya. Thank you. Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member
Schakowsky, Chair Rodgers, Ranking Member Pallone, members of
the subcommittee, good morning. I'm really grateful for the
chance to appear before you, particularly alongside my
colleagues, Chair Khan and Commissioner Slaughter.
I want to echo first of all their gratitude to you for your
support of our mission, and I want to echo their gratitude for
our staff. All that work you're going to hear about today,
that's staff work, career staff, nonpartisan staff working
overtime despite some pretty substantial ongoing resource
constraints to protect the American public.
I'd love to focus on one priority that is front of mind for
parents across the country, and that's the teen mental health
crisis, and specifically the role of social media in that
crisis. This is a bipartisan priority for members of the
subcommittee and the full committee. You are leading many of
the key efforts to address it, and so I want to tell you about
the work we're doing at the Commission on that front.
The first thing we're doing is digging deep into the
research. Just this last week, staff and I met with leaders at
the National Institute of Health to discuss that research, the
existing findings. We've also met with the top psychologists in
the field to learn from them. We've met with leaders at the
American Psychological Association, American Academy of
Pediatrics. And here is what I've learned. There is evidence
that some uses of social media do, in fact, hurt certain groups
of children and teenagers. Now, yes, there's important nuances
and more targeted research is necessary, but this is not
[indiscernible] panic. There is a there there.
The second thing we're doing is building our expert
capacity on this issue. One of the many reasons I was proud to
support the bipartisan comprehensive privacy bill put forward
by your committee, Mr. Chairman, was because it called on the
Commission to create a division focused on youth privacy and
marketing and also directed the Commission to hire
psychologists to study precisely this issue. And I want to get
that done now. And so I'm pleased to share that it is now part
of the Commission's strategic plan to explore hiring
psychologists on staff, and we are actively working on doing
that.
I've also started conversations with regulators in the
United Kingdom and the Netherlands and elsewhere to understand
how they are enforcing their own laws in the area and how they
use psychologists in their own work.
Third, we are bringing cases against companies we allege
are exacerbating this crisis. Research has shown that one of
the drivers of the teen mental health crisis online is the
harassment and verbal abuse they experience online. Chair Khan
mentioned the Commission's landmark case against the makers of
Fortnite, and in that case we allege that Fortnite preset its
privacy settings in a way that allowed adults to harass kids
and teens. And our actions shut that down and sent a message, a
clear message in my view, to all companies that that is not OK.
If the members of the committee and subcommittee are able
to pass a comprehensive privacy bill which includes additional
protections for kids and teens, that will strengthen our hand
and we will use every bit of that authority. In the meantime,
I'll just say that I personally believe that we do have
substantial authority to sue companies who are designing their
products in a way that harms kids and teens' mental health.
Until that day, I want to say unequivocally to any company
that makes money by tracking where people go to the doctor,
where they go for counseling, the medicine they take, or for
that matter where they worship or where they go for addiction
treatment, the Commission is watching and has brought several
recent actions against companies that we alleged broke the law
by making money off of this sensitive data.
That's most of what I wanted to share. I'll end on another
note. I was just sharing with some of the members of the
subcommittee before we started that we spend a lot of time with
our family in Louisiana, and so one thing I've tried to as a
Commissioner is prioritize getting out of the beltway and to
visit small business leaders in rural America. In the last
year, I met with grocers in South Dakota, in Utah, pharmacists
in West Virginia, corn growers and cattlemen in Iowa.
I am personally profoundly worried about what's happening
to grocery, pharmacy, and agriculture in small-town America,
and I'm trying to do everything I can to understand and to
help. That's why I was proud to support our study into pharmacy
benefit managers, our recent action against pesticide
manufacturers, and our recent right-to-repair cases. And that's
why I feel strongly that we should reinitiate enforcement of
laws intended to provide a level playing field for small-town
retailers.
Thank you for the opportunity to appear before you today.
I'm looking forward to your questions and--on these or any
other subjects. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Bilirakis. Thanks so much. Now I'll begin the
questioning, and I recognize myself for 5 minutes.
Chair Khan, we have been troubled by the redirection of FTC
resources away from consumer protection, such as from
consumer--again, such as a focus on fraud and scams to
competition rulemakings, merger reviews, and suits that do not
appear to be very successful. The statistics back this up, as
FTC data shows U.S. consumers have suffered billions of dollars
in losses due to fraud.
By your own numbers, Madam Chair, a staggering $8.8 billion
in losses last year, which is 30 percent--it's a 30 percent
increase over the previous year. The resources for your policy
agenda are eating up valuable career staff time and energy that
could otherwise be used on protecting consumers.
Why are--the question is why are you wasting away the
resources we give you with new rulemakings, and will you
instead commit to work with your colleagues, and hopefully your
future Republican colleagues, to move away from your current
direction of progressive legal theories and focus back on the
fraud program at the FTC in bringing down this sad statistic?
So that's the first question, please.
Ms. Khan. Chairman, addressing and taking on fraud remains
a core part of the FTC's work. Since I joined the Commission,
we've brought over 60 law enforcement actions targeting scams
and frauds across the economy, be it pyramid schemes,
healthcare fraud, Made in USA fraud. This remains a core part
of our work.
As you know, given the setback that we received in the
Supreme Court, it is much more difficult for us to return money
back to consumers when they have been defrauded. Our staff has
been working heroically to activate other authorities to make
sure that we have hooks to get money back in people's pockets.
But there's no doubt that that was a big setback in the courts,
but we continue to focus on our frauds--addressing frauds and
combatting frauds, and this is going to continue to be a part
of our work.
One change that we've also pursued is to be able to----
Mr. Bilirakis. Well, thank you for very much. Let me go
ahead and move on because you mentioned the 13(b) issue. We
both believe there should be a fix to ensure that defrauded
consumers should get money returned to them. Obviously, we both
agree on that. And you had mentioned the Supreme Court case.
After all, I led the only bipartisan effort in the
committee process last Congress to provide FTC with the
authority under 13(b) to seek monetary relief. I know you
remember that. This effort, though, was ultimately rejected by
the majority at the time and the Rules Committee, surely at the
behest of Speaker Pelosi.
Based on how the agency has abused other existing statutory
authorities, there's no doubt we must provide crystal-clear
guidelines on how the FTC pursues monetary relief in its
consumer protection cases. That kind of clarity will go a long
way in furthering the 13(b) dialogue.
So the question is, will you commit to pursuing a sensible
policy here that works in unison with standards of your other
statutes and the history of cases previously Chairs have
pursued? Yes or no, please.
Ms. Khan. I would be thrilled to work with Congress to get
a fix to 13(b), and I know our staffs have been working with
your teams.
Mr. Bilirakis. OK. Will you commit to working with the
Bureau of Economics to issue a monetary policy statement to
shed more light on how the FTC calculates monetary relief and
civil penalties in consumer protection matters? Yes or no,
please.
Ms. Khan. There is a set of legal considerations that we
take into account.
Mr. Bilirakis. Can you please answer yes or no?
Ms. Khan. We're happy to provide more information about how
we go about making those calculations. This is anchored in law.
We have to follow the law when we're making these calculations.
Mr. Bilirakis. Well, I want to work with you on this, but
we've got to get it done. Will you commit to ensuring
procedural due process with this policy and with all other
enforcement actions your agency takes? Yes or no, please.
Ms. Khan. Of course, due process is critical, and the FTC
vigorously follows due process.
Mr. Bilirakis. All right, let me go ahead and answer--ask
you one more question since I have the time. Chair Khan, last
year the Office of Inspector General conducted an audit of the
FTC's unpaid consultant and expert program. Unfortunately--and
I know you're aware of this and the entire Commission is.
Unfortunately, it found that there were limited controls in
place to mitigate the risk involved in the program and that
these unpaid academics were doing essential Government
functions which should only be reserved for Federal employees
under law. I think you know that too.
OIG put three significant recommendations in its report,
all of which are still considered open. Why is that, and what
are you doing to address the independent watchdog's concerns?
Have you addressed this? Are you in the process of addressing
this? Please, because we need an answer.
Ms. Khan. Yes, Congressman, we've addressed all of the
process improvements that the IG had identified. As you know,
we have--we followed longstanding Government authorities to
bring on outside experts to pursue critical work, including
work relating to AI, work relating to children's privacy. These
experts are a critical part of being able to make sure we have
the technical expertise in key areas.
Mr. Bilirakis. Well, I would like for you to--I'd like
additional questioning with regard to that because, again, as
you know, not being Federal employees, they don't really have
the right to do--I think they're overreaching. So we do need to
address this issue even more, and I understand it's considered
open.
So let me go ahead and conclude. I'll yield back, and I'll
recognize the ranking member of the subcommittee, Ms.
Schakowsky, for her 5 minutes, please.
Ms. Schakowsky. Thank you so much. I wanted to ask Chair
Khan this question. The issue of privacy--comprehensive privacy
legislation has come up, and you do have some--have engaged in
some rulemaking on that. What I wanted to ask you: Why do you
think it's important, despite the role of the FTC, for us to
have comprehensive privacy legislation, and how would it fit
with what the FTC does to protect consumer privacy?
Ms. Khan. There's no question that Congress passing strong,
comprehensive Federal privacy legislation is the best option
here. We, through our work, see day after day that the cost of
privacy violations are real, they're serious, they lead to
stalking, stigmatization, people's sensitive information being
exposed, huge hacks. And so action in this area is critical.
Of course, what that legislation ended up looking like, the
details would matter in terms of our subsequent work, but we
would--we stand ready to enforce any privacy law that Congress
passes and would be happy to continue working with you all on
that.
Ms. Schakowsky. Thank you.
Commissioner Slaughter, you were talking about 13(b), and
you heard from the Chair that we are very concerned about the
fact that now consumers can't be made whole in any way. Do you
have any estimate of how much money would actually be returned
to consumers, I don't know, with any particular period that you
could cite, if 13(b) did not prevent that from happening?
Ms. Slaughter. Thank you. I can give you one data point,
which is that in the 10 years prior to AMG, the Commission
returned about $10 billion to consumers in redress. It's very
difficult to calculate what we are missing now, in part because
of our creative efforts to fill the gap and in part because in
addition to making it harder to get money back to consumers,
the lack of 13(b) authority actually makes it harder for us to
get companies to enter into settlement, because there isn't a
monetary cost to them for violating the law if they're only
subject to injunctive relief.
So it's hard to make a prospective number, but the data
from the past indicates that we were able to return many, many,
many times the agency's annual budget to consumers every year.
Ms. Schakowsky. Ten billion dollars that now fraudsters,
you know, that--that there's no help for consumers. This is
really, I think, an urgent situation.
I also wanted to ask about FTC whistleblowers. Any one of
you could answer. I am interested in passing legislation that
would protect whistleblowers. I don't know if----
Ms. Khan. I'm happy to----
Ms. Schakowsky [continuing]. Mr. Bedoya would want to, or
Chairman Khan.
Ms. Khan. I'll just say briefly, whistleblowers play an
incredibly important function, shedding light on wrongdoing,
oftentimes, at great personal expense. And so giving the FTC
the ability to grant protections to whistleblowers would be
really important.
Ms. Schakowsky. Also, Chair Khan, can you describe some of
the recent FTC privacy cases and protections that you've been
involved in?
Ms. Khan. Yes, I'd be happy to. So one of the key areas of
focus for us has been protecting Americans' privacy when it
comes to sensitive information. That can include sensitive
health information, it can include sensitive geolocation
information. One of the companies that we sued last year was
Kochava, a data broker that was allowing others to buy
information that identified in granular detail where people
were going, whether Americans were going to addiction
facilities, whether they were going to church, and this was
information that was pretty easily available for sale. So we
took a law enforcement action. We're still litigating that
case, basically alleging that that was an unfair practice.
We've also recently brought actions against two healthcare
companies, GoodRx and BetterHelp. These were companies that
collected sensitive health information from consumers on the
pretext of using it for providing health-related services but
then ended up turning around and actually making it available
for advertising and effectively making it easy to monetize that
sensitive information. So that was another area where we've
been bringing actions, and we remain devoted to fully
protecting Americans' privacy.
Ms. Schakowsky. Thank you so much. And my time is up, I
yield back.
Mr. Bilirakis. I thank the ranking member, and now I
recognize the chairwoman of the full committee, Ms. Rodgers,
for her 5 minutes.
Mrs. Rodgers. Thank you, Mr. Chair and Chair Khan. As you
know, Ranking Member Pallone and I have been working on privacy
data security legislation. Last year I expressed to you my
concerns on your so-called commercial surveillance rulemaking
on data privacy. It was announced just weeks after this
committee had passed the bill 53 to 2.
I wanted to ask, once we've enacted our legislation--it is
a top priority for this Congress--do we have your commitment
that you will suspend this proceeding and focus FTC's resources
on implementing the laws enacted as well as stick to the narrow
contours of the rulemaking authority that we prescribe? Yes or
no.
Ms. Khan. Congresswoman, absolutely.
Mrs. Rodgers. Thank you.
Ms. Khan. We stand ready to enforce any privacy legislation
that Congress passes.
Mrs. Rodgers. Thank you.
Commissioner Slaughter and Bedoya, do we--do you agree? Yes
or no.
Ms. Slaughter. Yes.
Mrs. Rodgers. Thank you.
Mr. Bedoya. Yes.
Mrs. Rodgers. Thank you.
Chair Khan, I'd like to pivot to ethics, which are
essential to maintaining public trust in Government officials
like yourself. Do you recall the Senate questionnaire you
filled out for the position you're in now? Yes or no.
Ms. Khan. Yes.
Mrs. Rodgers. Within that document, you recall a
referendum--or a reference to a commitment on seeking advice
from the FTC's Designated Agency Ethics Official, known as
DAEO, yes or no?
Ms. Khan. Yes.
Mrs. Rodgers. Do you recall the nature of what that
commitment would be?
Ms. Khan. Sorry, could you repeat----
Mrs. Rodgers. Do you recall the nature of what that
commitment would be?
Ms. Khan. Consulting with the ethics official, yes.
Mrs. Rodgers. Can you confirm that it relates to conflicts
of interest?
Ms. Khan. Yes.
Mrs. Rodgers. Are there any instances where you've not
followed DAEO's advice? Yes or no, and could you list any?
Ms. Khan. No, I've--in instances where companies like
Facebook or Amazon petition for my recusal, I have consulted
with the DAEO and have taken actions that are consistent with
the legal statements that the DAEO has made.
Mrs. Rodgers. Thank you.
Commissioner Slaughter, and I'd like to--you to respond
each to these questions as well, Commissioner Bedoya. Would you
have concerns with an FTC Commissioner not following the
recommendations of DAEO? Yes or no.
Ms. Slaughter. Thank you, Congresswoman. I think our job in
all instances is to consult with our expert staff, including
the DAEO, study the underlying law, the underlying ethics
rules, and come to our own conclusions.
Mrs. Rodgers. Would you have concerns? I guess my--going
back to my question, would you have concerns with an FTC
Commissioner not following the recommendations of DAEO?
Ms. Slaughter. I would have huge concerns with an FTC
Commissioner not following the requirements of the law----
Mrs. Rodgers. OK.
Ms. Slaughter [continuing]. And the requirements of the
ethics rules.
Mrs. Rodgers. Thank you. I'm just going to reclaim my time
because I got a lot to get through here. Bedoya--Commissioner
Bedoya?
Mr. Bedoya. Thank you, Chair Rodgers. As Commissioner
Slaughter said, I'd have concerns if someone didn't consult
with ethics officials, and it's my understanding and belief
that Chair Khan did, in fact--has, in fact, complied with her
ethics obligations.
Mrs. Rodgers. OK, thank you. Again, to both of the other
commissioners: When voting for a redaction on a recommendation
for a recusal issue, are you aware that Congress can act--ask
for that unredacted version? Yes or no.
Ms. Slaughter. Yes.
Mrs. Rodgers. Bedoya? OK.
Mr. Bedoya. Yes.
Mrs. Rodgers. OK. You were both senior congressional
staffers, and I appreciate your work on the Hill. How would you
have advised your boss to respond to reports that a senior
political appointee was ignoring ethics guidance from an ethics
official of an agency she or he led? Commissioner Slaughter.
Ms. Slaughter. Well, I think the oversight work of this
committee and all congressional committees is really vital to
ensuring that agencies are acting properly, so any time
Congress hears of a concern, I think it's appropriate for
Congress to look into it.
Mrs. Rodgers. OK, thank you. Commissioner Bedoya.
Mr. Bedoya. Same, Chair Rodgers. I would urge them to ask
questions.
Mrs. Rodgers. OK, thank you.
Chair Khan, you've told me how ``congressional oversight is
incredibly important,'' so we certainly agree on that. And in
your Senate confirmation questionnaire, you include your own
congressional oversight experience. On page 18 of that
questionnaire, you said that you would ``ensure that your
department complies with deadlines for information set by
congressional committees'' and that your department ``endeavors
to timely comply with requests for information from individual
Members of Congress.''
Do you feel like you have upheld this commitment to
Congress? Yes or no.
Ms. Khan. Yes, I do.
Mrs. Rodgers. I and members of this committee and other
committees have asked you on multiple occasions for detailed
answers to your--to our questions. Yes or no, do you believe
that you've sufficiently answered these requests?
Ms. Khan. Yes. I know those conversations are ongoing, but
we have been engaging in good faith and already provided
significant information.
Mrs. Rodgers. That seems inconsistent with the letters that
you've sent back to us. For instance, in a letter that this
committee sent to you on December 8, 2021, the committee asked
you why you proposed deleting ``without unduly burdening
legitimate business activity'' from the FTC's mission
statement, the guardrail that has existed under both Republican
and Democrat administrations.
When the committee asked about the consultation you had
with other Commissioners to reach this consensus, you responded
with, ``The agency is currently considering the comments
received on the draft strategic plan, including some comments
that raise questions about the elimination.'' You go on to say,
``The Commission will consider these comments carefully when it
votes on the strategic plan.''
You know, it seems to me that you had--you've already made
up your mind, irrespective of the concerns that are shared. And
this is just one example of vague or misleading answers that do
not tell the whole story, and I just urge you to be responsive
to the people's House, this committee in particular. We are the
representatives of the people.
I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Bilirakis. The Chairwoman yields back. Now I'll
recognize the ranking member of the full committee, Mr.
Pallone, for his 5 minutes of questioning.
Mr. Pallone. Thank you, Chairman Bilirakis.
Last Congress, our subcommittee made historic progress on a
comprehensive data privacy bill, and that legislation focused
on data minimization rather than notice and consent, as the
best way to protect consumers' privacy, and it passed out of
our committee on a 53 to 2 bipartisan basis. The FTC's written
testimony acknowledges that the traditional notice-and-consent
framework for protecting consumer privacy is insufficient.
So let me ask, Chair Khan, do you agree that data
minimization is an important bedrock principle for ensuring
consumers have meaningful privacy protections in the modern
online economy?
Ms. Khan. Absolutely. I think time and time again we've
seen how minimizing the data the companies are collecting on
the front end is critical to ensuring that consumers' privacy
is protected and also has huge benefits for data security
because, if there's less data collecting they are collecting on
the front end, that means there is less opportunity for major
hacks that would expose significant data.
Mr. Pallone. Thank you. Now I understand that, in the
absence of a comprehensive Federal privacy statute, the FTC has
historically protected consumer data privacy using the FTC's
general authority to enforce against unfair and deceptive
business practices. But my question is, can you discuss what
challenges the FTC faces using that ``unfair and deceptive''
practice as authority to protect consumer privacy?
Ms. Khan. Yes. First of all, I'll say, I mean, any instance
in which Congress is providing greater specification, including
through bright-line rules and clear restrictions, that's always
the best course. For us, we have been using our unfair-and-
deceptive-acts-or-practices authority for some time with great
success. Of course, in the wake of the Supreme Court's decision
to say we can no longer get monetary equitable relief through
Section 13(b) of the FTC Act, it means that our opportunities
for remedies are quite limited, and so that would be one area
where I think we see significant shortfalls.
Mr. Pallone. Thank you. Now let me say that I appreciate
the breadth and importance of the FTC's consumer protection
work. And in your written testimony, you estimate that for
fiscal year 2022 every dollar of the FTC's cost returned an
estimated $30 in FTC-provided benefits to consumers. So let me
ask you that question: Can you please elaborate on your return-
on-investment analysis, and what sorts of benefits do consumers
receive from the FTC's consumer protection work?
Ms. Khan. Yes, absolutely. I mean, we really are a small
agency, but we punch above our weight. I think those numbers
really speak for themselves. And despite set--getting the
setback that we did, our staff have been able to activate other
authorities to make sure that, if companies are, for example,
scamming the American people or trapping them into unwanted
subscriptions or engaging in Made in USA fraud, these are all
the types of instances in which we can actually get money back
in people's pockets, and so these are all important areas of
our work.
Mr. Pallone. OK. Now how will the increase in funding and
staff that you're requesting help expand the Commission's
consumer protection work?
Ms. Khan. So this is something we've been thinking about
quite significantly, especially in light of the additional
funds that we were very grateful to receive this time around.
There are a few areas that we're really focused on. One is
making sure that we have in house the expertise needed to fully
understand how these technologies are working, fully grasping
really the inners of how these tools are functioning. And to
that end, we were really thrilled to be able to launch an
Office of Technology earlier this year.
We've already doubled the number of technologists that
we've had in house. As my colleague mentioned, Commissioner
Bedoya, we're also thinking about other types of expertise that
we need to be bringing onboard alongside our terrific lawyers
and our terrific economists, and, of course, growing their
ranks, as my fellow Commissioner, Commissioner Slaughter, noted
including in the context of our privacy and security work, that
would be a key priority for us in this area as well.
Mr. Pallone. Thank you. I'm just going to go back because I
have another minute. If either of the other Commissioners could
discuss my previous question about challenges the FTC faces
using unfair and deceptive practices authority to protect
consumer privacy. Probably only have time for one of you to
answer. Who wants to answer?
Ms. Slaughter. I'm happy to answer. So, as you know, the
FTC Act lays out a prohibition on unfair and deceptive acts and
practices and says that for an act to be unfair it must cause
substantial injury that's not reasonably avoidable and not
offset by countervailing benefits. That's an important test,
and it's one that allows us to reach some problematic data
practices, but not all of them.
And we cannot by rule--I think it's really important to
remember this--we cannot by rulemaking address practices that
are not prohibited under the FTC Act. So we can't do a rule
that would target something that we can't target through an
independent enforcement action.
What you, this committee, did with your privacy bill last
Congress was attack a whole--a much broader swath of
problematic practices than we might likely be able to reach
under the FTC Act's prohibitions, and that's really important.
So we have seen our rulemaking effort as an important way to do
more than we could do before and provide clarity to markets,
and especially the small businesses and honest businesses who
want to know what the law prohibits, but it is not nearly what
you can achieve in terms of passing a law.
Mr. Pallone. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Bilirakis. All right, thank you. The gentleman yields
back. Now I'll recognize Dr. Bucshon for his 5 minutes of
questioning.
Mr. Bucshon. Thank you, Chairman Bilirakis, for calling
today's hearing.
When this committee last spoke with the Federal Trade
Commissioners 2 years ago, I asked Commissioner Chopra about
rebate walls and other practices that stunt innovation and
competition. Maybe perhaps I should have asked about the FTC's
policies on zombie votes by a departed Commissioner, gag orders
on staff, or sidelining of the minority Commissioners, since we
don't have any. For all of the statements being made and the
rulemaking in the name of ensuring competition, it seems like
the FTC, within its own ranks, have prioritized sidelining
ideological competition to the progressive views of the current
Commissioners.
I also want to say this, that fraud against seniors is out
of control in this country. My--I know this. My father passed
away. About 6 months later I recognized my mother could not
manage her finances, and when I--it took me 2 years to unravel
it, and the amount of fraud that she had committed against her
financially and otherwise was unbelievable. It's out of
control, and whatever, you know, we can do about it is
important.
The FTC obviously has done a lot of positive things, but
let me focus on some of the concerns that I have, OK? Chair
Khan, last September I cosigned a letter for you expressing--to
you expressing support for the renewal of the FTC's Franchise
Rule in its current form, as franchises create a path to--
pathway to entrepreneurship for my constituents, especially
among women and people of color. On March 10th the FTC put out
a request for information on the business practices of
franchises in relation to the rule amidst growing concern
around unfair and deceptive practices in the franchise
industry.
First, I'll note the franchise--franchising is a business
model, not an industry. More importantly, what are the specific
unfair and deceptive franchising practices this refers to?
Ms. Khan. Thanks, Congressman. So we have been hearing for
over a year now from franchises about a set of practices that
are quite troubling. Month after month, franchises come to our
open Commission meetings where they can speak directly to
Commissioners and raise issues of concerns.
And so we thought it was important not just to be
collecting this information anecdotally but to actually do a
systematic look at what's really going on here. What is the
relationship between the franchisees and the franchisors? Are
there types of practices that we should be taking a closer look
at? Are there practices that may be unlawful?
And so that's why we issued the RFI. We've already started
getting some submissions and really look forward to taking a
close look at whatever comes in.
Mr. Bucshon. OK. Do you plan on pursuing a rule governing
the franchise relationship with the--this RFI as a basis?
Ms. Khan. So, as you know, we already have the Franchise
Rule in place----
Mr. Bucshon. Right.
Ms. Khan [continuing]. Which governs the disclosures the
franchisor----
Mr. Bucshon. Well, you're--you want to change it. So I
understand----
Ms. Khan. Well, we have a----
Mr. Bucshon. So you're going to use the RFI to justify
changing that, right?
Ms. Khan. No, these are separate procedures. And one reason
why we launched the RFI is because there were issues we were
hearing about that are not governed by the Franchise Rule. So
it was really in order to make sure that, if we need to do
subsequent enforcement activity separate from what's covered by
the Franchise Rule, that we have the information we need.
Mr. Bucshon. OK. And I think, I mean, if we're honest with
ourself, I mean, obviously I have a certain viewpoint but, I
mean, this is about organized labor wanting to organize all the
employees at franchisees across the country. We all know that.
I mean, it's about--yes, there are--there might be some
problems, but what it's about is taking a large organization
that has noncorporate restaurants that are franchised
restaurants and the Democrat Party and the organized labor are
unhappy that they can't organize all these people, say, at
Company X because one place may have 40 employees, 50
employees, and put it under one corporate--force it under one
corporate head so they have 25,000 employees that can be
organized by organized labor.
I mean, this--I bet--this has been an issue for years and
years and years. And if that's the goal, you know, then using a
Federal agency to assist organized labor in this effort is
wrong.
Ms. Khan. Congressman, respectfully, this is about small
business owners. The types of people that we are hearing from
are hotel owners, owners of fast food franchises. This is
really about the potentially abusive practices that they've
been suffering. It really is not connected to the some of the
issues----
Mr. Bucshon. Well, the ones I talk to, it--they want--
they're concerned that they want to have three or four
different worker unions within their local McDonald's. And
look, I've said for years and years publicly that if we want to
spend $25 for a hamburger and fries and Coke at McDonald's,
then I'm all--I'm--go ahead, because that's what's going to
happen if you use the FTC to force organized labor's agenda. I
yield back.
Mr. Bilirakis. The gentleman yields back. Now I'll
recognize Representative Kelly for her 5 minutes of
questioning.
Ms. Kelly. Thank you, Chair Bilirakis and Ranking Member
Schakowsky, for holding this very important hearing. I also
want to commend and thank our three witnesses for your service
at our Nation's chief consumer protection agency as well as
your staff.
Last Congress when the FTC testified before the committee,
we discussed several challenges the agency was facing, notably
the uptick in consumer complaints to the agency about a broad
range of pandemic-related marketplace abuses. I found this
dialogue particularly concerning because I often heard from
constituents, many of them seniors living in my district, about
how the pandemic put a squeeze on their finances, as my
colleague just talked about.
At a time when seniors had so much to worry about, I felt
moved to introduce legislation to help stop our vulnerable
populations from falling victim to scam callers. That led me to
introduce the Protecting Seniors from Emergency Scams Act,
which requires your agency to report on an increased awareness
regarding scams targeting older adults.
Chair Khan, do you think it would be beneficial to
consumers if there was a known centralized location to receive
current information about scams and contact information for law
enforcement and adult protective services agencies?
Ms. Khan. Thanks, Congresswoman. There's no doubt that,
whenever you make it easier for consumers to access that type
of information, that's a benefit for consumers but also to us
from an enforcement perspective.
Ms. Kelly. Thank you for your response. I find these scams
troubling and am looking forward to reintroducing this bill
this Congress so the House may once again pass it out of the
chamber.
Now I would like to shift focus to another FTC-related bill
that I introduced last Congress, the Consumer Equity Protection
Act, which would establish a Federal task force to advise the
FTC on issues of equity impacting consumers of protected
classes. This bill is important because we know that many times
folks are targeted based on their identity as a member of a
certain protected class like age, race, religion, sexual
orientation, or disability, which I can relate to now.
Chair Khan, I'm aware that over the years the FTC has
released a few reports, notably the Serving Communities of
Color and Combating Fraud in African American and Latino
Community reports that detailed fraud and consumer issues that
have a disproportionate negative impact on communities of
color. And last Congress, when you and then-Commissioner Chopra
testified, you all acknowledged the method of discrimination
has become more sophisticated and subtle as technological tools
are enabling discrimination in targeting of individuals
belonging to protected classes.
So given this growing threat, how would creating a task
force help the FTC to protect minorities from fraud and abuse?
Ms. Khan. This is absolutely a big area of concern. One
thing that we do as part of our Every Community Initiative is
actually do some data analysis to see what are the consumer
complaints coming in, and are those mapping onto greater abuse
or greater fraud being targeted at particular communities, and
we absolutely see that those trends continue.
We've been able to pursue enforcement actions in this area.
Last year we brought our action involving Passport, this auto
dealer that had been charging higher fees to Black consumers,
to Latino consumers, and raising costs for them as well as
attaching all sorts of junk fees. So we're taking enforcement
actions in this area as well as continuing to identify trends.
You're absolutely right that the growing digitization of
our economy is creating all sorts of additional, covert ways
that companies can be engaging in discrimination. As we bring
on additional expertise, including technologic--technologists,
this is an additional area that we're hoping to dig more into.
Ms. Kelly. So it's funny you brought up the Passport Auto
case because I was going to ask you about that and what you
intend to do to further emphasize the--this application of
unfairness doctrine and why this is important.
Ms. Khan. Yes, absolutely. In this case, we saw that there
was substantial injury stemming from the fact that Black and
Latino consumers were being charged more fees than their White
counterparts and that this was not reasonably avoidable and
that there were no countervailing benefits to this
discrimination. So we thought it was important to put the
market on notice that we viewed this as an unfair practice, and
this is absolutely an area that we're going to continue to be
looking at.
Ms. Kelly. Thank you. And I yield back.
Mr. Bilirakis. Thank you, I appreciate that. And now I'll
recognize the vice chairman of the subcommittee, Mr. Walberg
from the great State of Michigan, for 5 minutes of questioning.
Mr. Walberg. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thanks to the
Commission members for being here, and appreciate some of your
updates on some of the successes you had. I think successes, to
some degree, we could agree with.
Commissioner Khan, you and I talked about child online data
security and my concerns with that, and I appreciate efforts
there, consumer subscription cancellations and concerns that
are there, and other things. We certainly would expect you to
give us some wins.
But here in the committee, we're going to be talking about
what we think are losses and some concerns that we've received
not only from businesses and consumers but even from staff--
former staff members and Commissioners of the FTC. So with that
acknowledgement of the filter that we have, I'd--I want to ask
some pointed questions.
Chairwoman Khan, I want to follow up on some things that
Chair Rodgers referenced earlier regarding your decision to
strike those words in the FTC's mission statement, namely
``without unduly burdening legitimate business activity.'' The
message that I believe that that sent to an already challenged
American private sector struggling to rebound from COVID-19
shutdowns was quite simply--and these would be my words--
``Consider yourself guilty of accusations from the FTC unless
you can prove otherwise.''
That's a concern. If that isn't a reality, it's still an
assumption that many could make. Legitimate businesses
shouldn't have to worry about receiving a letter from the FTC
warning them of significant fines because you are not properly
dedicating resources to go after a specific bad actor. On
multiple occasions now, the FTC has sent in bulk over 700
letters to companies, including just last week, putting them
into the interrogation spotlight as they perceive, and
potentially imitating--intimidating them into submission.
Now, I don't think this is the best way to protect
consumers, and it may have even caused more harm than good.
Some could even say it's becoming evident that the present
mission statement is not to protect consumers but rather to
advance a radical, woke, progressive Biden administration
scheme to make every sector in our economy and to punish the
private sector, when the law does not allow for such
punishment. You have used process to make legal activity
difficult to achieve and a means of punishment.
Not surprisingly, this bulk mail approach to the private
sector has now led to scammers making the most of the FTC's new
unorthodox practice. Last week, the FTC tweeted out a warning
to be on lookout for--from--fake letters from Sam Levine,
Director of the FTC's Bureau of Consumer Protection,
threatening to take action against them. One should wonder, was
this threat to America's private sector created by the
Commission's own actions?
And so, Chair Khan, this apparent attempt to become the
national overlord has caused more harm than good. Do you plan
to extend or end these actions?
Ms. Khan. Congressman, first of all, I'll just say on our
strategic plan, that phrase that you mentioned remains in our
strategic plan. It was really a question of the mission
statement, what is the term--you know, what is a statement that
best represents the essence of what the FTC does?
There was a really terrific cross-agency working group made
up of staff. They really spent a lot of time thinking about
that question and determined that we really wanted to focus on
who were the communities that we're focused on protecting, what
are the legal authorities we're enforcing.
On the second issue, Section 5(m)(1)(B) of the FTC Act
gives us the authority to put companies on notice when there's
a particular practice that the FTC has determined is unlawful
and issued a cease-and-desist order. So if--by many measures,
to my mind, this is a good government practice because we're
putting market participants on notice about----
Mr. Walberg. But if I could jump in here and say the fact
that, you know, the aggressive approach has not been effective
to the point that you have not won on a number of those cases,
and that's one of the biggest concerns that we address. As
you've perceived, this is your purpose, yet underlying it are
failures at that level. Let's----
Ms. Khan. Congressman, respectfully, we haven't actually
lost any litigations relating to a notice of penalty offense
authority.
Mr. Walberg. But many losses because of the perception of
the aggressive nature that you've taken that's been outside of
what your purpose is, and especially when you attempted to take
those phrases--that phrase out of your mission statement.
I wish we could go on, but I see my time has ended, so I
yield back.
Mr. Bilirakis. The gentleman yields back. I'll recognize
Representative Castor from the great State of Florida for her 5
minutes of questioning.
Ms. Castor. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you to
our FTC Commissioners for being here today.
Members, it is urgent that the Congress pass a
comprehensive data privacy law that protects the personal
privacy of Americans, especially our kids. Luckily, we have a
bipartisan bill to do just that, the American Data Privacy and
Protection Act, and I urge Chair Rodgers and Ranking Member
Pallone to introduce a markup of the ADPPA as soon as possible.
Congress is late to the game here. Other countries have
acted. We are behind. But, fortunately, the FTC has used its
powers to protect Americans from unfair trade practices in this
area.
But I'm particularly concerned about the impact on
children, and I know you are too, based upon what you've done.
For many years, I've called attention to the ways in which Big
Tech platforms are surveilling, tracking, and collecting our
most private information in pursuit of profits. This is
especially concerning for children.
I've raised the alarm again and again about how these
surveillance practices harm kids and teens and how Big Tech
platforms use the manipulative design to addict kids to their
products and funnel them towards harmful content. That's why
I'm planning on reintroducing the Kids Privacy Act to ensure
tech platforms build in privacy and safety in kid-directed
products during their design. The FTC is also working to
protect children online--and thank you for that, but you need
to do more.
Chair Khan, could you please give us an update on the
Children's Online Privacy Protection Act rule review and the
6(b) investigations the FTC is conducting into social media and
video streaming services?
Ms. Khan. Thanks, Congressman, and thanks for your
leadership on this issue.
So both of these are currently ongoing. When we initiated
the rule review, we ended up getting over 170,000 comments as
part of our public record, so our staff has been diligently
reviewing those comments and identifying what potential
revisions to the rule could look like. Of course, that hasn't
stopped us from continuing to enforce COPPA, and we've been
really thrilled to be able to see strong enforcement actions on
that front.
In terms of the 6(b), that work also continues. As you
know, these orders went out to several large companies that
have significant resources to try to thwart the FTC from
getting the information that we need, so we've been engaged in
various back and forth there but hope we'll be able to show
progress publicly in short order.
Ms. Castor. And last year, the FTC published a policy
statement on education technology and COPPA. The statement
described how the Commission intends to scrutinize compliance
with the full breadth of the substantive prohibitions and
requirements of the COPPA rule and statutory language. I'm very
heartened by this approach. The statement specifically
discusses COPPA's prohibition against mandatory collection, use
prohibitions, retention prohibitions, and security
requirements.
Chair Khan, please discuss how those prohibitions currently
in COPPA are informing the Commission's strategy and
enforcement actions.
Ms. Khan. Yes, this policy statement really laid out what
are the key provisions of COPPA that go beyond the notice-and-
consent framework and actually identify substantive limitations
on what companies can do. And so that includes, as you
mentioned, you know, what they can do in terms of retention,
what they can do in terms of collecting data in the first
place.
One of the things that the policy statement highlighted was
Section 3127 of COPPA, which basically says that covered
companies cannot condition access to their technologies on
people having to surrender to endless data collection. And we
thought that, especially in an era where kids are having to do
their homework online, right, during the pandemic, that it was
especially important for ed tech providers to be on notice
about that, so these are all provisions that we're fully
committed to enforcing.
Ms. Castor. Thank you very much.
And, Commission Slaughter, you've also been active in this
area. What do you have to add on this--on the COPPA rule?
Ms. Slaughter. Well, thank you. I think of these issues not
just as an FTC Commissioner but as a parent of four young kids
who, candidly, are probably responsible for the fact that I am
sick today. And I think I see how hard I as a parent struggle
and my kids struggle with managing their interactions with
technology, so I think it is really important.
COPPA was a groundbreaking, revolutionary statute when it
was passed, but as you yourself has--have noted, its primary
provisions, which are putting parents in the driver's seat and
operating on a notice-and-consent framework, are pretty
outdated when it comes to today's economy. So we really are
grateful for the work that you and your colleagues are doing to
update this really important law and make sure it's fit for
purpose in the 21st century.
Ms. Castor. Thank you. It's overdue, and I look forward to
action by this committee and the Congress. Thank you. I yield
back.
Mr. Bilirakis. The gentlelady yields back. Now I'll
recognize Mr. Duncan from the great State of South Carolina.
Thank you. You're recognized for 5 minutes of questioning, sir.
Mr. Duncan. Thank you. Chair Khan, I wrote a letter last
month urging Secretary Raimondo and Ambassador Tai to deter
foreign governments from pursuing policies or actions that
target U.S. businesses and industries where the United States
is a global leader. I ask unanimous consent to put that letter
in the record.
Mr. Bilirakis. Without objection, so ordered.
[The information appears at the conclusion of the hearing.]
Mr. Duncan. The EU Digital Marking Act is designed to harm
U.S. tech companies and ultimately help Chinese companies take
their place within the European market. The EU has done a
terrible job, overregulating their own companies into oblivion,
and now they seek to harm the U.S. companies who have filled
that void to the benefit of Chinese market entrance. This is a
March 30, 2023, press release from the FTC which seems to brag
about the Commission's cooperation with the European Union's
implementation of the deeply problematic DMA. I ask unanimous
consent to enter that in the record.
Mr. Bilirakis. Yes, without objection, so ordered.
[The information appears at the conclusion of the hearing.]
Mr. Duncan. We cannot allow foreign jurisdictions to harm
U.S. companies under the guise of competition policy. But in an
interview you gave back in 2021, you stated, ``I think it's no
doubt the U.S. has been behind the curve, especially with
regards to the European Commission.'' And you noted that you
were in close--you were close to--in close touch with both
folks at the CMA and European Commission on competition
matters.
Chair Khan, under what legal authority do you send staff to
implement the DMA, which is not antitrust law from the U.S. but
regulations targeting U.S. companies?
Ms. Khan. Congressman, I'm proud of the international
cooperation that the FTC has long pursued under many, many
Chairs far preceding me. This has been a core part of the FTC's
work to make sure that we are able to share with other
jurisdictions the work that we are doing and also able to
understand the different paths that other jurisdictions are
taking.
Mr. Duncan. I get that.
Ms. Khan. That type of information makes us----
Mr. Duncan. You've also sought to undermine U.S. companies
in the current negotiating round of the Indo-Pacific Economic
Framework. The IPEF is used--has used a U.S. MCA as the basis
no-go negotiations.
Yes or no, Chair Khan, did you and Jonathan Kanter of the
Department of Justice send a letter to Ambassador Tai objecting
to the competition chapter and the digital trade chapter and
demand a seat at the negotiating table for future rounds?
Ms. Khan. We have been engaged with USTR about that
agreement. We've all seen how these trade----
Mr. Duncan. Did you all send a letter?
Ms. Khan. Yes. We've all seen how----
Mr. Duncan. Can I get a copy of that, please?
Ms. Khan. I'm happy to engage with your staff to see what
we can share with you.
Mr. Duncan. Thank you. Your actions from the EU DMA to the
IPEF negotiations really run contrary to U.S. interests. Were
these actions cleared by the State Department, Department of
Commerce, the NSC, or the NEC?
Ms. Khan. As you know, there are extensive interagency
processes in place, and we work through them as appropriate.
Mr. Duncan. Wow. Why should we increase your budget while
you're sending staff to Europe to harm U.S. companies and
directly benefit China? You don't have to answer that, but why
would you help the EU undermine U.S. law and U.S. companies?
Ms. Khan. Congressman, details back and forth from our
agency to other agencies, from other agencies to our agencies
have long been a key FTC practice extending back decades, and
we've been pleased to continue that tradition.
Mr. Duncan. Is it appropriate for you, the head of the FTC,
to lobby foreign agencies to block transactions when U.S.
companies or--and other companies overseas, especially when
these reviews are happening without the oversight of the U.S.
Federal court?
Ms. Khan. Congressman, we make our own independent
judgments with regards to our own enforcement authorities. We
have some information-sharing agreements in place with other
jurisdictions, but as it concerns our enforcement actions, we
use our independent judgment and look at the facts as applied--
look at the law as applied to the facts before us.
Mr. Duncan. These policies are problematic, and I think
what it's going to do is hurt U.S. companies from operating in
Europe, from consolidating operations, and it will be to the
benefit of Chinese companies, such as Alibaba, to enter
European markets when Amazon or companies like that are kicked
out.
So, Chair Khan, will you assure me the FTC will not urge
Europe, the UK, China, or other foreign jurisdictions to block
transactions or encourage those jurisdictions to extract any
remedies for competition from U.S. companies?
Ms. Khan. Congressman, again, we make our independent
assessments with regards to how the U.S. law applies to the
facts before us. We have some information-sharing agreements in
place, but every jurisdiction makes its own determinations
using its independent judgment.
Mr. Duncan. So you're not cooperating with the Europeans on
blocking U.S. companies operating in Europe, or the DMA, or the
CMA with regard to the UK?
Ms. Khan. Again, we have information-sharing agreements in
place, but each jurisdiction has to follow the laws of its--of
that country, and that's what each----
Mr. Duncan. With the encouragement of the U.S. or the
disapproval of the U.S.?
Ms. Khan. Again, you know, there are many examples in which
these jurisdictions are coming to different examples. I think
it's good government for us to be sharing information and
cooperating to get to consistent outcomes where possible. And
again, these types of international processes have been in
place at the FTC for a long time. We have a stellar Office of
International Affairs that is widely respected around the
world, in part because of the leadership that we have been able
to show, both on the antitrust front as well as consumer
protection.
Mr. Duncan. Thank you. And I look forward to you delivering
that letter. Thank you.
Mr. Bilirakis. The gentleman yields back. Now we'll
recognize Representative Blunt Rochester for her 5 minutes of
questioning.
Ms. Blunt Rochester. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you
to the witnesses for joining us today, and especially for your
service to our country.
The work the FTC undertakes is some of the most impactful
on the everyday lives of Americans and affects the economic
health of our entire country. Chair Khan, your bipartisan
confirmation demonstrated that Americans on both sides of the
aisle are concerned about our personal data harmed by
widespread fraud and scams and ultimately concerned about the
power large corporations have over our everyday lives. So
again, thank you for your willingness to testify before the
committee.
Chair Khan, for years, companies like GoodRx and BetterHelp
deceptively shared private health information with social media
companies so that they could make more money from users' health
ailments, even information about users' mental health. These
companies broke their public promises to keep the data private.
The FTC rightly took enforcement actions on these two companies
for breaking the law.
My question is, the allegations against BetterHelp note
that these practices continued from 2013 until 2020. Chair
Khan, can you explain how companies are able to hide their
deception for so long and how the FTC was able to pursue
enforcement in this case?
Ms. Khan. Thanks, Congresswoman. Yes, we were really
thrilled to be able to move forward with enforcement on both of
those areas, especially since we saw how during the pandemic a
lot more health services switched online and people became much
more reliant on these apps to be able to access key health
services, be it, you know, counseling services, therapy
services.
You're absolutely right that oftentimes the inner workings
of these companies can be somewhat of a black box to us,
especially in digital markets, and we were really thrilled and
proud of the FTC's work to uncover these practices that had
been going on for so long. Again, we have our lawyers looking
at this, we have our technologists increasingly on board that
are also trying to unpack what's happening there.
Ms. Blunt Rochester. Thank you. I'll note that the FTC
under your leadership has taken a balanced approach to
regulating this new emerging healthcare mobile app industry. In
addition to taking punitive actions, the FTC has also updated
the business guidance for health data. Does updating this
guidance suggest that GoodRx and BetterHelp are not outliers,
and should Congress be taking more concerted action to protect
Americans' health information?
Ms. Khan. Absolutely. As you know, Americans health
information is some of the most sensitive data that there is.
People feel extremely exposed when this information is out
there and misused, and so I think this is an especially
critical area where we need action.
Ms. Blunt Rochester. Chair Khan, I think Americans will be
pleased and encouraged to learn about your proposed Click to
Cancel rule. My colleagues, like Ms. Clarke of New York, have
been pushing to make it easier for Americans to cancel
subscriptions, but as you noted, businesses often trick
consumers into these subscriptions and then make it extremely
difficult to get out of them.
While you are taking important action to remedy these
predatory practices, I want to ask you about preventative
measures. As you know, I intend to reintroduce the DETOUR Act,
which aims to crack down on deceptive practices that undermine
the ability for Americans to make informed choices, practices
also known as dark patterns. How pervasive of a problem are
dark patterns, and what kind of impact do they have on American
families?
Ms. Khan. Based on our work, including a deep study that
the FTC staff did that was published last year, dark patterns
can be quite extensive across the economy and across digital
markets. Unfortunately, what we've seen is that in practice,
dark--these dark patterns can end up tricking consumers into
signing up for services that they didn't want, into leading
them to situations where they're incurring fees for charges or
services that they don't want. And so I think we see a lot of
deception that can stem from these types of dark patterns.
Ms. Blunt Rochester. And do you support legislation that
bans the use of intentionally manipulative design techniques
that trick users into giving up their personal information? And
I will ask all of the Commissioners.
Ms. Khan. Yes.
Mr. Bedoya. Yes.
Ms. Slaughter. Yes.
Ms. Blunt Rochester. At this point, I cannot believe I am
actually ahead of schedule. I've got more questions, but I will
put them for the record. But again, thank you so much for your
service, especially now. We know that so many Americans have
been tricked just looking at a app or a website, and they can't
even find the little X to cancel out because it is deceptively
the same color as the ad or the page. And so, again, your work
to protect us from abuse, scams, fraud, we really appreciate
it.
And I thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I yield back.
Mr. Bilirakis. I thank the gentlelady. Appreciate it. She
yields back. And now I'll recognize Dr. Dunn from Florida.
We're really well represented on this committee from the great
State of Florida. We appreciate that.
Mr. Dunn. Thank you.
Mr. Bilirakis. So I'll recognize you for 5 minutes.
Mr. Dunn. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Chair Khan, thank you for appearing before this panel
today. Congressional oversight of the FTC is an important part
of the American political process. Small and medium-size
businesses are the backbone that rural communities throughout
America, including Florida's Second Congressional District,
these include regional and local grocery stores and convenience
stores, which are typically the only source of essential
groceries and other consumer goods in many small towns in my
district.
Last year, as our Nation faced broken supply chains and
rising prices, I sent a letter to the FTC asking the Commission
to use its existing authority to study conduct that could
violate laws under its purview. My primary concern is when
rural stores are taken advantage of in such unstable times.
Many towns and small rural communities have become food deserts
after their local grocery stores went out of business.
In addition, many of these businesses are family owned and
provide the only viable option for individuals who don't have
access to adequate transportation to travel to larger chain
stores, which may be hours away.
The independent, small, and medium-size grocers are telling
me that big-box star--stores are forcing them out of business.
So, Chair Khan, Section 6(b) of the FTC Act empowers the FTC to
require companies to respond to questions about business
practices. Where are you currently in the 6(b) process on
independent grocers and food supply chains, and have you
formally inquired about monopolistic practices harming
independent and regional grocers?
Ms. Khan. Thanks for that question, Congressman. I couldn't
agree more that these are especially troubling concerns that
we're hearing from independent retailers, especially
independent grocers. One 6(b) that we launched early in my
tenure was to understand whether the supply chain disruptions
that we had seen were being exacerbated by asymmetries of power
that we may see between the small independent stores and the
big chain stores. We had----
Mr. Dunn. So my question, though, have you actually
formally started that 6(b) process----
Ms. Khan. Yes.
Mr. Dunn [continuing]. For inquiry?
Ms. Khan. Yes, we have.
Mr. Dunn. Excellent, excellent. So last Congress, the then-
Ranking Members Rodgers and Bilirakis sent a letter to
Secretary of Commerce Raimondo--we mentioned that earlier
today--requesting that the Secretary work with stakeholders
across the Federal Government to prevent supply chain
disruptions in--throughout Americans, but especially in rural
areas. Have you been working with the Department of Commerce on
that particular effort?
Ms. Khan. I'm not sure if we're working with them on this
specific issue, but generally we try to take a whole-of-
government approach to these issues in general.
Mr. Dunn. All right, then. So I'd like to recognize and
actually commend the Commission's bipartisan May 2021 report
called ``Nix the Fix.'' It was an FTC report to Congress
regarding restrictions on repairs on various products. The vote
was 4 to 0 on that ruling in 2021. This congressionally
directed report highlighted the unsustainable rise in cost of
vehicle maintenance and repair, and it prompted the need for
bill--my Bill H.R. 906, the REPAIR Act, which seeks to restore
consumer choice and competition in the vehicle repair sector.
The Nixing the Fix report highlights the important ways in
which bipartisanship at the FTC can result in positive
legislative actions afterwards. So after all, you know,
Congress did create the FTC, and we're glad that on passage of
that bill, vehicle owners will be able to repair their own
property and repair shops can continue operating without fear
of being put out of business.
Unfortunately, bipartisanship does not seem to be the order
of the day currently at the FTC. Ms. Khan, I find it striking
that the FTC Commission--or that Commissioner Christine Wilson
resigned in protest of your partisan conduct as Chair.
Chairman Bilirakis, I'd like to submit this February 14,
2023, Wall Street Journal article, ``Why I am Resigning as an
FTC Commissioner,'' for the record.
Mr. Bilirakis. Without objection, so ordered.
[The information appears at the conclusion of the hearing.]
Mr. Dunn. Thank you very much.
Chair Khan, Commissioner Wilson's scathing review of your
agency cited, first, your violation of due process, given your
failure to recuse yourself from a Meta acquisition case despite
clear legal precedent requiring you to do so; second, your
colleagues' and staff's excessive redactions to her written
objections and dissent you--in order to protect you; and third,
a staggering 49 percent--less than half--of the FTC employees
recently polled believe that senior FTC agency officials
maintain high standards of honesty and integrity. For
comparison, in 2020, just prior to your appointment, 87 percent
thought FTC officials had high honesty and integrity standards.
Do you have an answer to that question, Chair Khan?
Ms. Khan. Thanks, Congressmen. I'll just say I'm incredible
proud of the FTC staff who day after day are on the front lines
of protecting Americans from unlawful business practices.
There's no doubt that early in my tenure there were things we
could have done better or differently, but since then we've
been taking these survey results seriously and taking steps to
make sure we're fully understanding what was the source of
these declines and identifying what changes we can put in
place, and I think----
Mr. Dunn. My time has expired, and I yield back to the
Chair. I'll submit the--or my questions for----
Mr. Bilirakis. The gentleman yields back. Thank you,
Doctor. Now we'll recognize my friend, again from the State of
Florida, Mr. Soto, for his 5 minutes of questioning.
Mr. Soto. Thank you, Chairman. This committee is charged
with broad jurisdiction, and overseeing the FTC is one of our
great responsibilities. Thank you, Chairwoman and
Commissioners, for being here.
We've been through a lot together: COVID-19 scams, like in
Florida, where fake cures, paycheck protection program scams,
stimulus check scams ran abound. I appreciate the FTC's work to
rein those in. We faced challenges with social media, and we
did have some victories, like a bipartisan robocall reform,
which I know everybody around here appreciates. You all
testified your work to combat opioid fraud, fraud against our
military, and others.
You know, I find it pretty sad that both Republicans,
Wilson and Phillips, both resigned. They took their toys and
went home. I guess they couldn't hold on for one more day,
right? And now we face major challenges, like restoring the
restitution power recently struck down by the courts, combating
potential fraud related to the Inflation Reduction Act, a
privacy standard that we're hoping this committee could get out
and passed. In the meantime, you all have stepped up in the
vacuum. We appreciate you doing that.
Chair Khan, we saw Grant Bae, a fraudster company from Lake
City, Florida, preying on minority small business owners
seeking pandemic relief, specifically African-American business
owners, with false promises of easy access to guaranteed grant
funding. And I commend the Commission for stepping up to shut
them down.
With new laws now rolling out, like the Inflation Reduction
Act, can you speak to FTC's role in preventing future predatory
business practices with a lot of the tax credits and other
opportunities coming out of both that, the infrastructure law,
and other laws coming out?
Ms. Khan. Yes, absolutely. There are a few ways in which
our work intersects with some of this new legislation. One is
making sure that in areas where the Government is trying to
prioritize Made in USA, that we are protecting the integrity of
Made in USA labels. I think all too often we've seen that
companies can play fast and loose with that label. They put it
on, but actually their products were manufactured elsewhere.
In 2021, we finalized a rule that allows us to go after
Made in USA fraudsters and get civil penalties, and so that's
an area we'll be--where we will be continuing to do this work.
More generally, any time you have benefits from the
Government or credit from the Government that's going out,
there's always a heightened risk of fraud that can attach to
that. We saw that during COVID, and I think we have to be
vigilant at this moment as well.
Mr. Soto. And how important is restoring your restitution
power to protecting consumers with these future scams?
Ms. Khan. It's critical. You know, absent that, we saw
billions of dollars basically evaporate that could have gone
back into consumers' pockets that were not able to get back to
them.
Mr. Soto. Commissioner Slaughter, the FTC recently launched
a new Office of Technology, which would hire technical staff to
inform the Commission's investigations. How would this in-house
technical expertise help further the Commission's work in areas
like you just worked on with Epic Games in helping our--protect
our children from predators online?
Ms. Slaughter. Having a fully staffed Office of Technology
is critical to make sure we can keep up with 21st century
problems in the markets. It's the kind of expertise we need to
really understand the business practices that are most hurting
Americans in digital markets. And to be fair, today almost
every market has some sort of a digital element to it. Almost
every case we have has some sort of a technological element on
it.
We have, for a very long time, put economists on every case
that we bring, and that is enormously valuable, but the
technological expertise is also really valuable. So I want to
commend the Chair for standing up that office, and I'm really
excited for the work it's already producing.
Mr. Soto. Commission Bedoya, we saw the Commission work to
help put a consent order for Google Pixel 4's deceptive product
claims in Spanish radio ads. If the Commission were provided
additional resources, what actions--additional actions could
the Commission take to prevent predatory business practices in
Espanol?
Mr. Bedoya. Thank for that question, Congressman. I'll
point to one recent example that I think gives you a sense of
what more could be done.
The Commission actually has a great track record for
decades providing information in Spanish and English, but
recently, as of February, we've been able to start providing
advice to spot frauds, identify them, how to report them in 12
languages in addition to English. When you add English in, we
can reach 99 percent of the American population in the
comfortable they're most--in the language they're most
comfortable in. And that's a great initiative from the Every
Community Initiative, and there's more where that came from,
and with resources, we could do even more of that work.
Mr. Soto. Thank you. And my time's expired.
Mr. Bilirakis. Thank you, appreciate that. Now we'll
recognize Representative Allen for his 5 minutes of
questioning.
Mr. Allen. Thank you, Chair Bilirakis, and for convening
this hearing, and thank you to our Commissioners for being here
today. I want to start immediately with questions, and if you
could give quick answers because I've got a lot to get to.
Chair Khan, during your nomination confirmation process,
you noted that you would take a 2-year unpaid leave of absence
from your faculty position at Columbia University School of
Law. Two years will have passed in June of this year since you
were sworn in on June 15, 2021. Have you asked Columbia
University for an extension to your leave of absence?
Ms. Khan. Not officially, but those discussions are ongoing
since I intend to continue to serve in this position.
Mr. Allen. So you have spoken to administration officials
about serving--continuing to serve in the administration?
Ms. Khan. My term goes until--through 2024, and I fully
intend to continue serving, yes.
Mr. Allen. Thank you. Members from rural districts have
been tracking the status of the American Farm Bureau, John Deer
MOU, and other related actions on farmers' repair facilities
having access to farm equipment repair data. To date, there has
not been any similar industry action or agreement between the
automakers and industry partners: repair shops, car rental
companies, aftermarket parts manufacturers, distributors.
With the FTC's Nixing the Fix report in 2021, and the
administration's interest in repair data access, does FTC have
a strategy or plan to address the light-duty-vehicle-data
access issue that owners of vehicles and their repair
facilities face? And I will ask who would be most able to reply
to my question?
Mr. Bedoya. I'd be glad to say, Congressman, that the
Commission's work under Chair Khan's leadership has been
terrific on this. I took a meeting with Commissioner Phillips
in Iowa with a group of corn growers and cattlemen, and one of
the things they kept on coming back to was, ``I used to be able
to fix my tractor. Now I can't, now I have to go 3 hours to the
special shop. They're not open, they don't answer their
phones.'' And this is really big issue, and this is something
the Commission is taking very seriously and started under
bipartisan action of the Chair.
Mr. Allen. OK, good. Well, thank you, I'm glad you're on
that.
Chair Khan sent a letter to then-Chair Cicillini and
Ranking Member Buck on September 28, 2021, about antitrust and
the American worker. I seek unanimous consent to have this
letter included in the record, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Bilirakis. Without objection, so ordered.
[The information appears at the conclusion of the hearing.]
Mr. Allen. Towards the end of the letter, Chair Khan
explained that legislation clarifying that labor organizing by
workers regarding the terms and conditions of their work is
outside the scope of the Federal antitrust statutes, regardless
of whether the worker is classified as an employee, would
remove the threat of the antitrust liability resulting from
such coordination. Chair Khan went on to say that this
clarification would allow for expansion of this concept to the
gig economy.
Commissioner Bedoya, you recently gave a speech in Utah
saying that Congress has made it clear that work organizations
and collective bargaining are violations of antitrust laws. An
article detailing your speech also stated that you said
independent contractors such as those who work at gig economy
companies like Uber, Lyft, and DoorDash aren't barred from
collectively bargaining under antitrust law.
Commissioner Bedoya, how can you definitely assert that
under antitrust law independent contractors have the authority
to collectively bargain when your colleague has written to the
Judiciary Committee seeking legislative action to clarify this
as current law?
Mr. Bedoya. Thank you for that question. Let me just state
that some of the headlines around that speech don't reflect
what was in that speech. I can tell you, however, that I do
think if you look at what Senator John Sherman said on the
floor of the Senate in 1890--1889, if you look at what Members
of Congress said in 1914, if you look at what, you know,
Fiorella LaGuardia said on the floor of this House in 1932,
every single instance they wanted to make clear that if you're
a working person, they do not want antitrust law to be used to
stop you organizing for better wages, better working
conditions, things like that.
I read Chair Khan's letter from--the letter you just
mentioned to be squarely in line with my own beliefs and
remarks. My clarification in Federal law be useful either
through an amendment to the antitrust laws or through something
like the PRO Act. I personally think it very much would, and I
read that to be in line with what Chair Khan said.
Mr. Allen. So I--if I understand what you're saying----
Mr. Bedoya. Yes, sir.
Mr. Allen [continuing]. What she said, you did not say?
Mr. Bedoya. Respectfully, some of the headlines were not
from what my remarks said, although I do think there is a
strong argument that a lot of people who have been classified
or misclassified as independent contractors should benefit from
the ability to organize, yes.
Mr. Allen. OK, thank you.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Bilirakis. The time of the gentleman has expired. Thank
you, appreciate it. And now we'll recognize Representative
Clarke, who was my classmate, I believe, and I'll recognize her
for 5 minutes.
Ms. Clarke. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I thank our
Commissioners and Chairperson for your presence today and their
forthcoming responses to the Members' questioning.
Chairwoman Khan, as you know, automated critical decision-
making processes like algorithms can produce discriminatory
outcomes on the basis of race, sex, or other characteristics.
I'm encouraged by the steps the Commission is taking toward
addressing discriminatory algorithms through both its 6(b)
investigation into social media companies, which I hope will be
completed soon, and its ANPRM on commercial surveillance.
The American Data Privacy Protection Act passed by this
committee last Congress would prohibit companies from
collecting, processing, or transferring covered data in a
discriminatory manner and requires algorithmic impact
assessments. While this committee continues to work towards
passage of a comprehensive privacy bill, can you commit to
addressing algorithmic discrimination in your commercial
surveillance rulemaking?
Ms. Khan. Thanks, Congresswoman. As you know, this
rulemaking proceeding is underway. We have received thousands
of comments that our staff is reviewing now to determine next
steps, but it's a big area of interest for all of us, and so
we're looking closely to see if we may be able to move forward
to address these practices.
I think you're absolutely right. Given the digitization
across our economy, the ability for firms to be able to
algorithmically discriminate is a huge concern.
Ms. Clarke. Thank you. I'm concerned about with the ability
of new generation AI tools to be used not only to spread
misinformation and disinformation online but to generate new
and more sophisticated scams. We've seen recent reports from
scammers using ChatGPT to generate phishing attacks and deep-
fake audio scams.
Chair Khan, could you discuss how the FTC is working to
combat unfair or deceptive practices that result from advances
in new technology? I know the Commission recently formed the
Office of Technology, and how will that office work across the
agency to ensure the FTC is able to fulfill its mission to
adequately protect consumers from unfair deceptive practices?
Ms. Khan. Thanks, Congresswoman. Making sure that we're
able to enforce the laws, even as underlying technologies
shift, is core to the FTC, and we have a host of tools
available to make sure we can do that. I think you're
absolutely right that AI provides--presents a whole set of
opportunities but also presents a whole set of risks, and I
think we've already seen ways in which it could be used to
turbocharge fraud and scams.
We have been putting market participants on notice that
instances in which AI tools are effectively being designed to
deceive people can place them on the hook for FTC action. Our
technologists are embedding across our agency's work, both on
the consumer protection side and on the competition side, to
make sure that we're issue spotting for this, because I think
the turbocharging of fraud and scams that could be enabled by
these tools is a serious concern.
Ms. Clarke. Commissioners Slaughter and Bedoya, anything to
add there?
Ms. Slaughter. Well, I think this is an area, you know,
throughout the FTC's history, we have had to adapt our
enforcement to changing technology. There's a lot of noise
around AI right now, and it's important because it is a
revolutionary technology in some ways, but our obligation is to
do what we've always done, which is apply the tools we have to
these changing technologies, make sure that we have the
expertise to do that effectively, but to not be scared off by
the idea that this is new, revolutionary technology and dig
right in on protecting people.
Ms. Clarke. Very well.
Mr. Bedoya. Congresswoman, thank you for your leadership on
this. Let me add, I'm really proud of how staff in the Division
of Privacy Identity Protection and the Division of Advertising
Practices have been consistently sending signals to industry
that there is law. A lot of folks in the industry are saying,
this is unregulated, we need to regulate this. Our staff has
been consistently saying our unfair and deceptive practices
authority applies, our civil rights laws, fair credit, Equal
Credit Opportunity Act, those apply.
The other point I'm really glad that they have stressed is
it is not OK to say your algorithm is a black box and you don't
understand it, so you're not responsible for it. Some of these
laws demand expandability. And so I'm proud that the Commission
has been staying up to date through the Office of Technology,
through the career staff at DPIP and DIP to make clear that
there is law and companies will need to abide by it.
Ms. Clarke. Very well. Thank you so much.
And, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Bilirakis. Thank you. The gentlelady yields back, and
I'll recognize Representative Fulcher for his 5 minutes of
questioning.
Mr. Fulcher. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you to
those on the panel for being here and contributing today.
This is addressed to Chair Khan, please. The proposed Motor
Vehicle Dealers Trade Regulation Rule is something that FTC
claims will save consumers $31 billion while only imposing 1.4
billion in regulatory costs. The entirety of these savings is
based on FTC's claim that consumers will spend 3 fewer hours
shopping for a vehicle, and the Commission arrives at that
apparently by taking the number of vehicles transacted in 2019,
which is about 62.1 million, multiplying that by 3, then
multiplying that sum by 22.20, which is the value nonwork-time
hours for the average U.S. worker. That's my understanding
where that came from.
The 3 hours of savings is based on the Commission's
assumption that the proposed rule will save 3 consumer hours.
Can I just ask, Ms. Khan, what sources or documentation does
the Commission have for making that kind of an assumption?
Ms. Khan. Congressman, our proposed rule lays out extensive
documentation for how we have come up with some of these
estimates, and we'd be happy to engage with your team to
share----
Mr. Fulcher. And why won't those sources, though--I
understand why you may not be able to recite them here, but why
weren't those sources listed in the documentation in the rule--
or in the notice of proposed rulemaking, or NPRM, because it
was not----
Ms. Khan. I know as a general matter our staff tries to
make sure that they're citing whatever empirical evidence
underlies their assessments and analysis. Again, happy to
engage with your team to see if there's more----
Mr. Fulcher. It's my understanding that that was simply not
there. That rule also mandates up to four new disclosures for
car buyers to sign related to add-on products. We all know that
takes time, burdening consumers with more Government paperwork
and so on.
Did your assumption factor in your own rule and what that
will cost consumers in terms of time in the showroom?
Ms. Khan. Congressman, our work here is based in part
through our enforcement actions, which have shown that
unfortunately the car-buying experience remains unfriendly to
consumers.
Mr. Fulcher. So we take that as a no, it did not factor
that in. That's how--that's what I'm understanding.
Ms. Khan. Factor what in?
Mr. Fulcher. The time that it takes to put your own rule in
placez, burdening consumers with that paperwork for add-on
product disclosures.
Ms. Khan. When we do this rulemaking, we have to engage in
a cost-benefit type of analysis, so those considerations were
definitely done here.
Mr. Fulcher. Using the Commission's calculation of the
value of consumers' nonwork time, can you provide an estimate
of how much the added paperwork mandated under the proposed
rule will cost consumers?
Ms. Khan. We're happy to be in touch with your team if we
can provide any----
Mr. Fulcher. These are things that are important when you
go about the process of this rulemaking, and that's the point
of this discussion here.
In a response to a question for the record--and I think it
was to Senator Cruz last year--you made a quote, you said,
``For a recent and exceptionally well-done example of an
economic analysis that FTC economists played a leading role in
formulating, I recommend to you the notice of proposed
rulemaking concerning a Motor Vehicle Dealers Trade Regulation
Rule. The billion dollar plus regulatory cost of this rule is
real.''
So those are your words, that's my understanding. So is
this what passes in the FTC now for exceptionally well-done
example of an economic analysis, an analysis based on inflated
data and assumption but not supported by, what we can tell, any
economic data?
Ms. Khan. Congressman, our economists do superb work. The
analysis that they do is undergirded by close assessment of the
available empirical evidence, and I have no doubt that that's
true here as well.
Mr. Fulcher. Ms. Khan, I--well, it's--the data doesn't seem
to back that up.
Section 110 of the FTC's Procedural Rules states, prior to
the commencement of any trade regulization rule proceeding, the
Commission must publish in the Federal Register an advanced
notice of such proposed proceeding. Since the proposed Motor
Vehicle Dealers Trade Regulation Rule is a trade regulation and
rule, why didn't the FTC first issue an announced notice of
proposed rulemaking, or ANPRM?
Ms. Khan. Congressman, this rule was issued pursuant to
Dodd-Frank, which is separate from Section 18 of the FTC Act,
which does require publication of an ANPR. Pursuant to Dodd-
Frank, we're able to do this under the Administrative Procedure
Act.
Mr. Fulcher. And my understanding is, is that you still
have that requirement, regardless of how this is submitted.
Ms. Khan. My understanding is that this is not under the
APA. The APA permits us to begin by publishing a notice of
proposed rulemaking.
Mr. Fulcher. Ms. Khan, I thank you for your responses, but
at the same time, I hope you understand the concern here. I've
got a group of car dealers that are very difficult to upset in
many ways, but you figured out a way to do that. And so our
urging is to make sure that you follow that process moving
forward. It's there for a reason.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Bilirakis. Thank you. The gentleman yields back, and
I'll recognize Representative Dingell for her 5 minutes of
questioning.
Mrs. Dingell. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I'm biting my tongue
because I--I'm not old, but I'm seasoned, and the auto industry
has for many a year not always loved the FTC. But anyway, I'm
going to behave.
Thank you, Chairman and Ranking Member Schakowsky, for
holding this important hearing and to all of you for sitting
through all of this.
The FTC provides a critical service promoting fair
competition and protecting consumers from fraud and deceptive
business practices to robocalls and exploitative, predatory
marketing. The FTC's mandate is expansive, and it's continuing
to grow with an increasingly diverse and innovative
marketplace.
This committee is also considering granting the FTC
additional specific authorities to regulate Big Tech and data
privacy through comprehensive data privacy legislation. And I
want to make this point to all of my colleagues: If we can
seriously expect the FTC to enforce these critical protections
among its many responsibilities, we are going to have to make
sure that you've got adequate funding and staffing to do so.
I would like to focus now my questions in some of the
crucial efforts that you are currently engaged in to protect
consumers. In March we heard from TikTok's CEO about the
company's collection of location data, and it gave me great
concern. In the face of that information, I'm very pleased to
talk about the FTC's latest geolocation data case against the
data broker Kochava.
My understanding is that in Kochava, the FTC has alleged
that the defendant collected consumers' precise geolocation
data, including locations that revealed consumers' visits to
reproductive health clinics, houses of worship, temporary
shelters for domestic violence survivors, and addiction
treatment centers, and then sold that data to third parties--
all without the knowledge of the consumers whose data was being
collected and sold.
I know that this case is in litigation in Federal court
now, so you're going to be somewhat limited in what you can
say, but I--these are issues that really matter personally to
me and to the victims I try to help, to those that are trying
to get treatment, who are--those who are scared that they'll be
persecuted for where they're worshiping.
So I'd like to ask each of the Commissioners: Setting aside
technical legal standards for unfairness under the FTC Act, do
you believe the average consumer would agree it is unfair for a
data broker they've never had contact with to sell data about
their visits to sensitive locations? Just yes or no. Chairman
Khan--Chairwoman Khan?
Ms. Khan. As a general matter, yes, I think most Americans
would be quite surprised.
Mrs. Dingell. Commissioner Bedoya.
Mr. Bedoya. Yes. I'll just add this was a bipartisan case
of the Commission.
Mrs. Dingell. Commissioner Slaughter.
Ms. Slaughter. Yes.
Mrs. Dingell. Chairwoman Khan, in this case, is the FTC
seeking any financial recovery from the defendants? And if not,
explain why not.
Ms. Khan. Thanks, Congresswoman. So in this case we are
alleging that the practice was unfair under Section 5 of the
FTC Act. In light of the Supreme Court's decision in AMG, we
are not able in Federal court to get back monetary equitable
relief, including money back for consumers, under Section 5 in
Federal court. So, unfortunately, we are hampered in that way.
Mrs. Dingell. So, Commissioner Slaughter, would allowing
the FTC to seek civil penalties to help deter this type of
conduct in the continued sale of precise geolocation data
revealing sensitive information?
Ms. Slaughter. Yes, civil penalties play a very important
deterrent effect, and we can only activate them either where we
have an existing order or where we have an existing rule or
where Congress has given us specific authority, and that would
make a big difference here.
Mrs. Dingell. And for any of the three of you, is there
another--other authority Congress could provide to the FTC that
would help enforcement in these type of privacy cases? Chairman
Khan.
Ms. Khan. I think as a general matter, any more specific
bright-line rules of prohibitions that Congress is able to
legislate would certainly make our jobs easier.
Mrs. Dingell. Thank you. I'm going to quickly try to do--
I'd like to talk about one type of technology that some data
brokers use to collect data: software development kits, or
SDKs. Data brokers that consumers have likely never heard of
entice app developers to install these SDKs in their apps,
which collect geolocation data and feed it directly to the data
brokers who then resell it to advertisers, other brokers, and
anyone else they choose. And even the app developers often
don't know where the consumers' data will end up.
To all consumer--Commissioners: Yes or no, putting aside
the statutory requirements for an unfairness claim, do you
think consumers would think this type of data collection is
unfair? Yes or no. Just go down the----
Ms. Khan. Yes.
Mr. Bedoya. Yes.
Ms. Slaughter. Yes.
Mrs. Dingell. And, Chairman Khan, in 4 seconds, do you know
any good reason why Apple and Google continue to let app
developers use SDKs and applications offered on their mobile
application platforms? Do SDKs warrant significant concern?
Ms. Khan. I think they warrant scrutiny, yes.
Mrs. Dingell. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I'm just--people don't understand
what's happening. I went in to do my financial disclosure this
week and went in to look up the value of something, and within
2 minutes of my having done that, I was getting investment
advice, which--people don't know how we're being traced. I had
to make that point. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, yield back.
Mr. Bilirakis. I appreciate it very much, thank you. The
gentlelady yields back, and now I'll recognize Representative
Harshbarger for 5 minutes of questioning. Thank you.
Mrs. Harshbarger. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
I want to thank you all for looking at the unfair and
deceptive business practices of pharmacy benefit managers, and
I know it's--that study was initiated a year ago, but I hope
you look at vertical integration and how that is really making
it impossible for small, independent businesses to survive.
And with that being said, Chair Khan, I'd like to discuss
the gig economy. Specifically, I'd like to discuss the FTC's
policy statement related to gig work, which was rammed through
on a 3-2 vote. The policy statement complains about a power
imbalance between gig companies and workers which may leave gig
workers exposed to harms from unfair, deceptive, and
anticompetitive practices and is likely to amplify such harms
when they occur.
Chair Khan, just a mere power imbalance in a commercial
distribution change does not violate American antitrust or
consumer protection law, unless it's accompanied by a specific
bad conduct which harms consumers. Chair Khan, you have a
specific amount of legal authority that Congress has
authorized, and it does not include addressing power
imbalances. Why are you deviating--in a short answer, why are
you deviating from your authorized role?
Ms. Khan. Thanks, Congressman. We're actually following
existing precedent, including work that was started under my
Republican predecessor, Joe Simons, to address instances in
which gig companies are engaging in illegal practices,
including with regards to their workers. One of the enforcement
actions that preceded my time at the Commission involved
instances in which Amazon was deceptively withholding tips from
gig workers, from its drivers.
Mrs. Harshbarger. That's----
Ms. Khan. So again, there's nothing really unusual about
this work.
Mrs. Harshbarger. OK, that's good enough for me. But
there's another interesting component of the policy statement,
and it's around gig workers. It seems natural to me to call
these people workers, not consumers, because generally, in a
lot of--if you look at Lyft or Uber drivers, for example,
they're contract workers or 1099s. They can leave anytime they
want.
But the FTC seems to have invented a new term called
working consumers. Am I getting the phrase right? Yes or no.
Working consumers?
Ms. Khan. I'm not specifically familiar with that phrase. I
will say our statute prohibits unfair or deceptive acts or
practices as they could affect any market participant, be it a
consumer, be it a worker, be it a small business.
Mrs. Harshbarger. Well, if it's called working consumers,
it's an oxymoron because the next thing we're going to have are
manufacturing consumers or we're going to have selling
consumers. And it's alarming because the FTC seems to think
that it can regulate just about anyone if you label them as a
consumer. And the wording is especially concerning given the
FTC's agreement with the National Labor Relations Board. The
Federal Trade Commission does not have the authority to promote
the unionization of workers.
And answer--you can answer this very shortly. How does the
FTC NLRB Memorandum of Understanding affect the FTC's review of
the gig economy?
Ms. Khan. So this is an MOU that we're really pleased to be
entering because there are ways in which our staff can be
exchanging information and sharing information that can allow
each agency to better do its job. It's absolutely true that our
authorities differ from those of the NLRB, but through having
these partnerships, through having training of staff, we can
make sure each of us is best positioned to do our job.
Mrs. Harshbarger. OK. I have two more, and I've got a
limited amount of time. I will tell you this: I'm troubled by
the actions taken by the FTC to unwind the Illumina/GRAIL
merger. And Illumina reacted--or reacquired GRAIL in 2021. It's
a company which has developed a transformational test to detect
cancer, and with a single blood test, that gallery test can
screen asymptomatic patients for more than 50 types of cancer,
many of which have no other form of screening and are often
caught too late to treat effectively.
And I can go on and on about that, but why does the FTC
insist on blocking the merger in the name of competition when
there are no other companies that are even close to having a
test on the market for several years? Why is that?
Ms. Khan. Congresswoman, I'm limited in what I can say here
given that this case remains pending in our administrative
proceeding. I will note that the Commission recently published
an opinion stating out our views and our legal analysis as
applied to the facts here.
Mrs. Harshbarger. OK, OK. And I do have another comment. We
can all agree that competition law isn't supposed to protect an
industry's dominant player, do you agree?
Ms. Khan. Sorry, could you say that again?
Mrs. Harshbarger. I say we can all agree that competition
law isn't supposed to protect an industry's dominant player.
Ms. Khan. Correct.
Mrs. Harshbarger. In light of that, I find it curious that
the FTC is taking action to protect Sony, which has 68 percent
of the global market for high-end video gaming consoles, from
competitive--or competition attempted to block Microsoft's
proposal--or their proposed acquisition of Activision Blizzard
King. As you know, Sony's been the most vocal opponent of that
deal, and remarkably, the FTC has sided with Tony--Sony. Can
you explain why that seems to be a good idea?
Ms. Khan. This case also has been voted out and is in
administrative proceeding, so I'll let the complaint speak for
itself. I will say as a general matter, we always really
benefit from hearing market participants across the board,
including big players, but at the end of the day, we always
make our own independent judgments based on the law and the
facts.
Mrs. Harshbarger. OK. I know my time is about up, and so
with that, I yield back.
Mr. Bilirakis. Thank you. The gentlelady yields back, and
now we'll recognize Representative Trahan for her 5 minutes of
questioning.
Mrs. Trahan. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you
Ranking Member Schakowsky.
It's worth reminding that a strong FTC is good for
consumers, it's good for small businesses, certainly good for
our economy. You simply cannot be pro privacy and support a
weak FTC. And you can't be pro competition and support an
understaffed Commission.
The issues before us, whether we're talking about
anticompetitive monopolies or online harms, are just too big.
And we need Federal enforcers like the FTC to have the
resources and the personnel necessary to tackle them.
Commissioner Bedoya, as you know, an overwhelming majority
of my colleagues on both sides on the dais here today support
comprehensive privacy protections, particularly for our
children. I share Representative Castor's concern about privacy
violations in education technology, and I'm encouraged by your
answers on improving COPPA enforcement and the COPPA rule. I'm
particularly worried that parents and students don't have any
choice or control over the technologies that students are
required to us.
Could you expand on what the FTC is doing to investigate
privacy abuses and expand consumer choice and education
technology, and what options do parents have if they have
concerns about the technology that children are mandated to use
in their classrooms?
Mr. Bedoya. Thank you for that question. I think one of the
great first steps the Commission has taken recently in pushing
against precisely this issue is making clear that parents
legally have to have a choice. The policy statement made clear
that in the rule it says you can't force kids to surrender
their privacy in order to do their homework, so you can't
require them to surrender all this information to do their
homework. It also reminded people that they needed to give
industry--they need to give parents a choice about deleting
that data.
And so the first thing is sending very clear signals that
there is law here. And for years COPPA, by folks outside of the
Commission, was caricatured as a notice-and-choice rule when
it's not. It's much more than that.
Secondly, alongside the rule review, there have been some
very aggressive cases brought. The one that comes most to mind
is the Chegg case. This involved data that was stored in plain
text, weak encryption, that resulted in the breach of 40
million students' data, including information about disability
and sexual orientation, and the Commission was able to bring a
strong case there.
And so between the Office of Technology, the policy
statement, and enforcement from the Division of Privacy
Identity Protection, we're moving on a number of fronts on
this.
Mrs. Trahan. Thank you, Commissioner Bedoya. And the--
that's the level of attention that our parents and our
students, frankly, deserve.
When we talk about harms to privacy and potential digital
discrimination, those are what I would call systemic risks. And
while it's heartening to see you tackling them in ed tech, we
know harms exist across the online economy. Systemic risks are
things we can all agree on: illegal activity and content
online, digital discrimination, and risks to our democracy and
to the health and well-being of consumers.
That list includes public security. And the recent leak of
classified information by an attention seeker on Discord showed
that our country is prone to public security risks inherent in
the use of online platforms. Last Congress I introduced the
Digital Services Oversight and Safety Act, which would require
the largest tech companies to comprehensively assess and report
systemic risks.
So, Chair Khan, do you believe that large online platforms
adequately assess systemic risks around digital discrimination,
illegal content or activity, public security, and/or health and
well-being of their users, and do you believe a failure to
assess these risks could potentially be unfair under Section 5
of the FTC Act?
Ms. Khan. Thanks for that question. I worry that there is a
lot more work here to be done. I think we've all seen time and
time again how the business models of these platforms can
really incentivize practices that are not aligned with what's
best for their users or consumers, and so I definitely think
that there is much more need for us to be looking closely to
understand what types of practices are happening, is there
discrimination, and how can we be better targeting those.
Mrs. Trahan. And if you were to enforce against companies
for failing to properly consider systemic risks, could you
accomplish that if there wasn't a standardized way to measure
and qualify those risks?
Ms. Khan. It would certainly be challenging. I'll say in
our data security work, we've been able to identify what
constitutes best practices and then enforce the law based on
what should be required for best practices for data security. I
imagine we could try to do something here but, of course, clear
word from Congress about how to do that would be most helpful.
Mrs. Trahan. Thank you. I understand those challenges, and
that's why I've been proposing and much for a national
framework like the one outlined in the Digital Services
Oversight and Safety Act to assess those risks and those
mitigations.
Thank you so much for your time. I yield back.
Mr. Bilirakis. I thank the gentlelady. I'll recognize
Representative Armstrong for his 5 minutes of questioning.
Mr. Armstrong. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The fiscal year
2024 FTC budget request is a substantial increase compared to
previous years. The request is for $590 million, which is a 160
million increase from last year's enacted level and a 2,000--or
213 million increase from the fiscal year 2022 enacted level.
The budget explains that the increase is accounted for by
adding 310 full-time staff along with an anticipated 5.2
percent pay increase for said staff. And there is a single line
that briefly mentions inflationary adjustments to account for
what I--the four-decade-high inflation data that exceeds 9
percent comparing 2022 to 2021. And much of the proposed budget
is to help the FTC in pursuing your mission in regards to
competition enforcement.
The Commission's testimony states that the FTC has been
reassessing how we can enforce antitrust laws to maximize our
efficacy. Considering the Commission's record in competition
cases in recent years, we conclude that the--we could conclude
that the record is neither effective nor efficient. And that
may be largely due to the Commission's advancing of novel legal
theories as opposed to enforcing conduct that is violative of
current law. Former Commissioner Wilson referenced this as
defiance of legal precedent.
The Commission recently abandoned an effort to prevent Meta
from purchasing a fitness startup after losing in district
court on an actual potential competition claim, a theory that
was entertained by the district court but rejected on the
facts. The Commission lost the suit before the ALJ to reverse
the acquisition of GRAIL by Illumina, the first decision since
the Commission dropped its support of the 2020 Vertical Merger
Guidelines, which acknowledged that vertical mergers generally
create efficiencies.
Undeterred, the Commission ordered Illumina to divest GRAIL
this month. I fear this may also be the case with Microsoft/
Activision, but we'll get to that in a second. The motive is
clear: The Commission's goal is to advance its novel legal
theories. Winning cases seems to be secondary. But you still
have to win cases. Referring to the Commission's recent record,
former Commissioner Kovacic simply said, ``Ultimately you need
litigated victories.''
And this perceived budgetary inefficiency and advancement
of policy goals isn't limited to litigation. After the last
U.S./EU joint tech compliance dialogue, the Commission
announced it would send personnel to assist with the
implementation of the Digital Markets Act, an EU-passed law
that is in conflict with U.S. competition.
So I'm left to wonder, as someone who cosponsored a bill to
increase merger filing fees to support the Commission's
enforcement efforts, why should Congress grant such a
substantial budget increase to the Commission?
With regards to Sony and--Sony controls about two-thirds of
the global gaming market and has vocally opposed Microsoft's
acquisition of Activision. The FTC's position aligns with Sony,
the dominant market leader, despite Xbox's position as the
third-place gaming console manufacturer with a near nonexistent
mobile gaming market share and multiple public comments to
ensure that Call of Duty is open to competitor consoles. While
the FTC complaint mentions that Microsoft competes with
independent studios to offer games like Call of Duty, this is
really another challenge of a vertical merger.
I previously mentioned the FTC's administration court loss
in the GRAIL/Illumina, but the DOJ's failure to block the
vertical merger between UnitedHealth/Change Healthcare is also
[indiscernible]. I understand that the Commission may be
limited in what they can say regarding ongoing limita--ongoing
litigation. Without speaking to the facts of that matter,
Chairwoman Khan, do you agree with the statement that antitrial
law--trust laws exist to protect consumers, not individual
competitors?
Ms. Khan. Thanks, Congressman. The--we follow the
competition laws as written by Congress. The Sherman Act says,
you know, restraints of trade or practices that undermine
competition are illegal. We also look closely at Section 5 of
the FTC Act, which prohibits unfair methods of competition. So
we are fully committed to following the text of the statutes.
Mr. Armstrong. And you have previously stated that
reforming FTC merger policies should be more deeply rooted in
the text of our statutes and bringing antilaw--antitrust more
squarely within the rule of law. Yet the FTC now demands
decadelong prior approval provisions in consent orders and
merging--merger matters. Former Commissioners Phillips and
Wilson have called this policy an end run around the Hart-
Scott-Rodino premerger notification framework that Congress
established in 1976.
What is the specific statutory text that grant FTC
authority?
Ms. Khan. So these prior approvals are obtained in
settlements with parties when we're taking action. I should
note that pursuing prior approval was actually a longstanding
FTC practice through the mid-'90s, and so the changes that
we've made are actually putting us back into alignment with
longstanding FTC practice.
Mr. Armstrong. And then I would ask unanimous consent to
enter into the record a letter Senator Cramer sent----
Mr. Bilirakis. Yes, without objection, so ordered.
[The information appears at the conclusion of the hearing.]
Mr. Armstrong. Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Bilirakis. Thank you. And I don't see anyone on the
Democrat side, so I'll recognize my good friend from
Gainesville, Florida, home of the Fighting Gators, Ms. Cammack.
Please, you're recognized for 5 minutes.
Mrs. Cammack. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Go Gators.
[Laughter.]
Mrs. Cammack. All right. Mr. Chairman, I would like to
start out by submitting two letters for the record written by
FTC alumni expressing concerns about the integrity and fairness
of the FTC and its departure from the agency's traditional
norms and bounds.
Mr. Bilirakis. Without objection, so ordered.
[The information appears at the conclusion of the hearing.]
Mrs. Cammack. Thank you. As I mentioned, these letters are
both signed by prominent former officials of the FTC, and I
would say that when FTC alumni are questioning the direction
and integrity of the FTC, I certainly think that we here in
Congress should as well. I would also like the record to
reflect that neither of these letters have been responded to by
you or your office.
Additionally, Mr. Chairman, I'd like to submit the August
1, 2022, FTC Inspector General's Report titled, ``Audit of the
Federal Trade Commission's Unpaid Consultant and Expert
Programs,'' for the record.
Mr. Bilirakis. Without objection, so ordered.\1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ The report has been retained in committee files and is
available at https://docs.house.gov/meetings/IF/IF17/20230418/115716/
HHRG-118-IF17-20230418-SD030.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Mrs. Cammack. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chair Khan, according to the Inspector General's report,
you expanded the agency's use of unpaid consultants and
experts, correct?
Ms. Khan. We made use of Government authorities that allow
us to bring on experts, yes.
Mrs. Cammack. How many consultants were added to the FTC
after your confirmation?
Ms. Khan. I don't have those numbers top of mind, but we're
happy to get those to you.
Mrs. Cammack. Thank you. Did they receive training?
Ms. Khan. They received ethics training and ensuring that
they were in compliance with all FTC's rules and ethics rules.
Mrs. Cammack. OK, perfect. According to your agency's press
statement on the IG's audit, you defended the agency's use of
unpaid consultants and experts by claiming that they fill
``subject matter gaps.'' What gaps have existed during your
tenure?
Ms. Khan. Yes, this is a great question. And I should note
that there are existing authorities that allow us to bring on
these experts for precisely this function. A lot of our work
can get quite technical. It can require deep industry
expertise. Especially as we're doing our work in digital
markets, it can require expertise to understand how these
technologies are working. And so we were able to bring on, for
example, experts in AI technologies to help us make sure that
our work in this area was fully informed by the latest best
practices and the latest industry knowledge.
Mrs. Cammack. Perfect, thank you. Who did these consultants
and experts report to and how frequently?
Ms. Khan. So it would depend on where they were brought on
within the agency. We had some experts that were brought on
within the Office of Policy Planning, and so they would report
to the director of that office. We had some experts brought
onto the Bureau of Consumer Protection, and so they would be
reporting to the respective managers there.
Mrs. Cammack. And did your staff keep you informed about
the work of these consultants and experts that were doing work
on behalf of the agency?
Ms. Khan. Yes, as a general matter, these consultants were
being plugged into existing work streams, and so as that work
was coming up to the Commission, we would see their
contributions there.
Mrs. Cammack. So I would like to get copies of the
communications from these consultants to you and your office
and your staff. Could you provide that to us?
Ms. Khan. We're happy to work with your team to see what we
can make available.
Mrs. Cammack. I would hope all of it would be made
available. Now, under your helm, how did the agency define
``consultant'' and ``expert''? Specifically, what criteria did
the agency use in recruiting these consultants and experts?
Ms. Khan. As a general matter, when we're looking to bring
on experts, we're doing so because there is a specific function
for which we need their expertise, and so the criteria would
depend on whether we were looking to bring on people who had
particular expertise in AI, in particular its forms of digital
markets, in particular areas of antitrust where we felt we
didn't have the requisite expertise internally and so it needed
to go outside.
Mrs. Cammack. So that doesn't really answer my question of
how you define a consultant or an expert, but I guess----
Ms. Khan. I believe those terms are probably defined under
the regulations, so we would follow those definitions.
Mrs. Cammack. So you advertised this to members of the
public?
Ms. Khan. As a general matter, we have the authority to
identify specific experts that we want to bring on board. There
are no requirements----
Mrs. Cammack. So that's no.
Ms. Khan. There are no requirements under the regulation--
--
Mrs. Cammack. So you did not publicly advertise these
unpaid consultant positions to the public.
Ms. Khan. Correct.
Mrs. Cammack. You did not, OK. Why?
Ms. Khan. We followed the underlying regulations that
permit Government agencies to bring on outside experts and
consultants. Given that the function for which we're doing this
is to fill specific niche needs, we thought it would be most
efficient to actually identify directly the people we needed.
And again, we followed the regulations and what they require.
Mrs. Cammack. So you don't publicly advertise these
positions for these experts. Who initiates contact?
Ms. Khan. As a general matter, I would think the agency
would have initiated contact since these were specific needs
that we were looking to fill, and so we would know what our
needs were.
Mrs. Cammack. It seems like it's a--it's ripe for an
opportunity for fraud or corruption or finding people who are
willing to execute on a political agenda. But did you receive
approval from the FTC's Office of General Counsel ethics team
to do this?
Ms. Khan. Yes, the ethics teams is always involved anytime
we bring new people on board at the Commission.
Mrs. Cammack. And you will be willing to provide the
written approval to this committee?
Ms. Khan. We're happy to provide you whatever materials we
have available in this area.
Mrs. Cammack. My time has expired, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, Chair Khan, for being here.
Mr. Bilirakis. The gentlelady yields back, and now I'll
recognize my good friend from the State of Indiana, Mr. Pence,
for 5 minutes of questioning.
Mr. Pence. Thank you, Chairman Bilirakis and Ranking Member
Schakowsky, for holding this hearing, and thank you to the
Commissioners for being here with us today.
As we discussed today, the FTC plays a critical role
protecting consumers from fraudulent schemes and deceptive
trade practices. You know, years ago, many years ago, I had to
get involved in mergers that occurred across the country, and
that doesn't seem to be something anybody gets involved in
anymore. And the consolidation, especially in Big Tech, which
is something I focus on, has just gone unchecked.
But that's not part of what I want to say today. In the
past year alone, the FTC has returned over 25 million to
Hoosiers that have fallen victim to the deceptive scams and
frauds. However, I echo the concerns of my colleagues regarding
the direction of the FTC under Chairwoman Khan's leadership.
During the Chairwoman's tenure, the FTC has routinely
overstepped congressional-directed jurisdiction to target
American companies. Meanwhile, the Chair has disregarded the
other Commissioners and consolidated authorities of the FTC
within her own office. Chairwoman Khan has even gone as far as
to allow a former Commissioner to vote on a substantial merger
policy.
In a recent and notable overreach, the FTC issued initial
violation notices through their unprecedented penalty offense
authority rule to over 700 companies before the final order was
issued. Since the Commission does not have authority to issue
civil penalties for initial violations for most unfair or
deceptive practices, the FTC is setting a new and dangerous
precedent that could threaten Hoosier businesses operating in
the U.S. economy. This has left businesses in my State in the
dark about how they're allowed to do business and continues
this administration's find-and-fine approach instead of
collaboration in partnership to meet common goals and protect
consumers.
In 2004, we had the same problem in the State of Indiana
where it was fine and fine--find and fine, and we got that
changed and, of course, the State of Indiana has a fabulously
balanced budget and our economy is growing.
The FTC has continued their overreach with a proposed rule
seeking to ban noncompete clauses in its partnership with the
National Labor Relations Board. This rule rejects American free
market ideals and disregards State laws that already serve to
protect employees in their communities. I had a conversation
just a little while ago with a friend of mine sitting in the
back, a surgeon, about what if I went to work for a hospital
that paid off my debt, would I--could I not have a noncompete.
That's not my question, OK.
As a result of the FTC's concerning overreaches, the
remaining Republican Commissioners have all resigned. Before
this committee considers any sort of additional authority, it's
imperative that we gain a better understanding as to how the
FTC can more appropriately utilize the resources they have at
hand.
Chair Khan, former Commissioner Wilson, who resigned just a
few weeks ago, brought important private-sector experience to
the FTC. Can you describe your experience working in the
private sector?
Ms. Khan. Thanks, Congressman. I have not worked in the
private sector. I did work for Columbia University, but that's,
I believe, you know, organized as a nonprofit.
Mr. Pence. I'm not downplaying your private--your academic
experience, but my view of the FTC, which is very positive back
in my business experience all my life, understanding how
business actually operates is pretty important. Do you believe
the lack of business experience among FTC Commissioners
inhibits your ability to regulate private-sector entities
effectively?
Ms. Khan. Congressman, there's no doubt that diversity of
experience among Commissioners greatly benefits our work, and I
really look forward to new Commissioners that the President
would nominate and the Senate would confirm, and we'll look
forward to that.
Mr. Pence. So I hope you lead that. I'd like to yield the
balance of my time to Mr. Armstrong.
Mr. Armstrong. Thank you.
Mr. Bilirakis. You're recognized.
Mr. Armstrong. Chair Khan, earlier you expressed concerns
about data brokers selling sensitive location data, and I share
that concern. Anybody who's noticed me testifying in just about
any entire hearing my entire time here, I think this is one of
the largest conversations we have moving forward. This might be
an unfair question, but I'm going to ask it anyway because we
forget about the true elephant in the room.
Do you have any thoughts on the Federal Government
purchasing that same data from third-party data brokers?
Ms. Khan. It's an interesting question. For us, our work
looks at private entities for the most part, and so that's
where our area is--of attention is. As a general matter, I
think it's no coincidence that those who have traditionally
been skeptical of concentrations of power, including in
government, are now also extending those concerns to the
private sector. I think any time we see, you know, deep
concentrations of economic power, that can create concern. And
so be it data collected by, you know, big business or big
government, I think a lot of people have concerns about that.
Mr. Armstrong. Thank you. And I yield back.
Mr. Pence. Thank you, Mr. Chair. I yield back.
Mr. Bilirakis. Mr. Pence yields back. Now we'll recognize
Ms. Lesko from the great State of Arizona. You're recognized
for 5 minutes of questioning.
Mrs. Lesko. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Chair Khan. My question for you, Chair Khan, is
in 2020, 87 percent of responding FTC employees affirmed that
senior leaders maintain high standards of honesty and
integrity. That number plummeted to 49 percent in 2022. This is
quite alarming. How do you respond to those that say your
leadership style is responsible for such a large drop in
employee confidence?
Ms. Khan. Thanks, Congresswoman. I'm incredibly proud of
the staff of the FTC who day in and day out are protecting the
interests of the American public, and I take those results very
seriously. After seeing those declines, my team and I sprung
into action to make sure we were understanding what was the
source of the decline and what changes we could put in place to
turn that around.
Mrs. Lesko. Thank you. Who at the FTC has authority to
initiate an investigation on a business?
Ms. Khan. So as a general matter, any time there is
issuance of compulsory process, or a CID, that has to go
through a particular Commissioner.
Mrs. Lesko. Do Commissioners have to vote to initiate an
investigation on a business?
Ms. Khan. It depends what type of investigation is being
done. Traditionally, on the consumer protection side, we had
what was known as the omnibus authority which streamlined the
ability to send out CIDs to make sure we could do our work more
efficiently. More recently, we've also adopted that on the
competition side, so in a whole host of areas, be it----
Mrs. Lesko. All right, let me ask you more specific. Do
Commissioners have to vote to seek a court order against a
business?
Ms. Khan. As a general matter, yes.
Mrs. Lesko. OK. Third question. In response to Elon Musk's
Twitter acquisition and public commitment to protecting free
speech on a social media platform, it appears the FTC began an
intense investigation into the company citing user data privacy
as the reason behind it. FTC made over 350 demands of Twitter,
including information on journalists that interacted with
Twitter, specifically those that produced the Twitter Files. On
what authority did the FTC make this demand?
Ms. Khan. Thanks, Congresswoman. As you know, Twitter has
long been under FTC scrutiny, extending back a decade when it
was found that lax data privacy and security practices had
allowed hackers to take over all sorts of accounts, including
the account of Fox News. At that point, there was a consent
order that was entered into.
Last year, we found that base--that Twitter had been
violating that consent order, entered into a new one. And
inasmuch as we read public reporting suggesting that third
parties may have been granted unauthorized access to Twitter's
internal systems and be violating the new consent decree,
that's absolutely something that we have an obligation to look
at closely.
Mrs. Lesko. But I fail to understand how you say it's due
to data privacy when you're asking about specific names and
communications, and you're specifically asking for the emails
and all communications with Elon Musk within the employee
network. How does that have to deal with data privacy?
Ms. Khan. We want to know who is making some of these
decisions, what type of responsibility are senior-level
executives potentially carrying, and so we try to be
comprehensive in how we're looking at these issues.
Mrs. Lesko. Thank you. And I yield back.
Mr. Bilirakis. OK, now I'll save Representative Carter some
time and say he is from the home State of Georgia, home of the
national champion Georgia Bulldogs. You're recognized, sir,
for----
Mr. Carter. Twice in row.
Mr. Bilirakis. Now you can stick to the second matter.
Mr. Carter. Two years in a row, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Bilirakis. Thank you.
Mr. Carter. Go Dawgs. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank
you for allowing me to waive onto this committee.
Thank you, Chair Khan. Thank you, Commissioners, for being
here, I appreciate it.
Let me preface my remarks by saying this. I became a Member
of Congress 8 years ago. The first thing I did when I got here
was to go straight to the FTC and ask them to look at the
vertical integration that exists in the drug pricing chain.
I'm a pharmacist. I've been in retail pharmacy. I've
practiced over four decades. I started when I was 10, so
anyway.
But seriously, this is something that I've witnessed over
the years. And again, 8 years ago, this was the first thing I
did when I got to Congress, go to the FTC. Asked you to look at
how the insurance company owns the pharmacy benefit managers,
the PBMs, that owns the pharmacy and in some cases that employs
the providers.
Finally, last summer you agreed to do that, and I know
you're doing it, and I want to thank you for that because this
is what the problem is right here. You've seen it throughout
the country. You've seen what's happened in States like Ohio
where the Attorney General just recently referred to PBMs as
gangsters. And they are. And they are the reason why the price
of prescription drugs are so high.
There was a study done a little over a year ago by the
Berkeley Group out in California that showed that only 63
percent of the price of a drug goes to the PBM. Only 37 percent
goes to the drug manufacturer. Now I'm not trying to take up
for drug manufacturers--they need to do a better job too--but
tell me what they are doing with that 63 percent. Do you think
that they are passing those savings onto the--the discounts
that they get onto the patient? I can tell you they're not.
You're familiar with it, Chairman Khan, I know you are,
with spread pricing, with DIR fees that are putting retail
pharmacies--independent retail pharmacies--out of business to
the tune of about 4 percent every year. The most accessible
healthcare professionals in America are pharmacists. Ninety-
five percent of all Americans live within 5 miles of a
pharmacy.
We want--everyone, Republicans and Democrats--want the same
thing in healthcare. We want accessibility, affordability, and
quality. That's what we all want. You do away with that
accessibility by doing away with independent retail pharmacies,
and you're going to decrease accessibility, and we don't need
that.
Chair Khan, can you bring me up to date of where the FTC is
now? I know you can only say so much publicly, but can you
bring me up to date where you're at in this process of looking
at this study? I believe that you call it a 6(b) study?
Ms. Khan. That's right. And, Congressman, early on in my
tenure we started hearing an enormous amount from independent
pharmacies about potentially abusive practices by PBMs. We took
those reports enormously seriously, and that's why we've
launched this study.
We've been collecting information, collecting the data that
was requested and are in the process of reviewing it. We're
hoping that we'll be able to, you know, share something on that
with your office in short order, but this is work that is
underway.
I couldn't agree more that independent pharmacies play a
critical role. One thing that we saw during the pandemic in
particular was that States that have legislation protecting
their independent pharmacies were actually able to have better
outcomes in terms of distribution of key medicines. And so I
think we've seen how on key metrics independent pharmacies are
outperforming, and so we need to make sure that unfair methods
of competition are not squeezing them out.
Mr. Carter. I know that you're looking at, I believe, it's
six PBMs total. You know, there are three PBMs that control 80
percent of the market. Eighty percent of the market. That's--
there is no reason--there ought to be a law that a PBM cannot
own a pharmacy. You know that there's patient steering going
on.
You know, when the insurance company owns the PBM that owns
the pharmacy, they're steering their patients toward their own
pharmacy. We see it every day. That's happening.
Ms. Khan. I think you're absolutely right that when you
have vertical integration coupled with significant industry
concentration, the ability for that structure to create
conflicts of interest become very, very real, and those
conflicts of interest can be a serious concern when they're
leading to those types of practices.
Mr. Carter. I mentioned the lawsuit that was--that's
recently been filed by the Ohio Attorney General that alleges
that PBMs, through their subsidiaries, collude to fix
reimbursement prices and share competitively sensitive
information to enable coordinated negotiations. Is the FTC
investigating this same conduct?
Ms. Khan. Congressman, some of that information is
nonpublic, but as a general matter, those issues are on our
radar. We also early on in my tenure issued a policy statement
noting that potentially illegal kickbacks or commercial bribery
that might be occurring through the rebate system is on our
radar as well.
Mr. Carter. Well, I'm out of time. Again, this is the first
thing I did 8 years ago. Thank you for doing this. This is
extremely important. Republican, Democrat. I never went to the
counter and asked a patient ``Are you a Republican or
Democrat?'' All I tried to do was to help the patients, as all
pharmacies are trying to do.
Thank you, and I yield back.
Mr. Bilirakis. Thank you, sir. The gentleman yields back.
And now we'll recognize--no one on the Democrat side, so we'll
go ahead and recognize Dr. Joyce from the State of
Pennsylvania. Thank you--thanks for your patience, sir.
Mr. Joyce. Thank you for yielding, Mr. Chairman. And I
would further like to thank both you and Ranking Member for
allowing me to waive onto this panel for this important
hearing.
Chair Khan, last fall I, along with 67 of my colleagues,
sent you a bipartisan letter in support of the FTC Franchise
Rule, which highlighted the importance that this rule has to
the business community at large. And I would like to ask
unanimous consent to enter this letter into the record.
Mr. Bilirakis. Without objection, so ordered. Thank you.
[The information appears at the conclusion of the hearing.]
Mr. Joyce. Chair Khan, is the FRI--is the RFI announced in
March of this year part of the FTC Franchise Rule review?
Ms. Khan. No, it's a separate effort.
Mr. Joyce. If this is not part of the FTC Franchise Rule
review, do you agree that there would be benefits of including
the RFI as part of the Franchise review--Rule review?
Ms. Khan. It certainly could be. The Franchise Rule itself,
as it stands, covers a narrower set of issues, so we wanted to
have the separate process to make sure we were getting a 360
view of what the issues here might be. If we learn things that
are relevant for how we should be enforcing the Franchise Rule
or do any amendments, of course we would take that into
account.
Mr. Joyce. And I agree with you. I think that it--including
that as part of the franchise review, including the RFI would
be important. Thank you for acknowledging that.
How does the FTC NLRB Memorandum of Understanding affect
the FTC's review of franchise issues, particularly at a time
when the NLRB is finalizing a rule that will upend the
franchise relationship?
Ms. Khan. As a general matter, we entered into this MOU to
make sure that we were able to share information that might be
relevant to each other. We each have different authorities, and
so if one of us is spotting conduct that we're not able to act
on but might be unlawful under their authorities, we can refer
that and vice versa. So that's the main way we're----
Mr. Joyce. And I think it's important that you acknowledge,
just as you did, that there are different authorities involved
here. Do you believe that the Commission has the authority to
grant a private right of action to franchisees under the FTC
Act?
Ms. Khan. No, the FTC Act, section 5 does not have the
private right of action.
Mr. Joyce. I think that this is an important message that
we take with us, that that private right of action is not
included. And I would also like to add that the franchise
system here in the United States is incredibly uniquely
American, and it has allowed hundreds of thousands of small
businesses to thrive and employ what we estimate are millions
of people.
Today, in America, we must ensure that this system
continues and the economic growth is not interrupted in a
partisan manner or by an antibusiness implementation of rules
that are outside the intent of the law. Small businesses rely
and thrive on that ability to have that integral action of
working right here in America.
I thank you, Mr. Chairman, for allowing me to waive on, and
I yield back the balance of my time.
Mr. Bilirakis. Thank you. And I--the gentleman yields back.
I ask unanimous consent to insert in the record the documents
included on the staff hearing documents list.
Without objection, that will be the order.
[The information appears at the conclusion of the hearing.]
Mr. Bilirakis. I'd like to ask the ranking member if she
had any comments. I really appreciate the testimony today, and
your ability to answer the questions, and I appreciate your
patience. And I'll yield to the gentlelady, the ranking member
of the subcommittee, Ms. Schakowsky, for any comments she might
have.
Ms. Schakowsky. I just want to give a big thank you to the
Chairman and the Commissioners for not only being here today
but for all the work that you do to--every single day to
protect consumers. Your efforts to go as far as you can to make
sure that all the fraudsters and the people who are trying to
hurt our consumers are addressed, and I think you're doing a
great job. I wanted to thank you for answering all of the many
questions that you had and for being there every day along with
your staff. Thank you.
Mr. Bilirakis. I appreciate you giving us your time.
I remind Members that they have 10 business days to submit
questions for the record. And I ask the witnesses to respond to
the questions promptly. Members should submit their questions
by the close of business day on May 2nd.
Without objection, the subcommittee is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 12:52 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]
[Material submitted for inclusion in the record follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
