- BREAKING BARRIERS: STREAMLINING PERMITTING TO EXPEDITE BROADBAND DEPLOYMENT

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

BREAKING BARRIERS: STREAMLINING PERMITTING
TO EXPEDITE BROADBAND DEPLOYMENT

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON COMMUNICATIONS AND
TECHNOLOGY

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

APRIL 19, 2023

__________

Serial No. 118-25

Published for the use of the Committee on Energy and Commerce

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

govinfo.gov/committee/house-energy
energycommerce.house.gov

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
55-203 PDF                  WASHINGTON : 2024

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE

CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington
Chair
MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas            FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey
ROBERT E. LATTA, Ohio                  Ranking Member
BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky              ANNA G. ESHOO, California
H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia         DIANA DeGETTE, Colorado
GUS M. BILIRAKIS, Florida            JAN SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois
BILL JOHNSON, Ohio                   DORIS O. MATSUI, California
LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana               KATHY CASTOR, Florida
RICHARD HUDSON, North Carolina       JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland
TIM WALBERG, Michigan                PAUL TONKO, New York
EARL L. ``BUDDY'' CARTER, Georgia    YVETTE D. CLARKE, New York
JEFF DUNCAN, South Carolina          TONY CARDENAS, California
GARY J. PALMER, Alabama              RAUL RUIZ, California
NEAL P. DUNN, Florida                SCOTT H. PETERS, California
JOHN R. CURTIS, Utah                 DEBBIE DINGELL, Michigan
DEBBBIE LESKO, Arizona               MARC A. VEASEY, Texas
GREG PENCE, Indiana                  ANN M. KUSTER, New Hampshire
DAN CRENSHAW, Texas                  ROBIN L. KELLY, Illinois
JOHN JOYCE, Pennsylvania             NANETTE DIAZ BARRAGAN, California
KELLY ARMSTRONG, North Dakota, Vice  LISA BLUNT ROCHESTER, Delaware
Chair                            DARREN SOTO, Florida
RANDY K. WEBER, Sr., Texas           ANGIE CRAIG, Minnesota
RICK W. ALLEN, Georgia               KIM SCHRIER, Washington
TROY BALDERSON, Ohio                 LORI TRAHAN, Massachusetts
RUSS FULCHER, Idaho                  LIZZIE FLETCHER, Texas
AUGUST PFLUGER, Texas
DIANA HARSHBARGER, Tennessee
MARIANNETTE MILLER-MEEKS, Iowa
KAT CAMMACK, Florida
JAY OBERNOLTE, California
------

Professional Staff

NATE HODSON, Staff Director
SARAH BURKE, Deputy Staff Director
TIFFANY GUARASCIO, Minority Staff Director
Subcommittee on Communications and Technology

ROBERT E. LATTA, Ohio
Chairman
GUS M. BILIRAKIS, Florida            DORIS O. MATSUI, California
TIM WALBERG, Michigan                  Ranking Member
EARL L. ``BUDDY'' CARTER, Georgia,   YVETTE D. CLARKE, New York
Vice Chair                       MARC A. VEASEY, Texas
NEAL P. DUNN, Florida                DARREN SOTO, Florida
JOHN R. CURTIS, Utah                 ANNA G. ESHOO, California
JOHN JOYCE, Pennsylvania             TONY CARDENAS, California
RANDY K. WEBER, Sr., Texas           ANGIE CRAIG, Minnesota
RICK W. ALLEN, Georgia               LIZZIE FLETCHER, Texas
TROY BALDERSON, Ohio                 DEBBIE DINGELL, Michigan
RUSS FULCHER, Idaho                  ANN M. KUSTER, New Hampshire
AUGUST PFLUGER, Texas                ROBIN L. KELLY, Illinois
DIANA HARSHBARGER, Tennessee         FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey (ex
KAT CAMMACK, Florida                     officio)
JAY OBERNOLTE, California
CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington
(ex officio)
C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hon. Robert E. Latta, a Representative in Congress from the State
of Ohio, opening statement.....................................     1
Prepared statement...........................................     4
Hon. Doris O. Matsui, a Representative in Congress from the State
of California, opening statement...............................     9
Prepared statement...........................................    11
Hon. Cathy McMorris Rodgers, a Representative in Congress from
the State of Washington, opening statement.....................    13
Prepared statement...........................................    15
Hon. Frank Pallone, Jr., a Representative in Congress from the
State of New Jersey, opening statement.........................    19
Prepared statement...........................................    21

Witnesses

Michael Romano, Executive Vice President, NTCA-The Rural
Broadband Association..........................................    23
Prepared statement...........................................    26
Answers to submitted questions...............................   202
Michael Saperstein, Senior Vice President, Government Affairs,
and Chief Strategy Officer, Wireless Infrastructure Association    40
Prepared statement...........................................    42
Answers to submitted questions...............................   207
Ernesto Falcon, Senior Legislative Counsel, Electronic Frontier
Foundation.....................................................    54
Prepared statement...........................................    56
Louis Finkel, Senior Vice President, Government Relations,
National Rural Electric Cooperative Association................    72
Prepared statement...........................................    74
Answers to submitted questions...............................   209
Michael O'Rielly, President, MPORielly Consulting, Inc...........    80
Prepared statement...........................................    82

Legislation \1\

H.R. ___, the Winning the International Race for Economic
Leadership and Expanding Service to Support Leadership
(WIRELESS Leadership) Act
H.R. ___, the Barriers and Regulatory Obstacles Avoids Deployment
of Broadband Access and Needs Deregulatory Leadership
(BROADBAND Leadership) Act
H.R. ___, the Cable Access for Broadband and Local Economic
Leadership (CABLE Leadership) Act
H.R. ___, the Connecting and Building Lines for Expedited
Expansion (CABLE Expansion) Act
H.R. ___, the Consumer Access to Broadband for Local Economies
and Competition (CABLE Competition) Act
H.R. ___, the Cable Transparency Act
H.R. ___, the Broadband Expansion and Deployment Fee Equity and
Efficiency (BEAD FEES) Act

----------

\1\ The proposed legislation has been retained in committee files and
is available at https://docs.house.gov/Committee/Calendar/
ByEvent.aspx?EventID=115750.
H.R. ___, the Granting Remaining Applications Not Treated
Efficiently or Delayed (GRANTED) Act \1\
H.R. ___, the 5G Using Previously Granted Rulings that Accelerate
Deployment Everywhere (5G UPGRADE) Act \1\
H.R. ___, the Streamlining Permitting to Enable Efficient
Deployment for Broadband Infrastructure (SPEED for Broadband
Infrastructure) Act \1\
H.R. ___, the Wireless Broadband Competition and Efficient
Deployment Act \1\
H.R. ___, the Broadband Competition and Efficient Deployment Act
\1\
H.R. ___, the Wireless Resiliency and Flexible Investment Act \1\
H.R. ___, the Broadband Resiliency and Flexible Investment Act
\1\
H.R. ___, the Proportional Reviews for Broadband Deployment Act
\1\
H.R. ___, the Reducing Antiquated Permitting for Infrastructure
Deployment (RAPID) Act \1\
H.R. ___, the Coastal Broadband Deployment Act \1\
H.R. ___, the Brownfields Broadband Deployment Act \1\
H.R. ___, the Timely Replacement Under Secure and Trusted for
Early and Dependable Broadband Networks (TRUSTED Broadband
Networks) Act \1\
H.R. ___, the Connecting Communities Post Disaster Act \1\
H.R. ___, the Wildfire Wireless Resiliency Act \1\
H.R. ___, the Reducing Barriers for Broadband on Federal Lands
Act \1\
H.R. ___, the Standard Fees to Expedite Evaluation and
Streamlining (Standard FEES) Act \1\
H.R. ___, the Enhancing Administrative Reviews for Broadband
Deployment Act \1\
H.R. ___, the Expediting Federal Broadband Deployment Act \1\
H.R. ___, the Deploying Infrastructure with Greater Internet
Transactions and Legacy Applications (DIGITAL Applications) Act
\1\
H.R. ___, the Facilitating the Deployment of Infrastructure with
Greater Internet Transactions and Legacy Applications
(Facilitating DIGITAL Applications) Act \1\
H.R. ___, the Federal Broadband Deployment Tracking Act \1\
H.R. ___, the Rural Broadband Permitting Efficiency Act \1\
H.R. ___, the Fair Access to Internet Ready Poles Act (FAIR
Poles) Act \1\
H.R. 1241, the Broadband Incentives for Communities Act \1\
H.R. 2552, the Community Broadband Act \1\

Submitted Material

Inclusion of the following was approved by unanimous consent.
List of documents submitted for the record.......................   138
Memorandum from Shalanda D. Young, Director, Office of Management
and Budget, et al., ``Implementation Guidance for the Biden-
Harris Permitting Action Plan,'' March 6, 2023.................   139
Letter of April 19, 2023, from Gary Bolton, President and Chief
Executive Officer, Fiber Broadband Association, to Mr. Latta,
et al..........................................................   155
Letter of April 18, 2023, from Tom Quaadman, Executive Vice
President, Chamber Technology Engagement Center, U.S. Chamber
of Commerce, to Mr. Latta and Ms. Matsui.......................   157
Final Report on Status of Implementation of MOBILE NOW Act
Section 606(c) Requirements....................................   160
Senate Bill 2674, 219th Legislature, State of New Jersey.........   168
Letter of April 18, 2023, from Desmarie Waterhouse, Senior Vice
President of Advocacy and Communications & General Counsel,
American Public Power Association, et al., to Mrs. Rodgers, et
al.............................................................   189
Letter of April 19, 2023, from Zach Cikanek, Connect the Future,
to Mrs. Rodgers, et al.........................................   191
Letter of April 19, 2023, from Clarence Anthony, Chief Executive
Officer and Executive Director, National League of Cities, et
al., to Mr. Latta, et al.......................................   193

----------

\1\ The proposed legislation has been retained in committee files and
is available at https://docs.house.gov/Committee/Calendar/
ByEvent.aspx?EventID=115750.
Letter of August 5, 2022, from Ms. Matsui, et al., to Secretary
Pete Buttigieg, Secretary, Department of Transportation, et al.   196
Letter of April 14, 2023, from Todd Schlekeway, President and
Chief Executive Officer, NATE: The Communications
Infrastructure Contractors Association, to Mrs. Fletcher.......   199
Statement of Chip Pickering, Chief Executive Officer, INCOMPAS,
on the Broadband Incentives for Communities Act................   200
Statement of the Competitive Carriers Association on the
Broadband Incentives for Communities Act, April 19, 2023.......   201

BREAKING BARRIERS: STREAMLINING PERMITTING TO EXPEDITE BROADBAND
DEPLOYMENT

----------

Wednesday, April 19, 2023

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Communications and Technology,
Committee on Energy and Commerce,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 10:31 a.m., in
Room 2322, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Robert Latta
(chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Members present: Representatives Latta, Bilirakis, Walberg,
Carter, Dunn, Curtis, Joyce, Weber, Allen, Balderson, Fulcher,
Pfluger, Harshbarger, Cammack, Obernolte, Rodgers (ex officio),
Matsui (subcommittee ranking member), Clarke, Veasey, Soto,
Eshoo, Cardenas, Craig, Fletcher, Kuster, Kelly, and Pallone
(ex officio).
Also present: Representative Johnson.
Staff present: Slate Herman, Counsel, Communications and
Technology; Noah Jackson, Clerk, Communications and Technology;
Sean Kelly, Press Secretary; Peter Kielty, General Counsel;
Emily King, Member Services Director; Giulia Leganski,
Professional Staff Member, Communications and Technology; John
Linn, Senior Counsel, Communications and Technology; Kate
O'Connor, Chief Counsel, Communications and Technology; Evan
Viau, Professional Staff Member, Communications and Technology;
Hannah Anton, Minority Policy Analyst; Jennifer Epperson,
Minority Chief Counsel, Communications and Technology; Waverly
Gordon, Minority Deputy Staff Director and General Counsel;
Tiffany Guarascio, Minority Staff Director; Dan Miller,
Minority Professional Staff Member; Caroline Rinker, Minority
Press Assistant; Michael Scurato, Minority FCC Detailee; Andrew
Souvall, Minority Director of Communications, Outreach and
Member Services; and Johanna Thomas, Minority Counsel.
Mr. Latta. Well, good morning. The subcommittee will come
to order, and the Chair recognizes himself for 5 minutes for an
opening statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. ROBERT E. LATTA, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF OHIO

Broadband connectivity is a critical part of everyday life.
Ordinary activities like work, education, healthcare now
require a high-speed internet connection. Yet millions of
Americans, particularly those in rural areas, still lack access
to broadband and aren't able to enjoy the benefits of
connectivity.
Over the past few years, Congress has made significant
investments to bridge this digital divide, the most significant
being the Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act, providing
over $45 billion for broadband deployment. While funding is a
key piece to the puzzle, it's not enough to make sure that
people have access to broadband; we need to make sure new
networks can be built in a timely and a cost-efficient manner.
I firmly believe that the infrastructure bill was a missed
opportunity to enact meaningful permitting reform that would
have broken down barriers to deployment and stretched Federal
spending. Lengthy application reviews and excessive fees for
deployment will only delay connectivity and increase costs,
leaving behind those Americans--American families who lack
reliable internet access.
Without changes to the permitting process and meaningful
oversight, all of this money set aside for broadband could be
wasted. We cannot let that occur. Permitting reform is not just
necessary to bridge the digital divide; it is necessary to help
us continue to lead the world in the next-generation wireless
technology. We will not beat China to 5G leadership if efforts
to deploy new wireless infrastructure are delayed.
I appreciate that the Federal Communications Commission has
worked to streamline State and local permitting process in this
space. We need to codify and build on these reforms. The
legislation we're reviewing today includes over 30 proposals
that will help us streamline permitting at all levels of
government, facilitating accelerated broadband deployment.
These ideas include implementing shot clocks on State and
local government reviews of permitting applications, capping
fees, removing burdensome environmental and historic
preservation reviews, and making it easier to deploy on Federal
lands. Enacting these policies would help providers receive an
answer in a timely manner, reduce the burdens and costs of the
deployment, ensure that the--ensure that we connect people
quickly.
I am proud to once again lead the Wireless Leadership Act,
which would help expedite the deployment of wireless
infrastructure. This legislation would set timelines that State
and local governments must abide by in reviewing applications
and create a deemed grant remedy for reviews that miss
deadlines. It would also reduce the cost of the deployment by
limiting the fees these government--those governments can
charge for reviewing applications and using a right-of-way. The
bill does all this while preserving State and local zoning
authority.
I hope that we can make these bills bipartisan as we move
through our regular order. This is not a partisan issue. Both
Republicans and Democrats want to close this digital divide.
And as I've said in the past, it's not a Republican, Democrat,
or Independent issue, it's all of our issue.
The bills we are considering today will ensure we do so
quickly and cost effectively. I am pleased that the Biden
administration recognizes the need for permitting reform and is
encouraging States to streamline their permitting processes for
broadband deployment. I hope we can work on this package
together.
I look forward to hearing from our witnesses today, all of
whom understand the challenges of deploying broadband. And
again, I want to thank our witnesses for appearing before us.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Latta follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Latta. And at this time, I will recognize for 5 minutes
the gentlelady from California, the ranking member of the
subcommittee.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. DORIS O. MATSUI, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA

Ms. Matsui. Thank you very much, Chairman Latta. The topic
of today's hearing is an important one. If we're able to find
bipartisan solutions that speed broadband deployment, we can
accomplish a goal shared by all members of the subcommittee:
getting connectivity to communities who need it. While I have
some concerns about process and representation on the witness
panel today, it is my hope that moving forward we can get back
to a more balanced approach that encourages bipartisan
collaboration on a consequential issue.
The small towns and hamlets in my district are desperate
for modern internet connectivity. The mayors that reach out to
me are ready to do whatever it takes to get their residents
connected. This is something I know is not unique to me.
Most of us on this subcommittee hear from our districts
about the lack of broadband on a daily basis. These local
governments understand the challenges they have--they face
better than anyone else. They know where broadband is
available, where it's not, and the barriers they face to
connectivity.
I believe we must be supporting, not limiting, their
efforts. These communities want broadband connectivity, and
with the funding included in the bipartisan infrastructure
bill, we have historic opportunity to provide it. The
bipartisan IIJA provided $65 billion to expand access to
broadband through new deployment and adoption efforts.
This includes $42 billion for the BEAD Program, which is to
support deployment of new broadband infrastructure projects.
BEAD will be successful because it addresses the fundamental
impediment to broadband deployment: economics. In rural areas
where populations are more spread out, private companies can't
afford to deploy or operate a network. In those areas, the
problem isn't permitting barriers, it's an unsustainable
business case.
Thankfully, Congress correctly recognized this dynamic with
the bipartisan BEAD Program. Continuing to support NTIA in the
States as they implement BEAD is the single most powerful tool
that we have to connect our unserved constituents.
Let me repeat: It is the bipartisan BEAD Program, more than
any bill on today's agenda, that will be responsible for
closing the digital divide. In both Republican and Democratic
districts, this funding will soon result in shovels in the
ground and homes coming online.
If you haven't already, I'd encourage Members to reach out
to their State broadband offices. Let them know about the needs
of your district and get engaged.
Over this past recess, I held a roundtable with NTIA, the
California Public Utilities Commission, and official--and local
officials to discuss broadband implementation. We outlined the
broadband needs of the rural areas in my district and how all
levels of government can work together to get them served.
I believe that this type of Federal, State, and local
collaboration is a key to successful broadband deployment.
Leveraging the expertise of all involved to connect communities
is the right path forward. That's why I'm concerned that as
drafted some of the proposals on the agenda today could
undermine that collaboration. Rigid, top-down Federal
preemption can never be as successful as meaningful incentives
to support local collaboration and engagement.
Having said that, it's clear that there are ample
opportunities to support a more predictable, sustaining
permitting process, especially at the Federal level.
Contradictory permitting requirements, unacceptable deadlines,
and a confusing tangle of bureaucracy at the Federal level has
inhibited broadband deployment for far too long. This is
especially a problem for western States where Federal lands can
prevent middle-mile connections that serve as a bridge between
communities.
I'm hopeful we can find bipartisan agreement on issues like
this which can meaningfully speed up broadband deployment.
We've done it before. I think about the bipartisan work on
commonsense dig-once policies led by Congresswoman Eshoo or
some of the consensus permitting items advanced by the FCC.
So while I am disappointed by some aspects of this hearing,
I'm committing to really continuing the discussion. There is
more to be done: providing clarity and responsiveness at the
Federal level, incentives for local engagement, and a more
predictable process across the board.
I want to thank our witnesses for appearing before us
today, and I look forward to our discussion.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Matsui follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Ms. Matsui. And I yield back the balance of my time.
Mr. Latta. Thank you. The gentlelady yields back, and at
this time the Chair recognizes for 5 minutes the Chair of our
full Committee of Energy and Commerce, the gentlelady from
Washington.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, A
REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF WASHINGTON

Mrs. Rodgers. Good morning, and thank you, Mr. Chairman.
In 2021, Congress wrote the largest check for broadband
deployment in our Nation's history, more than $42 billion for
the Broadband Equity Access and Deployment, or BEAD, Program, 1
billion for the middle mile infrastructure deployment, an
additional 2 billion for deployment on Tribal lands, and 2
billion for rural broadband deployment through the Department
of Agriculture.
These funds are just a small fraction of the funding
appropriated over the past several years that could have been
used for deploying broadband. This is an historical opportunity
in our Nation's history to connect all Americans, and we cannot
allow permitting delays and unnecessary costs to mess it up.
Unfortunately, the Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act
spent more money without the needed fixes to the burdensome
permitting process. We need to lift regulatory burdens, cut the
red tape, roll out the red carpet. Without removing barriers to
deployment, a record amount of taxpayer money will be wasted.
This means that rural Americans will continue to watch from a
distance as technologies advance, kids will go without access
on--to online educational resources, and businesses in Rural
America will be left behind as the digital economy continues to
boom in urban centers across the globe.
This issue should not be partisan. The Federal funding wave
is coming. The BEAD Program will begin awarding money for
deployment as early as the end of this year in addition to the
deployment that is already happening from both private and
public investments.
It was good news last year that the National
Telecommunication and Information Administrative encouraged
States to identify steps to reduce costs and barriers to
deployment, promote the use of existing infrastructure, promote
and adopt dig-once policies, streamline permitting processes,
and cost-effective access to poles, conduits, easements, and
rights-of-ways.
But encouraging and promoting these actions is not enough.
It's time for Congress to act and pass substantive permitting
reform like the legislative discussion drafts we're considering
today. The bills being discussed today offer a wide variety of
needed improvements to existing permitting requirements at the
Federal, State, and local levels.
I'm proud to lead the Wildfire Wireless Resiliency Act as a
part of our legislative agenda. In wake of a disaster,
communities need to be reconnected as quickly as possible when
their networks go down. Communications providers working to
reconnect victims to the systems that provide access to public
safety, healthcare, and resources should not be tied up in
regulatory nightmares.
Under this new legislation, projects to rebuild damaged or
destroyed communication facilities will be exempt from NEPA and
historical preservation review, which would have already
occurred from the original communications facility to be built.
We don't need another round of environmental or historic review
when there's already existing infrastructure. And this is one
of many we will discuss today that enacts reasonable permitting
reforms.
Members across this committee are putting forth excellent
solutions that guarantee these important Federal funds are
going to go towards deployment, as Congress intended and
communities need.
I look forward to hearing from the witnesses. To our rural
and urban constituents currently under- and unserved, broadband
is on the way. I'm hopeful that we can get it to you faster in
a less costly manner.
[The prepared statement of Mrs. Rodgers follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mrs. Rodgers. Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Latta. Thank you. The gentlelady yields back. The Chair
now recognizes the gentleman from New Jersey, the ranking
member of the full committee, for 5 minutes.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. FRANK PALLONE, Jr., A REPRESENTATIVE
IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF NEW JERSEY

Mr. Pallone. Thank you, Chairman.
Breaching the digital divide has been a top priority of
this committee for years, and in 2021 Democrats delivered on
that promise with passage of the bipartisan infrastructure law.
This law made historic investments in broadband that will help
connect millions of Americans to high-speed, affordable, and
reliable broadband regardless of income or ZIP Code. And I look
forward to discussing today how we can build upon the
investments we've already made to continue bridging the divide.
For years, House Democrats have championed the need to make
government investments in areas where the private markets have
failed to build out broadway--broadband networks equitably and
affordably. Far too many people in these communities the lack
for--for them, the lack of high-speed, reliable internet means
not having the opportunity to do basic things that many of us
now take for granted like applying for a job, telehealth
appointments, or completing schoolwork from home.
All told, the Biden administration will provide more than
$60 billion across a number of programs to bring state-of-the-
art broadband networks to families and households in primarily
unserved and rural communities, Tribal lands, and other
unconnected areas around the country. The overwhelming majority
of these funds have yet to be distributed, and therefore the
hard work ensuring these funds and projects reach the people
who need them mostly remains ahead of us.
It's critical that we ensure States and communities are
prepared to receive these funds and get projects moving quickly
and efficiently. If there are impediments or delays that might
jeopardize the smooth implementation of these programs, then we
want to know about them.
So it's important for this committee to hear from expert
witnesses about potential issues, but that's not the point of
today's hearing. Republicans have skipped right past an
examination of the issues to potential solutions, which is
unfortunate and defies logic. The subcommittee should first
take the time to identify where the problems are before
examining solutions. And this legislative hearing is, in my
opinion, too broad.
The 30 Republican discussion drafts on the agenda span a
vast number of issues, amend a number of different Federal
laws, impact a number of different industry sectors and State
and local autonomy. The Republican majority invited four
witnesses to cover these bills, and yet the Chair rejected our
request for a second Democratic witness for the panel, and I
have deep concerns about that imbalance and the precedent it
sets, especially because the Republican majority skipped
holding an informational hearing.
I believe that any discussion of these issues that does not
include State and municipalities, Tribal representatives,
environmental justice communities, and other experts with
relevant testimony is incomplete. The Republican majority's
actions are inconsistent with their calls for bipartisan
collaboration, and unfortunately may make it harder to work
together on these bills as they move forward.
To be clear, if there are real obstacles in deploying
broadband universally, we want to know about them and find ways
to address them. But some of the Republican proposals before us
today are supposed solutions to problems that simply do not
exist. In fact, one of the clearest obstacles to reliable and
affordable internet are State laws in more than a dozen States
that prohibit municipalities from competing in the free market
to build or operate their own broadband network if they choose.
Representative Eshoo's Community Broadband Act is critical
to ensuring flexibility and competition for communities that
want to provide this service for their residents, which is a
successful model in many States. Representative Fletcher's
Broadband Incentives for Communities Act would kick start
deployment efforts by providing resources to communities to
deal with the influx of applications for these projects and
others. So these two bills are real solutions as we bridge the
digital divide.
And, obviously, I think that we need to investigate a lot
of the background here before we move forward with these bills,
Mr. Chairman.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Pallone follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Pallone. And with that, I yield back the balance of my
time.
Mr. Latta. Thank you. The gentleman yields back the balance
of his time.
And I would like to point out for our witnesses that you
will each have 5 minutes to address the committee. And also, I
don't see in front of you--do we have the light, the timer in
the front for the witnesses? Yes, there--I see we don't have it
on the tabletops today. But you'll see that when the light
turns yellow that you'll each have 1 minute remaining, and then
when it turns red, the time has expired.
Our witnesses for today's meeting is Mr. Michael Romano,
executive vice president of the NTCA-The Rural Broadband
Association; Mr. Michael Saperstein, the senior vice president
of Government Affairs and Chief Strategy Officer of the
Wireless Infrastructure Association; Mr. Ernesto Falcon, the
senior legislative counsel, Electronic Frontier Foundation; Mr.
Louis Finkel, the senior vice president of government
relations, National Rural Electric Cooperative Association; and
our final witness is the Honorable Michael O'Rielly, president
of MPORielly Consulting, Inc.
And with that, Mr. Romano, you are recognized for 5
minutes.

STATEMENT OF MICHAEL ROMANO, EXECUTIVE VICE PRESIDENT, NTCA-THE
RURAL BROADBAND ASSOCIATION; MICHAEL SAPERSTEIN, SENIOR VICE
PRESIDENT, GOVERNMENT AFFAIRS, AND CHIEF STRATEGY OFFICER,
WIRELESS INFRASTRUCTURE ASSOCIATION; ERNESTO FALCON, SENIOR
LEGISLATIVE COUNSEL, ELECTRONIC FRONTIER FOUNDATION; LOUIS
FINKEL, SENIOR VICE PRESIDENT, GOVERNMENT RELATIONS, NATIONAL
RURAL ELECTRIC COOPERATIVE ASSOCIATION; AND MICHAEL O'RIELLY,
PRESIDENT, MPORIELLY CONSULTING, LLC

STATEMENT OF MICHAEL ROMANO

Mr. Romano. Thank you. To Chairwoman McMorris Rodgers,
Ranking Member Pallone, Chairman Latta, Ranking Members Matsui,
members of the subcommittee: Thank you for the chance to
testify this morning regarding how to accelerate the deployment
of broadband networks.
My name is Mike Romano, I am the executive vice president
of NTCA-The Rural Broadband Association. We represent
approximately 850 small community-based network operators who
live in and serve the most rural parts of the United States.
NTCA members have made extensive strides in deploying
broadband in rural America. This gives them substantial
experience and perspective on permitting and approvals relating
to Federal lands, highways of all kinds, and railroad
crossings, among others. At the same time, they have more to do
to upgrade their remaining customers and they are actively
engaged in expanding to reach unserved locations in other
areas. This gives them a substantial interest in finding ways
to improve and expedite permitting procedures where possible.
My written statement provides a series of case studies
involving NTCA members to highlight some of the most
significant concerns they encounter in navigating current
permitting laws and procedures. Examples include a provider who
incurred $30,000 in engineering and environmental fees and
delay of nearly a year to cross BLM land for one small part of
a large fiber ring.
A provider who was trying to upgrade a network to fiber in
a previously disturbed right-of-way that took 9 months to
approve despite a categorical exclusion under NEPA, with the
approval coming too late to start construction during the
winter.
A provider who faced delays of nearly 2 years for
historical and consultation processes under the National
Historic Preservation Act for projects that were primarily in
previously disturbed rights-of-way.
And a provider who faced delays and fees of $12,000 simply
to bore 15 feet under a railroad crossing.
These examples and many more like them demonstrate how
providers can face lengthy and frustrating delays, and the need
to expend substantial sums beyond the actual cost of
construction to access Federal lands or other rights-of-way for
broadband deployment. What must not be missed, however, is that
this is just the current state.
Certainly broadband deployment has accelerated over the
past several years, but we are just on the precipice of even
more massive investment as important well--much-needed
initiatives like the Broadband Equity Access and Deployment
Program, or BEAD, come online. These expanded efforts will lead
to much greater demand for permits and approvals that threaten
to exacerbate existing backlogs and could undermine a shared
national objective of universal connectivity.
While permitting is just one piece of the puzzle when it
comes to the business case for rural broadband, it is a
critical piece, and NTCA therefore greatly appreciates both the
subcommittee's general attention to these issues and its
specifical consideration of various pieces of legislation aimed
at promoting streamlining. Bills like the Broadband Leadership
Act, the BEAD Fees Act, and the Reducing Barriers for Broadband
on Federal Lands Act will help facilitate fiber deployment in
rural areas through a variety of measure outlined in those
bills.
I also highlight in my written statement how the
subcommittee can make sure that other legislative measures
under consideration here will streamline wireline and wireless
deployments alike, and the need for further conversations
regarding how to promote timely and cost-effective access to
poles and railroad crossings.
Finally, workforce development has become an important
phrase in our national dialogue these days generally and in the
broadband industry specifically. But as my written statement
highlights, this concept is going to be essential as well in
considering how to make permitting more efficient. As good and
as skilled as many employees in Federal, State, and local
permitting offices may be, NTCA members consistently report
that there appears to be a lack of staff resources necessary to
handle the quantity of applications presented, leading to
confusion, delay, and a lack of effective communication at
times.
For example, one NTCA member reported that the BLM office
in a large western State had only two staffers tasked with
reviewing all broadband, oil, and gas permitting applications
there. Therefore, even as the subcommittee rightly and
thoughtfully considers process improvements that can accelerate
broadband deployment through the legislation presented, NTCA
encourages attention as well to ensuring that permitting
agencies and offices at all levels are staffed for the work to
come, that the staff will be well-trained for the important
work they need to do, and that internal systems and procedures
are in place within each agency to ensure more timely and
effective communication with applicants.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify. I look forward to
the conversation today and answering your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Romano follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Latta. Thank you for your testimony.
And, Mr. Saperstein, you're recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF MICHAEL SAPERSTEIN

Mr. Saperstein. Chairwoman McMorris Rodgers, Ranking Member
Pallone, Chairman Latta, Ranking Member Matsui, and members of
the subcommittee, thank you for holding this timely hearing
highlighting the importance of efficient and streamlined
infrastructure permitting reform.
I am Mike Saperstein, senior vice president of government
affairs and chief strategy officer for the Wireless
Infrastructure Association, WIA.
WIA represents the multitude of entities that make up the
entire wireless ecosystem. We have never been closer to
achieving our bipartisan goal of nationwide connectivity,
making broadband available literally everywhere from dense
urban corridors to rural farmland. To realize our shared
connectivity goals, we must also account for significant
consumer demand for broadband connectivity on the move. Mobile
broadband has never been more available, affordable,
accessible, and competitive than it is today. We should
acknowledge this win for the American people even while we
finish our work.
However--and this is the main message I want to impart
today--infrastructure deployment is the fulcrum between the
potential of historic broadband investment and the reality of
universal connectivity. Our Nation's broadband potential will
ultimately be limited by the barriers we do not remove. That's
why today's hearing is so important.
What we're doing here today is fundamentally in exercising
good government and sound management. If universal connectivity
is Congress' priority--and there are 65 billion reasons to
believe it is--then we must identify the things within our
control preventing us from achieving that priority. Permitting
processes serve a function, but common sense tells that not
every proposed action requires the same amount of scrutiny. And
what we're asking for is straightforward.
We simply seek a predictable application process
proportionate to the project that will be decided in a timely
manner. And when the answer is no, let us know why that is, and
let's work together to resolve reasonable concerns.
Fortunately, we're not starting from scratch. We can build
on the existing policy, much like we can build on existing
physical infrastructure, and fill in the gaps that exist.
Congressional action over the last decade, aided by the FCC's
sensible interpretations, has been effective in reducing the
gap between potential and actualized connectivity. And the
results speak for themselves.
5G is being deployed at twice the speed of 4G. Siting
activity in the 2 years following FCC reform exceeded the
previous 7 years combined. And that's why these reforms must be
maintained and strengthened as we attempt to cover the hardest
remaining parts of America.
Permit me to give a few examples of what WIA members
experienced. Many jurisdictions were doing an end run around
the application shot clock for colocation and minor
modifications simply by claiming things like the locality lacks
processing procedures and the shot clock can't start until
those procedures are established; or, most egregiously, simply
refusing to accept an application to avoid triggering the shot
clock.
There was also endless debate about what constitutes a
substantial change to the dimensions of a structure that make
it eligible for streamline review that the FCC's 5G upgrade
order resolved. The FCC's interpretation of congressional
action has gone a long way toward solving this problem, and we
see an increasing partnership with local communities that
understand the value of wireless connectivity.
But the FCC's orders are subject to challenge. Today, the
FCC's 2020 5G upgrade order is now under appeal in the Ninth
Circuit. We appreciate the bills, like Chairman Latta's
Wireless Leadership Act, that would codify and make permanent
existing FCC interpretations.
In Congress' own backyard, siting on Federal lands
continues to be a bedeviling issue despite prior congressional
action. More than anything, WIA members seek clarity,
accountability, and transparency with respect to permitting on
Federal lands. Simple portals would help this.
Similarly, there are resource-driven review issues at the
FAA that could also use congressional attention. WIA supports
codifying streamlined environmental reviews which otherwise may
not be commensurate with the undertaking and unnecessarily
delay broadband deployments.
Finally, WIA supports efforts to increase government's
ability to prepare themselves for this increasing permitting
demands across all divisions, Federal, State, and local--a
crucial effort as broadband providers push to connect every
corner of this Nation.
Removing broadband--barriers to broadband deployment has
long been a bipartisan goal of Congress and the executive
branch. We agree. We look forward to discussing today the slate
of bills at issue to determine how we can help remove those
barriers. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Saperstein follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Latta. Well, thank you for your testimony.
Mr. Falcon, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF ERNESTO FALCON

Mr. Falcon. Chairman Latta, Ranking Member Matsui, and
members of the subcommittee, my name is Ernesto Falcon, and I'm
the senior legislative counsel for the Electronic Frontier
Foundation. Thank you for inviting me today to speak with you.
My organization has been around for more than 30 years and
is focused on the simple premise that a person's rights and
liberties are maintained--must be maintained or enhanced as
technology advances. We have been at the forefront of studying
the future of broadband access and how to get it to everyone
because without 21st century right of connectivity, you are not
a full participant in society.
We have conducted in-depth research and produced
publications on the issue from both the legal and technical
perspective. And for years I have led the organization's
research and analysis work and have interviewed with the CEOs
of ISPs, municipalities, industry consultants, cooperatives,
financial experts, and many others involved in our broadband
ecosystem. I hope to be of assistance to the subcommittee as we
dig into how to ensure the success of BEAD.
One thing is clear: Fiber infrastructure underlies the
advancement of all broadband access options, from fixed
wireless to satellites to wireline. The IIJA Priority Broadband
Projects Provision is arguably one of the smartest course
corrections we have made in telecom policy. Now, Federal
dollars must be spent on futureproof networks so we do not have
to continually play a game of catchup.
In the past, we have spent billions subsidizing good-
enough-for-now access only to find all of it obsolete within a
few years. Now, Congress and the Biden administration have set
forth a path for every State to deliver 21st century access
infrastructure through fiber that will not need to be replaced
for decades to come.
Two objectives I think we all share here are predictable
construction timelines and standardized costs when accessing
public land, and the unnecessary cost driver is delay. And I
also think a lot of good can be done with standardizing fees
when accessing public land in a way that is consistent and
logical. There are fee structures out there that I have
witnessed that actively undermine fiber deployment, and I
detail that in my written testimony. Those types of structures
would undermine the goals of BEAD.
And I understand the attractiveness of shot clocks with
deemed granted, and policies should favor expeditious review of
permits to enhance BEAD, but the reality is increasing staffing
resources to the relevant permitting agencies will likely yield
better results. Most communities are eager, but resource
constrained, to work with the ISPs to expand access, and ISPs
are not able to know of all the possible complicating factors a
public land might hold without involving the government agency
in charge of managing it. And in terms of cities, ISPs are not
fully aware of a city's infrastructure or the current status of
the rights-of-way without the help of the local government.
And any number of complications may occur if we view
deployment as a unilateral matter. These need to be done in
collaboration. Furthermore, running over local power I believe
risks forgetting what we learn--what--forgetting what happened
last time we did this nearly 20 years ago with a consolidation
of franchise authorities in most States at the advent of fiber
to the home.
Study after study have showed that large ISPs favored the
most lucrative targets of a community while foregoing equal
upgrades to less desirable areas. This has created a two-tier
broadband market where wealthy areas enjoy fiber-based
broadband with faster speeds and lowering prices while low-
income areas are still stuck with legacy access that is both
slower and more expensive. As part of IIJA, Congress found it
necessary to remedy this problem by creating the digital
discrimination rulemaking authority at the FCC.
So it's important to keep local power involved to give
them--and give them the flexibility to work with ISPs to ensure
equitable outcomes.
We cannot forget the E in BEAD. And local governments have
traditionally served as the party to represent the interest of
local communities. And we can't lose sight of the fact that a
successful BEAD is one that delivers broadband access to all
people without exception.
Thank you again for inviting me here to speak. I look
forward to your questions and hope to be of assistance.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Falcon follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Latta. And thank you very much for your testimony.
Mr. Finkel, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF LOUIS FINKEL

Mr. Finkel. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Chairman,
Ranking Member Matsui, members of the subcommittee, thank you
for inviting me to testify today.
My name is Louis Finkel, and I serve as the senior vice
president for government relations at the National Rural
Electric Cooperative Association, or NRECA.
NRECA is the national service organization for more than
900 rural electric cooperatives that provide electric service
to approximately 42 million people across 48 States. Rural
electric cooperatives are member owned, not for profit, and we
were formed to provide safe, reliable electric service to their
members at a most--at the most reasonable cost.
Electric cooperatives are focused on people, not profits. A
longstanding commitment to rural communities drives co-ops to
identify ways to help build a better tomorrow. This obligation
is not without challenges. More than 80 years ago, electric
cooperatives were formed to bring affordable electricity to
high-cost, low-density rural areas where large, investor-owned
utilities would not. Those same economic factors exist today
for broadband delivery to those same areas.
The cost of building and maintaining these networks in
sparsely populated areas with difficult terrain is prohibitive
for member--many providers. It is a cost-intensive process with
little return on investment.
Today, more than 200 electric cooperatives in 39 States are
involved in rural broadband deployment efforts, whether as the
internet provider themselves or through partnerships. Since
cooperatives are owned by the people they serve, they truly
understand the need for broadband in these areas and the
challenges associated with deploying this infrastructure, which
is why some coops have chosen to expand their services to
include broadband. Simply put, co-ops are providing this
service because no other provider will.
The existing Federal permitting process takes too long,
it's too expensive, and is an impediment to the ability of
broadband providers to meet the needs of their consumers and
communities. This process must be modernized to give more
certainty and predictability to providers.
The National Environmental Policy Act, or NEPA, regulations
present a significant challenge to rapid broadband deployment.
Co-ops face NEPA requirements when seeking a variety of Federal
permits, approvals, and financial assistance, including access
to powerlines right-of-way on Federal lands. In many instances,
existing rights-of-way and easements only apply to electric
service and not to broadband. When this happens, the utility
must renegotiate the right-of-way or easement agreement with
each State, each Federal agency, local jurisdictions, and
private landowners, which can take years and cost millions of
dollars.
Improving coordination amongst Federal agencies is a
simple, commonsense step that can alleviate many challenges to
rural broadband deployment and reduce both delays and costs for
these projects. Even within the same agency, co-ops have
experienced differing application of the rules when dealing
with multiple regional or State offices. Similarly, duplicative
reviews by Federal agencies for broadband infrastructure placed
on existing poles in existing right-of-ways only serve to slow
down projects and make them more expensive.
Streamlined approaches to actions that are known to have
minimal environmental impacts will allow agencies to focus
their time and resources on proposals that truly do have
significant environmental impact. Similarly, ensuring that
broadband maps are accurate before BEAD funds is distributed is
critical to connecting unserved communities. Congress should
provide flexibility to States to use their own maps and local
knowledge in addition to the FCC maps when determining eligible
locations for BEAD.
As electric utilities, co-ops own and maintain utility
poles and rights-of-way for the safe and reliable distribution
of electricity. When space and capacity allow, co-ops lease out
excess space to their poles to communications providers. This
relationship provides communications companies with access to
an existing pole distribution network for a small fraction of
the cost that the co-op community has incurred to build and
maintain these systems.
The fees charged to attach to co-op poles reflect the
unique geographic and demographic characteristics of each co-op
service territory, which can vary from State to State and co-op
to co-op. If the Fair Poles Act were enacted, it would dissuade
electric cooperatives from participating in recently created
Federal programs and supporting broadband deployment in high-
cost rural areas.
Cooperatives are some of the most willing entities to bring
broadband to those hardest-to-reach and most expensive
communities, and adoption of the Fair Poles Act would unfairly
change the rules of the game after providers have already gone
through the complicated and costly process of applying for
Federal funding. The Federal permitting process becomes even
more challenging when multiple Federal agencies are involved,
and lengthy reviews coupled with unclear timelines and
administrative burdens only add to the challenges and
frustration of dealing with the Federal Government.
NRECA and its members are deeply committed to bridging the
digital divide and connecting rural families and businesses
with reliable, high-speed internet. We appreciate the
committee's timely attention to permitting issues and
streamlining deployment so that families, no matter where they
live, can access reliable, affordable internet connection that
meets their needs today and into the future.
I thank you for the opportunity and look forward to your
questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Finkel follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Latta. Thank you for your testimony.
And the Chair now recognizes Mr. O'Rielly. Thanks very much
for being with us. Good to see you back at the subcommittee.
And you're recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF MICHAEL O'RIELLY

Mr. O'Rielly. Thank you. Good morning, everyone. Thank you
to Subcommittee Chairman Latta, Ranking Member Matsui, Full
Committee Chair Rodgers and Ranking Member Pallone, and the
members of the subcommittee for calling this important hearing
for the--and including me as a panelist.
I am Michael O'Rielly, currently president of a self-named
small consulting firm. Previously, I served as an FCC
Commissioner and a 20-year congressional staffer, including 8
years on this subcommittee.
I want to start by extending my support for the large
majority of bills and the underlying issues that are the
subject of today's hearing. I appreciate and applaud the
subcommittee's attention to ease the broadband permitting
process and address the necessary component of pole
attachments. In several instances, respectfully, I do believe
the legislative efforts could go further, especially on pole
attachments.
For multiple decades, policymakers rightfully have declared
it U.S. policy that all Americans should have access to
broadband. Despite changing definitions of speed and capacity
requirements over time, the charge has remained constant: Bring
private-sector broadband offerings to every unserved household
in our Nation.
While several of today's bills may be being brought forward
by Republicans, I note that relevant Biden administration
officials have wholeheartedly agreed with permitting reform and
have outlined additional action that they intend to take on
that purpose. Inefficient and costly permitting and pole fee
requirements extend broadband buildout timelines, raise overall
costs, reduce willingness to participate in Federal and State
programs, alter bids being submitted, and waste broadband
company resources.
If the ultimate goal is to give broadband access to those
unserved Americans, this effort, if sufficiently broad and
comprehensive, can remove a known and legitimate set of
obstacles to deployment. Likewise, the U.S. cannot be a global
leader in wireless connectivity without necessary upgrades to
existing wireless infrastructure. Yet, creating modern wireless
networks and meeting consumer wireless needs can reduce overall
approval from--requires overall approval from a multitude of
government entities.
In particular, the siting of towers and antennas, be they
large or small, has generated unnecessary opposition from
certain groups for various reasons, and operators have run into
processes that are outdated based on out--based outside of
reason or fact and are downright discriminatory. Application
costs have also been a major issue.
For wireline-centric networks, new fiber routs as well as
fiber connecting wireless communication towers and antennas
will be buried underground or attached to existing pole
infrastructure. Hundreds of thousands of miles of fiber that
all need to be approved whether it uses States or local lands,
easements, rights-of-way, and the source--or needs overall
governmental approval to dig and lay the fiber within a State.
Thus, improvements to these procedures, such as those
contained in the draft Broadband Leadership Act and other draft
bills would be exceptionally helpful to the effort.
Respectfully, these are not new issues, as we've mentioned
before. They've been explored at length and are well known.
I participated in hundreds and hundreds of meetings on this
particular topic. I've been in the fields and have run the
diggers, the cherry pickers, and the trenchers. I've had
thousands of conversations with people who are trying to get
broadband out into the communities they serve. I've sat with
families who have had--who have not had broadband and are
seeking it. And these problems exist and have existed pretty
much in some form or fashion for the last 30 years of my
career. We're finally getting to a point where we're trying to
patch up a number of issues that are well known.
On the wireless side, streamlining Federal siting
provisions and codifying recent efforts of the Commission, such
as timelines, deemed granted procedures, application fee
amounts, minimizing upgrade approval needed, and addressing
historic preservation and NEPA restrictions would go a long way
toward securing a wireless future and short circuiting endless
litigation.
Additionally, a number of bills under consideration would
address the wireless siting procedures on Federal land. One of
the bills being discussed today would effectively apply Section
224 of the Communications Act, thus sidestepping the current
exemption for multiple--municipal systems, cooperatives, and
nonutilities for entities that are or becoming recipients of
certain Federal broadband subsidy programs.
While I worry the scope of this bill may be too narrow, I'm
outraged by a joint letter that I saw yesterday by many
electric utility and co-op organizations opposing even this
moderate step. To put in context, these organizations represent
entities that have sought to enter the broadband marketplace
and have full access to the provisions of 224 for areas outside
their natural footprints but reject any type of reciprocity.
These are the same entities that stood at my door at the FCC
and begged to be put first in line on broadband subsidies,
leaving others to pick for the leftover areas and funds.
Not only should this applicable bill be passed into law,
but the current exemption should be completely eliminated. If
that's too far, at least exclude the exemption area--exclude
the exemption for areas deemed unserved or underserved.
I thank the Chair for his time.
[The prepared statement of Mr. O'Rielly follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Latta. Well, thank you very much for your testimony.
And before I begin the questioning on our end here on--with
the Members, I would also like to point out that we also have
another subcommittee running downstairs, Health is, and so many
of us also, including the Chair, are also on Health, and so
we're going to have to go back and forth between the two
subcommittees. But I just wanted to mention why you see the
movement of Members in and out of the subcommittee today.
So it's not that they don't want to hear your testimony or
be here for the entire--they're just covering for two. And it's
always a fun day when we have three running, so we can really
keep moving.
But I'm going to begin the questioning and recognize myself
for 5 minutes.
And, Mr. O'Rielly, as I've said, the infrastructure law was
a missed opportunity to enact meaningful permitting reform.
That's why we need to make those changes now. If Congress does
not act to roll back certain permitting requirements, what are
the risks for the future of broadband deployment in these hard-
to-reach areas?
Mr. O'Rielly. Thank you for the question. You're absolutely
right that reform is necessary. The last time that I remember
that Congress addressed these was in the siting provisions in
2012, the last time I was here working in the Senate. If we
don't go forward as a nation, if we don't--if the committee--
subcommittee is unable to fix some of these issues, then
broadband will be delayed. Broadband deployment will be
extended, the timelines will be much farther out, and the costs
will be--you know, will be exceptional for the providers
themselves.
And this is not something that is--that we just learned of.
We have providers in the RDOF Program, the FCC's RDOF Program,
who are the canary in the coal mine, who have been trying this
for a number of years to deploy and have run into these exact
problems. It's not something that we just came up with. These
things will delay and--delay deployment and cost more money,
and that will leave a portion of population unserved after all
the money has been spent.
Mr. Latta. Well, thank you.
Mr. Saperstein, over the last decade, the FCC has taken a
number of steps to streamline permitting for wireless
infrastructure. These actions include imposing shot clocks for
reviewing applications, deemed granted remedies for missing
deadlines for reviewing applications to modify existing
wireless towers, and limiting fees. How have these changes
helped accelerate deployment, and why should Congress codify
these changes?
Mr. Saperstein. Thanks for your question, Mr. Chairman. So
as you mentioned, thanks to Congress' leadership, starting
really with the 6409 Act addition, the FCC has done a number of
interpretations that have really made the siting process much
more streamlined and efficient than it was before that. But the
reason we need Congress' help is because those reforms are not
necessarily permanent.
As I mentioned, the proof is in the pudding in terms of the
FCC's reforms and the overall improvements that we've seen.
We've seen 5G deployed at a rate that 4G never was. We've seen
twice as many--well, more infrastructure deployed over the last
2 years after the FCC's action than in the previous 7 combined.
The FCC's reform--interpretations of Congress' actions are
making a big difference, but we're afraid if Congress does not
step in to act and does not codify the reforms that the FCC has
made, that challenges like the one going on right now in the
Ninth Circuit for the 5G upgrade order could backslide on all
of those. And so, we can't afford to have that. We can't afford
to go back to where we were. We need to keep charging forward
with our wireless infrastructure, so we'd appreciate your
consideration.
Mr. Latta. Yes, let me follow up, because again, something
you mentioned--something I--I'm not sure I've ever heard here
in committee, that you mentioned that, you know, the problems
you're--that folks out there are finding, you know, not only as
far as shot clocks and things like--but refusing to accept an
application.
Mr. Saperstein. Yes, I mean, and so this goes I think to
part of what----
Mr. Latta. And I guess one of the questions is how do we--
who should we do that here in Congress to make sure we're--you
know, we're legislating on something like that because not
accepting an application, saying, ``Sir, we're not going to
take it today, or tomorrow, or whenever.''
Mr. Saperstein. Right. And some of the reforms that are
proposed here, they provide accountability, and that's one of
the key things that we seek. And that can be in the form of a
deemed granted measure.
So there's a certain shot clock. There are provisions in
there for when an application is deemed complete, so it's clear
to the jurisdiction, as well as the applicant, you have
submitted a completed application, there's an established
period of review, which is appropriate, and from there,
jurisdiction either needs to act or the application would be
deemed granted.
Mr. Latta. Well, thank you.
Mr. Romano, in my last minute and 10 seconds, a similar
question for you. The FCC has taken some action to streamline
wireline deployment, including one-touch, make-ready rules and
prohibiting moratory on deployments. What reforms have not been
acted up by the FCC that Congress should consider to streamline
the wireline permitting process? And, I'm sorry, I only got
about 50 second left.
Mr. Romano. So I'll just--thank you, Chairman, for the
question. I think something like the Broadband Leadership Act
is something we look to, for example, as a terrific measure to
move some of these forward. They address some of the concerns
that Mr. Saperstein raised as well in the wireless context.
For example, when applications are considered complete,
there is a definition in the bill of that process, received and
complete, which is terrific. We've seen cases in Michigan, for
example, where the provider didn't hear for months about the
status of its application despite inquiries. These measures
would help to instill, I think, definitional important--
definitional certainty in the process, promote communication,
and ultimately, I think, lead to better results in terms of
knowing where one stands at the very least in this process.
Mr. Latta. Well, I appreciate that. And again, you know,
what we want to get done, we want to make sure that our
unserved areas get served, you know, our underserved areas get
better service, and we don't end up in situations where you
might have served areas being considered unserved. So we want
to--these are all the things we're looking at.
But my time's expired, and at this time I'm going to
recognize the gentlelady from California, the ranking member of
the subcommittee, for 5 minutes.
Ms. Matsui. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Last year I wrote a letter to the Biden administration
urging the Departments of Transportation and Energy, along with
NTIA to coordinate on the deployment of electric vehicle
charging and broadband infrastructure. Much of the disparities
we see in broadband access are also present in EV charging
infrastructure. Low-income and rural areas lag behind.
Colocating EV charging and broadband infrastructure can address
multiple national priorities simultaneously and avoid
duplicative permitting requirements, maximizing impact of this
funding.
Mr. Saperstein, do you believe coordinating infrastructure
deployment efforts in IIJA with broadband expansion can help
reduce deployment barriers and stretch Federal dollars further?
Mr. Saperstein. Thank you for the question. Yes,
absolutely. One of WIA's core tenants it to make shared use of
infrastructure.
Ms. Matsui. OK, thank you very much, Mr. Saperstein.
Much like dig-once, I really think this type of colocation
can speed broadband deployment. I ask unanimous consent to have
this letter introduced.
Mr. Carter [presiding]. Without objection.
[The information appears at the conclusion of the hearing.]
Ms. Matsui. OK. Mr. Falcon, this is a question for you. In
addition to deployment challenges, we can't lose sight of the
critical adoption equity work we need to do to truly close the
digital divide. I introduced the Digital Equity Foundation Act
to establish a nonprofit foundation that would channel public
and private investments into making progress boosting adoption
in digital literacy.
Mr. Falcon, can you discuss the role equity and adoption
plays in closing the digital divide, and do you believe
additional resources are needed to support these efforts?
Mr. Falcon. Thank you for the question, Ranking Member
Matsui. Absolutely. I think there is an awful lot of
opportunity in helping a large segment of the population learn
how to interface with the internet. You know, a lot of them
need, you know, actual assistance in understanding, you know,
the value of the internet, the resources available to them. And
efforts that promote adoption are going to be necessary for
quite a long time.
Ms. Matsui. OK. While it's understandable that Federal
agencies approach property management differently, significant
discrepancies between their approaches to permitting can be
extremely burdensome for broadband deployment on public lands.
Mr. Saperstein, how do these--those diverse and conflicting
requirements hinder broadband deployment on Federal lands, and
do you believe they have a disproportionate impact on rural
broadband access?
Mr. Saperstein. Yes, I mean, when it comes to wireless
infrastructure, the last remaining areas that are unserved by
wireless are often in rural lands, and often those areas
coincide with Federal lands as well due to park land.
There are success stories. We know that some of our members
have recently worked, for instance, in Utah to work closely to
bring service there. But what we don't have right now when it
comes to siting on Federal lands is a clear sense of clarity
for how the processes should exist; accountability, what
happens if you miss the deadlines that Congress has worked so
hard to install; and transparency, where are we in the process.
Even knowing that would be extremely helpful.
Ms. Matsui. OK, fine. Thank you.
And, Mr. Falcon, can you discuss how these arbitrary fee
scales can disincentivize innovative broadband financial
models?
Mr. Falcon. Absolutely. So one of the things that fiber
infrastructure provides from a financial planning standpoint is
longevity. So you can look at it with a very long timetable of
how long your investment will be worthwhile, and that opens up
a lot of opportunities in terms of long-term financing.
However, if there are fees that essentially--in my written
testimony, demonstrated a fee that kind of scaled up the cost
of the monthly, annual cost of deploying additional fiber
strands, that kind of destroys the model of any sort of long-
term planning. A lot of these will need--you'll--on the early
years will need to look for subscribers and opportunities to
sublease.
Ms. Matsui. OK. Well, permitting barriers can prevent
deployment in certain circumstances. The biggest impediments
have always been economic considerations. For rural and low-
income neighborhoods, this historical legacy has produced a
digital divide we're attempting to close with the BEAD Program.
Mr. Falcon, can you discuss limitations of permitting
reform in addressing these considerations and how BEAD can help
support the access in these historically underserved areas? And
I don't have much time. We have 30 seconds to discuss this.
Mr. Falcon. Certainly. So, I mean, the local community, the
local government has always been the negotiating arm on behalf
of the local community, so ensuring that they're part of the
process, to ensure that there's equitable deployment of the
network in applicants is key.
Ms. Matsui. I find that very true since I met with some of
my people, and they feel the same way in these small villages
and community areas. So anyway, thank you very much, and I
yield back the balance of my time.
Mr. Carter. The gentlelady has yielded back. The Chair now
recognizes the Chair of the full committee, Ms. Rodgers, from
Washington State.
[Phone ringing.]
Voice. Oops, excuse me.
Mrs. Rodgers. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The Federal
Government owns a significant amount of land in the western
States--hundreds of millions of acres--and many of these areas
are unserved despite billions of dollars of private and public
investment that has historically gone into broadband
deployment.
Mr. Romano and Mr. Saperstein, can you discuss the
challenges your members face trying to deploy on Federal lands
and how we can make this process easier?
Mr. Romano. Sure. Thank you for the question, Chairwoman
Rodgers. To start, I think the issue on Federal lands is
getting--as Mr. Falcon mentioned as well, for fiber, for
example, it's a long-term investment. We're trying to plan for
years ahead, and also trying to plan around build cycles and
timeframes and seasons and the like. And the predictability is
so important in trying to plan, especially for smaller
providers, many of whom are based in rural America and want to
serve the communities in which they live, trying to plan to get
contractors on site, trying to plan to get supplies in, all of
these things are specific challenges that not only prevent
potentially private deployment but also can deter potential
participation in public programs to the extent that I cannot
necessarily specify when I'll be able to deliver, the cost of
delivering.
All of those things make it much harder to both deliver on
the promise or even participate in the programs that would help
with that.
Mrs. Rodgers. Right, right. Thank you.
Mr. Saperstein, would you speak to maybe any ideas you have
as to how we can make the process easier?
Mr. Saperstein. Yes. We were excited to see two bills that
dealt with portals, and this is a simple but really helpful fix
that would at least allow applicants to know where they are in
the process. Currently, there is no transparency into where
they are from--with the Federal land agencies, so that would be
a very helpful fix.
Mrs. Rodgers. OK, thank you.
Mr. Finkel, I've heard from some providers that the cost of
pole attachments is high and is a barrier to broadband
deployment, and I understand that some pole attachment rates
are regulated by the Federal Communications Commission, FCC, or
the States, while some, those are--those set by municipal or
cooperatively owned utilities are not. I wanted to ask you to
speak to how cooperatives determine their pole attachment rates
and how they compare to the regulated rates.
Mr. Finkel. Sure. So I appreciate the question, Madam
Chair. Pole attachment rates, as determined by--at least, I can
only speak for electric cooperatives, is really based upon what
the true cost is for that attachment. In many rural areas,
there are more poles than people, and so when we're looking at
what the cost is to attach that pole, the cost is truly the
cost. And there's no profit motive, though accusation has been
made that we're in the business of trying to impose higher fees
for access. It's based on the geography, on the density, on the
demographic of that community.
And so when you're talking about trying to connect these
rural communities, I mean, our members, they're the provider of
last resort. They were in electricity 80 years ago, and they
are now in many rural communities where they're providing that
broadband service because nobody else will show up.
I mean, it's--so for us, reliability and affordability of
the electric system is the first priority, and so when we try
to establish that fee, it's a fee based upon what's going to
keep that pole safe and what's going to ensure that we get back
the true cost of that attachment.
Mrs. Rodgers. Thank you for those insights. I appreciate
what you do.
I wanted to ask Mr. O'Rielly if you would also speak to
this issue.
Mr. O'Rielly. Yes, I appreciate the views of my fellow--I
don't--fellow panelist, but I don't agree. You know, we have
providers that are right next to the exempt entities that are
offering and able to comply with FCC rules and rates, and are
not going bankrupt and are not putting health and safety at
risk.
This exemption doesn't match up with cost. There's a number
of studies that have been done that the rates are two to three
times more expensive on the exempt entities than on nonexempt
entities, and that's just not something a provider--you know,
we talk about areas that are unserved and why there's, you
know, a carrier of last resort, someone who is offering
service. Well, Congress is going to provide a--is providing a
boatload of money to help provide access and buildout.
It has to deal with the issue of these rates being--you
know, we're not going to bury all of the poles and fiber, we're
going to have to attach--excuse me, attach to the poles that
already exist.
Mrs. Rodgers. Well, this is an issue that we're--appreciate
your insights. We got to work on this some more.
I want to--in my time remaining, one of my priorities is to
strengthen American competitiveness. And we know that the
Chines Communist Party wants to surpass us in wireless
leadership, and it's easy for them to build the infrastructure
to do that. We need to be doing everything in our power to make
sure that that doesn't happen.
So why is permitting reform good overall for American
competitiveness? And just incorporate that into your answers in
the future.
[Laughter.]
Mrs. Rodgers. OK, thank you all for being here.
I yield back.
Mr. Carter. The gentlelady has yielded. The Chair now
recognizes the gentlelady from New York, Representative Clarke,
for 5 minutes.
Ms. Clarke. Good morning. Let me start by thanking our
panel of witnesses for joining us today, as well as Chairman
Latta and Ranking Member Matsui for convening this important
hearing on broadband deployment.
Access to reliable high-speed internet is essential in our
increasingly digital society, and I'm proud of the work this
committee has done to bridge the digital divide in America. The
historic bipartisan infrastructure law provided billions of
dollars in Federal funding to bring high-speed internet to the
millions of Americans still lacking access. As we continue to
grow as a nation and expand our digital infrastructure, it is
vital that these funds are used to bring broadband to
communities historically left out of certain opportunities and
investments.
Unfortunately, the stark reality is that many of the
communities that were disproportionately denied mortgage loans
in the 1960s are the same communities that are without high-
speed or any internet access today. So I look forward to
working with my colleagues on this committee to explore
pathways to equitable streamline--equitably streamline
permitted processes, bridge the digital divide, and unleash the
full potential of our Nation.
My first question is directed to Mr. Falcon. As this
committee looks at efforts to streamline broadband deployment,
what factors should we consider to ensure that low-income
minority communities have been--who have been subjected to both
traditional and digital redlining in the past do not continue
to be left behind? And other witnesses may feel free to chime
in as well.
Mr. Falcon. Certainly. Thank you for that question. The--I
mean, I think the fundamental goal of all of these applications
and the funding is ensuring that the infrastructure is built
equally and equitably to all people that are in need of it. The
history of cherry picking and redlining has given us--has given
Congress the reason to have passed the digital discrimination
rulemaking. So ensure we don't forget that we had to do that,
and prospectively going forward ensuring equitable distribution
of these networks is vital.
Ms. Clarke. Would anyone else like to chime in now? Mr.
Romano.
Mr. Romano. Thank you, Congresswoman. I'll weigh in as well
representing more rural areas specifically. I think one of the
important things that Congress has done and that Congress
should continue to do, and the funding agencies as well, is to
make sure that when providers are receiving funding, for
example, that there is a commitment to serve throughout the
entirety of the area for which funding is provided without
differentiation between particular communities within that
serving area.
I think that is a critical piece of this, and it does
underpin I think a lot of the recent grant programs and other
funding programs, but the accountability and the backend of
tracking whether that is, in fact, happening is going to be
critical as well.
Ms. Clarke. Very well.
Mr. Saperstein?
Mr. Saperstein. Yes, thank you for the question. I just
wanted to point out that one of the great benefits of wireless
infrastructure, particularly shared wireless infrastructure, is
it allows multiple service providers to attach to the same
facility, and therefore, multiple network providers to serve
that community. We saw the benefits of this with 99 percent
coverage with 4G LTE, and we're already well on our way ahead
of pace with 5G.
Ms. Clarke. Very well, thank you.
In your testimony, Mr. Falcon, you acknowledge that
previous deregulatory efforts failed to spark industry
competition. It did nothing to mitigate the digital redlining
we see today. I'd like to dig into that topic a bit more.
Can you explain to this committee the negative impact of
digital redlining, particularly how it perpetuates poverty in
low-income and minority communities, and why haven't previous
efforts by the FCC to streamline permitting for broadband
deployment resulted in buildout in digitally redlined
communities?
Mr. Falcon. Certainly. So the natural inclination of a
provider would be to kind of target the most lucrative portions
of a community first. In the absence of any sort of regulation
to ensure a fully distributed network of full equitable
deployment, that's generally where they'll stop. That's what
most of these studies that we've seen over the years have
shown. The markup did a nationwide analysis showing, you know,
a replicated result of this type of discrimination that's
occurring and the ramifications that are significant.
When we look at in terms of fiber deployment in particular,
you know, there's a study by the Fiber Broadband Association
that shows that property values, the value of a home when it's
connected to fiber, you know, is a sizable--there's a sizable
increase, so the equity of a household in a neighborhood is
dependent on the wire that's connected to that household. The
pandemic I think showed the significant problem when your
connection couldn't handle distributed work and remote
schooling. These are--this is why I call it a first-class and
second-class internet structure.
Ms. Clarke. Thank you. Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Carter. The gentlelady has yielded back. The Chair now
recognizes the gentleman from Florida, Representative
Bilirakis, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Bilirakis. Thank you, sir. I appreciate it very much,
and I appreciate all the testimony here.
I represent Pasco County, one of the counties I represent,
and it's no stranger to horrors of the Federal permitting
process. In 1998, the county identified the need for an
additional emergency evacuation route for use during a flood
event, such as a hurricane. That year, the county submitted its
proposal known as the Ridge Road Extension Project to Federal
regulators.
That public safety project sat in a regulatory quagmire for
22 years, despite the overwhelming support of the county
residents and really unanimous support in the Tampa Bay area.
Meanwhile, the 178,000 people who were deemed to benefit from
the emergency project were put at risk. The project was finally
green-lighted after President Trump issued an Executive order
titled ``Expediting Environmental Reviews and Approvals for
High Priority Infrastructure Projects.''
But we shouldn't have to rely on an Executive order, folks,
in my opinion, to streamline permitting, especially for
projects that promote public safety. That's why I have
submitted the Coastal Broadband Deployment Act as a discussion
draft for today's hearing. This bill would remove lengthy
barriers to deploying or modifying communication facilities
within a floodplain, which can help people stay connected
during a weather event.
And I want to tell you, Ridge Road is--we finally got it
done, and--man, oh man--the people love it. The community loves
it, and they're--they feel safer because it is an evacuation
route, God forbid we have a hurricane in our area directly. If
we get a direct hit, it's going to be very difficult.
But I want to ask the question, Mr. Romano, in your written
testimony, you mentioned that your members have delays as long
as 2 years due to Federal reviews when building out. Can you
discuss the potential regulatory problems a company may face if
they wanted to modify an existing communications facility, for
example, to make it more resilient to natural disasters? If you
could answer that question, I'd appreciate it.
Mr. Romano. Yes, thank you, Congressman, for the question.
You know, one of the most confounding deployment struggles we
face at times is putting something--restoring networks, putting
in where previously disturbed earth is there. You would think
that putting a network back in or upgrading an existing network
in a previously disturbed right-of-way should be relatively
seamless due to the fact that it's already been used, and it--
and you would think that it's gone through reviews in the past.
Nonetheless, we run into these circumstances all too
frequently, and so I think bills like the one you've talked
about are going to be critical to make sure that we can get
through both the NEPA and the National Historic Preservation
Act and Section 106 Procedures as promptly as possible to
reengage or re--and then upgrade those networks and those
places.
The one other note I would make, Congressman, very quickly,
on this bill and a number of others is because they're amending
existing law, they tied a 6409, which is a provision that's
primarily dealing with wireless issues. So we would encourage
the subcommittee and folks to think about this. I know there's
some bills in here that help to amend 6409 to pick up wireline
networks as well, and so we would like to make sure to see that
as part of all of these measures to pick up wireless and
wireline networks alike and make sure they're all resilient and
can be restored quickly.
Mr. Bilirakis. Very good. It makes a lot of sense to me.
Mr. Saperstein, during an emergency, real-time
communication keeps people informed of ongoing threats. Do you
think there's--there are instances where regulatory delays and
building out or disaster mitigation of communications
facilities could unnecessarily threaten lives through hindered
communications?
Mr. Saperstein. Yes. And what we see right now is that much
of the parklands, particularly, you know, in western districts,
are still unserved, and that is really a public safety threat.
So we would encourage any actions that can really expedite
siting on Federal lands in order to avoid those public safety
instances.
Mr. Bilirakis. OK, I'd like to ask this question for Mr.
O'Rielly. If he don't--if we don't have time, at least he can
get it for the record.
Over the past several years, the Federal Government has
allocated tens of billions of dollars of taxpayer money for
broadband buildout in closing the digital divide, as you said.
In your estimation, as a percentage, how much of allocated
dollars are doing regulatory red tape as opposed to actually
getting people connected?
Mr. O'Rielly. I'm happy to give you more specific, but if I
had to, you know, off the top, I would say it's probably around
15 to 20 percent.
Mr. Bilirakis. OK. That's a lot. So yes, please, if you can
give us some more specific information, I'd appreciate it.
And I yield back, Mr. Chairman. Thank you.
Mr. Carter. The gentleman has yield back. The Chair now
recognizes the gentleman from Florida, Representative Soto, for
5 minutes.
Mr. Soto. Thank you, Chairman. Just a few weeks ago we got
to travel to Kenansville, Florida, in our district in Southern
Osceola County with the Under Secretary of Rural Development,
Xochitl Torres Small, a dear friend and former colleague here.
We met with local ranchers and local hunting and game managers
in an area that is as rural as it gets.
And it was great to hear them talk about the 15 million
being invested by the American Rescue Plan in that area. They
talked about the need to download information quickly for the
ranches on information related to their cattle, on information
related to dove hunting. Who would have thought, right? The
Osceola turkey as well, which you have to go to my district to
make the turkey trot on the East Coast.
And I guess if you're not in there, you don't realize how
much data is needed for all these rural businesses, and
agricultural and hunting and other businesses. And so I was
pleased to see that the American Rescue Plan is helping deliver
internet to rural communities in Central Florida. And, Members,
if you're not seeing that in your district, it's, you know,
time to speak up. It's changing lives in Central Florida.
But that's just the first step. And we know with the
Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act passed recently, 65
billion improve internet access, 42 billion for the Broadband
Equity Access and Deployment Program, the BEAD Program. I'm
excited that Florida has taken steps to participate in the BEAD
Program and signaled it intends to continue that process. We
already saw 5 million awarded to help with their initial plan
and grant to create a 5-year action plan, and they've received
over $7.4 million in Federal funds to support that planning.
In addition, NTIA has estimated--as well as third-party
research--that Florida could receive as much as $1.5 billion
through BEAD to really help finish the job across Florida. The
company in question who stepped up for areas of South Osceola
was Spectrum.
And, Mr. Romano, are your member companies ready to take on
this challenge like we've seen in rural Osceola?
Mr. Romano. Thank you, Congressman. Yes, they're ready and
eager. I think the biggest challenge--some of the biggest
challenges will be figuring out--well, among other things that
aren't subject to this hearing necessarily, supply chain
considerations, finding trained workforce.
But permitting issues, again, will be a piece of the
puzzle. Our members have been--actually, I would say probably
the active participants in the reconnect program, so great
partners with rural development. I think we're excited about
the promise of this.
The biggest concern I have right now is we--as I mentioned
in my testimony, we're on the precipice of massive amounts of
investment coming in, and we need to make sure both the
procedures are ready to go but also the staff skill sets and
training are there, and to--and the systems to make sure, as
Mr. Saperstein mentioned, the portals, to make sure that we can
see--realize the promise of all of these different programs out
there.
Mr. Soto. Thank you.
And, Mr. Finkel, this is Peace River country, one of your
members, and I know they've been eager since--we won't see--
we'll see a combination of companies help with this. How are
your members gearing up, and what are you hearing from your
customers about the potential of getting higher-speed internet?
Mr. Finkel. Well, Congressman, it's always driven by the
local community, as electric utilities are owned by the
communities we serve. When the community speaks up and our kind
of ownership base drives us to build out and asks us to
partner, we do. It's just really that simple.
Mr. Soto. Well, we're excited to work with our local folks
as well.
Mr. Falcon, we saw the Biden-Harris administration put out
a permitting action plan. There's a lot of discussion in the
cornucopia of bills of today in this hearing of how to address
permitting as we implement the Inflation Reduction Act and the
Infrastructure Law. Do you have any comments on the permitting
action plan by the Biden-Harris administration and any other
principles that you think can guide as we have to permit these
projects?
Mr. Falcon. Yes, I think it just demonstrates that everyone
is committed to the success of implementation of BEAD. No one
wins if systemic delays results in rising costs, particular for
small applicants, particularly new entrants into the space.
I think, you know, as I say in my written testimony, really
just predictability and predictability in the cost in terms of
the fees on public lands are probably the two best things you
can deliver in order to ensure successful outcomes.
Mr. Soto. Thank you so much.
Members, our oversight is going to be a key part of this as
well as we work with the administration, with our colleagues in
Congress, so I look forward to continuing that work. And I
yield back.
Mr. Latta [presiding]. Thank you. The gentleman yields
back, and at this time, the Chair recognizes the gentleman from
Michigan's Fifth District for 5 minutes.
Mr. Walberg. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thanks to the
panel for being here.
Broadband providers are subject to significant permitting
delays, as we've talked about already. Delays are felt by the
consumers. The frustration of some of my neighbors seeing me
with broadband finally and not seeing themselves with a sight
of broadband coming down. I felt the same way for a number of
years myself, and so it's a challenge. Connecting everyone to
broadband is a goal we all share.
Billions of dollars have gone out the door, but it takes
dollars, it takes many hands to make it work. And oftentimes we
don't see interagency coordination, and maybe through no fault
of their own, but the process that takes place. The FCC, NTIA,
USDA, and various stimulus grants over the years have often
appeared to compete with one another.
And so, Mr. Romano, how do we improve coordination between
agencies? And if I could add on to the question, do you believe
requiring all government broadband programs to make
distributions based on FCC's new broadband maps can break the
decades-long cycle of overbuilding and the problems that come
from that?
Mr. Romano. Thank you for the question, Congressman. The
second part of your question actually I think was the first
place I was going to go in terms of effective coordination,
which is the use of a singular data source to start from.
Now there are always going to be issues arising in terms of
the maps that are presented by--produced by the FCC being
snapshots in time and needing updating. There are processes set
forth in BEAD, for example, for States to run challenges. But
at the end of the day, we should be starting from a singular
data source that reflects the best source of information we've
got available. So I think that is going to be a critical
starting point for coordination.
The other part of coordination that's going to be important
is sharing of information about enforceable commitments that
are made, grants that are made among these agencies so that if
NTIA sees that the FCC has done something over here, NTIA is
not necessarily putting money there or vice versa. So I think
that sharing of information about enforceable commitments
feeding into the broadband mapping exercise, those are two of
the most critical pieces of communication that can happen.
Mr. Walberg. It cuts down a lot of waste, too. Yes.
Mr. Saperstein, while permitting delays can be a barrier to
deployment, should we also be concerned about other potential
bottlenecks, including supply chain delays, workforce
shortages, and what efforts are underway to ensure we have the
labor force in place to get the job done?
Mr. Saperstein. Congressman, thank you for the question.
WIA actually is doing a lot on the workforce front. We are
partnered with the Department of Labor, with the
telecommunications industry registered apprenticeship program,
which has thousands of apprentices in the pipeline now working
with over 80 employers.
We couldn't agree more that we can't allow our human
workforce, our human infrastructure, to become a bottleneck
here, and so we're working to train the next generation.
Mr. Walberg. Yes, so necessary. Good jobs out there, too.
Mr. Saperstein. Absolutely.
Mr. Walberg. The slate of bills we're discussing today
includes my Brownfields Broadband Deployment Act, which would
help streamline the deployment of broadband projects entirely
within Brownfields sites by eliminating the requirement to
prepare an environmental or historic preservation review. These
sites are often located in digitally underserved areas, and the
proposed changes will help promote greater digital
connectivity.
In Vicksburg, Michigan, where I was just last week, in
fact, they are creating a one-of-a-kind facility for lodging,
entertainment, artist development in a town of less than 4,000.
Located in a former paper mill, this brownfield site will
hopefully bring incredible economic growth to the area, but
they have a problem with connection.
Mr. Romano, how important is broadband connection to the
economic viability of rural areas, and how could a longer
regulatory approval process for broadband infrastructure
destroy that opportunity?
Mr. Romano. Thank you, Congressman. So at NTCA, we believe
not only that networks need to be built but they need to be
used and celebrated, and that those--the best practices should
be shared. I mean, economic development--we have a program
called Smart Rural Community that highlights the fact that
these networks are not just built for their own sake but for
the benefit ultimately and uses of the community for
telehealth, telework, economic development, and the like.
Those types of uses, especially in a town of 4,000 people--
that's about the average size of the biggest city in the type
of areas that our members serve. That's a difference maker in
terms of rural--attracting new people to rural areas and just
getting people to come back home after school, so it's
incredibly important.
And permitting's a big part of that. If providers go to--
again, as I said earlier in an earlier question, if it takes
them--if they look at a program and think, ``I could do this
but for the fact that I don't know that I can meet the buildout
deadlines because I don't even know when my shot clock's going
to start,'' that can be a real deterrent to participation.
Mr. Walberg. Yes, and this is a visionary community, they
believe in their community. It's a neat site. It will be
unbelievable if they get it done, but this is a key component
to it.
So thanks for your attention, and I yield back.
Mr. Latta. Thank you. The gentleman yields back, and at
this time, the Chair recognizes 5 minutes to the ranking member
of the full committee, the gentleman from New Jersey, for 5
minutes.
Mr. Pallone. Thank you, Chairman Latta.
Affordable, reliable broadband service is a resource that
every community needs and every community wants, and so I have
some concern that broad measures by Congress to trample on
local authority and treat every community the same will end up
creating more problems than they solve.
So let me start with Mr. Falcon. In your testimony, you
point to examples of when past deregulation efforts have not
closed the digital divide but have, in fact, exacerbated the
problem. So what lessons should we keep in mind about the role
of municipalities and local leaders in broadband deployment,
and how can proposals to remove local consultation and
authority hinder efforts to connect all Americans to high-speed
internet?
Mr. Falcon. Thank you for that question, Ranking Member
Pallone. I think the big lesson to have learned is just looking
at the results of what has happened when you compare two
similar situated markets: Los Angeles and New York City. New
York retained local authority for franchising, and California
didn't. California consolidated under the State government. New
York is pushing fiber to the home to hundreds of thousands of
low-income households--New York City, that is. And Los Angeles
has less than half of their community connected to 21st century
access today.
You know, these are both very similar areas of density in
terms of income and opportunity, business sector, but the
removal of the local community from negotiating with ISPs, from
ensuring equity in the deployment, ensuring a ubiquitous
deployment, yields these results. So I think that is the
number-one lesson to learn from removing local power, removing
the local community from the equation and working with ISPs.
They're eager to work, but they also want to make sure everyone
is covered.
Mr. Pallone. All right. Now, many of the witnesses today
have pointed to a lack of resources at permitting agencies as a
cause for delay and other challenges in the review process.
But, again, Mr. Falcon, what is the risk to communities and the
public at large if we ignore those resource restraints and
focus only on strict approval timelines and deemed granted
provisions, if you will?
Mr. Falcon. Absolutely. Thank you for that question. The
challenge here that we're facing is this is the largest public
works projects happening in many areas for decades, and they
don't have the staffing in place to handle that. So staffing up
and providing the personnel resources to review these permits
in an expeditious way resolves the issue. It's not really about
removing the government or taking--getting the government out
of the equation. The government is an inherent and necessary
partner for the success of the deployment of these areas. The
ISPs cannot completely go it alone to be successful at their
deployment plans.
Mr. Pallone. So would you agree, then, that unless
permitting agencies at the Federal, State, local, or Tribal
levels get additional resources for personnel and training,
we're not going to fully address delays in permitting for
broadband infrastructure?
Mr. Falcon. I think there's a whole list of unforeseeable
complications that will come up, particularly for--and I would
like to distinguish between, you know, upgrading areas where
existing rights were already utilized versus, you know, new
construction. A lot of this money is going towards new
construction and new areas. Lacking knowledge of the local area
because the managing government agency is the one with that
knowledge could be detrimental to deployment planning.
Mr. Pallone. All right, thanks. I've just got another
question or so to Mr. O'Rielly. It's good to see you here
today.
I'm concerned that efforts to complete our historic
buildout of reliable high-speed broadband to every corner of
the country will still leave too many people behind unless we
continue to focus on ensuring that everyone can afford the
service regardless of income. So I know that--I'm sure you can
answer--or if you could just briefly discuss funding for the
Affordable Connectivity Program, why it's important to close
the opportunity gap. Well, I know because you've been involved
with it, obviously.
Mr. O'Rielly. I have supported and do support the ACP. I
believe that additional funding from Congress would be wisely
spent. Affordability is a component for a number of American
families who--you know, we can get broadband to everybody, but
if they can't afford it, then they're not going to be able to
subscribe.
The program is working today. It's probably in the best--
the best program in terms of its structure that we've had, and
there have been a number of programs in the past that have had
deficiencies, and we've solved some of those with ACP. So I
think additional funding would be appropriate, but that's also
with another committee to work through in terms of going
forward.
Mr. Pallone. Well, you know, we can push them, as you know.
[Laughter.]
Mr. O'Rielly. I think that would be smart for both sides,
and I support--you know, as a fiscal conservative, I think it's
money well spent.
Mr. Pallone. All right, thank you so much. I don't--I guess
I'm out of time, so I'll leave it at that. Thanks a lot.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Latta. Well, thank you very much. The gentleman yields
back. And at this time, the Chair recognizes the gentleman from
Georgia, the vice chair of the subcommittee, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Carter. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank all of you
for being here.
Before I ask my questions, I want to respond to the ranking
member's comments earlier about broadband permitting barriers
not existing. I could not disagree more. They do exist, and the
witnesses here today have already cited examples of where they
exist, and I'm sure we'll cite even more examples. Even the
current FCC Chairwoman has also acknowledged that these
barriers exist.
In 2018, when the Republican-led FCC embarked on an effort
to revise its infrastructure rules to promote expansion of 5G,
Chairwoman Rosenworcel suggested in her statement that, ``If we
want broad economic growth and widespread mobile opportunity,
we need to avoid unnecessary delays in the State and local
approval process.''
While we may disagree on the approach, we must all
acknowledge that these are real problems and they deserve real
solutions. So I appreciate you bringing up these examples that
you've brought up. And with all due respect, I am encouraged to
hear the ranking member say that he's concerned about local
control, a long-held Republican view that I'm glad that is
being shared now with some of our colleagues, so I appreciate
that.
You know, Mr. Chairman, I appreciate this hearing because
this is extremely important, and as vice chair of this
committee, it's one of the things that I really wanted to
concentrate on. And one of my top priorities is to close the
digital divide that exists, particularly in rural America.
For those of you who don't know, I'm from Georgia. We have
a saying in Georgia: There are two Georgias--there's Atlanta,
and everywhere else. And I represent everywhere else, so this
is extremely important to me. And it's extremely important for
us to continue to lead U.S.--to help the U.S. maintain
leadership on broadband and wireless innovation, investment,
and competition.
So, Mr. Saperstein, I want to ask you, one of the bills
that we're discussing today is my bill, the Proportional
Reviews for Broadband Development Act. This expedites the
process for certain modifications to wireless towers or base
stations. Specifically, it exempts the addition, removal, or
replacement of transmission equipment on those towers or
stations from environmental and historic preservation reviews.
Do you think that such a simple modification would improve
the quality and the timeliness of broadband deployment for
Americans?
Mr. Saperstein. Yes. Thank you for the question. So, yes, I
mean, I think what your bill and what we're seeing with many of
the bills affecting the NEPA review is that it adds a deal of
proportionality to the review at stake. So not everything needs
to be reviewed in the same manner.
Colocations don't need to be reviewed in the same manner.
Things that have already gone--undergone different reviews
don't need to be reviewed in the same manner. And I think it
brings a commonsense approach to that.
Mr. Carter. Thank you. And that's the key, common sense,
and that's what we're trying to get at it here. Look, we all
want to make sure we have rules and regulations and they're
followed, but we want to use common sense and get this done and
really eliminate unnecessary barriers. That's what we're all
trying to do here.
Also, Mr. Saperstein, I wanted to ask you, in June of 2021,
the New Jersey State Assembly passed S2674, a bill that was led
by three Democrats that would institute cost-based fees, shot
clocks, and deemed grant remedies for wireless and broadband
network facilities. The purpose of the bill was to meet the
growing consumer demand for wireless data and increasing
competitive options for communication services available to the
State's residents.
Chairman Latta has a bill that--the Wireless Leadership
Act, that contains many of the same principles as this New
Jersey State bill. Do you agree that enacting these policies
would help meet the needs of consumers and promote competition?
Mr. Saperstein. Yes. We appreciate Chairman Latta's
Wireless Leadership Act and its--steps that it would take to
really codify many of the reforms that the FCC has done to
encourage, you know, fees that are reasonably based to the
costs as well as streamlining of permitting procedures.
Mr. Carter. Good. The New Jersey bill that passed the State
Senate was also amended to accommodate the concerns of
residents and municipal leaders who raised concerns. Can you
describe how broadband permitting laws can balance State and
local concerns with the need for timely and fair permitting
processing?
Mr. Saperstein. Absolutely. One of the things that we've
seen is that we've taken out the review of colocation, which
makes sense because it's making use of existing infrastructure.
There's nothing in what we see here today that would remove a
community's ability to have legitimate aesthetic concerns and
their own processes dealt with. So there's a good balance to be
struck in there, and we find that we have a good partnership
with our communities.
Mr. Carter. Great. Thank you, and thank all of you for
being here.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I'll yield back.
Mr. Latta. Well, thank you very much. And our next Member
to ask questions is the gentlelady from New Hampshire. You're
recognized for 5 minutes.
Ms. Kuster. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, and thank
you to our witnesses for being with us today to discuss the
speed--how to speed up deployment of broadband services.
There are a number of legislative proposals before us
today, but I'd like to take a step back and further examine the
challenges to broadband deployment. Addressing these challenges
will allow States and providers to implement Federal broadband
funding. Through the bipartisan Infrastructure Law, Congress
invested an historic $65 billion to build out our country's
broadband infrastructure. This established the Broadband Equity
Access and Deployment Program for States to expand high-speed
services to their communities. This program will ensure that
even the most rural and hard-to-reach communities, like many in
my district in New Hampshire, have access to broadband.
Mr. Falcon, you spoke about how deploying this scale of
infrastructure will be a major endeavor for many small
communities. How should Congress ensure local governments are
equipped to meet this challenge?
Mr. Falcon. Thank you for that question. The--you know,
what it--again, what it boils down to is providing the
resources for personnel to kind of meet this surge of demand.
This is going to be a very intense but short period of years
where these projects will come in large volume, and once
constructed, given that the guidance is to deploy fiber, we
will not be revisiting these any time in the near future. So
it's really just a matter of the surge demand and ensuring the
resources are available there for them to, you know, meet that
demand when it comes.
Ms. Kuster. Thank you. Now, I know that local governments
will play an important role in bringing high-speed broadband
service to the communities. While this hearing focuses on the
deployment of broadband, these services will still be out of
reach for families that can't afford them. The Affordable
Connectivity Program, or ACP, is established by the bipartisan
Infrastructure Law to provide assistance to eligible households
to help them afford internet services.
This program has already connected over 16 million
Americans to internet services, including many, many families
in my district. Unfortunately, funding for the ACP is set to
run out without congressional action.
Mr. O'Rielly, you briefly spoke about the importance of
addressing broadband affordability. Can you elaborate on why
funding the ACP should be a high priority this Congress?
Mr. O'Rielly. So, as I mentioned to the ranking member of
the full committee, I do support ACP. I believe it's important
to address affordability component. There are a number of
families in America, certainly in New Hampshire, that won't be
able to afford service without such a program. I think we
crossed the 17-million threshold in terms of people--families
that are taking advantage of the funding. So I think it is
something that has to be addressed if you're trying to figure
out how to serve all Americans.
If I could just return briefly to your previous question.
Ms. Kuster. Sure.
Mr. O'Rielly. I've spent a great deal of time in New
Hampshire in a past life. I will tell you the local governments
there are really sharp, and I don't know that they need
necessarily the resources. It's really the areas, especially in
the north country and the western part that you represent, that
are--that, you know, attracting--having the subsidy that's
going to come forward to actually serve those areas throughout.
That's probably more important to me in terms of New Hampshire,
in terms of the local governments who are actually pretty--you
know, they're very small, and they do represent the people very
well.
Ms. Kuster. Well, we're lucky we have a lot of volunteers
that get involved in these committees who are very
knowledgeable.
As cochair of the Rural Broadband Caucus, I'm committed to
ensuring that communities can connect to broadband services.
It's critical that Congress not only address the challenges to
deploying broadband but also work to make these services more
affordable. The bipartisan Infrastructure Law set our country
on a path to close the digital divide, and I look forward to
working with my colleagues on both sides of the aisle to
continue this work.
And with that, Mr. Chair, I yield back with 49 seconds to
go.
Mr. Latta. Would the gentlelady yield?
Ms. Kuster. I will yield.
Mr. Latta. Thanks very much. I'd like to go back with the
40 seconds that are remaining, a question--just a quick
question.
Mr. Finkel, in your statement you mentioned that with
right-of-ways on Federal lands that when you already have the
lines up that you have to renegotiate for the broadband, and I
assume you're deploying a line across it, and so what's the
difference? You know, this is the commonsense question.
Mr. Finkel. Yes.
Mr. Latta. It's already there and you're putting another
line up.
Mr. Finkel. So, many rural electric cooperatives are either
crisscrossing or abutting Federal lands, whether it's U.S.
Forest Service, BLM, and so we'll have existing electric
infrastructure, and we'll have existing right-of-way and
existing easement, and to put up broadband onto the same pole
in the same right-of-way with the same easement requires a
Greenfield review in many cases.
Mr. Latta. OK. I just wanted to make sure I had that
clarified. Thank you very much.
And I appreciate the gentlelady yielding. The gentleman
from Florida's Second District is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Dunn. Thank you, Chairman Latta.
So as he said, coming from the Second District of Florida,
we know how damaging natural disasters, such as hurricanes, can
be to communications infrastructure when it matters the most.
You know, communications facilities, including wireless and
wired infrastructure and power sources, shelters, et cetera,
they're all essential after a disaster and must be restored
quickly, efficiently.
That's why I plan on reintroducing my bill, the Connecting
Communities Post Disasters Act of 2023. My bill provides that
after a major disaster declared by the President, projects to
replace and improve communications facilities will not be
subject to the requirements to prepare environmental historical
preservation reviews, which become massive obstructions. You
know, this requirement leads to needless delays, and it happens
during a crisis when it's most essential to restore these
services.
You know, when your community is damaged by a natural
disaster and it's struggling for essential communications
infrastructure, imagine the frustration that barriers such as a
mandatory environmental preservation review, you know, can
cause. These are reviews that were performed previously when
the infrastructure was first built. I think it's nonsense red
tape, we've addressed that earlier, that must be corrected and
for the good of relieving all Americans.
Mr. Saperstein, in your testimony, you mentioned that
Congress has made progress on removing barriers to the wireless
infrastructure in the past, and yet broadband is still out of
reach for far too many people. Do you agree that wireless
connectivity is especially important during and immediately
after natural disasters?
Mr. Saperstein. Thank you for the question, Congressman.
Yes, I mean, I think the first place most people reach in order
to get in touch with their loved ones is to their cell phone
and so they can reach out and make that connection, so wireless
connectivity is absolutely a key. And your bill makes very--a
number of commonsense points with respect to need and reform.
Mr. Dunn. I experienced that firsthand after Hurricane
Michael. We went 13 days without our cell phones. You can
imagine, you know, several counties like that. We were really
wandering around lost. So both baseline connectivity and, of
course, resilience and restoration after a disaster is very
important.
Are you familiar, sir, with any regulatory barriers to
wireless deployment, specifically when recovering from natural
disasters?
Mr. Saperstein. So most of--when it comes to natural
disasters, the physical infrastructure is generally pretty
resilient. What happens is we often lose power, and that's one
of the key elements that we need to make the overall systems
run. There's backup power, but that only exists so long and,
you know, the providers themselves are not independent sources
of commercial power. So that's one of the reforms that we
really need to see overall.
Mr. Dunn. Yes, our problem is we lost all our towers. I
certainly agree with the need for resilient infrastructure, and
I encourage all of my colleagues to support this legislation or
to increase our Nation's ability to respond and rebuild after
disasters.
Mr. Romano, as EVP of the Rural Broadband Association, I'm
especially happy to see you here. Can you share with us what
the biggest regulatory burdens, challenges, or inefficiencies
are impacting wired connectivity in rural areas?
Mr. Romano. Thank you, Congressman, for the question. Yes.
So fundamentally making the business case for investing in
rural areas where distances are measured in tens or hundreds of
miles and densities are very low, that is a significant issue,
and obtaining permits in order to deploy across those areas can
be significant barriers I've talked about.
In particular, I think things that we see frequently, and I
had mentioned briefly on a question earlier, replacing--so our
members have been in these communities in many cases for
decades or hundreds of years or a hundred years in some cases,
and--but the problem becomes replacing or upgrading networks in
these existing facilities, or restoring in the case of natural
disasters. We have to go through, oftentimes, repeat reviews
under the National Historic Preservation Act, Section 106, or
NEPA.
The ability to make sure we can upgrade these networks in
an efficient fashion to get better broadband out there, more
resilient broadband out there, bury the networks if we need to,
that's a significant regulatory impediment today.
Mr. Dunn. Thank you very much for that. I'll take that as
an endorsement of my bill. It's an important, you know, thing
for us to streamline connectivity development and restoration
in the United States. I just want us to stay out of our own
way, you know, with excess permitting needs, and so I think if
we do that, we can help everyone in the United States.
With that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Latta. Thank you. The gentleman yields back, and at
this time the Chair recognizes the gentleman from California's
29th District for 5 minutes.
Mr. Cardenas. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and also thank you,
Ranking Member Matsui, for having this important hearing on
broadband.
As we all know, in November of 2021, President Biden signed
the Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act into law. Through
this legislation, Congress made a $65 billion investment
towards eliminating the digital divide and delivering
affordable, reliable, high-speed broadband to every American.
In the next few months, the NTIA will begin providing grants to
States and territories to deliver broadband access to
underserved areas across our Nation.
While this is truly a historic investment in our country's
infrastructure, Congress' work still is not done. Affordable
broadband to every American is far from over. We have a lot of
work to do.
Specifically, there are various permitting application and
review processes that must take place before broadband can be
deployed effectively. Some of my colleagues are highly
skeptical of the value of these processes. I, on the other
hand, believe that these processes are important to keeping
communities safe, competition robust, and ensuring that
important stakeholders are not ignored.
That having been said, permitting should not be overly
burdensome. Construction of these critical projects should not
be delayed by endless reviews or unreasonable fees. We must
strike a balance between protecting communities and expanding
and improving broadband in an efficient and cost-effective
manner.
Mr. Falcon, in your testimony, you gave an example of how
policies in New York yielded more equitable results and brought
more fiber to homes, more than my little hamlet of Los Angeles
in the 2000s. Using the quote from one of my colleagues as she
described hamlets in her district, so I felt a little jealous.
Can you provide--it sounds cozy. Can you provide other, more
recent examples of State or local governments that can serve as
models for expanding high-quality, reliable broadband access to
their residents?
Mr. Falcon. Certainly. So, as I mentioned before, the--you
know, the local government is I would say a valuable partner to
the industry because of the rights-of-way. The taxpayers funded
the infrastructure that allows these networks to deploy. You
know, I think one of the best examples from California is
Brentwood, California. In Brentwood, California, the city
required developers to build conduit and deed it to the city,
so a large underground conduit network was available for a
competitive fiber provider called Sonic to deploy what I would
say is probably the fastest, cheapest private internet: $40 for
one gigabyte, $50 for 10 gigabyte internet.
That was, you know, really a product of smart local
planning and coordination with the local government to really
eliminate most--the most expensive part of construction was the
civil works in deployment. I think if more communities made
their rights-of-way accessible and kind of preplanned for the--
you know, the advent of new entrants coming in, that pays
itself off quite handsomely as these applicants are coming in.
Mr. Cardenas. OK. Also, Mr. Falcon, a lot of your work and
that of your organization is focused on connecting historically
underserved and underprivileged communities with modern high-
speed broadband. Can you talk about the importance of the
Affordable Connectivity Program now and into the future in
meeting our goal of universal connectivity, and how would a
permanent affordability program level the playing field between
high- and low-income communities competing for providers to
serve them?
Mr. Falcon. Thank you for that question, Congressman. The
ACP, if it were to be made permanent, I think, would radically
change the financial planning of many providers that are
motivated to serve entire communities. One of the first things
I started asking a lot of the people in the kind of the public
and the private industry when ACP was first enacted is how much
did that--how much does this change the way you think about
where you can deploy and finance it. And the answer was not
enough, because it was temporary.
You know, we want to have, you know, 10-to-30-year, maybe
even 40-year plans, and if this money runs out within 5 to 6
years, we really don't make a plan around that. We don't really
expect a revenue source from low-income subsidies as a means of
helping finance the overall network.
But if Congress were to make the ACP permanent, I think you
would see a lot more expansion of these networks, simply
because the predictability and the dependability of the revenue
and how you change the attractiveness of low-income users to
many in the industry would be significant.
Mr. Cardenas. So are you describing that a longer plan
would actually spur public-private participation to bring more
accessibility to more Americans?
Mr. Falcon. A permanent ACP would, I think, expand private
providers and public providers and all players, cooperatives as
well, their capacity to deploy fiber simply because the
dependability of the revenue for parties who can't afford the
internet will be there, and that changes a lot of financial
models.
Mr. Cardenas. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Latta. Thank you. The gentleman yields back, and the
Chair recognizes the gentleman from Utah for 5 minutes.
Mr. Curtis. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Madam Ranking Member,
thank you for holding this hearing.
I find myself, as I'm listening to this thinking, I think
we all agree on this. Like why can't we move forward, why can't
we solve this? And I also feel like there's a little bit of
oneupmanship, and I'm going to try to do one upmanship over all
my colleagues today and see if anybody can beat me on this.
Think about this scenario. My district is not only rural,
half of it is classified as frontier. Now layer over top of
that that the vast majority of it, 90 percent of the land, is
owned by the Federal Government. Now wrap your arms around that
for a minute. When we talk about these delays, 90 percent of
this property, you--it takes years and years and years to
permit.
A great story is one of my companies had to spend the money
within 5 years. The permit took 9 years to get, to go, Mr.
Chairman, in an existing right-of-way down an existing road to
lay that fiber. Nine years. And we want to solve this, you
know, much quicker than that.
So I have a bill out there, it's the Rural Broadband
Permitting Efficiency Act, and what this basically does is it
turns over NEPA to the States. We do this in transportation a
lot where we let the States complete the NEPA process for the
Federal Government. The Federal Government's backed up. We know
it takes them years and years to get an answer.
It's a great bill. It actually passed on a bipartisan basis
in the 115th Congress, and I'd to commend this bill to my
colleagues as one possible solution to help us move through
this.
Mr. Finkel, just weigh in on the impact of 9 years to
permit. What is that costing us, right? What--help us get our
arms around that.
Mr. Finkel. Yes, I mean, you're talking about, depending on
the size and scale of the project, you know, I mean, 10, 20, 30
percent more. And especially in a time where we have a
constrained supply chain. So you have Federal dollars. The
Federal dollars are going to expire at some point. So you don't
have BEAD out there yet, right?
So if you have 9 years to spend--if you have 9 years to
permit the project and the BEAD money is going to expire in j9
years, you're not going to get the project built, and even if
you do, it's going to push off 5, 6, 7 years where your costs
are going to go up. So your original cost estimates are going
to be up considerably between now and then.
Mr. Curtis. And----
Mr. Finkel. And that's even when you try to do it in an
existing right-of-way.
Mr. Curtis. And so now we can understand that from a
company's perspective. Imagine the constituents we're trying to
serve and telling them you have to wait 9 years, right, before
you can have this.
Mr. Saperstein, weigh in from your members' perspective. If
we were able to fix this, what would your members be able to do
differently, right, if they didn't have this--that we're all
talking about--all of us are talking about the same problem
here. Could you give us what that world looks like?
Mr. Saperstein. Well, the world is universal connectivity.
I mean, I think that's the short answer. Where people can use
their devices and be connected anywhere they go at any point,
enabling the world economy to their homes and phones.
Mr. Curtis. So I've only got just a couple minutes, and so
I'm going to direct this to you and Mr. Romano and Mr.
O'Rielly. Last August, NTIA and Bureau of Indian Affairs
announced an agreement to, among other things, streamline the
NTIA and Bureau of Indian Affairs' Environmental Policy Act
reviews for Tribal broadband grants. In fact, Assistant
Secretary Allen Davidson noted pridefully that NITA is
``streamlining the creating efficiencies within in the Federal
Government to ensure Tribal communities get the resources they
need quickly to close the digital divide on Tribal lands.''
I believe a lot of the Republican-led legislation that's
being discussed today would streamline the environmental review
process, and I'm just wondering if--I also think that's
consistent with President Biden's approach. Can any of you
describe the impact of this, and is this part of the answer?
Mr. Saperstein. So, yes. Thank you for the question. So
streamlining and efficiency are two favorite words when it
comes to permitting processes. And for too long, many things,
particularly on Federal lands, have been caught up in those.
Mr. Curtis. Yes. Mr.----
Mr. Romano. And I would just say yes. Extending--or
offering that up in that program is, I think, a good case study
for why it makes sense in other programs. And I must tell you,
one of the most frustrating things we see is when members get
grant awards, announce that a grant award has been won, and the
customer is still waiting years later for that big news release
they saw in the local paper that broadband's coming. So, yes,
absolutely.
Mr. O'Rielly. So we used the word coordination. I would
suggest that, as nice as the presentation sounded, that
Congress acting on the matters that are before it today and
others, including one that you mentioned, would be very
helpful. The coordination is great, and the conversations will
happen between different parties at NTIA and, you know, the
Bureau of Indian Affairs, but actually getting progress is a
different story.
Mr. Curtis. Yes. I'm out of time, but I'd like to urge all
of my colleagues and myself included to make this a priority
and move these bills that we seem to all agree on, and let's
see if we can't solve this.
Mr. Chairman, I yield my time.
Mr. Latta. Well, thank you. The gentleman yields back, and
at this time the Chair recognizes the gentleman from Texas' 33d
District for 5 minutes.
Mr. Veasey. Mr. Chairman, thank you. And I want to also
say, you know, this is great, you know, the historic and
bipartisan Infrastructure and Investment Jobs Act. We're
delivering on a promise to create a more digitally inclusive
and equal society. And I continue to hear stories all over
Dallas-Fort Worth about helping to bridge the digital divide.
We have neighborhoods now, lower-income neighborhoods that have
free access to Wi-Fi so kids can do homework and people can
start businesses. And the Affordable Connectivity Program, or
the ACP, is also another success story that highlights the
benefits of making broadband internet affordable for low-income
households.
And after--California, Texas, and Florida have the highest
ACP enrollment rates in the country. And I think Commissioner
O'Rielly put it well in his recent op-ed, and it said,
``American poverty is not isolated to urban areas but
distributed throughout our country. In blue areas, in red
areas, the opportunity gap resulting from unequal broadband
access really impacts all regions.''
American families from all walks of life are connecting to
high-speed, reliable, and affordable broadband internet at
unprecedented levels. And, for instance, in the chairman's
district in Ohio, close to 50,000 households are enrolled in
the ACP. The title of today's hearing is ``Breaking Barriers:
Streamlining Permitting to Expedite Broadband Deployment,'' but
I would also urge my colleagues to engage in a conversation
about the sustainability of ACP, which is targeted to help
eligible households afford broadband once it's deployed. And I
hope this is an issue that we can work on together, because
it's obviously something that's helping all of our districts.
My question, Commissioner O'Rielly, in the op-ed that you
wrote, you said, ``More broadband deployment does not
necessarily equate to greater adoption. Broadband will remain
inaccessible to poorer families if affordability is ignored.''
And I couldn't agree with you more. You urged Congress to
prioritize extending ACP by adding additional funds.
Can you elaborate on why you think it is so important for
Congress to get to work on extending the program, which is
likely to deplete mid-next year, if not sooner?
Mr. O'Rielly. That's right, mid-next year sounds about
where the estimates are. And I just want to correct one point
earlier. I think the program actually is authorized. It's--you
know, we talked about permanency. I think it exists. It's
really a question of the funding.
Mr. Veasey. Right.
Voice. [Indiscernible] your mic.
Mr. O'Rielly. Yes, sir. I think it's a question of funding.
Mr. Veasey. Funding. Right, exactly, yes.
Mr. O'Rielly. And then that's something to be addressed.
But to your point, I think there's a portion of American
families that will all be challenged by the budgets that they
face and the circumstances they face, and it's both in, you
know, urban centers and also in very rural America, the jobs
and, depending on the economic situations that they face, that
they're going to, you know, not be able to afford broadband.
And if we believe, and I do, and in my previous jobs, believe
the benefits of broadband and should be available to all
Americans, well, then we have to address something on the
affordability side.
And I think ACP is structured the best that we've--that
Congress and the Government has created an affordable program.
Others have had lacking--there's still some improvements to be
had here. We can address some waste, fraud, and abuse in the
program. May look at eligibility. But overall, ACP is the best
we've had, and I'd like to see Congress add some funds to it.
Mr. Veasey. Yes. In your op-ed, you also talked about the
positive externalities of broadband adoption with respect to
helping government operate more efficiently in generating
economic activity. Can you expand on that and describe the
negative impacts that the loss of ACP would have on families
that rely on it and on businesses and local communities if
families are suddenly no longer able to afford broadband
service?
Mr. O'Rielly. Oh, absolutely. Broadband accessibility and
affordability--having broadband, you know, reduces the cost for
government. There's just so many services that would no longer
need to be in a paper form, it will be in--you know, you can
reduce populations in terms of in DC. You can, you know,
scatter offices, you can do all kinds of different things that
are more efficient and can reduce the cost for government
services. But it's on the small business side, it's in
bringing, you know, options and, you know, opportunity to so
many different families that don't have it today.
In terms of services that they may have or to be able to,
you know, have access to retail and so many different things
that they just don't have in their local communities and the
supplies and--you know. And the job side to the equation, I've
been and sat in family's kitchens when they're trying to figure
out how do they--you know, their job is moving away, and the
employer says I can--you can work remotely, and they say I
don't have broadband, what do I do?
Mr. Veasey. Yes. Yes. No, thank you very much.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Latta. Thank you. The gentleman yields back the balance
of his time, and at this time the Chair recognizes the
gentleman from Pennsylvania for 5 minutes.
Mr. Joyce. Thank you, Chairman Latta and Ranking Member
Matsui, for holding today's hearing, and thanks to the
witnesses for offering your time, your expertise, and your
testimony.
Americans have increasingly turned to the internet for
work, for school, for agriculture, for socialization, and in
telehealth. Virtually every facet of our daily lives requires
fast and reliable access to this commodity. As members of this
body, it is incumbent upon us to provide for our constituents
and all Americans access to resources specific to this
conversation, high-speed internet.
However, something that seems so simple and fundamental is
often met with opposition and prolonged delays, especially with
regard to buildout and permitting for this necessary
infrastructure. In an effort to bridge this digital divide,
I've led legislation that would cut through the bureaucratic
red tape and streamline the permitting process in order speed
up the deployment of critical broadband infrastructure.
As Chair McMorris Rodgers stated earlier in this hearing,
rural America cannot be left behind. Rural America should not
be left behind. In the 21st century, connectivity is actually a
key for success, and securing better access to broadband,
especially in rural Pennsylvanian communities, will benefit
students, small businesses, farmers, seniors, families.
So let's start with our questions. Mr. Saperstein, when
you've had positive interactions with State and local
permitting office, what were those experiences like, and can
other similar offices learn from your experiences?
Mr. Saperstein. Yes. And thank you for the question,
Congressman. So many communities now represent--recognize the
intense value that comes with mobile connectivity and wireless
connectivity. And so many of the relationships that we have
with our communities across the country are, in fact, positive.
The reforms that we're seeking today are to make sure that
those reforms stay in place nationwide. When we have positive
interactions, we are respectful of the community,
representing--or recognizing their need to have a say in the
siting process, but also recognizing that these facilities need
to be built to ensure coverage everywhere.
Mr. Joyce. What specific state--steps should we take, Mr.
Saperstein, can Congress use to reduce cost to broadband
providers when deploying new networks?
Mr. Saperstein. So colocation has been one of the biggest
benefits of the overall congressional reforms. And the reforms
that have streamlined that process have paid off by expedited
siting and increased wireless coverage everywhere. Making
permanent the FCC's interpretations of congressional acts are
probably the single most important thing that you could do.
Mr. Joyce. So the permanency will lower cost?
Mr. Saperstein. Correct.
Mr. Joyce. Thank you.
Mr. Romano, in some regions of our country, in particularly
in rural areas like I represent in Pennsylvania, construction
can only occur when the weather permits. How have long
application review wait times or environmental or historic
preservation reviews delayed your ability to deploy broadband
in areas where the construction period might only be 5 or 6
months out of 12?
Mr. Romano. Yes. Thank you, Congressman, for that question.
Yes, the frost belt can be a real concern for people,
especially as you move further north, of course, it does get
quite shorter. I'm headed to Minnesota in a few days, and
they've got snow on the ground there still right now. It just
came down--coming down again.
I have an example of a provider in North Dakota who waited
9 months to get through NEPA review of something that should
have been categorically excluded, but just to get confirmation
of that. And by the time they got that review, they had to sit
because they had to wait for several months before they could
start because it came right around to the November timeframe.
So, yes, Congressman, it is a significant issue. Again,
having shot clocks that are more concrete and definitions that
are more established will allow providers to have that
predictability to deliver sooner on that promise.
Mr. Joyce. I think predictability is ultimate in being able
to expand our broadband access. And building broadband in rural
areas, we recognize, is challenging, and it's expensive. Could
you describe in more detail permitting regulations at the
Federal level that are impeding broadband deployment?
Mr. Romano. So the two that I think stick out most are the
overarching sort of umbrella statutes of NEPA and National
Historic Preservation Act. They're incredibly important, but
there are circumstances in which--we've talked about
proportionality. Really, proportionality is critical here to
the application of those.
If it's in a previously disturbed right-of-way, if it's in
a critical circumstance of restoration of a network, those are
circumstances that really contribute greatly to the cost of
deploying a network in a place where it's already been deployed
before. It's simply, in many cases, upgrading copper to fiber,
for example.
So, you know, those are two of the biggest, you know,
delays that we see, and in turn they result in an increase with
cost for reasons that others explained on this panel. That time
delay leads to inflation, and the ability to procure supplies
and having to refind contractors.
Mr. Joyce. And thank you for recognizing that those time
delay recognizably increase the cost. I think that's an
important takeaway message for all of us.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, again, for this important hearing,
and I yield the remainder of my time.
Mr. Latta. Thank you. The gentleman's time has expired, and
he yields back, and at this time the Chair recognizes the
gentlelady from Texas for 5 minutes.
Mrs. Fletcher. Thank you so much, Chairman Latta. Thanks to
you and Ranking Member Matsui for convening today's hearing to
discuss the challenges we face in deploying next-generation
communications networks throughout the country, and thanks to
the witnesses for taking the time to be here and share your
expertise and testimony with us today.
As we all know, broadband infrastructure is essential
infrastructure. And like many of my colleagues here have
already mentioned and talked about throughout this hearing, I
was very proud to support the Infrastructure Investment and
Jobs Act, the largest long-term investment in our country's
infrastructure in nearly a century.
As we've discussed, the bill included almost $43 billion
for the BEAD broadband expansion program. And while some of
this money has already arrived for planning, the majority of it
will soon be on its way to States, Territories, and Tribal
Governments. And with this funding will come a flood of
applications to deploy infrastructure: the towers, fibers,
small cells needed to provide these broadband connections. And
local offices will be strained reviewing and processing these
applications.
Right now, we have a unique opportunity to capitalize on
these Federal investments and to close the digital divide. And
that is why I am so pleased that in our hearing today we are
including my bill, the Broadband Incentives for Communities
Act, which provides grants for local governments to hire and
train employees, purchase software, upgrade capabilities so
essential for permitting and for the effective deployment of
these funds so that we can really close the digital divide.
So I want to ask just a couple questions on that note. Both
Mr. Romano and Mr. Saperstein, both in your testimony and in
response to Mr. Soto a little while ago, you described some of
the challenges that your members have faced when obtaining
authorizations and permits. That's been a theme throughout the
day. Obviously, we also heard it from Representative Curtis as
well.
Can you talk about how legislation like the Broadband
Incentives for Communities Act would help address those
challenges and prevent bottlenecks at the local level?
Mr. Romano. Yes. Thank you, Congresswoman. Thank you for
that question. Thank you for the legislation as well. I agree
with you fully.
One of the things we hear most of all is the procedures do
need to be improved, and I think we support a lot of the
measures here for that very reason, but we also then need to
execute, and execution is going to be critical. And I think
measures like yours that look at how do you make sure the
offices are primed, the pump is primed for them to deliver on
anything else we do in terms of streamlining permitting is
going to be critical.
So systems, training, online portals, getting better
staffing, training people to respond to us, that will enable
better communication that ultimately delivers on all of these
other things that we're talking about.
Mrs. Fletcher. Thank you.
Mr. Saperstein?
Mr. Saperstein. Yes. Thank you for the question. I agree
with Mr. Romano, and I--it sounds from our discussion that we
all agree that it's critical that local governments have the
resources and expertise needed to review these projects quickly
so we can get these services out there. Your help in focusing
on being broadband ready is greatly appreciated. And I would
also add that NTIA has recently emphasized the importance of
being broadband ready, and we appreciate that focus there, too,
so thank you.
Mrs. Fletcher. Well, terrific, and you actually anticipated
my next question, which I was actually going to direct over to
Mr. Falcon.
But the bill does aim to address--to bring stakeholders
together through NTIA to establish a local broadband advisory
council so that problems with deployment can be addressed in a
collaborative manner or sharing experiences and other best
practices. And so it's modeled after work that we've done in my
city of Houston, which has been a relator in broadband
deployment, and 5G broadband deployment in particular.
So a key factor to success has been the close relationship
between all of those working to get it done, between city
leaders and the private sector and others. And a city's
technology investments in Houston, I know, will make a huge
economic impact in our region for years to come.
So, Mr. Falcon, with the time we have left, which is just a
little over a minute, could you describe--you described the
bill as a win/win for communities and industry in your
testimony, and I was just hoping you could take a few seconds
to talk about the importance of that public-private cooperation
and partnership, particularly in the early stages of these
projects.
Mr. Falcon. Certainly. Thank you for that question. You
know, I think the--particularly for cities that have just as
many needs in terms of the successful implementation of BEAD,
the rights-of-way are crowded, and I think the need to explore
alternative ways to deploy wires--you know, one of the--one of
your provisions in your bill includes, you know, improving
microtrenching and, you know, expanding on that.
I think microtrenching is a pretty key solution to
deployment. It's cheaper to deploy. It allows new ways to reach
different corridors, communities without trying to refigure out
accessing crowded out rights-of-way. And I think there are even
new forms of accessing city infrastructure to deploy the wires.
I've heard ideas of using kind of the stormwater system which
runs throughout a city, is another one that's under works
today.
So these types of collaborations are key, and everyone wins
if we all work together.
Mrs. Fletcher. Thank you so much.
I'm over my time, and so, Mr. Chairman, as I yield back, I
would like to enter some documents for the record in support of
the bill.
Mr. Latta. Without objection, so ordered.
Mrs. Fletcher. Thank you so much, Chairman, and thank you
all.
Mr. Latta. Thank you. The gentlelady yields back. At this
time, the Chair recognizes the gentleman from Texas' 14th
District for 5 minutes.
Mr. Weber. Thank you, Chairman, and thank you all for
joining us today to discuss these much-needed permitting
reforms.
This Congress I'm going to be leading the Cable
Transparency Act. This bill will streamline the franchising
process for cable operators and franchise authorities to make
it less costly and burdensome, which currently deters new
entrants. The Cable Transparency Act would help close the
digital divide by encouraging new cable providers to enter
markets and create more competition and therefore--and thereby
lower consumer costs, which we're all in favor of.
So question for you, Mr. O'Rielly. Cable providers are
important players in the broadband marketplace, and I think
we'd all agree and recognize that. What are some factors or
barriers to entry that they face as they enter new markets or
try to modify their franchises where they already operate?
Mr. O'Rielly. So they--you have a number of franchises that
are aggressive in trying to extend some of the obligations that
they would like to add when they actually don't have authority
to do so. And so in terms of simplifying the franchise process,
I think that's very important, and the transparency is very
important.
But they face--you know, poles is one of the biggest
issues----
Mr. Weber. Poles?
Mr. O'Rielly. Pole attachments. The ability to get access
to the infrastructure that they're going to need to attach
fiber and coax to serve the communities that are unserved
today, to do the grants that they will receive and expand. So
poles is a very big issue. The whole permitting process that--
and the culmination of the legislation that the bills that are
before the subcommittee would be very helpful, including yours
especially.
Mr. Weber. Well, that's good to know. And the gentleman to
your right there would be very interested in poles and the
application of the system to--but I have--still have a question
for you. Maybe for the panel too. What other deterrents--we
really haven't discussed is access to capital, does that play
in a part in any of this procedure? You're shaking your head.
Why?
Mr. Romano. Because the business case for rural broadband
can be incredibly challenging. I mean, we're talking distances
and densities that don't present a business case. It's a market
failure in some areas. And so the extent to which--I've had
members say before, ``You give me a hundred cents on the dollar
and I still wouldn't build it'' to--because the operating
expenses and the ability to maintain affordable rates is
difficult. So that is a barrier as well.
Mr. Weber. Is workforce availability a problem? Yes, sir.
Mr. Saperstein. Yes. Thank you for the question. That's one
of the things that WIA has really leaned in on is making sure
that we have the next-generation technicians who are going to
be out there propelling all of this infrastructure. And so we
have not only our registered apprenticeship program but we're
also working with States as part of the BEAD Program to be a
registered intermediary.
Mr. Weber. Are you experiencing--are we experiencing supply
chain issues? We'll go to you, Mr.--is it Finkel? I can't see
that far.
Mr. Finkel. Yes, sir. Supply chain, as this Congress has
talked about over the last 3 years, is a huge problem
economywide. But when you're talking about $65 billion worth of
buildout with Federal dollars plus private investment plus
upgrading existing infrastructure in well-served communities, I
mean--and it's not just domestic, it's a global supply chain
that we're competing in, so without question, supply chain is a
huge challenge.
Mr. Weber. Anybody else? Mr.--is it ``Falcone'' or
``Falcon''?
Mr. Falcon. ``Falcone.'' Yes, you know, I would echo much
of what was said here. I think the--to the question of access
to capital, I think there's also a need to look at alternative
means of deploying the infrastructure, treating it as--purely
as an infrastructure, I think, changes some of the long-term
investment strategies that are out there that BEAD has provided
an opportunity for.
I think there are ways we need to think about how to share
the infrastructure, particularly for 5G, in rural markets that
we haven't really explored much today. But there are going to
be challenges that small providers can't shoulder the burden
completely alone out there.
Mr. Weber. Were you the one that brought up microtrenching?
Mr. Falcon. Yes.
Mr. Weber. That kind of got my attention. Describe that for
us, please.
Mr. Falcon. Yes. So it's basically--the issue is a lot of
the rights-of-way that exist are already crowded. They're
already utilized by a number of providers or a number of other
entities, and, you know, sometimes a provider just needs to,
you know, run their fiber down a--you know, a handful of
streets to get from one side of a community to another to
connect their network, and they just need to trench through the
street itself. So, you know, digging more in a shallow way, in
an expedited way, allows them to connect an area of that. They
wouldn't be able to by running through traditional conduit or
other means you would normally do it.
Mr. Weber. So in other words, in a yard, they put cable in
your yard,--because I have cable in my yard, and they bring a
little trencher out there that makes a groove and they lay that
cable down. I bet it's not 4 or 5 inches deep. Is that----
Mr. Falcon. Yes, and I think--and the challenge has been a
lot of local communities are not familiar with this. One thing
that California did was standardize kind of safety protocols
around microtrenching and then published that to local
jurisdictions, so it kind of took some of the guesswork about
what's the right way to do it.
Mr. Weber. Got you.
Mr. Chairman, I appreciate the time, I yield back.
Mr. Latta. Thank you. The gentleman yields back the balance
of his time. At this time, the Chair recognizes the gentlelady
from Illinois for 5 minutes.
Ms. Kelly. Thank you, Chair Latta and Ranking Member
Matsui, for holding this important hearing this morning. I also
want to thank our witnesses for your testimony to help us
understand how we in Congress may help reduce unnecessary
barriers to broadband deployment.
Although the last few years have been clouded with
challenges like the COVID-19 pandemic and resulting in chips
and supply chain shortages that hurt our economy, I was so very
proud to stand with my colleagues last Congress as we passed
the bipartisan Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act, or the
IIJA. Watching it get signed into law was a historic day for
our country and proved that we are working on behalf of the
American people to deliver real results.
Importantly, the bipartisan bill made a huge investment of
65 billion to expand broadband and help close the digital
divide to ensure that every American has access to reliable
high-speed internet. My district is urban, suburban, and rural,
and I've seen the problem. Urban, suburban, and rural.
Mr. Falcon, I was particularly moved by your written
testimony where you said without 21st-century-ready
connectivity you are not a full participant in society. As we
look to expand broadband deployment, I'm very concerned still
that certain communities will be left behind as they have been
with other emerging technologies and advancement.
To ensure the promise of the Broadband Equity Access and
Deployment BEAD Program can be fulfilled, what recommendations
do you have for us as we look to ensure access is delivered to
everyone?
Mr. Falcon. So thank you for that question. I think the
fact that the Congress created the digital discrimination
rulemaking authority to the FCC is a recognition that there
always has to be oversight to ensure equitable outcomes given
historically that has not happened. So rigorous enforcement of
that new authority to the FCC is going to be key.
Ms. Kelly. OK. And also, what can the FCC do in its
rulemaking to ensure that this practice ends for good and we
get rid of this two-tiered broadband infrastructure?
Mr. Falcon. Thank you for that question. The big debate at
the FCC between I would say the civil rights community and many
in the consumer advocacy space with industry is when does
liability trigger from the new digital discrimination rule.
There--the civil rights community argue, and in line of
many other civil rights statutes, that it should be a
disparate--impact standard meaning, you know, what is the
statistical information on the ground, what does the evidence
show. And a number in industry are arguing it should be
disparate treatment, which would raise the standard of
liability to a point where you would be very difficult to
actually prove.
I think that actually contradicts what Congress intended
with the passage of the law because, you know, when you invest
a lot of dollars in terms of BEAD, to simultaneously say, you
know, ensure that all people receive the benefit. Equal access
means equal for all people.
Ms. Kelly. Also, millions of Americans, many of whom are
older or lower income, have access to broadband but do not
adopt broadband because they don't understand how to use it or
the value it can add to their lives. To address the adoption
barrier, we need to promote digital equity, which among other
things focuses on providing digital literacy and skill training
for people who have not been afforded an opportunity to develop
these skills.
Mr. Falcon, can you speak about the challenges of broadband
adoption, how we can best address these needs? And then,
Commissioner O'Rielly, can you make comments if you have any?
Mr. Falcon. Thank you for that question. You know, the
challenge of adoption is--there has to be a lot of training and
sensitivity to that. There's a lot of Americans who really--
don't really know how to use the internet fully, you know, need
to be acclimated and helped, a lot in the senior citizen
population, for example. And it's a--there's a value to getting
everyone connected and everyone acclimated to the internet.
You know, this is something that, you know, we're not
reinventing the wheel here. South Korea did something similar
to advance their economy, where they're at now. They gave
people free computers and trained people how to use the
internet.
Mr. O'Rielly. If you look to reasons why people haven't
adopted--why families haven't adopted, it's a long list.
Affordability is one of them, and I've talked to--about that
today and elsewhere. But digital literacy and the benefits and
education on broadband benefits is important, and Congress has
obviously made it so they can provide funding for that purpose
for the first time. So there's other programs that have touched
on it, but literacy and the value of it to individuals, we'll
see what the result is from that.
Ms. Kelly. Thank you so much.
And, Mr. Chair, I yield back.
Mr. Latta. Thank you. The gentlelady yields back, and at
this time, the Chair recognizes the gentleman from Georgia's
12th District for 5 minutes.
Mr. Allen. Thank you, Chair Latta, and again, thank you to
our witnesses for being with us today.
Since I was first elected to Congress, expanding rural
broadband, improving cellular service in my district has been
one of my top priorities, and it sounds like it's the
priorities of every Member that has asked questions today. It
is frustrating when it seems that no matter how many billions
of dollars we appropriate towards this mission, it just gets
more complicated and it's incomplete. It's almost like we can't
do big things in this country anymore.
A top priority of mine last Congress was to reduce waste,
fraud, and abuse by making sure that the Federal broadband maps
are as accurate as our broadband mapping is in the State of
Georgia. Now I'm concerned about the fees some State and local
governments charge for processing applications and using space
in public right-of-ways. I'm concerned that these calls will
only increase the cost of deployment and make it hard to
provide service to those who need it.
Mr. Saperstein and Mr. Romano, could you describe typical
application fees associated with building broadband
infrastructure at the State and local level, and is there a
high level of variance between one State and one locality and
another?
Mr. Saperstein. Well, thank you for the question. One of
things that the FCC's reforms have done is help to standardize
the FCC's fees and make them cost-based, and that's one of the
things that we're seeking to be made permanent by Congress
today is to eliminate some of those wild disparities that we
used to see where fees were not cost-based.
Mr. Allen. OK. Thank you. Given these fees, I'm concerned
that we will not be maximizing the money we dedicated for
broadband deployment. This money needs to go towards building
new networks, not helping local governments. This is especially
true for the 42 billion that has been dedicated to the BEAD
Program.
Mr. O'Rielly, why is it necessary to cap fees to State and
local governments--that State and local governments charge for
deployment under the BEAD Program?
Mr. O'Rielly. So you absolutely have it right, the money
should go to the buildout. We have a number of locations that
need to be addressed, households that don't have service, the
unserved population needs to be addressed, and that money needs
to go for those, and we'll probably at the end of that still
have a problem and still have a percentage. So you can't use up
the dollars on other functions like permitting fees--like--or
sorry, permitting applications and everything else that they're
trying to overcharge the applicants.
Mr. Allen. Exactly. And that's why we're here today. We
need legislation to correct that.
Mr. O'Rielly, when you were on the FCC, you acted to
prevent local and State governments from blanket banning the
deployment of telecommunications services or facilities. From
your perspective, have regions who have been unfriendly to the
deployment of such facilities in the past been less responsive
in processing permitting applications in a timely manner?
Mr. O'Rielly. Whenever there is a barrier in the past,
whenever there was a problem, you saw the dollars and where the
construction would go to somewhere else. The providers would
shift dollars to somewhere else, and those communities would
suffer, and this--you know, what's left is what we're dealing
with. The population that needs attention is, you know, both in
economic reasons and some because of the shifting of attention
is really important.
So you highlight the issue of how receptivity is the
community, how receptivity--how receptive, excuse me--is the
application process, the permitting process is really important
to how the dollars will flow.
Mr. Allen. Well, and would you all agree that, you know,
when it comes to Federal funding you're dealing with interstate
commerce, so all things being equal, shouldn't it be standard,
reasonable fees across the country?
Mr. O'Rielly. I agree with that, and I've made that point a
number of times, so I agree absolutely.
Mr. Allen. OK. Anyone else object to that?
Mr. Romano. No, not object at all. I was going to say to
the contrary, we were part of the Broadband Deployment Advisory
Council--or Committee at the FCC when then-Commissioner
O'Rielly was at the FCC as well, and I think that group, there
were a number of us in that group, including NTCA, who
supported cost-based fees, so the actual and direct costs. And
I think several of the pieces of legislation here aim to do
that at as well, and that's welcome.
Mr. Allen. OK. Well, you know, you have my support to
provide legislation. Let's get this done and so America can do
big things again.
And with that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Latta. Thank you. The gentleman yields back, and the
Chair recognizes the gentlelady from California's 16th District
for 5 minutes.
Ms. Eshoo. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and for always being so
specific about the number of my district.
[Laughter.]
Ms. Eshoo. It's a----
Mr. Latta. If I could just interject, the gentlelady has
informed me I was wrong one time.
Ms. Eshoo. Well, thank you, and thank you to all of the
witnesses.
I served 10 wonderful years on the San Mateo County Board
of Supervisors in California before I was elected to the House
in 1992, and I hold a deep reverence for local government to
this very day. Academicians, political leaders from both
parties, industry groups, public interest groups all agree that
universal high-speed internet is necessary for our country's
competitiveness in the 21st century. I mean, there just isn't a
question about this. This is accepted across the board.
The pandemic made this need even more evident as so many
had to transition to teleworking, schools operating through
distanced learning, doctor visits via telehealth. It's
currently estimated that 24 million Americans lack internet
access, a problem that is far more acute in rural and Tribal
communities in our country. And this number is just those who
lack access. Millions more simply can't even afford high-speed
internet.
Last Congress, Democrats made a generational investment to
bridge the digital divide and bring reliable high-speed
internet to every American household. That's the goal: 82
billion--with a B--dollars for broadband affordability, equity,
deployment.
I think one of the most promising solutions to closing the
digital divide that I've seen comes from local communities.
That's why I started my comments out about serving in local
government, county government in California. Over 900 counties,
cities, local utilities, co-ops, neighborhood association, and
Tribes are taking on the digital divide into their own hands by
building their own broadband networks. Community broadband
systems expand internet access to unserved and underserved
areas and encourage competition across the country.
And here's the thing about locally owned networks: They
work really well. In 2019--in a 2019 report, New America's Open
Technology Institute called these networks ``the fast,
affordable internet option that's flying under the radar.''
Unfortunately, 19 States have enacted--they're protectionist
laws, I mean, that's what they are, that's what they deserve to
be called, that restrict and in some cases ban community
networks.
This is--I think it's wrong. You know, I mean, so many--you
know, we all espouse competitiveness in our country, but there
are some outfits, when they see competition from 5,000 miles
away, they go and squash it like a bug. So that's essentially
what has happened here.
So to solve this problem, I introduced the Community
Broadband Act, which simply prohibits State laws that ban or
restrict community broadband. There's always talk about the
reverence we have for States and local governments except when
it comes to legislating. So here's an opportunity I think for
us to underscore that. I think every solution to bring reliable
and affordable internet to Americans should be available.
Commissioner O'Rielly, thank you for the work that you've
done at the FCC. We partnered on so many issues, and I think
we're both legitimately proud of that. And I don't know whether
you support my legislation or not, but let me ask Mr. Falcon
and Mr. Saperstein, do you support the Community Broadband Act?
Mr. Falcon. One hundred percent, absolutely. It is--if we
are serious about getting----
Ms. Eshoo. Music to my ears.
Mr. Falcon. If we are serious about getting everyone
connected, every--all hands have to be on deck.
Ms. Eshoo. Mm-hmm. Mr. Saperstein?
Mr. Saperstein. Yes, so as wireless infrastructure
providers, we support communities providing service--well,
whatever service provider wants to serve any given area.
Ms. Eshoo. And Commissioner O'Rielly, do you?
Mr. O'Rielly. Well----
Ms. Eshoo. And if not, how do we get your support?
Mr. O'Rielly. So I am more sympathetic on the ban side
where there are limitations. And I've done a number of blogs on
this topic. I've examined these issues. Things like
referendums, rights of first refusal, having a budget, that was
a--that's been pointed out as having a--that's an objection and
a barrier and therefore should be prohibited. A State shouldn't
mandate that they're--actually have to have a budget from
someone who's--you know, a community that's going to, you know,
offer this service.
I think that our--you know, so that's some of the States,
that's some of the 19 you mentioned. There are a number, and I
can't--it used to be, you know, bigger. It's shrinking.
Ms. Eshoo. It's 19.
Mr. O'Rielly. Yes, but I'm saying the number that actually
have the ban, the straight-up ban across the board, and that's
a little different in my mind. I'd explore in terms of--there
are also a lot of advantages that I'd be--I'm very worried come
to the local community broadband network that wouldn't be
available--that are not available.
Ms. Eshoo. So you're squishy. You're squishy on it.
[Laughter.]
Mr. O'Rielly. This issue is--yes, on this issue, I'm a
little squishy.
Ms. Eshoo. Yes.
Mr. O'Rielly. I might lean more to the--I might lean to
the----
Ms. Eshoo. I just want you to know how fair I am in asking
you when I know that you weren't a hundred percent----
Mr. O'Rielly. Probably less squishy and maybe lean no
category.
Ms. Eshoo. Yes, yes, exactly. Maybe we got rid of some of
the squishiness.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and to our wonderful ranking
member, Congresswoman Matsui. This is an important hearing, and
I thank you for having it, and thank the witnesses.
Mr. Latta. Well, thank you very much. The gentlelady's time
has expired, and the gentlelady from Tennessee is recognized
for 5 minutes.
Mrs. Harshbarger. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you
for the panelists that are here today.
Mr. Saperstein, in your testimony you discussed the
barriers to broadband caused by lengthy Government reviews. Do
you agree with me that the Government's way too big and
permitting is way too slow? You can say yes.
Mr. Saperstein. Yes.
Mrs. Harshbarger. OK, good deal. Well, under the Trump
administration, the FCC instituted a 60-day shot clock for
making technology updates on existing cell towers. You know
that it's crucial that the telecommunications industry can make
any updates to existing towers for the transition to 5G for
future technologies. You know, it's common sense making a
technological update on existing towers shouldn't be a
tremendously controversial change. I mean, is attaching the
equipment to a pole that difficult, or it's just the
permitting, am I correct?
Mr. Saperstein. That's correct.
Mrs. Harshbarger. OK. I'm leading the 5G Upgrade Act, which
would codify this shot clock, so if a State or a local
government takes too long approving a permit for adjusting
technology on an existing tower, it's automatically approved.
And I guess my question to you is, why is that important that
the shot clock be codified as law?
Mr. Saperstein. Thank you for the question and for your
support of the 5G Upgrade Act. Many of the reforms that were
made recently in the FCC's 5G upgrade order are currently under
appeal, and we don't know how those are going to turn out. So
being--making sure that those are codified is essential so we
can have commonsense reform so colocations can have the
streamline reviews, we can get 5G upgraded quickly everywhere.
Mrs. Harshbarger. Yes, I have a rural district in East
Tennessee, and it's imperative--you know, there's so many
things that we can do if we have that, so, you know, broadband
and everything else. So there's much to do, but dragging our
feet is not the answer, so I think--I appreciate your agreement
with me that the Government's too big and the permitting's too
slow.
And with that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Latta. Well, thank you. The gentlelady yields back, and
the Chair recognizes the gentleman from Texas' 11th District
for 5 minutes.
Mr. Pfluger. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And, you know, I appreciate the leadership that Chair
Rodgers has shown on this, and I love the discussion on
permitting reform, whether it's energy, or telecommunications,
broadband, electricity, it doesn't really matter. You know,
this is a commitment that we made to the American public to
deliver at the speed of relevancy, and I think we're currently,
you know, being inhibited in a lot of areas by government
delays, inaction, and otherwise, so I appreciate the
conversation.
I just want to start with that because I think if we don't
pay attention to that, inevitably we're going to lose. We've
had this same discussion on satellites in this committee, and
spectrum, and we're going to lose to China if we don't continue
to move at the speed of relevancy.
So, Commissioner O'Rielly, I'd kind of like to start by
talking about, you know, the difficulty to track permitting
applications once it's submitted to a Federal agency.
Mr. O'Rielly. So depending on the agency, my experience is
that different agencies are more receptive and more capable of
handling the process and being favorable to the--excuse me,
apology for that, I'm the--responsible for my kids, so
anytime----
Mr. Pfluger. We understand.
Mr. O'Rielly. Anytime the local school calls I'm--so, yes,
so the application process and the actually approval process is
extremely tough to follow, and the providers can highlight how
it gets lost in the shuffle and then go--years can go before
the action is actually taken, much less know what's happening.
And the Commission itself, as a former Commissioner, we
wouldn't be able to see any of that, you know, from other
agencies. Ourselves, in the activity that we did, you know, was
to move forward on all the balls that your colleague
highlighted and really push the envelope as far as we could.
Mr. Pfluger. Mr. Romano or any others on the panel, your
thoughts on how difficult it is to track?
Mr. Romano. Thank you for the question. Yes, I would agree,
and I'll give you an example. I was talking to a member in
Michigan just last night who applied for a permit in August of
2022. Despite repeated inquiries, couldn't get word back on
where that stood until December of 2022, which then put their
shot clock starting then, which pushed them into August of 2023
for their 270 days, which then becomes a problem because of
frozen ground in Michigan when they want to start construction.
So having greater transparency, greater responsiveness,
greater levels of communication is going to be critically
important. There are a lot of dedicated people working on these
permitting issues, but having systems and processes in place to
provide greater transparency will be critical.
Mr. Pfluger. Well, thank you for that. That--I'm proud to
introduce the--you know, a bill that will have a tracking
mechanism, you know, to have the deployment tracking--to
understand what the facts are to better communicate between
government and industry. You know, in a rural area like I
represent in West Texas, you know, look, there's billions of
dollars that have been spent on this, and we want to see the
results. We want to see connectivity.
And I'm just interested--Mr. Finkel, I'm interested in your
thoughts on this. Is there a--an intentional delay towards
rural areas?
Mr. Finkel. Well, look, I don't--I'm not sure that there's
an intentional delay, but I think that by nature a lot of these
agencies just move real slow, they add a level of redundancy.
There's agencies that are duplicative, that are tripping over
each other when they're doing reviews.
And one of the things that I--that was in my testimony was
that, you know, working across 48 States, our members, when we
get aggregated stories from them, you'll have different field
offices for different agencies which have totally different and
completely different approaches, different timelines. So
they're all moving through the process at a different pace, so
even when you get that transparency, you're going to see a
great degree of discrepancy between the different offices
within the same agency.
Mr. Pfluger. Well, I'm not a conspiracy theorist here, and
I don't want to inject things that may not be happening, but I
think it's clear that the inefficiencies, whether it's
intentional or not, or the lack of tracking, whether it's
intentional or not, you know, OK, let's fix the problem now,
and let's deploy broadband into areas that need it.
And for our area, this is energy. This is, you know, the
energy capitol of America, it's agriculture, it's the men and
women who work in those industries. It's a safety issue, and as
I mentioned earlier, I think that this is a national security
issue with regards to competing with China every single day
because they're doing this, and they're deploying it, and we
need to get our act together.
So thank you all for testifying and for your thoughts
today, and I appreciate your professional expertise here.
I yield back.
Mr. Latta. Thank you. The gentleman yields back, and the
Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Ohio's 12th District
for 5 minutes.
Mr. Balderson. Thank you much, Mr. Chairman, and thank you
to the panel for being here.
Too many people in my district and across Ohio--as I have
three Ohioans here so they can all speak for the same, and
often--too often the buildout of new networks can be delayed or
even sidelined completely due to lengthy applications for
franchising or permitting zoning problems, issues with access
to poles, and more. Congress needs to do something. The bills
being discussed here today would do just that, and I applaud
the chairman for hosting this committee.
My bill, the Cable Leadership Act, puts a shot clock on
franchising authorities to grant or deny franchise to
providers. This is the only one of the many applications that
need to be submitted and approved before providers can start
building out new broadband networks.
Mr. Romano, I know that you don't represent cable companies
so you can't give input on that specific bill, but could you
give some great examples in your testimony about how your
members' projects have been delayed? What tools, such as a shot
clock, can Congress employe to streamline the approval process
and prevent such delays?
Mr. Romano. Thank you, Congressman, for that. And, in fact,
it's interesting, we do have a handful of cable companies
within our membership, so it--there is some relevance there as
well directly too.
Yes, I think the biggest things we see with--and I think
where these bills would help tremendously is certainty.
Providing definitional certainty, knowing what it means for
something to be complete, what it means for something to be
received. Providing greater certainty and transparency into the
process. The communicate--lack of communication, as I mentioned
earlier, is a real concern. The inability to see and predict
what's going to be coming next.
Our members are small companies. A lot of cable companies
are small cable companies as well. Their ability to hire
construction crews depends upon knowing when they're going to
be able to hit the ground running, and if they don't have that,
they can't line that up, which complicates both the cost and
the timing of keeping those crews busy.
So all of those things are significant hurdles, and I think
the measures before this committee would help to alleviate
those, if not address them completely.
Mr. Balderson. All right, thank you. Sorry. Thank you.
And, Mr. Romano, I'm going to include you on this next
question too, but also Michael Saperstein. I'm curious, where
most of these delays occurs. As I've mentioned, various
applications and approvals are needed from all levels of
government before a provider can start building out a new
network. Are your members--both of you, are your members seeing
these delays occur more often at the Federal level, or State
and local level?
Mr. Romano. I think just by nature of the areas they serve,
it tends to be more of a Federal issue because, especially as
you get out west, our members are serving a lot of Federal
lands for service BLM and the like. But State highways can be
an issue as well, and I would be remiss if I did not mention
railroads. Railroads are a significant issue in rural areas in
terms of crossing.
So I have examples in my testimony of people going 15 feet
and paying significant sums for that. So--but it is--tends to
be more of a Federal end issue, but then that does bring in
State historical preservation offices at times for some of
those Federal reviews, which again, is why these measures are
so important.
Mr. Balderson. Thank you.
Mr. Saperstein. Yes. And thank you for the question. I
would agree, due to congressional and FCC action, that most of
the delays we're seeing now is on the Federal level. One thing
I wanted to highlight is that one of the big challenges we're
seeing now is that the FAA actually has to approve certain
towers that are over a certain height, use certain frequencies,
or in a certain proximity to airports. What was taking 3 weeks
about a year ago is now taking 9 months to a year. And so we
are looking to--for Federal guidance to--I believe it's a
resource issue--how we can get that better resourced so we
don't delay 5G rollout.
Mr. Balderson. Thank you.
My last question is for Mr. O'Rielly. I can hardly see, but
I see you through the thing here.
Voice. I'm with you.
Mr. Balderson. Anyway, in your--and I--you know, I've been
in and out and--as you're well aware of, but in your testimony,
you talked about the FCC--which I did read--and needed to take
it upon ourself to alleviate barriers to broadband deployment,
often pushing its statutory boundaries. Do you feel that the
FCC should be granted more latitude to tackle barriers to
deployment as they come up, and if so, in what areas? And you
have 50 seconds.
Mr. O'Rielly. So I agree with the package of legislation,
and there's probably some things I would do to make them
stronger. I want--I would believe the committee and the
subcommittee should always limit and structure what the FCC--
what you ask out of the FCC. But in terms of aggressiveness and
the need to act, I think the FCC can be very helpful in this
case.
It certainly needs to be talked about, poles. I think the
FCC can address all the poles nationwide. Don't have to have
the exemption for certain municipal or nonutilities or co-ops.
So I think that the Commission can handle those things and can
handle other authority. They've done a very good job, I think,
in this universe, and if you give them direction and
limitations, they will follow closely. If you give them broad
authority, then you run into some issues sometimes.
Mr. Balderson. Thank you all very much.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Latta. Thank you. The gentleman yields back, and the
Chair now recognizes the gentlelady from Florida's Third
District for 5 minutes.
Mrs. Cammack. Awesome. Well, thank you, Chairman Latta, for
hosting this important hearing today.
Thank you to our witnesses for appearing. I see you all
have been bunched up real tight this entire hearing. I've been
noticing the elbow room as I've been dipping in and out of the
room, so we are near the end. Hang in there.
This is such an important topic. I know we have chatted
about this and how we can do this in a way that is efficient,
responsible, and hits the mark. And every single person who
serves today has a district that is impacted by broadband or
lack thereof, and so I'm excited that we're starting to really
address some of these issues.
All of our witnesses here today I'm sure share the concerns
of the process for permitting is too complicated, opaque, time
consuming. I heard a little bit about some of the delays that
we're having.
In your view, what is the single most urgent change needed
to the permitting process in order to best deploy broadband
across the country, especially in rural areas like Florida? And
I would like to address this question to each of you, and we'll
start down here and work our way down.
Mr. O'Rielly. So pole attachments, both access and rates,
and I actually wrote a letter a number of years ago to the
State House in Florida because they were looking to simplify
that process there.
Mrs. Cammack. I'm shocked by your answer. That's my joke
for the day.
[Laughter.]
Mrs. Cammack. Mr. Finkel.
Mr. Finkel. Expediting the process on existing right-of-
ways on existing poles to make sure that you don't have to go
through an EIS for--to put wire on existing infrastructure.
Mrs. Cammack. OK.
Mr. Falcon. I think increasing the personnel resources
available given the surge of projects that are coming in is key
to shorten the review time.
Mrs. Cammack. So at the agency level?
Mr. Falcon. Yes.
Mrs. Cammack. OK.
Mr. Saperstein. Thank you for the question. For Federal
lands, it's adding clarity, accountability, and transparency to
that process, in addition to looking at what more resources can
be given to FAA to avoid a bottleneck there.
Mrs. Cammack. OK.
Mr. Romano. And thank you, again, Congresswoman, for the
question. So, yes, I think it's--to echo some of the others,
dealing with reviews for previously disturbed rights-of-way and
previously disturbed earth, those--the ability to upgrade
networks quickly where especially we've already got networks in
place is going to be critical to delivering on next-generation
capabilities and capacity.
Mrs. Cammack. Excellent. Thank you, as we're considering a
number of bills that are working to address some of these more
nuanced issues. Myself, in particular, I'm really glad to lead
the discussion draft for the Digital Applications Act, which
would establish an online portal to accept, process, and
dispose of the common form application to deploy a
communications facility on Federal property.
Mr. Finkel, can you discuss the current challenges with the
common form application SF299 and how an online portal for
permitting applications would benefit broadband deployment on
Federal property?
Mr. Finkel. It's just common sense.
Mrs. Cammack. Thank you. You know. And common sense is not
common around here.
Mr. Finkel. I don't need to add much more.
Mrs. Cammack. You mentioned Federal property?
Mr. Saperstein. Yes, and thanks for the question. Actually,
portals are one of the things we--our members have talked about
that's a simple fix that would add so much transparency into
what's going on and allow more predictability in the overall
build cycle.
Mrs. Cammack. Just going down the line, legislation like
this to basically modernize the process and make it more
transparent, you would fully support, and it would be silly for
anyone to oppose this legislation, correct?
Mr. Romano. Yes.
Mrs. Cammack. Just go--we'll start down here.
Mr. Romano. Gaps in--yes, gaps in communication are
incredibly frustrating. At a time when we can track so many
things in our daily lives online and check with--on the status
of different things from airline flights to train schedules, it
is difficult to understand why we cannot keep track of these
significant investments in our future. Yes.
Mrs. Cammack. Excellent.
Mr. Saperstein. I think Mr. Romano said that well.
Mrs. Cammack. Mr. Falcon.
Mr. Falcon. Yes. No, I would agree, and I think the
coordination amongst if there's several agencies involved is
also key. Some sort of single point of contact may be a way to
augment the value of a portal.
Mrs. Cammack. Excellent.
Mr. Finkel. And the portal, again, makes it so all agencies
can see it. It creates transparency for the applicant. You have
a clear picture of what your process is.
Mr. O'Rielly. I actually----
Mrs. Cammack. If you say--if you don't say ditto, I'm going
to be disappointed.
Mr. O'Rielly. Ditto. I support--I agree with the
legislation. I may not use the word silly, only to--but I--I'm
hard pressed to come up with a reason to oppose it.
Mrs. Cammack. Excellent. Well, thank you guys for making
the case for that wonderful piece of legislation.
What expected risks and challenges in the absence of
permitting reform, considering the massive amount of Federal
dollars dedicated to broadband deployment, do we face over the
next few years? Just--we've got 30 seconds. Give me your
number-one concern if we don't act. And we'll go down the line.
Mr. O'Rielly. I'm worried about overbuilding, and I'm
worried about waste, fraud, and abuse.
Mrs. Cammack. OK.
Mr. Finkel. I'm worried the money won't get out.
Mrs. Cammack. Ooh.
Mr. Falcon. I'd be worried about costs rising and
minimizing the impact of the dollars invested.
Mr. Saperstein. Yes, simply that we would fail our
objective of universal connectivity.
Mr. Romano. A crush of applications leading to chaos and
trying to sort through them all to get them done.
Mrs. Cammack. Excellent.
With 2 seconds to spare, Mr. Chairman, my time has expired.
Thank you to our witnesses for appearing before us today, and
with that I yield back.
Mr. Latta. Thank you. The gentlelady yields back, and the
Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Idaho for 5 minutes.
Mr. Fulcher. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and for those on the
panel willing to take the time and provide some input to us.
We all want rural broadband, and the permitting process, as
we've had many discussions on, sometimes slows things down and
makes it tough. In the State of Idaho, we have a tremendous
amount of Federal land, nearly two-thirds of land mass there.
And in my State, rural carriers and utilities struggle to get
approvals to lay fiber lines, set up towers, construct
buildings and other infrastructure to ensure residents that are
physically located in regions surrounded by Federal lands, or
in other words kind of landlocked that way, so they can get the
same access and quality broadband as those in urban areas.
And so by streamlining the Federal side of the permitting,
then that gives the access and the quality for broadband to
those in rural areas and just makes it that much more
achievable. So one of the bills that I am introducing is--it's
called the Reducing Barriers to Broadband on Federal Lands Act,
and this bill would remove the requirement to do a NEPA review
for the deployment of broadband projects that are on previously
disturbed land. And that previously disturbed, basically to
summarize, means there's already been a NEPA process for other
purposes.
And so otherwise, these projects end up just not making it
through the planning stage, and there's multiple examples right
in my backyard where that's been the case.
So, Mr. Chair, there is a report that I'd like to enter
into the record. It's from the National Telecom and Information
Administration. They published a report that provides
recommendations on how Federal agencies can improve or
streamline their processes for reviewing broadband installation
applications, and I would ask unanimous consent to enter that
report into the record, please.
Mr. Latta. Without objection, so ordered.
[The information appears at the conclusion of the hearing.]
Mr. Fulcher. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And basically my questions and my requests for interaction
from you all is, first of all, do you see specific problems--
and I'll start with Mr. Romano and then Mr. Saperstein and Mr.
Finkel. Do you see problems with that when we're looking to
streamline by foregoing NEPA again when it comes to permitting
for rural broadband? Mr. Romano.
Mr. Romano. Thank you, Congressman, for the question, and
thank you for the discussion draft you put forward--the bill
you've put forward.
We support that bill. We think that it makes a ton of
sense. The landlocked point you raise is a really good one, an
interesting one, and I think it's one of these pieces that's
hard to capture sometimes. But the puzzle pieces of putting
together when you're going across Federal land, and then you're
in a private right-of-way, then you're going across a railroad,
that can make it incredibly hard, especially for a smaller
provider.
So I think a bill like yours offers an opportunity to help
put the puzzle pieces together better. I don't think when
you're talking about previously disturbed earth, previously
disturbed rights-of-way, you're talking about upgrading
existing networks, that hopefully is a proportional response
that allows you to make sure that you're not presenting the
kinds of concerns that would rise to a higher level of scrutiny
or need a higher level of scrutiny with respect to
environmental or historical preservation issues.
So I think this bill makes a lot of sense. It's a good use
of finding a way to make sure it's not considered a major
Federal action or an undertaking under those statutes.
Mr. Fulcher. Thank you for that.
Mr. Saperstein?
Mr. Saperstein. Yes, and thank you for the question. So our
view is that permitting processes should be predictable,
proportionate, and timely, and I think your bill speaks
specifically to the proportionality. In the types of
circumstances that you're describing, do we really need the
types of NEPA views--NEPA reviews, or are we better off
exempting them? And I think your bill goes a long towards that.
Mr. Fulcher. Thank you for that.
Mr. Finkel?
Mr. Finkel. As I shared with the Chair earlier, the idea
that you'd have to Greenfield existing right-of-way that you've
already--and existing infrastructure that's already been
through the NEPA process just seems totally redundant and a
waste of both time and Federal resources.
Mr. Fulcher. Thank you.
Mr. O'Rielly?
Mr. O'Rielly. I support your legislation. I think it's the
direction to go, and the requirement is unnecessary in my mind.
Mr. Fulcher. Great.
We'll ask Mr. Falcon too.
Mr. Falcon. Thank you. I--you know to the extent that many
of the projects are transitioning legacy infrastructure to kind
of 21st century infrastructure in previously disturbed ground,
I think there is--it is right to think about how do you
distinguish that from actual Greenfield projects.
Mr. Fulcher. Thank you for that.
Mr. Chairman, I'm going to have 20 seconds to spare. I
yield back.
Mr. Latta. Thank you. The gentleman yields back the balance
of his time, and the Chair now recognizes the gentleman from
California's 23d District for 5 minutes.
Mr. Obernolte. Well, thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
I represent an extremely rural district, and the problems
that my constituents have in accessing broadband are
exacerbated by the fact that over 90 percent of the land mass
of my district is in public ownership in one form or another.
So it's not enough to merely allocate grant funding to be able
to create broadband infrastructure in these rural areas, then
we'll have to manage this process of getting that
infrastructure built through the privately held--the publicly
held land that separates the communications hubs from the
places where my constituents live. I know that you're very
familiar with that particular problem.
So one of the bills that we are discussing today is my
bill, the GRANTED Act, which aims to solve in some small part
that problem. Congress has already directed the FCC to expedite
the processing of those permits required to cross Federal lands
either through lands held by the BLM or sometimes the
Department of Agriculture. We've directed a common application
for those permits, and we have put a shot clock of 270 days on
the approval of those permits.
Unfortunately, what we are experiencing is that in many
occurrences the Federal agencies involved take more than 270
days to process those permits, and unfortunately, there are no
penalties or consequences for them doing that. So my bill would
deem approval for any application for broadband infrastructure
across public lands that has been pending for more than 270
days, provided that application was full and complete when it
was submitted. And I think that's a commonsense way of solving
that problem.
I'd be interested in your opinion on that concept. Are you
a supporter of that kind of deemed approval after 270 days as
a--let's start with the end of the table here, Mr. Romano.
Mr. Romano. Yes, Congressman, thank you for the question.
Yes, we do. We think that that makes a lot of sense. And I
think what this highlights too--one of the things I want to be
clear about as well is a lot of the bills that are being
presented here refer back to 6409, the section which is a
wireless facilities deployment.
So one of the things--one of the other bills that's present
in this proceeding would attempt to stitch this together and
make sure those also apply to wireline, and I think that's
going to be critical. I think a lot of the concepts here that
are presented make a ton of sense and would help to expedite
deployment. I think it's going to be critical as well to make
sure those dots connect to make sure they apply to wireless and
wireline----
Mr. Obernolte. Sure.
Mr. Romano [continuing]. Facility deployment alike to the
extent appropriate.
Mr. Obernolte. That's a good point.
Mr. Saperstein?
Mr. Saperstein. Yes, thank you for the question. And yes,
we support your bill, and we believe it would help adding
accountability to the Federal land process because currently,
though Congress has set this 270-day shot clock, there is no
accountability and there is no recourse if they fail to meet
it.
Mr. Obernolte. Right. I hope so too.
Mr. Falcon?
Mr. Falcon. Thank you for that question. I think the--if
the staffing personnel is made available, permits can be turned
over faster. And a common issue I hear, particularly in
California with rural carriers, is there's just not that many
people there for reviewing permits. So, you know, I think it's
a fixable problem that can bring it down to that number you're
shooting for in terms of 270 days.
Mr. Obernolte. Mr. Finkel?
Mr. Finkel. I'll associate myself with the comments of Mr.
Romano on both--including wireless and wireline. But let me
also--you noted and you used ``full and complete application,''
and that's when the shot clock would end. So just one thing to
consider is oftentimes with agencies that have that--have the
time limitations, how they define ``full and complete'' and
whether or not they restart the shot clock because they deem
you to not have been full and complete, and how they
communicate and how--whether or not they're transparent about
the full and complete is a really important factor to consider
as well.
Mr. Obernolte. Yes. I actually think that's an excellent
point. We've tried to be very thoughtful and deliberate with
our approach to that problem in the text of the bill, but we
are certainly open to any suggestions that you might have to
differentiate perhaps between the shot clock for declaring an
application complete and the 270 days required to review it,
because what we don't want is to get to the end of 200--you
know, Day 269 and have an agency come back and say, oh, you
know what, you include--you failed to include this piece of
paper, we're starting over, you know, at Day Zero.
Mr. O'Rielly?
Mr. O'Rielly. Yes, I've got experience with that at the
FCC. But to your point, I actually very much support your
legislation. I think you're maybe being a little generous on
270 days.
Mr. Obernolte. Well, we'll have to think about that. Well,
I thank you very much, and we'll continue to work with you as
we work through the legislative process with this bill, but I
think we're all unified in our desire to increase this access
to rural--access to broadband infrastructure and solve some of
these systemic problems.
I yield back.
Mr. Latta. Thank you. The gentleman yields back the balance
of his time, and at this time the Chair recognizes the
gentleman from Ohio's Sixth District for 5 minutes.
Mr. Johnson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I'm really proud to
once again this session be sponsoring the Wireless Broadband
Competition and Efficient Deployment Act that would remove the
requirement for environmental and historic preservation reviews
in order to add or upgrade wireless facilities on existing
infrastructure.
This is common sense, and it would eliminate a tremendous
burden with reviews that are often repetitive and that
unnecessarily slow down broadband expansion. And I want to
thank Chairman Latta for including my discussion draft in
today's legislative hearing, and thank you to our witnesses for
your insight. We really have to break down the barriers to
deployment that are keeping folks like those I represent in
rural Appalachia on the wrong side of the digital divide.
Commissioner O'Rielly, you and I have worked together on
this for a long time. It's so frustrating to me that here in
2023 we're talking about the same problems that we were talking
about in January of 2011. We're just not making progress on
rural broadband, and this is a commonsense thing that can
really make a difference.
Mr. Romano, your testimony discussed the difficulties and
lengthy delays your members have experienced when obtaining
permissions through environmental and historic preservation and
consultation processes for broadband deployment. How often do
you have to perform an environmental or historic preservation
review for simply adding or upgrading wireless facilities on
existing infrastructure?
Mr. Romano. So the way the NEPA and HPA work essentially
is, if we are deploying on Federal lands or essentially using
Federal funds, those are going to trigger the kinds of----
Mr. Johnson. So anytime the Federal Government's involved,
you have to do all that.
Mr. Romano. That essentially is correct. I mean, there may
be--there are categorical exclusions under NEPA that can apply
that can take one out of that, but oftentimes they can't even
take time to figure out whether one qualifies for a categorical
exclusion and the number of the projects.
Mr. Johnson. Got you. In your view, does the amount of
time, effort, and cost for these reviews detract from the
incentive for providers to upgrade existing wireless
infrastructure, and what does this mean for consumers?
Mr. Romano. I think the--and I'll pick up a point that Mr.
Saperstein made earlier about the sort of transparency and the
predictability of this. The inability to know for certain
what--how long this is going to take, what exactly is going to
be required can be a deterrent to participation in some of
these programs or otherwise to invest in these areas. I will
say the incentive to invest--our members are based in the
communities they serve, so they've got strong incentive to do
it anyways. But particularly, participating in expansion
programs, that can be a real deterrent.
Mr. Johnson. Got you.
Mr. Saperstein, same question: In your view, does the
amount of time, effort, and cost for these reviews detract from
the incentive for providers to upgrade existing infrastructure?
Mr. Saperstein. Yes, absolutely. I mean, colocation is one
of the most efficient things we can do as a society to spread
wireless deployments. It makes use of existing infrastructure,
it allows multiple carriers to serve an existing area, and it
reduces the overall effect on the local community. So
absolutely.
Mr. Johnson. OK.
Mr. O'Rielly? And again, it's good to see you. The last
time I think I saw you maybe when you came out to see some of
the rural aspects of my district and the struggles that we have
there with broadband. In your testimony, you mentioned the
importance of permitting reform for wireless connectivity,
including for 6G. Can you expand on what reforms will be
helpful for future 6G deployment?
Mr. O'Rielly. So 6G is expected--and it's still early in
the discussion stage, but it's expected to use higher
frequency, so both midbands and super-high bands, and in doing
that, you're going to have more towers, more infrastructure
that's absolutely necessary. And so that means more colocation,
that means more placement of towers, it means new construction
of big towers and small cells and antennas, and all of that's
going to need approval, and all of that's going to go through
the molasses that we've been talking about today.
Mr. Johnson. OK. Are there any particular reforms you would
recommend to increase the efficiency of current 5G deployment?
Mr. O'Rielly. Well, I--permitting is at the top of my list.
Permitting and pole attachment, both the rates and access are
at the top of my list. I've talked about other aspects that the
committee can focus on. I--we talked about railroads briefly.
I'd put railroads in that category as well.
Mr. Johnson. You know, we used to have an anti-drug
campaign in America that the big byline was ``Just Say No.''
God, we need the Federal Government to just say yes to some of
these things that are common sense. It--this is mind-boggling
to me.
Mr. Chairman, thanks again, I appreciate you letting me
waive on the committee. Thank you.
Mr. Latta. Well, thank you very much. And seeing no other
Members wishing to ask questions, I want to thank our panel of
witnesses today for your expertise and your time today. We
greatly appreciate it. You can tell from the interest of the
Members that this is a very, very important topic that we're
dealing with.
I ask unanimous consent to insert in the record the
documents included on the staff hearing documents list.
Without objection, so ordered.
[The information appears at the conclusion of the hearing.]
Mr. Latta. I remind Members that they have 10 business days
to submit questions for the record, and I ask the witnesses to
respond to the questions quickly. Members should submit their
questions by the close of business on May the 3rd.
And without objection, the subcommittee is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 1:30 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]
[Material submitted for inclusion in the record follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
