- LOWERING UNAFFORDABLE COSTS: LEGISLATIVE SOLUTIONS TO INCREASE TRANSPARENCY AND COMPETITION IN HEALTHCARE

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

LOWERING UNAFFORDABLE COSTS: LEGISLATIVE
SOLUTIONS TO INCREASE TRANSPARENCY AND
COMPETITION IN HEALTHCARE

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON HEALTH

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

APRIL 26, 2023

__________

Serial No. 118-27

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Published for the use of the Committee on Energy and Commerce

govinfo.gov/committee/house-energy
energycommerce.house.gov

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
55-326 PDF                  WASHINGTON : 2024

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE

CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington
Chair
MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas            FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey
ROBERT E. LATTA, Ohio                  Ranking Member
BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky              ANNA G. ESHOO, California
H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia         DIANA DeGETTE, Colorado
GUS M. BILIRAKIS, Florida            JAN SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois
BILL JOHNSON, Ohio                   DORIS O. MATSUI, California
LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana               KATHY CASTOR, Florida
RICHARD HUDSON, North Carolina       JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland
TIM WALBERG, Michigan                PAUL TONKO, New York
EARL L. ``BUDDY'' CARTER, Georgia    YVETTE D. CLARKE, New York
JEFF DUNCAN, South Carolina          TONY CARDENAS, California
GARY J. PALMER, Alabama              RAUL RUIZ, California
NEAL P. DUNN, Florida                SCOTT H. PETERS, California
JOHN R. CURTIS, Utah                 DEBBIE DINGELL, Michigan
DEBBBIE LESKO, Arizona               MARC A. VEASEY, Texas
GREG PENCE, Indiana                  ANN M. KUSTER, New Hampshire
DAN CRENSHAW, Texas                  ROBIN L. KELLY, Illinois
JOHN JOYCE, Pennsylvania             NANETTE DIAZ BARRAGAN, California
KELLY ARMSTRONG, North Dakota, Vice  LISA BLUNT ROCHESTER, Delaware
Chair                            DARREN SOTO, Florida
RANDY K. WEBER, Sr., Texas           ANGIE CRAIG, Minnesota
RICK W. ALLEN, Georgia               KIM SCHRIER, Washington
TROY BALDERSON, Ohio                 LORI TRAHAN, Massachusetts
RUSS FULCHER, Idaho                  LIZZIE FLETCHER, Texas
AUGUST PFLUGER, Texas
DIANA HARSHBARGER, Tennessee
MARIANNETTE MILLER-MEEKS, Iowa
KAT CAMMACK, Florida
JAY OBERNOLTE, California
------

Professional Staff

NATE HODSON, Staff Director
SARAH BURKE, Deputy Staff Director
TIFFANY GUARASCIO, Minority Staff Director
Subcommittee on Health

BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky
Chairman
MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas            ANNA G. ESHOO, California
ROBERT E. LATTA, Ohio                  Ranking Member
H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia         JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland
GUS M. BILIRAKIS, Florida            TONY CARDENAS, California
BILL JOHNSON, Ohio                   RAUL RUIZ, California
LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana, Vice Chair   DEBBIE DINGELL, Michigan
RICHARD HUDSON, North Carolina       ANN M. KUSTER, New Hampshire
EARL L. ``BUDDY'' CARTER, Georgia    ROBIN L. KELLY, Illinois
NEAL P. DUNN, Florida                NANETTE DIAZ BARRAGAN, California
GREG PENCE, Indiana                  LISA BLUNT ROCHESTER, Delaware
DAN CRENSHAW, Texas                  ANGIE CRAIG, Minnesota
JOHN JOYCE, Pennsylvania             KIM SCHRIER, Washington
DIANA HARSHBARGER, Tennessee         LORI TRAHAN, Massachusetts
MARIANNETTE MILLER-MEEKS, Iowa       FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey (ex
JAY OBERNOLTE, California                officio)
CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington
(ex officio)

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hon. Brett Guthrie, a Representative in Congress from the
Commonwealth of Kentucky, opening statement....................     2
Prepared statement...........................................     4
Hon. Anna G. Eshoo, a Representative in Congress from the State
of California, opening statement...............................     6
Prepared statement...........................................     8
Hon. Cathy McMorris Rodgers, a Representative in Congress from
the State of Washington, opening statement.....................    10
Prepared statement...........................................    12
Hon. Frank Pallone, Jr., a Representative in Congress from the
State of New Jersey, opening statement.........................    16
Prepared statement...........................................    18

Witnesses

Chiquita Brooks-LaSure, Administrator, Centers for Medicare and
Medicaid Services..............................................    20
Prepared statement...........................................    22
Answers to submitted questions...............................   331
Ashley Thompson, Senior Vice President, Public Policy Analysis
and Development, American Hospital Association.................    78
Prepared statement...........................................    80
Answers to submitted questions...............................   344
Kristin Bass, Chief Policy and External Affairs Officer,
Pharmaceutical Care Management Association.....................    92
Prepared statement...........................................    94
Answers to submitted questions...............................   347
Brian Connell, Executive Director, Federal Affairs, The Leukemia
& Lymphoma Society.............................................   108
Prepared statement...........................................   110
Sean Cavanaugh, Chief Policy Officer, Aledade....................   116
Prepared statement...........................................   118
Ilyse Schuman, Senior Vice President, Health Policy, American
Benefits Council...............................................   132
Prepared statement...........................................   134
Loren Adler, Fellow and Associate Director, USC-Brookings
Schaeffer Initiative for Health Policy, Economic Studies,
Brookings Institution..........................................   157
Prepared statement...........................................   159
Answers to submitted questions...............................   350

Legislation

\1\ Discussion Draft, H.R. ___, To amend title III of the Public
Health Service Act to ensure transparency and oversight of the
340B drug discount program
H.R. 977, the Patient Access to Higher Quality Care Act of 2023
H.R. 1613, the Drug Price Transparency in Medicaid Act of 2023
H.R. 2665, the Supporting Safety Net Hospitals Act
H.R. 2666, the Medicaid VBPs for Patients Act
H.R. 2679, the Pharmacy Benefits Manager Accountability Act

----------

\1\ The proposed legislation has been retained in committee files and
is available at https://docs.house.gov/Committee/Calendar/
ByEvent.aspx?EventID=115801.
H.R. 2691, the Transparent Prices Required to Inform Consumer and
Employers Act
Discussion Draft, H.R. ___, To establish patient protections with
respect to highly rebated drugs
Discussion Draft, H.R. ___, To phase out certain services
designated as inpatient-only services under the Medicare
program
Discussion Draft, H.R. ___, To amend title XVIII of the Social
Security Act to increase price transparency of diagnostic
laboratory tests
Discussion Draft, H.R. ___, To amend title XVIII of the Social
Security Act to promote transparency of common ownership
interests under parts C and D of the Medicare program
Discussion Draft, H.R. ___, To amend title XVIII of the Social
Security Act to require payment for all hospital-owned
physician offices located off-campus be paid in accordance with
the applicable payment system for the items and services
furnished
Discussion Draft, H.R. ___, To amend title XI of the Social
Security Act to increase transparency of certain health-related
ownership information
Discussion Draft, H.R. ___, To require the Secretary of Health
and Human Services to consider, within the annual rulemaking
processes, the effect of regulatory changes to certain Medicare
payment systems on provider and payer consolidation, and for
other purposes
Discussion Draft, H.R. ___, To amend title XVIII of the Social
Security Act to provide for site neutral payments under the
Medicare program for certain services furnished in ambulatory
settings
Discussion Draft, H.R. ___, To amend title XVIII of the Social
Security Act to provide for parity in Medicare payments for
hospital outpatient department services furnished off-campus
Discussion Draft, H.R. ___, To amend titles XI and XVIII of the
Social Security Act to require each outpatient department of a
provider to include a unique identification number on claims
for services, and to require hospitals with an outpatient
department of a provider to submit to the Centers for Medicare
& Medicaid Services an attestation with respect to each such
outpatient department

Submitted Material

Inclusion of the following was approved by unanimous consent.
List of documents submitted for the record.......................   205
Letter of April 25, 2023, from Brent Gardner, Chief Government
Affairs Officer and Senior Vice President, Americans For
Prosperity.....................................................   207
Letter of April 25, 2023, from David Williams, President,
Taxpayers Protection Alliance, to Mrs. Rodgers, et al..........   209
Letter from Better Solutions for Healthcare to Mr. Guthrie and
Ms. Eshoo......................................................   210
Statement of the Association for Clinical Oncology by Lori J.
Pierce, Chair of the Board, April 26, 2023.....................   211
Letter of April 26, 2023, from Sterling N. Ransone, Jr., Board
Chair, American Academy of Family Physicians, to Mr. Guthrie
and Ms. Eshoo..................................................   213
Letter of April 26, 2023, from the Ambulatory Surgical Center
Association to Mr. Guthrie and Ms. Eshoo.......................   218
Letter of April 25, 2023, from Americans For Prosperity, et al.,
to Members of Congress.........................................   221
Statement of the Infusion Providers Alliance, April 26, 2023.....   223
Statement of the Large Urology Group Practice Association by Evan
R. Goldfischer, President, April 26, 2023......................   226
Letter of April 26, 2023, from Andrew Lautz, Director of Federal
Policy, and Nicholas Johns, Policy and Government Affairs
Manager, National Taxpayers Union, to Mr. Guthrie and Ms. Eshoo   228
Statement of the Physicians Advocacy Institute, April 22, 2023...   232
Statement of the Partnership to Empower Physician-Led Care by
Kristen McGovern, Executive Director, April 26, 2023...........   238
Letter of April 24, 2023, from Mark Battaglini, Chief Strategy
Officer, Alliance for Regenerative Medicine, to Mr. Guthrie and
Ms. Eshoo......................................................   243
Letter of April 26, 2023, from Kevin Kuhlman, Vice President,
Federal Government Relations, NFIB, to Mr. Guthrie and Ms.
Eshoo..........................................................   244
Statement of Consumers First, April 26, 2023.....................   247
Report, ``Hospital Competition and Restrictions on Physician-
Owned Hospitals,'' by Matthew C. Mandelberg, et al., February
5, 2023\2\
Statement of the Texas Medical Association, April 24, 2023.......   251
Report, ``Eligibility for Non-Citizens in Medicaid and CHIP,''
Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services, November 2014........   252
Statement of AHIP, April 26, 2023................................   265
Letter of April 25, 2023, from Andrew Mignatti, President and
Chief Executive Officer, Careviso, to Mrs. Rodgers and Mr.
Pallone........................................................   272
Web page, ``Immigration Status and the Marketplace,''
HealthCare.gov.................................................   274
Statement of the Connecticut State Medical Society, April 26,
2023...........................................................   277
Statement of the California Medical Association, April 25, 2023..   278
Statement of the North Carolina Medical Society, April 26, 2023..   279
Statement of the Nebraska Medical Association, April 25, 2023....   281
Statement of the South Carolina Medical Association, April 26,
2023...........................................................   282
Statement of the Tennessee Medical Association, April 26, 2023...   283
Letter of April 24, 2023, from Kenneth E. Raske, President,
Greater New York Hospital Association, to the New York State
Congressional Delegation.......................................   284
Letter of April 25, 2023, from Bea Grause, President, Healthcare
Association of New York State, to the New York State
Congressional Delegation.......................................   286
Letter of April 19, 2023, letter from ACA Consumer Advocacy, et
al., to Hon. Charles Schumer, et al............................   288
Letter of April 20, 2023, from the Disability and Aging
Collaborative & the Consortium for Constituents with
Disabilities to Hon. Chuck Schumer, et al......................   293
Statement of the American Cancer Society Cancer Action Network,
et al., April 24, 2023.........................................   300
Statement of the American Academy of Family Physicians, et al.,
April 24, 2023.................................................   302
Statement of the Association for Community Affiliated Plans by
Margaret A. Murray, Chief Executive Officer, April 19, 2023....   304
Letter of April 25, 2023, from Charles N. Kahn III, President and
Chief Executive Officer, Federation of American Hospitals, to
Mr. Guthrie and Ms. Eshoo......................................   306
Statement of the Partnership for Employer-Sponsored Coverage,
April 26, 2023.................................................   312
Letter of April 25, 2023, from the American Academy of Family
Physicians, et al., to Hon. Charles E. Schumer, et al..........   314
Statement of the U.S. Public Interest Research Group by Patricia
Kelmar, Senior Director, Health Care Campaigns, April 26, 2023.   316
Letter of April 25, 2023, letter from Kate Finkelstein, Director,
Government Affairs, Alliance of Safety-Net Hospitals...........   325
Letter of April 25, 2023, letter from Jordan Kough, Executive
Director, National Down Syndrome Congress, to Hon. Chuck
Schumer, et al.................................................   327
Statement of the American Academy of Pediatrics by Sandy Chung,
President, April 26, 2023......................................   330

----------

\2\ The report has been retained in committee files and is included in
the Documents for the Record at https://docs.house.gov/meetings/IF/
IF14/20230426/115801/HHRG-118-IF14-20230426-SD004.pdf.

LOWERING UNAFFORDABLE COSTS: LEGISLATIVE SOLUTIONS TO INCREASE
TRANSPARENCY AND COMPETITION IN HEALTHCARE

----------

WEDNESDAY, APRIL 26, 2023

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Health,
Committee on Energy and Commerce,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 10:00 a.m. in
the John D. Dingell Room 2123 of the Rayburn House Office
Building, Hon. Brett Guthrie (chairman of the subcommittee)
presiding.
Members present: Representatives Guthrie, Burgess, Latta,
Griffith, Bilirakis, Johnson, Bucshon, Hudson, Carter, Pence,
Crenshaw, Joyce, Harshbarger, Miller-Meeks, Obernolte, Rodgers
(ex officio), Eshoo (subcommittee ranking member), Sarbanes,
Cardenas, Ruiz, Dingell, Kuster, Kelly, Barragan, Blunt
Rochester, Craig, Schrier, Trahan, and Pallone (ex officio).
Also present: Representatives Allen, Matsui, and
Schakowsky.
Staff present: Alec Aramanda, Professional Staff Member,
Health; Kate Arey, Digital Director; Jolie Brochin, Clerk,
Health; Sarah Burke, Deputy Staff Director; Corey Ensslin,
Senior Policy Advisor, Health; Seth Gold, Professional Staff
Member, Health; Grace Graham, Chief Counsel, Health; Nate
Hodson, Staff Director; Tara Hupman, Chief Counsel; Peter
Kielty, General Counsel; Chris Krepich, Press Secretary; Carla
Rafael, Senior Staff Assistant; Emma Schultheis, Staff
Assistant; Michael Taggart, Policy Director; Dray Thorne,
Director of Information Technology; Lydia Abma, Minority Policy
Analyst; Jacquelyn Bolen, Minority Health Counsel; Waverly
Gordon, Minority Deputy Staff Director and General Counsel;
Tiffany Guarascio, Minority Staff Director; Stephen Holland,
Minority Senior Health Counsel; Saha Khaterzai, Minority
Professional Staff Member; Una Lee, Minority Chief Health
Counsel; Rick Van Buren, Minority Senior Health Counsel; and
C.J. Young, Minority Deputy Communications Director.
Mr. Guthrie. The subcommittee will come to order.
So the Chair recognizes himself for 5 minutes for an
opening statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. BRETT GUTHRIE, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE COMMONWEALTH OF KENTUCKY

We are here today because the healthcare costs continue to
rise, further limiting America's budgets that have already been
stretched by the inflation driven by the spending in the last
couple of years. We are considering 17 bills and discussion
drafts to advance price transparency and improve competition
within the healthcare system to ultimately lower costs.
This legislation hearing builds on our bipartisan work last
month. In our educational hearing we heard from experts and
witnesses from across the political and policy spectrum who
share our goal to lower costs for patients. Republicans and
Democrats on this committee are reaching across the aisle to
advance solutions, and these bipartisan efforts can be seen in
many of the proposals before us today.
Transparency can reveal the true value of each step in the
healthcare supply chain and empower patients and employers to
get the best deal on high-quality care. Many of our proposals
before the subcommittee today will shine a light on
prescription drug middlemen and further policies to make the
healthcare system more competitive to lower costs. The
Transparent Price Act, introduced by the leaders of the full
committee, will help build upon the Trump administration's
hospital and insurers' transparency rules to ensure patients
and employers are getting the best deal possible.
While transparency is necessary for a functioning market,
there must also be competition to lower prices and increase
quality. As such, we are reviewing a number of policies
designed to reduce incentives to consolidate and require
providers to compete with one another on both price and
quality, all with the goal of benefiting patients. For example,
today we will examine a number of proposals that will ensure
patients aren't paying more for the same service in one care
setting versus another. I look forward to hearing what the
impacts of these policies could be for patients, both in the
quality of care they would receive and how these would impact
their out-of-pocket spending.
One proposal recommended by MedPAC would save $1.7 billion
annually. Similarly, another policy would simply require CMS to
assess the impact that regulatory decisions may have on
consolidation in healthcare to see if Federal regulations may
be unintentionally driving consolidation. Improving competition
will help ensure seniors maintain access to the highest quality
healthcare services at the best possible prices.
Another theme repeatedly heard during last month's
bipartisan educational hearing is the need to address pricing
practices by pharmacy middlemen. Patients are facing rising
costs at the drug counter resulting from the growing influence
of a small number of pharmacy benefit managers. Due
consolidation within the PBM industry, 80 percent of all drug
claims are adjudicated by three PBMs.
It is the subcommittee's duty to ensure this consolidation
is driving value and improving outcomes. That is why I strongly
support the bipartisan PBM Accountability Act to provide key
information to employers about the drug costs and their
coverage for their employees. With that information, employers
can truly know what benefit their PBM may be providing.
There is also bipartisan legislation from the--from
Representative Carter that would finally ban spread pricing in
Medicaid. In 2019 it was reported that PBMs earned $123 billion
in Kentucky alone through spread pricing. Medicaid programs
should find a more transparent way to pay PBMs for their
services.
Finally, I want to thank Representative Eshoo for working
with me on the MVP Act. The innovation coming the next few
years is game changing, including potential one-time cures for
rare diseases, sickle cell anemia, and hemophilia. However, the
Medicaid system is not set up to pay for high-cost treatments.
Medicaid programs operate on an annual budget and need more
flexibility to help ensure patients gain access to these
therapies. This bipartisan legislation builds on a Trump
administration regulation that would give Medicaid programs the
flexibility needed over time and enter into contracts that
provide patients with access to novel cell and gene therapies.
This payment model also ensures States aren't on the hook to
pay for treatments that fail patients.
In closing, I look forward to today's hearing to discuss
these bipartisan ideas to lower healthcare costs, and look
forward to working with my subcommittee colleagues to advance
these policies.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Guthrie follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Guthrie. I yield back, and I now recognize the
gentlelady from California, Representative Eshoo, for 5 minutes
for an opening statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. ANNA G. ESHOO, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA

Ms. Eshoo. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and good morning,
colleagues.
Today we are considering 17 legislative proposals to lower
costs and increase transparency in our healthcare system.
Administrator Brooks-LaSure, welcome to the subcommittee.
This is your first time, and we are very glad to have you with
us.
Our last hearing on this topic showed that the United
States spends more on healthcare than our peer countries, but
we have significantly worse health outcomes. Simply put, we are
not getting the best value for our healthcare dollar.
Hospital care is the largest health spending category in
the United States, accounting for 31 percent of all healthcare
spending in 2021. Since 2000, hospital prices have increased
over 200 percent, and are predicted to continue rising in the
coming years. When hospital prices increase, out-of-pocket
costs for Medicare beneficiaries, who are often on fixed
incomes, increase as well.
The proposals before us today raise very interesting and
important questions on how to lower costs and improve health
outcomes, including how to implement targeted site-neutral
policies, while protecting patient access and rural hospitals.
Aligning payment rates across outpatient settings could
save Medicare more than 141 billion--with a B--dollars over 10
years. But we should heed MedPAC's recommendation to ensure
that we prioritize safety and access when advancing our
policies: how to bring more transparency to the 340B program
without creating unnecessary barriers, how to further
competition in the healthcare industry to better serve patients
and to decrease costs.
I am also pleased that we are discussing two bills that I
am coleading. The PBM Accountability Act will finally shed a
light on the opaque drug pricing system that PBMs use during
their dealings with manufacturers and insurance plans to make
enormous profits. It would also save the Government, the
Federal Government, over $2 billion in the next 10 years.
The Medicaid Value-Based Payments for Patients Act will
codify a CMS rule to help ensure Medicaid enrollees have access
to breakthrough gene therapies for dreaded diseases, as the
chairman said, for sickle cell anemia and certain cancers. And
I am pleased to partner with the chairman on this legislation,
and continue--and I look forward to continuing to carefully
craft and tailor it.
Finally, we are considering bipartisan legislation to
codify existing price transparency rules for hospitals and
insurers and prevent payment reductions to disproportionate
share hospitals under the Medicaid program. I fully support
these bills.
So thank you, Madam Administrator, for being with us today.
We look forward to the--your answers to our questions. And I
know we have a second panel, and I see some of the panelists in
the hearing room--and thank you for being with us.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Eshoo follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Ms. Eshoo. And with that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back the
balance of my time.
Mr. Guthrie. Thank you. The gentlelady yields back. The
Chair will now recognize the Chair of the full committee, Chair
Rodgers, for 5 minutes for an opening statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, A
REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF WASHINGTON

Mrs. Rodgers. Good morning, and welcome to Administrator
Brooks-LaSure of the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid
Services, and a range of stakeholders on proposals to lower the
cost of healthcare for Americans through increased transparency
and competition.
This committee has a rich history of plowing the hard
ground necessary to legislate and address issues from data
privacy to mental health. And I am proud that we are coming
together on another top priority for the American people.
Each day it seems we hear a new and more unbelievable story
of patients struggling to afford their care and navigate the
system: a 4-year-old getting bills his parents can't protest;
entire books dedicated to helping people challenge hospital
bills and overcome denials of care issued by insurance
companies that receive billions in premiums and subsidies each
year. Addressing these challenges won't be easy, but I know
this committee is up to the task.
Transparency is essential for patients and employers to
know and plan for their healthcare costs. It is foundational to
rebuilding the doctor-patient relationship. Seven proposals
before us improve transparency in the system, and I am thankful
for Ranking Member Pallone for leading H.R. 2691, the
Transparent Price Act, with me.
Our bill has been years in the making, and it is a
culmination of a lot of bipartisan work and discussions to
bring price transparency to the forefront. Our bill builds on
regulations released by the Trump administration and enforced
by the Biden administration, which just had to levy two more
fines against hospitals to comply.
Thank you, Ranking Member Pallone, for working with me for
years now on this important issue, starting with ensuring
implementation of the rule and now building on it with
legislation.
More proposals also help people understand what happens
when their insurer owns their doctor, pharmacy, a PBM, and if
that is driving value and unaffordable costs for the system.
Five bills and proposals look to reduce what patients and
employers pay for medicines through transparency and
competition.
And lastly, a number address incentives for consolidation
in Federal healthcare programs. At our bipartisan hearing last
month we heard a story about a senior from Ohio with painful
arthritis. The cost of her annual steroid injection increased
from $30 to $1,400 because her office clinic reclassified as a
hospital department, even though it was the exact same service
with the--from the exact same provider and the exact same
building.
Today patients in Medicare pay more at hospitals than
outpatient centers or physician offices for the same services.
Several proposals would advance site-neutral payments for
certain services that can be routinely done safely in a
doctor's office, such as drug administration, diagnostic tests,
imaging procedures, to name a few. For these services Medicare
and patients would pay the same amount, regardless of where
they are performed.
Ideas for site-neutral payments are bipartisan. Presidents
Obama and Trump proposed them in their budgets. Before this
committee, Secretary Becerra committed to working on these
policies. This is the right thing to do for patients. The
Committee for a Responsible Federal Budget estimated site-
neutral payments would save Medicare patients $94 billion over
10 years.
Let's be clear. Hospitals are integral. They are integral
parts of our communities. And we recognize the effects of high
labor cost, inflation, and ever-increasing government
regulation. But the question before us is this: Should we
support hospitals through a complex and opaque network of
cross-subsidies with unintended consequences like consolidation
that increase costs for patients, or do we separately work on a
transparent, accountable way to support hospitals that need it?
I am glad that the American Hospital Association is here
today, and I hope we can come together to address these issues
for patients to get the care they need at the cost that they
can afford.
And as I close, I want to again thank Ranking Member
Pallone and all my colleagues on this committee, the
subcommittee Chair, the Ranking Member Eshoo, for leading--all
the Members that are coming together--to lead on solutions in a
bipartisan way. This is bigger than any one person or political
party. It is about people, especially the most vulnerable, who,
for way too long, have struggled in a healthcare system that is
too expensive and too complex.
Many are discussion drafts before us today, and we are
having this hearing to understand what work needs to be done to
move these policies forward. And I invite all the stakeholders
to provide constructive feedback to inform our bipartisan work.
Patients all over the country are hopeful that this Congress
may finally work together to address healthcare costs and
complexity, and I am proud that Energy and Commerce is leading
the way.
[The prepared statement of Mrs. Rodgers follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mrs. Rodgers. I yield back.
Mr. Guthrie. Thank you. The gentlelady yields back. The
Chair now recognizes the ranking member of the full committee,
the gentleman from New Jersey, Rep. Pallone, for 5 minutes for
opening statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. FRANK PALLONE, Jr., A REPRESENTATIVE
IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF NEW JERSEY

Mr. Pallone. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I want to start
out by saying I appreciate Ranking Member Rodgers' comments
about working with us on various legislation, but I am
concerned that we are holding a hearing on legislative efforts
to lower healthcare costs at the same time that the Republican
leadership prepares to bring Speaker McCarthy's what I consider
irresponsible and extreme Default on America Act to the House
floor.
The Speaker's bill will raise costs for American families,
kick millions of people off their health insurance, and cut
$100 billion from the Medicaid program so they can provide huge
new giveaways to billionaires and big corporations. Republicans
are manufacturing a debt crisis to justify these cruel cuts.
They are holding the American economy hostage, and this
brinkmanship will be catastrophic to our economy and make it
harder for American families to make ends meet.
Republicans are also rushing the bill to the floor without
holding any hearings or a markup. So much for regular order.
Last Congress, when Democrats were in charge, we held several
days of markups that included robust debates for both the
American Rescue Plan and the Inflation Reduction Act. But now
they are in charge, and Republicans are moving to the Default
on America Act without an open or transparent process, or any
process at all, really. And we haven't had the opportunity to
hear from experts about the bill's implications, probably
because Republicans know how deeply unpopular these ideas are.
So if Republicans succeed in cutting $100 billion from
Medicaid, the consequences will be devastating and will be felt
by every beneficiary, provider, and plan that relies on
Medicaid. Republicans claim their bill would encourage Medicaid
beneficiaries to work, but it is clear that this is just a
pretext to cut Medicaid.
As a reminder, the Congressional Budget Office found that
Medicaid work requirements do not increase employment. They
merely result in individuals losing coverage as a result of
bureaucratic red tape. Two-thirds of adults on Medicaid are
already working, and those who are not generally have caregiver
responsibilities, are dealing with physical or mental health
issues that make work difficult, or are experiencing other
barriers to unemployment like lack of education or training. If
Republicans actually cared about increasing employment among
Medicaid beneficiaries, they would have included policies to
address those barriers.
Now, turning to the topic of today's hearing, I do believe
we should be working together to bring greater transparency and
competition to our healthcare system. But I have some concerns
about the process leading up to today's hearing.
My Republican colleagues shared a vast majority of the
discussion drafts we will be discussing a week before the
hearing was noticed. Given the broad array of topics and bills,
I am disappointed that we did not have adequate time to fully
vet some of these policies and provide the minority's input
from the beginning.
So I hope my Republican colleagues will commit to work in a
bipartisan manner as we consider these policies moving forward.
And I know that the Ranking Member Rodgers has already said
that she is committed to that. After all, we have been working
together on H.R. 2691, the Transparent Price Act, which I
introduced with Chair Rodgers.
Patients deserve greater transparency in the prices they
pay for healthcare. Today consumers are not able to easily
obtain price information on healthcare services. Sometimes the
price information that is provided is inaccurate and
misleading, making it difficult to compare across providers or
determine the true value of the care. And I know that we are
going to work on that together. I just heard the chairwoman,
Chairwoman Rodgers, say that.
I am also concerned by reports that many hospitals are
either acting slowly or not yet complying with the hospital
price transparency final rule, making it even more difficult
for consumers to access price information. H.R. 2691 codifies
the existing requirements for both hospitals and insurers, and
it will also improve the accessibility and usability of the
price information for consumers.
I am also pleased we are considering two bills that will
increase transparency into pharmacy benefit manager practices
by helping employers, consumers, and State Medicaid agencies
better understand drug price information which can help lower
healthcare costs.
We will also discuss legislation that I support to cancel
the $8 billion in cuts currently scheduled for Federal payments
to Medicaid disproportionate share hospitals, and a bill to
require hospitals to disclose ownership data. Studies show that
health consolidation is leading to higher care prices for
consumers, and I am particularly concerned about the role of
private equity in hospital consolidation. I look forward to
hearing from the witnesses on how these trends may be impacting
healthcare affordability and access to coverage.
So I look forward to the witnesses' testimony.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Pallone follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Pallone. And with that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Guthrie. Thank you. The gentleman yields back. And I
will just say that this is a bipartisan hearing, and we want to
work together as we move forward to see if we can get the
bipartisan solutions on the bills that you referenced, as the
chairman committed to. So thanks.
So this morning we have with us today the Administrator for
Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services.
We appreciate you being here. And as you know, you have 5
minutes for an opening statement, and the yellow light will
give you kind of an update. And I know you have a tight
timeframe, so we are going to try to keep our questions to the
5 minutes as well. So we need to move forward so everybody gets
a chance to answer their questions.
So I would like to welcome the Administrator here today,
Ms. Chiquita Brooks-LaSure, and we appreciate you being here,
and you are now recognized for 5 minutes for your opening
statement.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. CHIQUITA BROOKS-LaSURE, ADMINISTRATOR,
CENTERS FOR MEDICARE AND MEDICAID SERVICES

Ms. Brooks-LaSure. Thank you so much, Chairs McMorris
Rodgers and Guthrie, Ranking Members Pallone and Eshoo, and
members of the subcommittee. I just really want to thank you
for the opportunity to discuss the Centers for Medicare and
Medicaid Services' work to lower costs and increase
transparency across the healthcare system.
As the Nation's largest payer for healthcare, CMS plays a
key role in incentivizing high-quality care and smarter
spending across the healthcare system. And I would like to
highlight some of the work we have been doing.
Drug costs account for a growing portion of overall
healthcare costs, and too often people are forced to choose
between paying for their prescriptions or meeting other basic
needs. CMS is hard at work implementing the Inflation Reduction
Act. And thanks to this law, people with Medicare prescription
drug coverage are already beginning to see lower out-of-pocket
costs. This includes Medicare beneficiaries that need insulin,
which now will no longer pay--will pay $35 for a month's
supply.
CMS has also taken action to discourage drug companies from
increasing their prices faster than the rate of inflation. And
we continue to work on the IRA provisions that cap total out-
of-pocket drug costs and allow Medicare to negotiate with drug
manufacturers for the first time in the history of the program.
Our efforts are lowering costs for people with Medicare and the
program overall while improving access to innovative,
lifesaving treatments.
In addition to lowering costs, CMS's efforts to increase
transparency across the healthcare system will incentivize
competition, improve consumer experience, and result in
additional savings for our healthcare system and for patients.
People should know the cost of their healthcare services and
what they will be required to pay before they seek care. CMS is
working hard to get this information into their hands, the CMS
hospital price transparency rules providing public access to
standard hospital charges, and we will continue to work to
ensure that available information is meaningful and useful.
It is important that this information is available to all
Americans, which is why we took action last year to increase
the penalty for noncompliance to over $2 million annually. And
I am pleased to announce today that we are updating our
enforcement process to shorten the time by which hospitals must
come into compliance after a deficiency is identified. Further,
for hospitals that have not made any good-faith attempt to
satisfy the requirements, we will no longer be sending a
warning notice, and we will move straight to the corrective
action plan phase.
In addition to improving the transparency of hospital
prices, we are working to improve transparency from private
health plans so that people know the cost of a covered item or
service before receiving care. These data will help people to
make informed decisions, and allows third-party developers to
create price transparency tools that will help people shop for
health plans and for doctors. It is critical to provide
Americans with cost information before they receive care.
Additionally, CMS is also working to implement the No
Surprises Act to protect patients from surprise medical bills
after care has been received.
We are also committed to expanding transparency efforts
across healthcare consolidation and its impacts on prices. In
particular, consolidation in healthcare can leave rural and
underserved areas with inadequate or more expensive healthcare
options.
CMS is working to make public information on mergers,
acquisitions, consolidations, and changes of ownership for
hospitals and nursing homes enrolled in Medicare. Making
facility ownership information available supports efforts to
identify poor performers, better understand the impacts of
consolidation, and help patients and caregivers make more
informed decisions about their care.
Thank you for allowing me to highlight some of CMS's
efforts to lower costs and increase transparency while
continuing to expand access to high-quality, affordable care.
We are committed to building on the work that we have done to
address rising healthcare costs in a way that helps us advance
health equity, expand access, improve health outcomes, and
increase transparency. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Brooks-LaSure follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Guthrie. Thank you, I appreciate that. And I will say
that you have a hard stop. We want everybody to have the
opportunity to ask questions, so I am going to be enforcing the
5-minute rule on questions.
So don't ask a question with 10 seconds left to go. So I
will get started. I will--the Chair will now recognize myself
for 5 minutes for questions.
And Administrator Brooks-LaSure, we will start with
Alzheimer's disease. It has touched every family. And there has
been a lot of attention to a decision to severely--by CMS--to
severely restrict access to an entire class of FDA-approved
Alzheimer's drug treatments. And the Veterans Administration
announced it will cover one of these therapies, Lecanemab,
which CMS will only cover in limited circumstances.
And in the case of Lecanemab, what is unnecessary and
unreasonable about this FDA-approved drug with the Medicare-age
patients?
And would you talk broader, or more of FDA and the
Alzheimer treatments that have come forward that are only very
limited cover by CMS?
Ms. Brooks-LaSure. Thank you so much for the question about
coverage of Alzheimer's drugs.
As you know, and we all know, Alzheimer's disease is
incredibly devastating. And I want to thank all the advocates
who are caring for the millions of Americans who suffer from a
devastating illness. And it touches so many families, including
my own.
I will start by saying it is CMS's responsibility to make
sure, when we approach the coverage process, that we evaluate
all the evidence and, of course, take in the work of the FDA.
When FDA fully approves drugs--and in this case, for the
treatment of Alzheimer's disease--that means that the FDA has
made a determination that it will affect the disease itself.
And when FDA fully approves drugs for Alzheimer's disease, CMS
will cover it more broadly.
What--our requirements are that, once the drug is fully
approved by the FDA, we encourage doctors and ask doctors who
are prescribing the medication to make sure that information is
available through our registry. And we are doing that because
we need to continue to develop evidence of and understand the
impact on the drug. But we will----
Mr. Guthrie. Do you believe CMS would benefit from Congress
providing greater clarity into the phrase ``reasonable and
necessary'' in the Medicare program?
Ms. Brooks-LaSure. I would say that we have very clear
guidelines, and we have outlined in our national coverage
determinations how we approach our responsibility that we have
from Congress, which is to evaluate coverage in Medicare
populations. And we absolutely take the work that we get from
the FDA as we consider our coverage.
Mr. Guthrie. OK. I know there are--other Members are going
to address that as well, so I want to get to one question on
the bill before us before we move forward. But that is
concerning to all of us. It is bipartisan. I have heard both
sides of the aisle talk about the access to this drug for
Alzheimer's patients, and we are all concerned about it.
But before leaving office, President Trump finalized a
Medicaid rule in place to permit manufacturers to submit
multiple best prices, including a bundle sell option as well as
value-based best price, to submit to a non-VBP best price
opinion--option as well. We will have legislation, bipartisan
legislation with myself and Chair--or Ranking Member Eshoo.
H.R. 266, the MVP Act, would codify the rule. Will you commit
to working with Ranking Member Eshoo and me to codify this
rule?
Ms. Brooks-LaSure. I will absolutely commit to working with
you on outcomes-based options for Medicaid. This is something
that we are very interested in in the administration, and have
started to put together a proposal from the Innovation Center
and would love to work with you on that.
Mr. Guthrie. So could you go further, and just discuss how
this rule--because we have talked about the expensive
treatments for sickle cell, for hemophilia that could--people
who suffer from these diseases could greatly benefit from these
programs. Could you just go and discuss more how these
therapies will help patients by providing flexibility for
Medicaid programs to structure them?
Ms. Brooks-LaSure. Certainly. And while I won't talk about
specific proposals, I will say that what we have seen across
States is them needing to have more strategies as innovative
therapies come to market that affect a limited number of people
but where these illnesses are incredibly devastating.
And you talked about sickle cell disease. There are others,
but sickle cell in particular, where it is so important that
people know--that the doctors know how to treat that disease,
and that they--people get those therapies. It is critical that
States are able to cover those in a way that is affordable to
them so that we can ensure access, and I would love to work
with you on additional strategies.
Mr. Guthrie. Yes, I remember talking with Dr. Francis
Collins, the previous NIH director, and he said that--he said,
``I never used the word 'cure' for a lot of diseases, but
sickle cell can be cured with some of these treatments, and we
need to make sure people have access to them.''
Ms. Brooks-LaSure. Absolutely.
Mr. Guthrie. And so we look forward to--all of us--working
together with the administration and from our side of the
Capitol, or the--of DC to make sure we work together to move
this forward.
My time has expired, and the Chair now recognizes the
ranking member for 5 minutes for questions.
Ms. Eshoo. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I am very glad that the chairman raised the issue of
Alzheimer's, the drug. We did not have a conversation with each
other coming into this hearing, but I want to take up the same
issue. And it is a demonstration that there is a really deep
concern on both sides of the aisle on this.
I see, as I expressed to you when we spoke, a disconnect
between CMS, the FDA, and the VA on new treatments for mild
Alzheimer's. By July 6th, as you know, the FDA will determine
whether Lecanemab is--it is a new treatment for mild
Alzheimer's--whether it--that it will qualify for full
approval. This will be the traditional FDA approval that is the
gold standard, not an accelerated approval. That is already in
place.
The VA has already said it will cover this drug as long as
patients meet the criteria for use. Currently--and I am sure
you are well aware--tens of thousands of veterans with mild
Alzheimer's can go to their VA neurologist, be assessed, and
receive a prescription. But it is unclear whether the estimated
1 million Medicare patients who could benefit from the
treatment would be able to access the FDA-approved drug in
July. And in order to access the drug, they may need to enroll
in what you described to me as a CMS-approved prospective
comparative study like a registry.
So I have just a few quick questions. They are not long
answers, they are really yes-or-no.
Has Medicare ever required participation in a registry for
a fully FDA-approved drug before?
Ms. Brooks-LaSure. Let me start by saying that registries
are not a study. So--just to be clear.
Ms. Eshoo. But have you ever done this before?
Ms. Brooks-LaSure. We have. Registries are something that
we have done, but I can get back to you on details about that.
Ms. Eshoo. Has CMS published any details about the required
registry for fully approved Alzheimer's treatments, besides the
general description that is in the April 22 memo?
Ms. Brooks-LaSure. Not beyond that, but we----
Ms. Eshoo. OK.
Ms. Brooks-LaSure [continuing]. Intend----
Ms. Eshoo. Do you know of any doctors' offices or health
systems who are prepared to enroll Medicare Alzheimer's
patients in the registry beginning in July?
Ms. Brooks-LaSure. We welcome doctors to do so.
Ms. Eshoo. No, but have you--do you know of any that are
prepared to enroll, any doctors----
Ms. Brooks-LaSure. We wouldn't know that until----
Ms. Eshoo [continuing]. Or health systems?
Ms. Brooks-LaSure. We wouldn't know that until FDA fully--
--
Ms. Eshoo. Have you published any information to
Alzheimer's patients and their families explaining how to get
the drug under Medicare?
Ms. Brooks-LaSure. We will do so.
Ms. Eshoo. But it is not done.
Ms. Brooks-LaSure. That is correct.
Ms. Eshoo. OK. So here is the thing. If doctors don't know,
if patients don't know, and Medicare doesn't really seem to
know what this registry entails, how are Medicare patients
going to get the drug potentially beginning in July? That is
really the $64,000 question in my mind.
Let me describe to you two constituents. One is a
grandfather and a veteran. He has coverage. He has been
diagnosed. His wife was also diagnosed. She is not a veteran.
How do I, or any of us, explain that to our constituents?
This is, as you said and have said many times, this is a
devastating disease, and I don't think this can be treated as
17 months of a little additional hope.
Any--this drug comes out, families across the country are
going to be clamoring for it. Medicare is not prepared, from
your answers. You are adding layers to this. The VA is doing
something very different. And there is, as I said, there is a
huge concern here.
This is a progressive disease. We know that early
intervention with progressive diseases is really essential.
So I hope that you will leave this hearing with a new
commitment and a new view of how to do this, because you are
not prepared. And the beginning of July is, like, 2 months
away--8, 9 weeks away.
So I will give you the opportunity to----
Mr. Guthrie. We are out of----
Ms. Eshoo. Well, all right, yes.
Mr. Guthrie. I am sorry, we are out of time. Hopefully, you
will have a chance during the hearing to answer that----
Ms. Eshoo. I really, really----
Mr. Guthrie [continuing]. Because I want to hear your
answer, as well.
Ms. Eshoo. Well, OK.
Mr. Guthrie. Absolutely.
Ms. Eshoo. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Guthrie. The Chair now recognizes Dr. Burgess for 5
minutes for questions.
Mr. Burgess. I thank the chairman and the ranking member
for bringing this up. I will just stay in the same vein for a
moment.
The AMA puts out a--what is called a Morning Rounds every
morning. Yesterday the AMA Morning Rounds was--talked about how
scientists are targeting mild cognitive impairment, the early
Alzheimer's stages, with aggressive treatment. And if we don't
have these things in our armamentarium because--not because of
the FDA, which is a perennial problem, but it is you, with a
coverage determination that removes a tool from what doctors
are able to use.
It actually wasn't what I wanted to talk about. There's a
lot of things. I am going to submit some stuff to you in--for
questions for the record.
I do have to say, you know, Texas has had an issue with
expanding Medicaid coverage to 6 months, which they did in the
last legislative session. It actually was blocked by CMS for
reasons that I don't understand. You--I wrote you a letter, the
Texas delegation wrote you a letter. You responded and said you
received it last November, but it really wasn't a satisfactory
response.
I know the State legislature is working on something now.
Yes, time marches on. Things are likely to change, but CMS
needs to provide us an answer why they blocked this action by
the Texas legislature, which I feel would have helped patients
who were falling out of coverage after 3 months, as used to be
standard practice. Granted, 6 months is not as good as 12
months, but it was a start, and Texas should have been allowed
to have that State flexibility.
Now, what I really want to talk about is the bill that does
away with the prohibition in Medicare physician-owned
hospitals. And we have talked about this a lot in this
committee. It is just fundamentally wrong that, because of an
academic degree that I have, I am not able to engage in a
lawful practice in this country. And yet you brought up in your
testimony that consolidation in healthcare allows hospitals to
own doctors. This is nuts. Hospitals can own doctors, but
doctors can't own hospitals. Why is that OK?
So I do have a number of statements for the record. I have
got a study that I want to submit for the record, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Guthrie. Without objection, so ordered.
Mr. Burgess. So let me just ask you, are you doing an
analysis on--with this consolidation rulemaking that you are
working on or anything in the CMMI model development, are you
looking at removal of this prohibition on physician-owned
hospitals?
Ms. Brooks-LaSure. Thank you for the question. We need to
follow the statute, which sets out what the requirements are
and when--and in terms of physician-owned hospitals, which we
are doing so.
And in terms of consolidation, our focus and our authority
is around transparency. And that is why we have been working
very hard to make it clear where we have ownership in nursing
homes, hospitals, hospice, home health. That is where our
authority lies.
Mr. Burgess. Well, look. It was a physician-owned hospital
in the Rio Grande Valley that saved a lot of people during the
pandemic. Had they not stepped up--and they had to get a
special waiver from the agency in order to just take care of
the patient population they had to take care of, all because
they were a physician-owned hospital.
So I am just simply going to ask, will you commit to work
with me on this bipartisan issue to ensure CMS examines the
considerations in the rulemaking process?
Ms. Brooks-LaSure. I would be happy to work with you.
Mr. Burgess. And let me further ask--CMS, in its recent
inpatient prospective payment system proposed rule--you
narrowed the opportunity for physician-owned hospitals to
expand, raising barriers to entry and increasing costs. Will
you work with me on that?
Ms. Brooks-LaSure. I would absolutely work with you where--
notice and comment, and happy to work with you on it.
Mr. Burgess. Are you aware of a working paper coauthored by
the Department of Justice and Federal Trade Commission staff
addressing hospital competition and restrictions on physician-
owned hospitals?
Ms. Brooks-LaSure. I am definitely aware that DoJ is
working on hospital consolidation.
Mr. Burgess. So the Biden Executive order notes the need
for improved labor market competition. This working paper notes
that repealing the ban on physician-owned hospitals will
increase labor market competition. Do you agree with that?
Ms. Brooks-LaSure. I would have to review the document,
thank you.
Mr. Burgess. And we will make sure you have it available.
Look, we talk about access and particularly rural access.
Physician-owned hospitals is a way to rapidly provide that
access. And again, it is just fundamentally wrong that a
hospital can own a doctor, but a doctor can't own a hospital.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I will yield back.
Mr. Guthrie. Thank you. I thank the gentleman for yielding
back. The Chair now recognizes my friend from New Hampshire,
Ms. Kuster, for 5 minutes.
Ms. Kuster. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you for
holding this hearing.
I want to thank all of the guests in the audience and my
colleagues for addressing Alzheimer's. This was something that
we lived with in our family, and I appreciate your advocacy.
I am going to turn to a different topic. I am glad to see
that my bill, the PBM Accountability Act, was included for
discussion. I want to thank the Chair. It is great to work with
you, Chairman Guthrie and Ranking Member Eshoo and Congressman
Buddy Carter, to introduce this legislation that brings
transparency to pharmacy benefit manager operations and lowers
costs for patients.
Administrator Brooks-LaSure, thanks so much for your
testimony. I would like to focus on the challenges facing the
Medicaid program, particularly the unwinding process and the
threat from our colleagues on the other side of the aisle of
work requirements.
In the past 3 years, Medicaid enrollment has grown
substantially and the number of uninsured Americans,
fortunately, has dropped. Nearly 95 million people had health
insurance through Medicaid as of March of 2023. As we move to a
new phase of the pandemic with the end of the public health
emergency and States beginning the process of redetermining who
is eligible for Medicaid coverage, we must recognize the risk
to individuals and their families and the public health risks
that we all became so aware of during the pandemic.
Estimates find that as many as 15 million Americans could
lose health insurance coverage because of these
redeterminations, including 6.8 million who would still be
eligible for coverage and incorrectly lose their Medicaid.
These numbers are staggering, but they can hide the true
challenge that people in every single district across this
country will experience.
Picture a family who loses coverage and is unable to access
care, preventative services, behavioral healthcare, necessary
medications because of factors completely outside their
control: 6.8 million people will have an experience where
logistics lead to them getting kicked off the Medicaid rolls,
whether it be agency staffing shortages, low electronic renewal
rates, or outreach barriers.
I want to ask you, Administrator, can you detail the
efforts that CMS has made in coordination with States to
prevent people from unnecessarily losing their Medicaid
coverage?
Ms. Brooks-LaSure. Thank you so much for highlighting how
important of an issue it is for us to make sure we hold on to
the millions of people who have coverage in the Medicaid
program.
If we have learned anything over the last couple of years,
it is how important it is that everyone has access to
affordable healthcare in this country. It is important for the
individuals themselves, their families, and for all of us to be
safe and secure. We are at record-low levels of uninsured
across this country, with over 92 million people who are
enrolled in Medicaid and CHIP, many of them caregivers, hard-
working individuals who have multiple jobs, who are in school,
who are taking care of family and friends.
And so, for--when we think about the unwinding, what we are
doing here at CMS is working very closely with States both on
the Medicaid side as well as the marketplace side, and thinking
about healthcare.gov to make sure that people are aware of the
need to update their contact information and update their
information if they get unwinding letters from States. And we
are encouraging States to automatically enroll as much as they
can, to automatically rely on data that they have in house.
We are also wanting to work with partners, community
organizations, health plans, providers, everyone who touches a
Medicare--Medicaid beneficiary. And I have been thrilled with
some of the work that the private sector has been interested in
doing and already beginning to make sure that people are aware
of the importance of staying on their healthcare coverage.
Ms. Kuster. Thank you. Medicaid, as we know, is the single
largest payer for mental health services in the U.S. and is
increasingly playing a larger role in the reimbursement for
substance use disorder services.
My time is very short, but I am very concerned that recent
analysis shows that the work requirement in a Medicaid program
would jeopardize access to care for 21 million people, leaving
millions without critical coverage when seeking mental health
and recovery. Would you--would instituting Medicaid work
requirements affect how patients and communities respond?
Ms. Brooks-LaSure. What we have found over time is that
whenever we put up red tape barriers to people being able to
enroll in coverage----
Mr. Guthrie. Your time is expired.
Ms. Brooks-LaSure [continuing]. It affects----
Mr. Guthrie [continuing]. The 5 minutes. I apologize.
Hopefully, you will have an opportunity to answer as we move
forward.
Ms. Kuster. Thank you very much, and I will----
Mr. Guthrie. Thank you.
Ms. Kuster [continuing]. Yield back.
Mr. Guthrie. The gentlelady yields back. The Chair
recognizes Mr. Latta from Ohio for 5 minutes for questions.
Mr. Latta. Well, thanks, Mr. Chairman, and thanks for
holding this very important hearing today.
And, you know, there is broad bipartisan consensus that the
price of healthcare is unaffordable and that government
spending is out of control. As has been pointed out a little
bit earlier, the United States spent about 4.3 trillion on
healthcare in 2021, which represents about one-fifth of the
U.S. gross domestic product. Unfortunately, without
congressional action, healthcare spending is expected to
increase to nearly 6.8 trillion by 2030. We all know this is
unmanageable, and we need to find some solutions so we can put
the patients first.
And, you know, I--in reading your testimony, when you were
talking about the income--or the Inflation Reduction Act, under
the IRA you state that lowers prescription drug spending for
millions of people with Medicare, redesigns Part D, and keeps
drug premiums stable, and strengthens the Medicare program both
now and in the long term.
But let me ask this. You know, we know one thing: The
United States leads the world out there in finding drug and new
cures. And I know the gentlelady from California was talking
about on the Alzheimer's side. But, you know, when we just went
through COVID, I remember sitting in those early meetings
around the table when COVID was just at its--we were just
starting to deal with it. And sitting around with individuals
from companies--and within a year, you know, we had three
different types of medications out there. Nowhere else in the
world could--did that occur but here in the United States. But
it is because of--you know, we have here in this country.
Is there a concern at CMS that with what has been placed in
the law right now could inhibit the creation of these new drugs
and cures?
Because, again, it is just not one type of a cure out there
that we need. In Alzheimer's, a cure that we have got to have--
and I know on both sides of our families that we have seen the
devastating effect of that horrible, horrible disease. But I am
really concerned about what is going to happen into the future
for companies being able to go out there and find these drugs,
and make--get these drugs to the market.
Ms. Brooks-LaSure. We share the goal that--of making sure
that drug companies still absolutely have the incentive to be
as innovative as they have been. And you are so right, that the
drug companies were incredible in making sure that we were safe
from COVID-19 with coming--bringing vaccines to market. And it
is our every intention at CMS to make sure that we run the drug
negotiation process in a way that continues to foster
innovation but also makes sure that we can provide it to
Medicare beneficiaries.
Mr. Latta. OK, let me follow up, though. Because when you
say that you are going to have that innovation out there, how
are you going to provide that?
Because, again, this is something that everybody is talking
about right now. But how is CMS going to make sure that you are
going to be able to have--that the United States leads the
world, and everybody sees is the envy of the world, in getting,
you know, lifesaving cures to the market that we have to have?
Ms. Brooks-LaSure. I would answer your question in two
ways.
First of all, we are working very closely with drug
companies as we work on our guidance, and that is something I
have personally done, as well as our staff have met with many,
many companies and talked to them through what our process is
going to be.
Second of all, the drug negotiation is something drug
companies do every day. They do it with companies all across
America, as well as, of course, the world. But they do it in
our drug benefit right now. And we are building on that work,
and taking all of that into account.
The drugs that we will be negotiating are drugs that have
been on the market for many, many years. There are drugs that,
by law, are going to be drugs that are top spenders where they
have been on market for many years. But we will continue to
work with policymakers and stakeholders to listen to concerns,
listen to issues that they raise with their guidance, just like
we are right this minute.
Mr. Latta. Well, in my last 50 seconds--I know the chairman
is being very good on keeping the time--because, you know, the
United States--and we have had the hearings in here, we have
seen the facts that around the--not only around the--you know,
this hemisphere, but around the globe, when a lot of countries
out there say what their costs are, really it is not apples to
apples out there. It is really--because what is happening out
there, we are seeing that the United States has a lot more
drugs that could be provided, but other countries that are out
there, they only have a certain number of drugs, and then those
individuals might need a certain type of cancer drug, and the
Government says, ``You can't have it, you are going to have to
have this,'' but it might not be the drug that they are going
to have to have for--to get them cured.
So I just want to make sure that CMS always remembers that
the United States is going to lead out there, because it is
absolutely essential that we do to make sure that we have the
best healthcare and the cures here, in the United States.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Guthrie. Thank you. The gentleman yields back. The
Chair now recognizes Mr. Cardenas from California for 5
minutes.
Mr. Cardenas. Thank you very much, Chairman Guthrie, and
also Ranking Member Eshoo, for holding this hearing.
And to Administrator Brooks-LaSure, thank you so much for
weighing in on these transparency-related issues.
Before discussing proposals we are considering today, I
feel like I must mention the threats we are seeing to Medicaid.
There is a bill before us this very week that will institute
what amounts to a significant cut to Medicaid access under the
guise of work requirements. In fact, just yesterday HHS
released new analysis showing that around 21 million Americans'
coverage and access to care would be threatened under the
Medicaid work requirement proposal put forth by my Republican
colleagues.
We have seen this before. And not only does it force people
out of their insurance, it does nothing to boost employment. We
can look at Arkansas as a case study. The State implemented
these work and reporting requirements, and, as a result,
thousands of people were disenrolled for failure to comply. For
many of these people, they were kicked off not just because
they were--not because they were ineligible, but because it was
so difficult to navigate the reporting process. And that is
really the point. The proposal is cruel, and a thinly veiled
attempt to restrict access to coverage to American citizens,
which brings me to my question.
Administrator Brooks-LaSure, why is access to Medicaid so
critical, and how do work requirements and the reporting around
them further disadvantage already vulnerable populations?
Ms. Brooks-LaSure. Thank you so much for your question
about how important coverage is.
I think we have gotten a lesson, as a country, of how
important it is, not only with the COVID-19 pandemic, where it
was critical that people could have access to vaccines and
treatments, but also when we think about tackling our other
crises in this country like maternal health, where we need to
make sure that women are getting healthcare before they are
pregnant, while they are pregnant, and afterwards to address
health outcomes and so on down the list in terms of mental
health.
You mentioned the experience that we saw in Arkansas, where
people who would have met the requirements where they were
working or where they would have been exempted lost coverage.
That is what often happens in these situations. I spoke to a
family during my time pre-CMS Administrator, when work
requirements were in discussions. And I remember talking to a
woman whose brother was disabled who absolutely would have
qualified for an exemption, but she was very overwhelmed by the
paperwork that she needed to fill out and the--and how
confusing it was.
That is what happens when we put up barriers to people
getting care, and it is critical that we make sure that people
in this country are covered, not just for them, but for all of
us.
Mr. Cardenas. Is depression a medical condition?
Ms. Brooks-LaSure. Depression is a medical condition.
Mr. Cardenas. Could somebody find themselves diagnosed with
clinical depression and want to work but for a period of time
is having a difficulty being employed?
If that is the case, and the person isn't employed, and
they are not able to navigate the system of paperwork, would
that be denying somebody access to healthcare that they
obviously critically need?
Ms. Brooks-LaSure. It is so important that people are
healthy so that they are able to work, so that they are able to
live their lives. And absolutely, what we have seen is that
people have gotten illnesses when they are uninsured, and that
has prohibited their ability to be in the workforce. And that
is what we don't want as a country. To make sure our economy
continues to grow, to make sure that people are able to achieve
the American dream, it is critical that we have that basic
protection.
Mr. Cardenas. Thank you. And I am very concerned about
these requirements, and I am grateful for your defense of
Medicaid on the record.
Now I also want to be sure to discuss the role of safety
net hospitals in providing critical care to medically
underserved and low-income communities. I am glad to see policy
proposals that would delay Medicaid DSH cuts, as this funding
has been critical to upholding services in safety net settings.
Administrator Brooks-LaSure, if we do not step in, what
type of impact would you expect for safety net hospitals, many
of which are still struggling in the wake of COVID-19 pandemic,
which is still with us?
Ms. Brooks-LaSure. Yes, hospitals have been on the
forefront of the pandemic and have been keeping so many of us
safe and healthy through the last couple of years.
We know that the safety net has--disproportionately serves
the underserved, and DSH payments do go to help support the
payments for particularly them supporting the uninsured.
Mr. Cardenas. Thank you so much. My time having been
expired----
Mr. Guthrie. OK, the----
Mr. Cardenas [continuing]. I yield back.
Mr. Guthrie. The gentleman yields back. I appreciate that.
The Chair now recognizes the Chair of the full committee, Chair
McMorris Rodgers, for 5 minutes.
Mrs. Rodgers. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Just to clarify regarding the proposal that the Republicans
have on the floor for work requirements for Medicaid, the
Democrats keep talking about millions. CBO just yesterday
suggested that it estimated 600,000 may lose their Medicaid if
these able-bodied adults with no children choose not to work,
volunteer, or get training 20 hours a week. So if you are
pregnant, you are not included. If you are a parent with
children, not included. If you are mentally or physically
unfit, the bill text is very clear, not included.
And I just want to get that on the record, because I don't
want people to be concerned, people that--we all believe it is
very important that Medicaid is a very important safety net.
What we are trying to do is protect that safety net and
encourage the able-bodied adults without children to work,
volunteer, or get some training, come alongside them, and it is
their decision.
Administrator, if--I wanted to ask some questions here. If
you could ask Congress--you know, back to transparency now--if
you could ask Congress for one specific improvement to price
transparency rules, what would they be?
Ms. Brooks-LaSure. What a question. I think that we have
been given authority on price transparency, as we have talked
about, with health plans and hospitals.
I will say that some of our transparency--our guidance on
hospitals is probably very limited; there is one sentence in
the statute. But I really would love to work with you to
increase our authority on price transparency.
Mrs. Rodgers. OK, thank you for that. Ranking Member
Pallone and I have proposed improvements to these rules, and I
am glad that in your testimony you mentioned the importance of
needing to standardize hospital price transparency data.
I believe that you are still not doing enough with the
authority that you have, and there hasn't been enough
enforcement across the board. I am specifically disappointed
that you did not mention enforcing the existing requirement
that PBMs disclose their drug prices. That is something that is
included in the bill. So I just would like to ask, what has
kept you from doing more to enforce these requirements?
Ms. Brooks-LaSure. Certainly, and thank you for your
leadership on price transparency and the push to encourage all
of the entities to submit data.
On PBMs in particular, and price transparency on
prescription drugs, because our rules interacted with new
legislation that passed in No Surprises Act, we took a step and
wanted to make sure it was coordinated, but we are committed to
continuing to make sure----
Mrs. Rodgers. So the----
Ms. Brooks-LaSure [continuing]. That information----
Mrs. Rodgers. Thank you. I will just take my--reclaiming my
time. There is a lot more to be done. And this hearing is about
competition, transparency. Healthcare businesses like PBMs
continue to rapidly consolidate, finding new and innovative
ways to add complexity, hide where the money is going. And we
are fighting to pass strong transparency laws.
I bring up these key transparency provisions because, from
the last bipartisan effort to address cost, they are not being
implemented. Congress banned gag clauses, but I routinely hear
from employers who cannot access their own health claims data.
Patients are supposed to get good-faith estimates on cost when
they schedule an appointment, but CMS is not enforcing this for
patients with employer-sponsored insurance.
And I do not want this committee's efforts--we are going
through a lot of work, hearings, bills to hopefully get a
bill--you know, many bills--signed into law. I don't want it to
languish for years while CMS prioritizes their other agenda. So
failure to do the implementation harms the very patients that
we are coming together to help in a bipartisan way. So will you
commit to work with this committee to get properly implemented
and enforced the bipartisan legislation?
Ms. Brooks-LaSure. We continue to work to enforce the law,
and absolutely will work with you on that.
Mrs. Rodgers. Thank you. We are seeing a dramatic growth in
a newer kind of consolidation under payers. In other words,
insurance companies purchasing healthcare providers. And to a
patient it means your insurance company might own the doctor
you see, the pharmacy where you get your medicine, and the PBM
that decides how much you pay for that medicine. And I think we
all have questions about what that means for patients and the
costs that they pay and the quality of care that they receive.
Administrator, one of the proposals before us contemplates
collecting numerous data points to tell us about the health of
and the spending on patients who see doctors or pharmacies
owned by insurance companies and PBMs, compared to patients
that see independent doctors and pharmacies. Have you attempted
to collect this data to better understand the effects of
vertical integration?
Ms. Brooks-LaSure. I do not believe we have authority to do
so, but I am happy to look in at the issue.
Mrs. Rodgers. OK.
Ms. Brooks-LaSure. But we very much support transparency
around ownership and increased transparency.
Mrs. Rodgers. OK, lots more to come. Thanks for being here.
I yield back.
Mr. Guthrie. Thank you. The gentlelady yields back. The
Chair recognizes the Ranking Member Pallone for 5 minutes.
Mr. Pallone. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Administrator Brooks-LaSure, thank you for coming here
today. And as I am sure you have seen, last week the
Republicans released their bill, what I call Default on America
Act. And of course, it includes a provision that would threaten
access to care for millions of low-income Americans and cut
over $100 billion from Medicaid.
So last Congress, when Democrats were moving through
reconciliation, Republicans repeatedly complained about the
lack of regular order. And of course, we put those bills
through multiple days of markups, considered probably dozens of
Republican amendments, and debated for hours. And Republicans
are skipping all of that and trying to rush a bill to the floor
without so much as a hearing today. So I am going to take this
opportunity to ask some of the questions I would have asked if
Republicans had been willing to hold themselves to the same
standards they held Democrats to last Congress.
And I know you have already been asked about the work
requirements, but I want a little more information. Would you
expect people to lose access to health insurance if Medicaid
were to adopt a work requirement?
Ms. Brooks-LaSure. I would expect that. And I would say
again that it is not just people who are subject to the
requirements that often get caught up in red tape. It is--can
often be people who are exempted.
So, for example, in Arkansas what we found is that there
was an individual who had health insurance, who was working,
didn't realize that he needed to fill out the paperwork, lost
his job, lost his insurance, had a health condition that made
him unable to work. That--those stories replicate across
barriers so often.
Mr. Pallone. Now, this--thank you. The Centers for Medicare
and Medicaid Services have previously said that the
administrative burden can make it difficult for beneficiaries
to comply with Medicaid work requirements. Is it fair to say
that many beneficiaries lose coverage because they get tangled
up in red tape? And that is, I guess, your example, but if you
want to----
Ms. Brooks-LaSure. That is an example. I think we have seen
it.
It is also--States are in the process of working on
unwinding. If--we want them focused on making sure they are
meeting all the requirements that were established by the
Congress at the end of the year and making sure, again, that we
are holding on to coverage so that we are addressing health
outcomes like maternal health, like mental health, and making
sure we have a strong and healthy workforce.
Mr. Pallone. So, Administrator, CMS has said that research
shows that most Medicaid beneficiaries are either already
working or subject to an exemption, and that this--and I
quote--``this makes it challenging for such a work requirement
to produce any meaningful impact on employment outcomes.''
In other words, work requirements and Medicaid don't
actually increase work. Is that correct?
Ms. Brooks-LaSure. There has been no link when we have seen
work requirements in States to an increase in employment.
Mr. Pallone. All right. And to summarize, I mean, again, I
know you have talked about this quite a bit with some of the
previous Members asking questions, but to summarize, work
requirements, in my opinion, won't increase employment. They
will cause people to lose health insurance, and many of these
people will still be eligible and just get caught up in the red
tape, and is that correct?
And if you wanted to talk about----
Ms. Brooks-LaSure. That is certainly our expectation, and
based on our experience over the last many, many decades. When
we establish new requirements for people, they form barriers to
the people who are subject to them as well as to others.
Mr. Pallone. Well, thank you. It is clear from your answers
that--you know, why Republicans wanted to skip regular order on
this bill. And that is because the Republicans' so-called work
requirements is nothing more than another attempt by
Republicans to take health insurance away from people and cut
over $100 billion from Medicaid. And I am disappointed that my
colleagues are choosing to ram this cruel and harmful policy
through the House of Representatives without so much as a
hearing. And I hope my colleagues will join me in recognizing
this bill for what it is: another transparent attempt to take
healthcare away from millions of Americans, unfortunately.
And with that, Mr. Chair, I yield back.
Mr. Guthrie. The gentleman yields back. The Chair now
recognizes Mr. Griffith of Virginia for 5 minutes for
questions.
Mr. Griffith. Good morning. In CMS's recent notice of
benefit and payment parameters rule, CMS finalized a policy
that your agency has originally estimated would render more
than 60,000 plans illegal to be on the ACA exchange. As many as
2.7 million people may lose their plan or have to scramble to
try to find a new plan.
You just finished a whole discussion of people getting
caught up in the red tape. Madam Administrator, aren't you the
red tape? Aren't you all the ones who are saying you can't do
this, you can't do that, particularly when it comes to these
ACA exchange programs?
Ms. Brooks-LaSure. I would say that we are working very
hard to make sure that people can enroll in coverage, and that
they have good options.
Mr. Griffith. But you have taken 60,000 options, plans off
the table.
Ms. Brooks-LaSure. So the provision that I think you are
referring to is our requirement around making sure that people
understand the difference between their plans. People will have
many dozens of choices. What we found in research and what we
found from this experience of States----
Mr. Griffith. And that may be true in some areas, but there
have been times in my district, a rural district that is
economically stressed, where there has only been one plan
available, and now that has changed. There's a couple of plans
available, but we are not going to have dozens. And then you
have taken 60,000 plans nationwide across the board off the
table.
And on top of that, we have seen price increases in the ACA
plans. It stands to reason, does it not, that when you limit
the number of plans, you create an incentive for price
increases. Isn't that true?
Ms. Brooks-LaSure. I would disagree.
Mr. Griffith. OK, you disagree. I want to come back to that
in a minute.
Where I had originally planned on starting before you
talked about getting caught up in red tape, and I am back here
going, ``But you are the red tape,'' I wanted to talk about
Alzheimer's. We have got a bunch of folks here from the
Alzheimer's Association, including a former aide of mine in the
Virginia legislature, Josh Myers, who is with us today. If you
look around, you will see a lot of purple behind you.
This committee worked hard to change the way the FDA did
its work so that we could get things that--medicines that take
a long time to show benefit or to have an impact out there on
the marketplace, because Alzheimer's is not something that you
cure in a day or a week or 2 weeks. You have got to have years
of using these medicines, particularly the--if I am saying it
right--the amyloid plaque medications. And we changed those
rules. We worked hard in this committee, this subcommittee, so
that the FDA could approve it.
My question to you is then, the FDA has approved it; when
did CMS decide or get authority to operate like a scientific
regulatory body, when that is the FDA's job? And isn't that
what you are doing? You have turned yourself into a regulating
body, a scientific regulatory body, by denying paying for the
Alzheimer's medication that this subcommittee, and this
committee on a bipartisan basis, worked hard to make sure was
available to the patients of Alzheimer's.
Ms. Brooks-LaSure. Thank you for your question. And as we
have all been talking about, Alzheimer's disease is incredibly
devastating, both to the individuals who have it, and the
families.
What we--our requirement by law is to do a determination of
whether a drug is covered--whether it is reasonable and
necessary for the Medicare population.
For the drugs that have been a--that have received
accelerated approval----
Mr. Griffith. And the FDA says it is reasonable and
necessary. When the physician says it is reasonable and
necessary--isn't it true you are just trying to cost shift?
Ms. Brooks-LaSure. Our decisions are based on our
requirements, the ones that we need to follow.
Mr. Griffith. So you say we need to change your laws.
Ms. Brooks-LaSure. Of course, Congress has the authority--
--
Mr. Griffith. Has that authority.
Ms. Brooks-LaSure [continuing]. To change our rules.
Mr. Griffith. I just don't understand why you are going
against what our clear wishes were from this committee, this
subcommittee, and this--and the Congress of the United States.
I have time maybe to go into one other direction. On those
plans that you ruled illegal for the ACA, one of those is a
company that has--is a disrupter. It is trying to try a new
model where they get rid of a lot of the middlemen and
therefore don't have a network. They approve all drugs approved
by the FDA. They will pay for them. It is a novel approach
coming out of Ohio. You all ruled if you don't have a network,
you can't be on an ACA plan. How does that make any sense?
Ms. Brooks-LaSure. I would say what CMS focuses on is
making sure that we know that if someone is enrolled in a
health plan, they will have access to their doctors. And so
that is our----
Mr. Griffith. Well, this plan allows them access to any
doctor they want, unlike the other ACA plans. It sounds like to
me this is exactly what you ought to be moving forward to
approving.
I appreciate your time, and I yield back.
Mr. Guthrie. The time has expired, the gentleman yields
back. The Chair now recognizes Dr. Ruiz for 5 minutes for
questions.
Mr. Ruiz. Thank you. Thank you for holding this important
hearing.
Lowering the cost of healthcare along with increasing
access to care are two of my top priorities. So I am especially
glad the Supporting Safety Net Hospitals Act, which will
eliminate the pending cuts to disproportionate share hospital
payments for the next 2 years, is included in this hearing for
consideration.
You see, I grew up, practiced medicine, and now represent a
district that is woefully medically underserved and in dire
need of better, more equitable access to healthcare. In my
district alone, I have four DSH hospitals: Pioneer, El Centro,
Palo Verde, and San Gorgonio hospitals, all of which will be
significantly impacted by these cuts. These hospitals that care
for our most underserved populations are already operating on
razor-thin margins, and any cuts could mean hospital closures,
and we certainly cannot risk that. Many of my constituents are
already forced to travel a significant distance to get to a
hospital, so any hospital closure will lead to even worse
access.
In addition to helping keep the doors open to DSH
hospitals--or the DSH hospitals' doors open, such as El Centro,
Pioneer, Palo Verde, San Gorgonio hospitals, we also need to
address the healthcare provider shortage that is plaguing our
country. One of the ways that we can do that is by increasing
the utilization of community health workers and promotoras.
Administrator Brooks-LaSure, you say in your testimony that
proposals in the President's budget to invest $8 billion to
enhance Medicare benefits, such as expanding access to diabetes
prevention services, behavioral health services, including
addiction services, nutrition and obesity counseling, and
community health workers. Can you expand on what the
administration wants to do to increase access to community
health workers?
And what is your understanding between the difference of
community health workers and promotoras, and will those changes
also help promotoras?
Ms. Brooks-LaSure. Thank you so much for your focus on
making sure that people, particularly the underserved, deliver
care. And what we know is that there are so many types of
organizations that are providing critical needs. And you
mentioned safety net hospitals, which are on the forefront in
many respects; Community Health Centers, where so many people
get their private primary care----
Mr. Ruiz. Let me just kind of refocus, because I only have
a certain amount of time, and my specific question is can you
expand on what the administration wants to do to increase
access to community health workers, or promotoras?
Ms. Brooks-LaSure. So we are very committed to making sure
that people who are helping to make sure that folks are
connected to healthcare coverage and healthcare services, we
are using our authority where we can, and welcome the
opportunity to continue.
Mr. Ruiz. OK, thank you. I am working on legislation on--to
increase access to community health workers and promotoras, and
would love to partner with you on those efforts moving forward.
Ms. Brooks-LaSure. Thanks.
Mr. Ruiz. Good?
Ms. Brooks-LaSure. Mm-hmm.
Mr. Ruiz. OK. So switching topics to the No Surprises Act,
this landmark policy was a huge win for patients who are now
left out in the middle of paying--payment disputes between
providers and insurance companies and are no longer receiving
these balance bills, surprise medical bills.
But as you mentioned in your testimony, there is a
significant portion of backlog disputes that are pending
eligibility determinations. And I am sure you can imagine that
I am hearing from a lot of folks about this backlog and the
significant amount of time it is taking to get a resolution on
their cases. And I think that the unanticipated backlog is
indicative of just how important it was that we addressed the
issue of surprise billing.
So I am pleased to hear you say that the departments are
working to increase staff in order to address the backlog in
eligibility determination, so that cases can be decided more
quickly by the certified independent dispute resolution
entities. So can you give us a status update on staffing, as
well as how long you estimate it will take to clear the current
backlog?
Ms. Brooks-LaSure. I think you are very right in saying
that the volume that we have gotten shows just how important of
an issue No Surprises has been.
Mr. Ruiz. So can you give us----
Ms. Brooks-LaSure. But yes, we will----
Mr. Ruiz [continuing]. A status update on staffing, as well
as how long you estimate it will take to clear the current
backlog?
Ms. Brooks-LaSure. We are working very hard on that, and
will continue to, and happy to follow up.
Mr. Ruiz. OK. So I will follow up with you on that one for
a status update. Staffing is going to be very important. I do
think that there are a lot of rural hospitals who serve in
underserved areas who rely on us making sure that this backlog
is cleared as soon as possible.
So with that, I thank you, and I yield back my time.
Mr. Guthrie. Thank you. The gentleman yields back. The
Chair now recognizes Mr. Carter from Georgia for 5 minutes.
Mr. Carter. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you very
much for this hearing. This is something you know that I am
very passionate about, and I can't tell you how much I
appreciate it.
Administrator, thank you for being here. Just for the
record, I am a pharmacist. I have practiced pharmacy over 40
years before I became a Member of Congress. I started when I
was 10, by the way.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Carter. But nevertheless, one of the issues that is
most important to me is transparency and drug pricing. I was
the one behind the counter who had to go and watch the senior
citizen make a decision between buying groceries and buying her
medicine. I was the one behind the counter who watched the
mother in tears as she tried to find the money to pay for her
child's antibiotic. And I set as my goal when I got here 8
years ago to do something about that.
The first thing I did was to go to the FTC and to ask them
to look at the vertical integration that exists within the drug
pricing chain, where the insurance company owns the PBM that
owns the pharmacy that, in many cases, employs the provider. I
asked them to look at that. Finally, after 7\1/2\ years, they
undertook a study last summer to look at the impact that the
practices of the PBMs are having on independent retail
pharmacies.
You know, this is a bipartisan issue. This is a nonpartisan
issue. I never went to the counter and asked, ``Are you a
Republican or a Democrat?'' The price was always the same. High
drug prices impact everyone here in America, all Americans.
That is why we have to do something about it.
Chair Rodgers asked you a question a little while ago, and
I want to get clarification and be fair here. I believe she
asked you if you had--I don't know whether she was talking
about transparency or about the vertical integration, and you
said you had no authority in that area. Was it about the
transparency?
Ms. Brooks-LaSure. It was about vertical integration.
Mr. Carter. About the--OK, fair enough. I do believe that
is the responsibility of the FTC, and I think the FTC has
failed, has failed Americans in not undertaking that
responsibility. And that is why I applaud them for this study
that they are doing right now.
And it is not just pharmacy, and it is not just drug
pricing. It is consolidation within healthcare, period. You
know, we had in this committee--we had the CBO, the
Congressional Budget Office, before us in a meeting. We had the
Director and we had 20 staff members. I asked them directly to
give me one--just one--example of where consolidation in
healthcare has saved money. They could not give me one. One
example of where consolidation in healthcare has saved money,
and they could not give me one.
You know, we all want the same things. Republicans and
Democrats want the same thing. We want affordability,
accessibility. We want quality in healthcare. That is what we
want. And when we talk about accessibility, we have to talk
about independent retail pharmacies, because 95 percent of all
Americans live within 5 miles of a pharmacy, yet 4 percent of
all independent retail pharmacies are going out of business
every year as a result of the practices primarily of PBMs.
Now, I have got a bill here. You know what spread pricing
is, and you understand it. We have got a bill, Drug Pricing
Transparency in Medicaid Act. You understand that the State of
Ohio, the attorney general, has just recently undertaken a
lawsuit against the PBMs, referring to them as gangsters. And
that is exactly what they are.
I just want to ask you, do you agree that more transparency
is needed when PBMs are now vertically integrated, and own the
insurance company that owns the PBMs that owns the pharmacy
that in many cases employs the provider?
Ms. Brooks-LaSure. I agree that transparency is important.
Mr. Carter. Well----
Ms. Brooks-LaSure. I did want to mention one thing that we
have done--and it really did come from talking with
pharmacists--was trying to increase the transparency with fees
that are paid and to make sure that pharmacists would
understand what the rules were. And it is something that we
will continue to work on.
Mr. Carter. What do you think you can do in helping us with
transparency?
Ms. Brooks-LaSure. I am happy to--our staff is happy to
work with you on ideas around transparency.
Mr. Carter. Well, we got plenty of them.
If we eliminated spread pricing, do you think that we could
save money here in America?
Ms. Brooks-LaSure. I think it is--as with----
Mr. Carter. If I could, there was a study done--and it is a
little aged now, it was done a little bit over a year ago--by
the Berkeley Research Group that showed--and listen, and if you
remember one thing, then remember this: It showed that only 37
percent of the price of a drug goes to the pharmaceutical
manufacturer, which begs the question, where does the 63
percent go? It goes to the PBM, it goes to the middlemen. That
is where the problem is. That is where we can control drug
prices at.
I want to ask you to please commit that you will work with
us to bring forth more drug transparency. We have got
bipartisan legislation that we are working on now.
Ms. Brooks-LaSure. I commit that we will work with you on--
--
Mr. Carter. Thank you, and thank you for being here today,
and I yield back.
Mr. Guthrie. Thank you. The gentleman's time has expired.
The Chair now recognizes Representative Barragan from
California for 5 minutes for questions.
Ms. Barragan. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for holding this
hearing.
Thank you, Administrator Brooks-LaSure, for being here, for
all the work that you do at CMS.
Before I want to start, I want to recognize advocates out
here in our purple-colored shirts that are advocating for
Alzheimer's. As you know, as many people have heard, my mother
has Alzheimer's. She is 82 years old. And the issue of
Alzheimer's and access to care, access to drugs, and making
sure it is equitable is an issue that is not only near and dear
to me, but requires advocacy.
Your testimony highlights that part of the goal that you
have is to have equity. And it says ``efforts across the Agency
are based on a foundation of goals that aim to advance health
equity, eliminate avoidable differences in health outcomes
experienced by people who are disadvantaged or underserved.''
We know that Alzheimer's impacts all Americans. We know
that Latino communities are growing, and they are at huge risk
of being those that are going to be impacted by Alzheimer's.
And I have seen firsthand--and a lot of our families have seen
firsthand--the devastation.
You and I have had conversation before, both through
letters that I have sent to CMS asking them to reconsider its
national coverage determination. We have had a meeting. You
were very generous with your time. I appreciate your
willingness to do that. I have held a press conference. I am
going to continue to hold press conferences, and I have
introduced legislation to try to fix--and what I see as a fix--
to CMS's unprecedented decision to tightly restrict coverage
for a whole class of Alzheimer's drugs.
And this is a bipartisan issue. This is something that we
have heard from colleagues on both sides of the aisle and
something that is, I think, meaningful and a failure, really,
of CMS to provide meaningful coverage for the class of
therapies targeting Alzheimer's disease. CMS's decision
continues to concern me. And so I want to follow up to a letter
I had sent to you and a response that you provided on March
27th, just a couple of weeks ago.
Administrator, you stated in your response letter to me on
March 27th, when I urged you to reconsider the coverage
policy--you said that--and I am quoting from the letter--``If
the FDA approves a drug within this class based on a direct
measure of clinical benefit, CMS will provide enhanced access
and coverage for people with Medicare participating in CMS-
approved studies, such as nationwide, registry-based study.''
And I am ending the quote there.
From my understanding, this means that CMS will continue
its policy of only providing coverage for those enrolled in a
CMS-approved study, which is concerning to me. Is that--is that
accurate?
Ms. Brooks-LaSure. No, in the sense of--I--and we will work
to clarify what we mean by ``registry,'' because it is clear
that there is a misunderstanding.
When we say ``registry,'' all that we are indicating is
that individuals who are taking the drug, their doctors will
put that information in a privately owned registry so that some
of the other factors that are prescribed by the drug can be
included. But it in no way limits people from getting access to
the drug.
Ms. Barragan. But don't they have to be----
Ms. Brooks-LaSure. Whatever is on the FDA label----
Ms. Barragan. Don't they have to be part of a study?
Ms. Brooks-LaSure. It is not a study in the sense of it
will just be included. The people who will be eligible will be
based on the FDA label. So whatever--when FDA approves the
drug, they say it--whichever populations they say it is
appropriate for, that will be the basis of which people will
get the drug.
Ms. Barragan. So you are basically saying that all patients
indicated for--for example, the drug lecanemab--and any future
therapies in the class will have coverage for the drug upon
full approval?
Ms. Brooks-LaSure. That is right.
Ms. Barragan. Do you know when such registries will be
ready for patients to enroll and begin receiving treatment?
Ms. Brooks-LaSure. We encourage----
Ms. Barragan. And will the registry be available the day of
the FDA's approval, or will there be a delay?
Ms. Brooks-LaSure. That is certainly our goal. Private-
sector entities right now can start setting them up.
Ms. Barragan. OK. Administrator, can you tell us what other
FDA-approved drug has been denied coverage by CMS?
Ms. Brooks-LaSure. We have never denied a drug for an FDA-
approved drug. We have done coverage with evidence development,
which we are doing here.
Ms. Barragan. Well, except for this, right, except for this
drug?
Ms. Brooks-LaSure. We are not denying coverage. We have
said that for an accelerated approval drug, it needs to be
covered in the--under a clinical trial. And when it reaches
Federal full approval by FDA, we will cover it more broadly.
Ms. Barragan. I think that is a little inaccurate, and that
is my concern, is it has been FDA approved, say, on an
accelerated basis, and this is the first time that the CMS has
not covered a drug, is my understanding----
Mr. Guthrie. I believe we have extended our time.
Ms. Barragan [continuing]. That was FDA-approved.
Mr. Guthrie. I agree----
Ms. Barragan. I am sorry.
Mr. Guthrie [continuing]. That accelerated approval is full
approval, my understanding.
Ms. Barragan. I yield back.
Mr. Guthrie. Thank you for that. But I agree with you, 100
percent.
The Chair recognizes Dr. Bucshon for 5 minutes for
questions.
Mr. Bucshon. Thank you, Chairman Guthrie, and thank you,
Administrator, for appearing today.
So following up on that, has the FDA told you that
accelerated approval is not full approval and should be treated
differently?
Ms. Brooks-LaSure. We have many conversations with the FDA.
We consider accelerated approval in a different category than
full.
Mr. Bucshon. OK, you do, but the FDA does not. So I want to
just make that clear.
I am sure, like all of us here today, that you support
lowering drug costs for all Americans, particularly seniors on
Medicare who live on a fixed income. So I am curious why CMS
chose to increase the taxpayer cost of cancer drugs and other
expensive medications for serious diseases by 37 percent
recently.
What I am referring to is that CMS traditionally paid 340B
hospitals, which acquire drugs at a discount in order to reach
more patients and expand care, which--I support the program--
and provide more comprehensive services to those folks at
around 80 percent of the average sales price. But as of
September 2022, CMS reimburses for these drugs at 6 percent
above average sales price. Why?
Ms. Brooks-LaSure. We--and as you probably are aware, under
the previous administration the policy was changed, and we have
gone back to the original policy, as dictated by Congress.
Mr. Bucshon. OK. Actually, it was a Supreme Court ruling,
probably, that has really----
Ms. Brooks-LaSure. That is right.
Mr. Bucshon [continuing]. Caused that. But for the record,
Justice Kavanaugh, in the ruling, ruled that CMS's first option
is to pay for 340B drugs based on hospital survey data. And I
understand that CMS has that survey data, which indicates that
it should be paying for 340B drugs, that average sales price,
minus 28.7 percent. Just saying.
So it is a little disingenuous to say you are--you know,
and try to blame it on the Trump administration, and say you
are going back to previous policy. It is based on a Supreme
Court ruling. However, your interpretation of the ruling, I
would argue, is inaccurate.
I have one additional question as it relates to this 340B
court case. It is my understanding that CMS has not yet
announced how it will handle payments for 340B drugs made prior
to last September 28th. What is the plan?
Ms. Brooks-LaSure. We plan--intend to issue it very soon.
Mr. Bucshon. So you don't have a plan that you have
publicly issued yet?
Ms. Brooks-LaSure. That is correct. We will publicly do so
in the next couple----
Mr. Bucshon. OK. Do you have an estimate about what the
expense will be, what the cost will be?
Ms. Brooks-LaSure. We will issue that as part of the rule.
Mr. Bucshon. OK. It is going to be in the billions and
billions of dollars. I understand that. I mean, I believe in
our system, you know, and the court made a ruling, and there we
go.
Mr. Chairman, I don't really have any further questions. I
just have a comment on the hearing in general. This is a great
hearing for the American people. This is about lowering
healthcare costs for all Americans regardless of your ZIP Code.
It is about making sure Americans have access to FDA-approved
drugs. It is about maintaining innovation and--in the
healthcare marketplace. And at the end of the day, again, it is
about access to quality, affordable healthcare services for the
people that we all represent.
So I just want to commend the committee and the chairman of
the subcommittee and the staff on the Republican side and both
sides of the aisle on Energy and Commerce for this hearing. I
have been in Congress for 13 years. I am a healthcare provider.
And I am not using hyperbole here, but I think this is
potentially one of the most important healthcare hearings that
I have participated in since I have been on the committee.
Ms. Eshoo. Would the gentleman yield?
Mr. Bucshon. I will yield.
Ms. Eshoo. I thank the gentleman.
I just would like to add something to the record in the
exchange between Congresswoman Barragan on it takes over a
year, Madam Administrator, up to 17 months for approval on
medical devices in terms of what you are referencing, the
system you want to use for this drug. That is not acceptable.
It really isn't. And so I just wanted to get that down for the
record. And I appreciate----
Mr. Bucshon. Yes, and I would yield----
Ms. Eshoo [continuing]. It, and I yield back.
Mr. Bucshon. I reclaim my time. I want to make a comment on
what Ms. Eshoo just said. I had--I am aware of a device in the
past that I was involved in--many of us were--that took 5 years
to get a national coverage decision of an FDA-approved medical
device, limiting access. So the discussion around Alzheimer's
drugs and other medications where CMS is not making quick
decisions on drugs that have been through the FDA process needs
to be looked at.
I yield.
Mr. Guthrie. The gentleman yields back. The Chair now
recognizes Ms. Representative Lisa Blunt Rochester from
Delaware for 5 minutes.
Ms. Blunt Rochester. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank
you, Administrator Brooks-LaSure, for your testimony.
I am grateful that we are considering policies to lower
unaffordable healthcare costs, and I would like to focus on a
few programs that protect the health and economic security of
low-income seniors.
I believe one of the most underdiscussed provisions of the
Inflation Reduction Act is the expansion of the Medicare Part D
low-income subsidy program, also called Extra Help. The low-
income subsidy program pays Medicare Part D prescription drug
premiums and cost-sharing for over 13 million individuals with
low incomes who meet certain resource criteria. An estimated 40
percent of low-income Medicare beneficiaries spend 20 percent
or more of their very modest income on premiums and other
healthcare costs, which makes programs like the low-income
subsidy program a lifeline for some seniors.
The Inflation Reduction Act expanded cost-sharing
assistance to enrollees in the low-income subsidy program
beginning in 2024. Can you tell us how this provision will
lower drug costs for vulnerable Americans and what CMS will do
to ensure that all people who qualify can take advantage of
this new benefit?
Ms. Brooks-LaSure. Thank you, Congresswoman, for
highlighting what is one of the most exciting provisions of the
Inflation Reduction Act.
Every year there are new provisions that take effect, and
in 2024 we are very excited to expand coverage. We encourage
seniors right now to look and see if they are eligible for what
we call our Medicare savings programs and our low-income
subsidy, because if you are already enrolled, you will
automatically have access when next year starts to these
additional protections around cost sharing.
It also expands the number of people who are going to be
eligible. And so, as part of our annual open enrollment period,
we are very focused on trying to get the word out to everyone
to make sure that they enroll in this coverage if they are
eligible.
Ms. Blunt Rochester. And you mentioned Medicare savings
programs, and MSPs are also programs that help those with
limited income and resources pay for Medicare Part A and B cost
sharing. However, MedPAC has noted that many Medicare
beneficiaries and providers do not know about the MSPs, and
many beneficiaries who are eligible may be particularly--may be
really difficult to reach them because they live in rural areas
or they are homebound or have limited English proficiency or
have vision, hearing, or cognitive difficulties.
Furthermore, conflicting enrollment and eligibility
requirements between the MSPs and related Federal programs
serving similar low-income individuals like the LIS program
have resulted in low-income individuals having--there are being
just inefficiencies in the--and creating underenrollment.
The President has proposed several reforms to ease the
administrative burdens for States and remove enrollment
barriers. Can you describe these proposals and how they would
help low-income seniors afford their healthcare costs?
Ms. Brooks-LaSure. We are incredibly focused on Medicare
savings programs because so many people who are eligible for
them are not enrolled, and that is something that we are very
focused on. States administer them, and so we are really trying
to make the connections even closer between the Medicare
program--so when someone calls our call center, that they get
connected to the State to get enrolled, and trying to limit the
paperwork as--in terms of what people need to fill out.
Ms. Blunt Rochester. I would also like to associate myself
with the comments of many of my colleagues about how important
this hearing is.
Also, to the advocates who are here today, the Alzheimer's
advocates wearing your purple, I always say, you know, as we
said, this has touched so many of us, whether it is my
grandmother, my mother, one of my good neighbors, that the
reason why you wear purple is because this is not a red issue
or a blue issue, it is an American issue. So thank you so much
for your advocacy.
And I yield back.
Mr. Bucshon [presiding]. The gentlewoman yields back. I now
recognize Mr. Johnson from Ohio for 5 minutes for his
questioning.
Mr. Johnson. Well, good morning and thank you,
Administrator Brooks, for making time in your busy schedule to
speak with our committee. As I understand it, this is the first
time that you have been in front of Congress, despite being in
your role for nearly 2 years.
I take Congress' oversight role very seriously. And while
we are on the topic of transparency in the healthcare space, I
think it is reasonable to question the Biden administration's
commitment to transparency, given that we haven't heard
directly from you before our committee previously. So I
appreciate having the opportunity to do that today.
You know, in late 2019 the Trump administration proposed
and later finalized rulemaking to increase price transparency
for patients, giving the American people all of the information
about their healthcare as vital to ensuring they receive the
care and treatment they deem necessary for their own lives and
the lives of their loved ones. Since that rule went into
effect, there have been varying reports of price transparency
compliance among hospitals. To date, CMS has issued only four
penalties for noncompliance. Yet a number of academic and
nongovernmental studies have concluded that the number is much,
much higher.
So my first question: Ms. Brooks, could you explain why
there is such disagreement with concern to transparency
compliance?
I mean, what metrics is CMS using that would cause such
confusion about who is following the rules and who isn't?
Ms. Brooks-LaSure. Thank you for your questions about
transparency and the work of the committee, and we are very
committed to implementing the rule.
Mr. Johnson. No, I want to--but I need you--Ms. Brooks, I
need you to answer my question.
Ms. Brooks-LaSure. Certainly.
Mr. Johnson. What metrics are you using that would cause
the confusion about who is and who isn't following the rules?
Ms. Brooks-LaSure. Some of the differences that people have
where--in the different studies, in terms of whether people are
complying, is because people have been looking at different
metrics. So we are looking at what our rules require. And I
will give you an example, if that is helpful.
So there have been some questions where hospitals, for
example, might have ``N/A.'' The reason why they may do that is
because they don't offer that service. And according to our
rules, they don't need to do so.
Mr. Johnson. Well, when cross-referencing hospital pricing
data with insurance company data under transparency in
coverage, patient advocate groups are finding real dollars-and-
cents amounts in insurance company price data fields, whereas
hospitals have posted N/As, blanks, dashes, and hyphens. So it
is not that they are not offering those services, because the
insurance companies are saying they are.
How can CMS consider hospitals that enter such data as
compliant in good faith, as you did in an interview with NBC
Nightly News, without first verifying the accuracy of the data?
Ms. Brooks-LaSure. So as we have been talking about, we are
working to implement the legislation. And when anyone lets us
know that they think a hospital is in violation, we undertake a
review, and we look to----
Mr. Johnson. And you have only found that four times out of
all of the hospitals?
Ms. Brooks-LaSure. No, that is not right. What we have done
is we send first a warning notice if they have met certain
standards, if they--if--we send a warning notice, we ask them
to do a corrective action plan.
And what we have found is, by--the vast majority of
hospitals, when they find out that they have not been in
compliance, come into compliance, because that is our goal. Our
goal is not to impose penalties, although we will absolutely do
so, and we have increased our penalties. We are focused on
getting hospitals into compliance, and that is why today we are
shortening our timeframes.
Mr. Johnson. Well, then why is CMS blindly accepting
hospital files, some of which have been flagged by various
outside groups as compliant, without first verifying that the
rates are legitimate?
Ms. Brooks-LaSure. We review when we get a complaint, and
happy to follow up on specifics.
Mr. Johnson. Well, I submit, Mr. Chairman, we are not going
to get to transparency--and we all know what transparent does.
Transparency improves competition, it ends up improving
quality, and it lowers cost. That is across any industry. Price
transparency is essential to lowering healthcare costs. And
when you consider that healthcare costs are the most--are the
largest part driving America's national debt, it is the most
expensive part of what the Federal Government spends. This is a
really important topic, Mr. Chairman.
I yield back.
Mr. Bucshon. The gentleman yields back. I now recognize Dr.
Schrier from Washington for her 5 minutes for questions.
Ms. Schrier. Thank you, Dr. Bucshon, Mr. Chairman, and
thank you, Administrator Brooks-LaSure, for coming to speak
with us today. It is great to see you, and welcome.
You know, the last couple of years have been really hard
for the medical community. Doctors and nurses and respiratory
therapists were overwhelmed by the demands of the pandemic.
Many put their health and their family's health at risk in
order to care for patients. Some physicians had to pause
elective procedures. Many shifted to telemedicine, as you know.
And because of some of these financial strains, many small
offices needed to close their doors.
At the same time, every year we scramble and panic by the
end of the year to prevent cuts to Medicare reimbursement
rates. And this is happening at a time of inflation and high
wages. And it is hard for small and large practices to keep
their doors open. In fact, according to the AMA, the failure of
Medicare reimbursement to keep pace with inflation has had such
a big impact on physician payment, it translates to a 26
percent drop in inflation-adjusted Medicare pay for doctors.
And that is not a way to keep a system functioning.
Add to that early resignations and retirements, and there
is a lot of strain on the system. What happens, then, to these
small practices is that the big ones eat them up, and you end
up with consolidation and a lack of competition and higher
prices. And if those large systems can't stay afloat, what they
will do is number--limit the number of Medicaid and Medicare
patients that they will see in order to get by, and then
patient access is impacted.
And so I am wondering, Administrator Brooks-LaSure, what do
you see as the best way to bring down costs, increase
transparency, have fair reimbursement, keep competition, and
how can we help in Congress?
Ms. Brooks-LaSure. Well, thank you so much for highlighting
what we are hearing across the country, just how much doctors
and other clinicians are struggling during--that is something
that has been happening for many years, and certainly over the
last couple of years, when the healthcare system has been
incredibly strained. We are happy to work with you to continue
to think about how we can support our workforce, how we can
really try to make sure that all offices can continue to be
able to thrive in different types of environments.
Ms. Schrier. Let's work together on physician
reimbursement. I know the community, and all of us at some
point will really appreciate that.
A quick question about transparency and pricing. I know we
have talked a lot today about listing--list prices for
procedures at hospitals, which seems really, really helpful on
the surface, but it mostly applies to people who either have
high deductibles or who are uninsured. And when I look at my
explanation of benefits, there is a negotiated price that is
far lower than that list price.
And so I am just wondering, given that many--most Americans
are not paying the sticker price or a percentage of that
sticker price, how much impact are these listed prices really
going to have on the cost of healthcare in this country?
Ms. Brooks-LaSure. It is a really important point. So we do
have rules and requirements around health plans providing
information about the--about procedures. And I think, for
people who are insured, that can be a more helpful
understanding of what their costs are going to be. But yes, if
you have health insurance, you are going to likely choose the
doctors that--and who are in your network.
The list prices, I would say, are a first step in
transparency. They certainly are helpful for the uninsured, but
also for third-party developers to use that information, and I
know this committee heard from one such entity that can help
with making the information more accessible.
Ms. Schrier. Thank you. I have one other issue, and I don't
expect an answer, I just look forward to working with you to
ease this problem.
I hear about this issue regularly from my patients, my
constituents who are also patients, and it strikes a nerve with
me because I have Type 1 diabetes, and have been using a pump
for, like, almost 40 years. Patients on insulin pump therapy
who have Medicare--even those who, like me, have been on a pump
for decades and are stable and their doctor only thinks they
need to come in once a year--they need to go see their
physician every 3 months to get authorization to use an insulin
pump. This puts them at risk for running out, it is a use of
medical dollars that we shouldn't be spending. And I would just
say that on these and other inefficiencies in the system, I
would love to continue to work with you.
I am out of time, and I yield back.
Ms. Brooks-LaSure. I am happy to talk.
Mr. Bucshon. The gentlelady yields back--I agree with you
on the insulin pump issue--and at this point I yield to Mrs.
Harshbarger from Tennessee for her line of questioning.
Mrs. Harshbarger. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you
for being here today, Madam Administrator.
I was concerned by the about-face that your agency took in
the last 2 weeks reversing decades of policy that has otherwise
precluded Federal healthcare coverage for undocumented
immigrants. In that rule your agency wrote, ``However, given
the broad aim of the ACA to increase access to health coverage,
we now assess that this rationale for excluding certain
noncitizen groups from such coverage was not only statutorily
mandated, it failed to best effectuate congressional intent in
the ACA.''
And I find it hard to believe that suddenly this
administration, unlike the prior two administrations, now knows
what congressional intent was and, all of a sudden, somehow you
are aware of a statutory mandate that none of us knew about,
including the Obama administration who passed the law.
Now, there's two documents, Mr. Chairman. In fact, I have
these documents from the Obama administration that made it
clear that DACA recipients were not eligible for Medicare or
Medicaid or ACA coverage. And I would like to submit these for
the record, Mr. Chairman.
So I guess my question----
Mr. Bucshon. Without objection.
[The information appears at the conclusion of the hearing.]
Mrs. Harshbarger. My question to you, Madam Administrator,
is how can you legally justify this sudden departure from the
law?
Ms. Brooks-LaSure. The Biden-Harris administration is
focused on making sure that everyone has access to affordable
coverage consistent with the law. We have made a determination
that people who are brought to this country when they were
children, known as DACA recipients, a closed cohort, so
everyone who is a DACA----
Mrs. Harshbarger. Was that----
Ms. Brooks-LaSure [continuing]. Under----
Mrs. Harshbarger [continuing]. By Executive order, or----
Ms. Brooks-LaSure. It is under----
Mrs. Harshbarger. It is not congressional intent.
Ms. Brooks-LaSure [continuing]. Administrative authority.
Mrs. Harshbarger. All right. I want to change subjects
right quick.
In late 2021 CMS published a 9-page FAQ with the last Q&A
stating, ``It is a Stark violation if medical practices simply
mail or otherwise deliver an oral drug to a patient.'' And I
have practices in my district and in my State like Tennessee
Oncology, and they are alarmed because they routinely send
these oral drugs to patients in rural areas like my area as a
convenience, or as a medical necessity when the patient is too
sick to pick the drug up.
And as a pharmacist for over 35 years, I cannot understand,
when an oral drug has been prescribed by a physician and
dispensed for a patient, how in the world that constitutes a
Stark violation when it actually costs that practice money to
send it and mail it to a patient?
And I am saying that because a number of my House
colleagues and I will be sending a letter urging you to retract
that FAQ. And very recently, even HHS Secretary Becerra said at
one of our committee hearings he would absolutely work with me
and our colleagues on this issue.
So I just need a yes or no. Do you really intend that
Medicare seniors who are too sick or without transportation to
possibly go without their cancer drugs or any of these critical
therapies?
Ms. Brooks-LaSure. I am happy to work with you on this.
Mrs. Harshbarger. Fantastic. And as my colleague, Buddy
Carter, mentioned, we have heard a lot about PBMs today, and
how they operate in the shadows. There's many, many things we
could talk about that, and even Secretary Becerra recently told
the Senate Appropriations Committee that, with regard to PBMs,
transparency would be helpful to see how they are operating,
and the moment we try to do something, we likely find ourselves
in court. We are trying to move the dial. That came from the
Secretary.
And I have two questions, but I do want to tell you about a
bill that I just put out this week. It is bipartisan
legislation. It is called the PBM Sunshine Accountability Act.
And what this would do would require public reporting of PBM
information that the HHS Secretary already gets under current
law. And it enhances the reporting to include the rebates and
fees that PBMs and its financial affiliates receive from drug
manufacturers and health insurers so we better understand the
rebates and fees that companies are receiving when they are--
where they are coming from, and what is not passed on to the
clients and the patients. Would you be in support of something
like that?
Ms. Brooks-LaSure. I would be happy to work with you on
that.
Mrs. Harshbarger. Absolutely. And I have got a couple other
questions, but I know my time is about up, and it concerns the
No Surprises Act. And in 2020, when it was passed into law, it
required to make publicly available by June 27th, 2023, a
report on drug rebates, drug reimbursements, and pricing trends
in commercial health insurance. And are you on track to meet
this deadline?
Ms. Brooks-LaSure. We are working to do this provision,
yes.
Mrs. Harshbarger. OK. I know my time is up, so I yield
back. Thank you.
Mr. Bucshon. The gentlelady yields back. Is Ms. Kelly ready
for her line of questioning?
I yield now to Ms. Kelly for 5 minutes.
Ms. Kelly. Hello, Administrator. Good to see you.
Ms. Brooks-LaSure. Nice to see you.
Ms. Kelly. Thank you, Chair Guthrie and Ranking Member
Eshoo, for holding today's hearing.
Administrator Brooks-LaSure, thank you for being here
today.
When we passed the American Rescue Plan, my legislation was
included to extend Medicaid postpartum coverage from 60 days to
1 full year. This extension has been a crucial lifeline for
mothers and their infants, and I am proud to say that this is
no longer a temporary measure. Currently, 32 States and
Washington, DC, have already made this extension permanent.
Even other States like Alabama, Tennessee, Kansas, Oklahoma,
and Nebraska have enacted postpartum Medicaid extension
legislation.
The expansion of Medicaid postpartum coverage is a critical
part of our efforts to address, as you know, the maternal
health crisis in this country, as the Medicaid program finances
about 4 in 10 births in the U.S.
Sadly, mothers aren't the only victims of our maternity
care system: 1 out of every 1,000 babies born in the U.S.,
approximately 6 babies die.
Extending postpartum--Medicaid postpartum coverage to 1
year is part of our ongoing efforts to break down barriers to
accessing care. I am deeply concerned that work requirements--I
know someone mentioned it before--in Medicaid will undo our
progress. Administrator, are Medicaid work requirements a
benefit or a hindrance to Congress' effort to make Medicaid
more accessible to low-income individuals as well as new moms?
Ms. Brooks-LaSure. Thank you so much for your work on
maternal health, and it is very exciting that every time I talk
we have more States that have come in to extend coverage
postpartum.
And I think it is really important, when we think about the
maternal health crisis, to remember that part of it is making
sure that women have coverage before they are pregnant. That is
one of the key pieces, that people have coverage so they can
live healthy lives, they can work. And the vast majority of
people on the Medicaid program are working. They are
caregivers. They are students.
But what we have seen over time is that, when there are
additional barriers to enrollment, that it creates people
getting lost in the red tape. And that can mean people who are
subject to the requirements, but very often it also means
people who are exempt but need to make sure that they produce
the right documents and produce the right forms and that they
go through it. And let's remember who these people are. They
are people working multiple jobs, who are juggling a lot of
life.
And so I think it is--as we have seen, it is critical for
people to have health insurance coverage, both for themselves,
for their families, and for us, as a country, to make sure that
we are safe when a pandemic hits.
Ms. Kelly. Thank you so much for your response.
On August 1st, 2022, CMS finalized the proposed rule, and
will award a birthing-friendly hospital designation in the fall
of 2023 to hospitals that have participated in a national or
statewide quality collaborative and carried out the recommended
intervention. This is the first-ever hospital quality
designation by HHS that specifically focuses on maternal
health.
How will these hospital programs be evaluated to ensure
that the awarded organizations' outcomes are higher than the
organizations without the designation?
Ms. Brooks-LaSure. I am so excited about the work that we
have been able to do on the birthing-friendly designation,
particularly because the private sector has really partnered
with us and is using it even more broadly. So more than half of
the country will be able to look to see these designations for
hospitals.
These are hospitals that will have agreed to have taken the
recommendations from their maternal health experts and included
those, and we intend to continue to get information from the
public commenters about quality measures that we will hold
these hospitals accountable for.
Ms. Kelly. I just want to thank you for all of your hard
work, and your staff, and for being accessible and helping our
office so much.
Thank you, and I yield back.
Mr. Bucshon. The gentlelady yields back. I now recognize
Dr. Joyce for his 5 minutes for his line of questioning.
Mr. Joyce. Thank you for yielding, Mr. Chairman, and for
holding this hearing today.
First, I would like to add my voice to the list of those
concerned of what CMS has decided on restricting coverage for
antiamyloid treatment for Alzheimer's disease. The CMS standard
is defined in statute as ``reasonable and necessary for the
diagnosis or treatment of illness or injury, or to improve
functioning of a malformed body member.''
I would like to thank my colleague, Rep. Barragan, for
working on legislation with me to mitigate this misguided
decision and would urge that this panel take lifesaving
measures to address this issue.
Administrator Brooks-LaSure, I was encouraged to see the
President's Executive order on competition take on hospital
consolidation by noting that this consolidation has left many
areas, particularly rural communities, with inadequate or more
expensive healthcare options. Can you please elaborate on
actions--and please be specific--your agency has taken to
address hospital consolidation?
Ms. Brooks-LaSure. Thanks. Thank you so much, Congressman,
for your mentioning of the administration's real focus on
consolidation.
Our authority at CMS on consolidation is really around
transparency, and that is what we are focused on, making sure
that there is ownership information available to people as they
are choosing plans. There are other agencies across the
administration with additional authority, of course. That is
our focus.
Mr. Joyce. Thank you. Building on this work, I am hopeful
that you will be encouraged to see these bipartisan bills--
draft as a way to address the President's Executive order by
removing incentives for greater hospital and provider
consolidation. Importantly, they are built on a foundation of
work from the presidential administrations from both parties,
nonpartisan groups like MedPAC, and academics and think tanks
across the ideological spectrum.
Will you commit to work with us on these policies to
mitigate consolidation and promote competition?
Ms. Brooks-LaSure. I will absolutely do so.
Mr. Joyce. This year over eight Humira biosimilars will
launch in the U.S., with expectations of producing significant
cost savings for patients and the healthcare systems. Medicare
alone, it is estimated, could save over $2 billion if it had
access to these biosimilars.
In order for patients and the Medicare program to realize
these savings, biosimilars must have immediate access to Part D
formularies. What policy actions is CMS taking to ensure that
these Humira biosimilars are available to beneficiaries?
Ms. Brooks-LaSure. We are certainly excited about
innovative drugs that come to market in particularly biologics
and other generics. I am happy to talk in more depth about what
we do to encourage Part D formularies--Part D plans to cover--
--
Mr. Joyce. I personally welcome that discussion. I think it
is so important for patients across America.
Earlier this year I sent a bipartisan letter asking CMS to
take action about biosimilars and formulary access. One point
that I raised was having CMS update guidance to ensure
maintenance charge--maintenance change policies were updated to
include a broad array of biosimilars. What is the status of
this request?
And will you commit to doing a thorough review to ensure
that biosimilar formulary access is not only permitted but is
also done in a way that ensures patients can utilize them?
Ms. Brooks-LaSure. We will follow up with your request,
and----
Mr. Joyce. Thank you.
Ms. Brooks-LaSure [continuing]. I will get you a status
update.
Mr. Joyce. I appreciate that commitment.
Finally, I would like to thank you, Mr. Chairman and
Ranking Member Eshoo, for the work that you have done on the
MVP Act and echo my support for this important legislation.
One of the things that is so important about the MVP Act is
it adequately is flexible for many different disease states. As
a physician, I understand how different some outcomes could be
across different disease states. For example, the outcomes that
you might measure and the length of time you would measure them
might look different for a gene therapy for muscular atrophy
than outcomes for hemophilia. The multiple best price approach
would allow payers and States to establish VBAs that could
encompass multiple outcomes, including one for diseases where a
pay-over-time arrangement is truly the most appropriate way.
Can you discuss how important it is that the best price
approach capture different types of VBAs in order for them to
work across all disease states?
Ms. Brooks-LaSure. I certainly agree, and am excited that
the committee is going to focus on outcome-based proposals to
make sure that we can--make sure that States can afford to
cover drugs, that people have access to them, and ones that
really support these innovative----
Mr. Joyce. Thank you for----
Ms. Brooks-LaSure [continuing]. Therapies.
Mr. Joyce [continuing]. Your commitment to access.
My time has expired, and I yield.
Mr. Bucshon. The gentleman yields. I now recognize Mr.
Sarbanes for 5 minutes.
Mr. Sarbanes. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I
appreciate it.
Administrator, thank you for being with us today and for
your testimony about the many efforts that CMS is undertaking
to create a more transparent, accessible, and affordable
healthcare system. We certainly appreciate it.
Last year, as you know, Congress finally--finally, after
many, many decades, really--took the historic step of standing
up to Big Pharma and enacting policies that are already--we are
seeing it--lowering healthcare costs for millions of seniors in
the Medicare program.
As the Inflation Reduction Act reforms continue to be
implemented over the coming years, we must continue to build on
this success, and I am glad the subcommittee today is
undertaking what is a bipartisan discussion of some of the
issues that contribute to rising healthcare costs today.
Too often, when asked to identify the driver of the high
cost of prescription drugs, the various actors in the supply
chain point the finger at others, and the veil of secrecy
surrounding so many healthcare pricing and contracting
practices makes it virtually impossible for anyone to fully and
accurately--and certainly, not easily--follow the money trail.
This is, in fact, an intentional design feature that allows Big
Pharma to continue to increase its prices and, along with
pharmacy benefit managers, its profits.
So, Administrator, how can the administration's current
work to increase transparency help policymakers better
understand these pricing practices, get behind this design, and
help patients make more informed decisions about their
healthcare?
Ms. Brooks-LaSure. Thank you for noting just how monumental
the Inflation Reduction Act is.
I get asked a lot of questions as CMS Administrator, but I
don't know one that I get asked about the most more than
prescription drug coverage and the ability of people to pay for
their prescriptions in this country. And we are really moving
forward and tremendously excited about the opportunity to bring
additional benefits to negotiate, and we are committed to
transparency as far as our authority allows and want to
continue to work with you on all of the proposals that you are
considering.
Mr. Sarbanes. Let me turn to increasing transparency and
better understanding of some of the drivers of healthcare
costs. If we have a better understanding of these factors, we
can address them more effectively, which will, in turn, improve
patient access and care overall.
In Maryland, as you know, we have been working to improve
patient care while lowering systemwide healthcare costs for
decades. Since the 1970s, we have had a hospital all-payer
system. It is unique now. And our current total-cost-of-care
model uses global hospital budgets to incentivize value-based
care, eliminate the need for charity hospitals, and strengthen
the quality and comprehensiveness of care provided to all
individuals regardless of their geographic location in the
State or their insurance status. It is really a visionary
approach.
And Maryland's total-cost-of-care model also allows our
State to invest in other health system goals, like lowering the
maternal mortality rate and the opioid overdose mortality rate,
decreasing the number of children who visit emergency rooms for
asthma, reducing adult Marylanders' risk of diabetes, and so
on.
So, Administrator, what benefits do patients and providers
do value-based approaches like the one that we have done in
Maryland offer, and how can we work to incentivize and expand
similar approaches across the country in this effort to lower
costs and improve access to care for all Americans?
Ms. Brooks-LaSure. Thank you for raising Maryland's
innovative approach to paying for care, and it is one of the
models that, through our CMS Innovation Center, we are really
focused on trying to create other opportunities for States for
other types of programs to really be able to operate and move
to much more of a value-based, outcomes-based program.
We have a number of demonstrations that are underway and
ones that we are intending to pursue, and really encourage all
stakeholders to reach out to us about ideas.
Mr. Sarbanes. Thanks very much. I look forward to
continuing to engage with CMS and others to further strengthen
Maryland's total-cost-of-care model and apply lessons learned
from that success to drive future healthcare initiatives.
I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Bucshon. The gentleman yields back. I now recognize
Mrs. Miller-Meeks for her 5 minutes.
Mrs. Miller-Meeks. Thank you, Mr. Chair, and thank you, Ms.
LaSure, for being here.
There were those of us who spoke very eloquently during the
Affordable Care Act that provisions within the Affordable Care
Act would lead to increased consolidation, both hospital
ownership of physician practices, larger physician practices,
and that consolidation would lead to procedures being done at
hospitals at higher cost and ultimately would lead to increased
healthcare costs.
And in 2019 and in 2020, almost 50,000 physicians left
private practice to work for hospitals or other corporate
entities. Roughly 70 percent of physicians are now employed by
larger systems, meaning just 3 out of 10 doctors practice
independently. Hospitals are motivated to gobble up physician
practices because they are able to bill Medicare roughly double
the amount that private practices are.
Not only do payment differences in Medicare cost the
Government and taxpayers more money, but it costs seniors more
because they are paying inflated coinsurance amounts for
services that would cost significantly less if provided by a
nonhospital-owned practice.
For example, a level 2 nerve injection in 2023 done in a
physician's office would result in a $226 payment from
Medicare. That same injection provided by a hospital outpatient
department would result in a $741 payment. Same service, but a
$515 payment increase due to it being provided in a different
location, putting the patient and the Government on the hook to
cover the delta.
And I am in a district that has numerous both critical
access hospitals, community hospitals, and in-between
hospitals. And so I am very sensitive to, you know, the
concerns of my rural hospitals, but when we are talking about
the entire healthcare system and the cost of the healthcare
system and trying to provide increased access and increased
quality care, I think this is concerning.
A 2020 estimate from the Congressional Budget Office
projected $141 billion in savings, and I think that has now
been increased to 158 by some more recent studies, $158 billion
over the next 10 years, if site-neutral payment reforms were
implemented.
And let me also say that I was a physician in academic
medicine and in private practice, and a hospital-employed
physician.
MedPAC has also supported site-neutral payment reform, not
only because it would reduce cost to beneficiaries but because
it would reduce incentives for vertical integration or
consolidation in our healthcare system, which, as we all know,
drives up costs.
Can you detail CMS's plans to implement site-neutral
payment reform, and how can Congress help?
Ms. Brooks-LaSure. Well, thank you so much for talking
about how important rural hospitals are, which is something
that I have been spending a lot of my time and travels just
hearing from rural hospitals, their issues, as well as the
issues around consolidation, which I think we all are very much
concerned about.
I would say that, as you know, for the most part, Medicare
payment policy is determined by statute. And so we are
following the way that we pay according to what Congress has
passed. In some limited circumstances we have implemented site-
neutral payments where we feel that we have authority, but
happy to work with you in ways that we can continue to make
sure that people can get care in the most appropriate setting.
Mrs. Miller-Meeks. And we are also seeing a concerning
trend of physicians being purchased by payers, with one health
insurance company now owning 7 percent of all physicians in the
United States. So another vertical integration that is
extraordinarily worrisome.
And do you believe it is better or worse for patient care
when physicians leave private practice?
Ms. Brooks-LaSure. We certainly want to make sure that
people have access to care and access to choices, and
consolidation can be an issue with that.
Mrs. Miller-Meeks. Thank you so much for your testimony and
for being here.
I want to also echo the sentiments--my mother had
Alzheimer's, so I appreciate all of you here in purple
supporting Alzheimer's and our support for getting drugs that
have been approved through the FDA on to the marketplace and
covered. So I echo the sentiments of my colleague.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I yield back.
Mr. Bucshon. The gentlelady yields back. I now recognize
Mrs. Trahan for 5 minutes.
Mrs. Trahan. Thank you to the chairman and to ranking
member for holding this important hearing today. Thank you to
our witness, Administrator Brooks-LaSure.
I first want to start my remarks by voicing my strong
appreciation for our hospitals and their workers, for the
unbelievable job that they do in our communities. Whether it is
a global pandemic, a natural disaster, a marathon bombing, a
mass shooting, our Nation's hospitals are always there, and
American patients expect them to be there, capable of meeting
their needs in times of crisis.
You know, many of my colleagues on this committee know
that, when appropriate, I will take opportunity to talk about a
critical safety net hospital in my district: Lawrence General
Hospital. Lawrence General serves a majority of Medicaid
patients in a city that is 80 percent Hispanic or Latino. Under
extremely challenging circumstances, the nurses, doctors, and
administrators at Lawrence General have continued to deliver
high-quality, affordable care to the underserved.
Like many safety net hospitals coming out of COVID,
Lawrence is struggling financially. Administrator Brooks-
LaSure, how important is it to maintain access to care for
underserved areas like Lawrence, Massachusetts?
And what is the agency doing to protect the Nation's safety
net providers?
Ms. Brooks-LaSure. Thank you so much for mentioning how
important our Nation's hospitals are in all sorts of
situations, but certainly over the last couple of years, as we
have been going through the COVID-19 pandemic.
We are absolutely committed to doing everything we can
within our own authority and have been looking at ways that we
can support a host of hospitals, certainly including safety net
hospitals which care for the most underserved, and would love
to continue to work with you all on that.
Mrs. Trahan. So I fully believe this committee has the
responsibility to legislate in a way that allows our hospitals
to deliver care while also lowering costs for American
patients. Many of the bills in this hearing today are in the
discussion draft phase. So I do look forward to working with my
Republican colleagues to finalize them in a bipartisan manner.
Administrator Brooks-LaSure, it is my understanding--and as
my colleague from Iowa just mentioned--that in recent years
there have been efforts by CMS to implement site-neutral
payment policies for certain services. However, there are
exemptions to the statutory requirement for rural sole
community hospitals, cancer hospitals, and children's hospital
to maintain access to appropriate care. Has CMS measured how
some exemptions to site-neutral payment policies have
maintained access to care in underserved areas?
And how would extending similar exemptions to the Nation's
safety nets help them financially?
Ms. Brooks-LaSure. I am happy to follow up with you on that
question.
Mrs. Trahan. Thank you. Safety net hospitals often rely
heavily on Medicaid and Medicare reimbursements to provide care
to underserved populations. And any reduction in reimbursement
rates could potentially impact their financial sustainability
and their ability to provide essential services in their
communities.
We know that CMS supports the Nation's hospitals. Can you
share how CMS is thinking about lowering Medicare costs for
patients while balancing the need to protect and defend these
critical providers?
Ms. Brooks-LaSure. We certainly, within our authority, are
very focused on pulling all of the levers that we can, and
happy to continue our discussions around that.
Mrs. Trahan. Well, I look forward to following up. I mean,
it is worth noting that site-neutral payments can be a complex
issue. While I am here to lower healthcare costs for patients,
promote price transparency, and encourage competition among
healthcare providers, I do want to make sure we are keeping in
mind any unintended consequences that may limit access to care
because of the discussion drafts in the hearings today.
So I look forward to working closely with you, with my
Republican colleagues to continue to work on the policies
before us today.
And thank you, Mr. Chair. I yield back.
Mr. Guthrie [presiding]. The gentlelady yields back. The
Chair now recognizes Mr. Crenshaw from Texas for 5 minutes for
questions.
Mr. Crenshaw. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Administrator, for being here. I think we all
share the common ground of lowering healthcare costs and,
especially, shoring up hospital safety nets. And without
appropriate protections that stem from costs from charity care,
access is impaired and everyone's healthcare costs go up.
I want to talk about the Medicaid Disproportionate Share
Hospital program, the DSH program. It is an example where we
provide very transparent payment to hospitals that do provide
that charity care. Our healthcare system is complex. It is
highly regulated. But the DSH program goes around this by
directly giving straightforward payments to hospitals that are
doing the good work of serving patients without coverage.
Unfortunately, this is often--this program has been cut in
favor of other priorities like the Affordable Care Act, and it
has been cut as a budget gimmick. Now, we have kicked the can
down the road by delaying those cuts for years and years and
years. I am proud to partner with Congresswoman Clarke on
bipartisan legislation to create a fully paid-for, 2-year
solution to Medicaid DSH funding, which covers the costs of
safety net hospitals that treat these at-need, uninsured
populations, avoiding these cuts also in a way that is more
fiscally responsible.
I just want you to comment on that and underscore how
important the DSH program is. I mean, you know, which hospitals
bear the brunt of potential DSH cuts?
Ms. Brooks-LaSure. As you were mentioning, so many of our
safety net hospitals are the ones who would lose payments,
according to DSH, because DSH really focuses on people--on
hospitals that serve a disproportionate share of uninsured or
Medicaid beneficiaries.
Mr. Crenshaw. So I am going to assume that you would agree
that we should probably----
Ms. Brooks-LaSure. Yes.
Mr. Crenshaw [continuing]. Not cut those in the future.
Ms. Brooks-LaSure. I would say that it is very important
that we maintain coverage for safety net hospitals.
Mr. Crenshaw. And do you agree with the assessment?
I mean, the Affordable Care Act's cuts were problematic for
these healthcare safety net programs.
Ms. Brooks-LaSure. I would say that it is important that,
particularly as we still have uninsured in the country, to make
sure that hospitals are paid for caring for them.
Mr. Crenshaw. Yes, I mean, I would point out for the
record, I mean, one of the problems here was that the DSH cuts
did come from the ACA. There was a miscalculation of how many
Medicaid enrollees would be in the program. It doesn't matter
if it was an expansion State or a nonexpansion State. I mean, I
am--Ms. Clarke is helping me lead this, obviously, and that is
New York.
So the last question I have: Do you agree DSH payments are
an accountable and direct mechanism with which to subsidize
hospitals?
And as we rethink incentives in the system, could DSH be a
good model for transparency when we do need to support
hospitals in need?
Ms. Brooks-LaSure. I do think that DSH is an incredibly
important program, and a way of really understanding who is
serving the----
Mr. Crenshaw. Well, it is an important program. But, I
mean, the framework, the way it is actually----
Ms. Brooks-LaSure. Yes, I would agree with you----
Mr. Crenshaw [continuing]. Administered, do you think----
Ms. Brooks-LaSure [continuing]. That there is----
Mr. Crenshaw [continuing]. It is a good model?
Ms. Brooks-LaSure. I think that there is a lot of wisdom to
having some understanding of what the mixed-payer mix looks
like in terms of payment.
Mr. Crenshaw. I want to talk about primary care access in
the Medicaid program. You know, a simple question: Do you think
there is a physician shortage, and where do you see that most
pronounced?
Ms. Brooks-LaSure. I would agree with you that we are
seeing workforce challenges, and it is not everywhere, but it
is in so many of our rural areas. And you mentioned primary
care. We absolutely have a lack of primary care in many parts
of the country.
Mr. Crenshaw. Yes. I am introducing bipartisan legislation
that would seek to--open access to independent primary care
physicians in State Medicaid programs, particularly through
recurring preset payments. We call that direct primary care.
And I am doing this because in too many parts of my State--and
throughout the country, actually--there is a shortage of
primary care physicians to serve this critical population. The
patient-to-physician ratio in rural areas is 39 to 100,000
people, compared to 53 to 100,000 in urban areas. And we are
looking to have a shortage in the United States of as many as
55,000 primary care doctors.
So I think this is very important legislation. I urge my
colleagues to support it for obvious reasons. You know, access
to primary care reduces emergency room utilization, improves
outcomes, probably reduces overall healthcare spending. You
know, we often talk about getting people access to coverage,
but that isn't care. I think this legislation would go far in
allowing States to experiment with their own Medicaid programs.
There is no question in there, but if you have any last
remarks or positive things to say about that, go ahead.
[Laughter.]
Ms. Brooks-LaSure. Just to agree with you that it is
crucial that we do more to support primary care in this
country.
Mr. Crenshaw. Great. Thank you.
And I yield back.
Mr. Guthrie. Thank you. The gentleman yields back. The
Chair, seeing none on the minority side, will recognize Mr.
Bilirakis from Florida for 5 minutes for questions.
Mr. Bilirakis. Thank you. I appreciate it, Mr. Chairman.
Administrator Brooks-LaSure, I have expressed concerns
about the practice of large health systems purchasing
independent, freestanding physician offices and then
subsequently billing for the same services by the same
providers at a significantly higher hospital rate. The Office
of Inspector General and others have explained that this
dynamic has created adverse incentives for consolidation and
inappropriate billing practices that ultimately cost the
Medicare program and cost patients who have to pay 20 percent
copay for hospital outpatient services.
So I wanted to ask you about the process CMS undertakes
after a hospital purchases a physician office practice to
subsequently bill at the hospital rate as a hospital outpatient
department. Can you please tell us what CMS does and what the
process involves to ensure that hospital-acquired freestanding
physician offices are compliant with the relevant conditions of
participation and other provider-based facility requirements in
Medicare in order to bill as a hospital?
And then I have a followup, as well.
Ms. Brooks-LaSure. Certainly. And as I thank the committee
for really focusing on hospital consolidation and our concerns
around what that is meaning for physician offices, our role is
to certainly put out, based on Congress, payment policies. And
when hospitals agree to get payment from us, they agree to
follow the rules around all of our guidances. And we certainly
will investigate if a hospital is billing incorrectly.
Mr. Bilirakis. Yes, that is my followup: Will you commit to
work with members of this committee to ensure this process is
efficient and effective and ensuring these facilities meet the
necessary requirements to bill as hospitals?
Ms. Brooks-LaSure. Yes.
Mr. Bilirakis. OK. Very important for our patients too.
Next, I also wanted to ask you about CMS's transitional
coverage of emerging technologies rule. We are almost 2 years
after the agency's repeal of the original MSET rule, which we
had expressed was incredibly disappointing at the time. CMS
promised to replace it with a new TSET rule to provide Medicare
coverage for new medical breakthrough device technologies but
has yet to do so despite the target date supposedly set for
this month. That is why I led bipartisan legislation in this
space to provide this pathway into law, since it is clear CMS
has little interest in advancing innovation for patients.
Again, Administrator, can you tell us when will CMS release
and implement your final TSET rule?
And what is CMS planning to do to ensure this simply isn't
another CED process but instead a meaningful separate pathway
for new devices with existing, sound data that does not require
additional evidence generation?
If you could answer that, I would appreciate that very
much.
Ms. Brooks-LaSure. Yes. We are committed to releasing
updated guidance this spring, and I will just say that we have
been working and talking with stakeholders, device companies to
make sure that they have an understanding of our roles, and
will--we will absolutely put that out very soon.
Mr. Bilirakis. OK, very good. We are going to stay on you
with that.
One of the themes on our agenda today is about discouraging
additional consolidation in the marketplace. In one of our
draft bills, the Provider and Payers Compete Act would require
HHS, during its annual rulemaking on Medicare provider
payments, to consider the effects these regulatory changes have
on further consolidation in the marketplace. I have been
concerned about how the physician fee schedule, for example, is
contributing to these trends.
How will you ensure your agency is doing what it can, from
a regulatory standpoint, to prevent additional consolidation,
whether it is through the physician fee schedule or other rules
that affect provider reimbursement?
Ms. Brooks-LaSure. I would be happy to work with you on any
and all ideas that you have for us in terms of our authority.
Mr. Bilirakis. All right, very good. Thank you. I guess my
time has run out.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Guthrie. The gentleman yields back, and that concludes
all Members present who have asked questions or--questions.
Thank you for being here today.
I think just the one thing I can say both sides have
absolutely agreed on, that we need to work on the Alzheimer
drug and make sure that people have access as we move forward.
I appreciate the opportunity for you--I appreciate you
being here, but I did have three letters for the record I
forgot to submit for the record. I showed the ranking member.
It is for our bill, so it is supporting our bill together. And
then Dr. Burgess offered one I am not sure I correctly
submitted for the record.
So without objection, so ordered.
[The information appears at the conclusion of the hearing.]
Mr. Guthrie. Thank you for being here, and we appreciate
your time, and we got you--our agreed-upon time, so we
appreciate that. And now we will get ready for panel 2.
[Pause.]
Mr. Guthrie. The second--the hearing will come back to
order, and we will be prepared for the second panel. I will
introduce our witnesses, and then we will recognize each other
for 5 minutes for questions.
I think most of you have testified or seen this, that you
all have a light. When--you have a green light. When the light
gets yellow, it means to start summarizing, and to be ready to
finish. And when it is red, it means time has expired. So you
have 5 minutes for moving forward.
So I am going to introduce the witnesses, and we will begin
the questions--the opening statements.
So first, Ms. Ashley Thompson, senior vice president of
public policy analysis and development for the American
Hospital Association.
Next we have Karen [sic] Bass, chief policy and external
affairs officer for the Pharmaceutical Care Management
Association.
Our next witness will be Brian Connell, executive director
of Federal affairs for Leukemia & Lymphoma Society.
The next witness is Sean Cavanaugh, chief policy officer
for Aledade--sounded like a Kentucky Derby horse name, so --
that is coming up in a couple of weeks, so watch Kentucky.
Our next witness will be Ilyse Schuman, a senior vice
president of health policy for American Benefits Council.
And then Mr. Loren Adler, associate director of the USC-
Brookings Schaeffer Initiative for Health Policy.
We appreciate you all being here, taking the time. I know
you have--most of you were able to listen to the first panel,
and know what some of us are thinking and what our thoughts
are, so we appreciate that. We appreciate you being here. All
of us are going to be working together to work on these pieces,
specific pieces of legislation before you today.
And so with that I will begin with--our first witness will
be Ashley Thompson, senior vice president of public affairs.

STATEMENT OF ASHLEY THOMPSON, SENIOR VICE PRESIDENT, PUBLIC
POLICY ANALYSIS AND DEVELOPMENT, AMERICAN HOSPITAL ASSOCIATION;
KRISTIN BASS, CHIEF POLICY AND EXTERNAL AFFAIRS OFFICER,
PHARMACEUTICAL CARE MANAGEMENT ASSOCIATION; BRIAN CONNELL,
EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR, FEDERAL AFFAIRS, THE LEUKEMIA & LYMPHOMA
SOCIETY; SEAN CAVANAUGH, CHIEF POLICY OFFICER, ALEDADE; ILYSE
SCHUMAN, SENIOR VICE PRESIDENT, HEALTH POLICY, AMERICAN
BENEFITS COUNCIL; AND LOREN ADLER, FELLOW AND ASSOCIATE
DIRECTOR, USC-BROOKINGS SCHAEFFER INITIATIVE FOR HEALTH POLICY,
ECONOMIC STUDIES, BROOKINGS INSTITUTION

STATEMENT OF ASHLEY THOMPSON

Ms. Thompson. Chair Rodgers, Ranking Member Pallone, Chair
Guthrie, and Ranking Member Eshoo, and members of the committee
and subcommittee, I appreciate the opportunity to testify on
behalf of the American Hospital Association's 5,000 member
hospitals and health systems.
Hospitals and health systems are cornerstone of communities
across our Nation. The more than 6 million people who work
there provide care, compassion, and comfort for the sick and
injured 24/7, 365 days a year. Last year they delivered 3.5
million babies and provided emergency care for 123 million
people. They are at the forefront of developing new techniques
and technologies to prevent, diagnose, and treat disease and
are responsible for training the next generation of doctors and
other clinicians.
While hospitals' commitments to caring never wavers, the
reality is right now they are facing many significant
challenges. These include historic workforce shortages
resulting in a national crisis, soaring costs of providing
care, cracks in the supply chain, overwhelming regulatory and
administrative burdens, and severe underpayment by Medicare and
Medicaid.
These challenges are jeopardizing access to care and
services for patients and communities. Some hospitals are being
forced to cancel or close critical services, particularly in
rural areas. Patients are experiencing longer wait times to
receive care. As all of you are hearing, hospitals are boarding
patients ready for discharge without any additional
reimbursement because post-acute care facilities and nursing
homes do not have space. Several hospitals are struggling to
remain open.
The AHA appreciates the subcommittee's dedication to
healthcare affordability, a goal that all of our members
fundamentally share. Thus, I appreciate the opportunity to
comment on five of the issues addressed by the subcommittee's
legislative proposals. Moreover, the AHA looks forward to
discussing them further with committee members and staff over
the next several weeks.
First, as you know, the hospital price transparency rule
went into effect 2 years ago during one of the most difficult
periods of the pandemic. Since then, hospitals have made
significant progress complying with these regulations.
According to CMS, 70 percent of hospitals have adhered to both
components of the rule, despite its complexity and lack of
clarity. Hospitals are eager to continue their compliance
efforts, and the Transparent Price Act affords an opportunity
to continue to work together towards this goal.
Secondly, the AHA strongly opposes legislation that would
lead to additional site-neutral payment cuts and threaten
access to patient care. There is nothing neutral about site-
neutral policies. Compared to other healthcare settings,
hospital outpatient departments treat patients who are often
older, poorer, sicker, and with more complex medical
conditions. Hospital outpatient departments also must comply
with more comprehensive licensing, accreditation, and
regulatory requirements. Additionally, hospitals are required
to maintain standby capacity for disasters, public health
emergencies, and unexpected traumatic events, as well as
deliver emergency care regardless of insurance status.
Third, the AHA strongly supports the 340B drug discount
program, which is crucial to helping hospitals stretch limited
Federal resources and expand health services to patients and
communities. We appreciate the subcommittee's interest in
making sure all stakeholders meet 340B program integrity
requirements. Already, 340B hospitals must attest to meeting
all program requirements, recertify their eligibility annually,
participate in audits conducted by HRSA and drug manufacturers,
and maintain records and inventories of all 340B and non-340B
prescription drugs. The AHA would oppose efforts to create
significant new reporting requirements for 340B hospitals. In
addition, any measures that increase transparency for 340B
providers also should include greater transparency for drug
companies.
Fourth, the AHA opposes changes that would either expand
the number of physician-owned hospitals or ease restrictions on
the growth of existing facilities. Studies show that physician-
owned hospitals cherry-pick patients who are less medically
complex and more financially lucrative, as well as provide
limited or no emergency services.
Finally, I would like to express strong support for the
Medicaid DSH legislation. We appreciate that Congress has, on a
bipartisan basis, kept the Medicaid DSH cuts from going into
effect. Hospitals care for a significant number of low-income,
uninsured, and Medicaid patients, and the Medicaid DSH program
is critical to maintaining access to essential services for
these individuals.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify. I look forward to
taking your questions.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Thompson follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Guthrie. Thank you. Thank you for your statement. The
Chair now recognizes Ms. Bass.
You are recognized for 5 minutes for an opening statement.

STATEMENT OF KRISTIN BASS

Ms. Bass. Good afternoon, Chairman Guthrie, Ranking Member
Eshoo, and members of the subcommittee. My name is Kristin
Bass, and I am the chief policy and external affairs officer
for PCMA, the national association representing America's
pharmacy benefit companies. I appreciate the invitation to
share our industry's views on the legislation under
consideration. We are grateful for the opportunity to work with
both majority and minority staff, and your willingness to hear
a variety of views.
It is important to understand what pharmacy benefit
companies do to best evaluate how legislative change may impact
their ability to help secure drug savings and drive
affordability for patients. We are proud that pharmacy benefit
companies are hired to administer prescription drug plans for
more than 275 million Americans who have health coverage
through public and private employers, labor unions, Medicare,
other Federal programs, and the exchanges, and we are proud of
the physicians, pharmacists, and other health professionals who
help design the prescription drug coverage options PBMs offer,
and administer the medication quality and safety programs they
provide.
To be clear, no employer or plan sponsor has to hire or use
a pharmacy benefit company, but virtually all choose to do so
to secure savings on drugs and to better serve the patients in
their plans. Employers select a PBM through a transparent and
highly competitive bidding process. With over 70 full-service
pharmacy benefit companies in the market and regular new
entrants, plan sponsors can choose to contract with the company
that best meets their unique needs. Some may choose based on
scale and ability to negotiate deep discounts. Others
prioritize innovative care management programs and different
levels of service.
As part of their bid request, plan sponsors define and
appropriately demand what information, transparency, and audit
rights they need, and those are memorialized in their
contracts. Our companies provide their clients with a broad
array of actionable, accurate information on price and quality
to make efficient purchasing and plan design decisions. And in
recent years, Congress and Federal regulators have added
numerous additional requirements for PBMs to report to Federal
agencies and to provide aggregated public reporting.
So why do plan sponsors choose to use a pharmacy benefit
company? They rely on our companies' expertise to secure
savings through price concessions from drug companies, to
partner with lower-cost, higher-quality pharmacies, and to
prove medication adherence. For small employers who may
struggle even to provide health benefits, pharmacy benefit
companies offer options for cost predictability, enabling them
to stretch their benefit dollars further.
Plan sponsors also choose how best to use the savings that
PBMs deliver, whether to lower premiums, lower costs at the
pharmacy counter, or make benefits more robust. The pharmacy
benefit company delivers the savings, and the employer plan
sponsor decides how to use them.
As we evaluate the legislation before the subcommittee
today, we have two major concerns that carry through many of
the bills proposed to address prescription drug costs.
First, the legislation would limit choice by dictating
terms to the market, taking away flexibility that is needed for
managing drug costs, keeping health coverage affordable, and
helping patients stay on their meds. We should avoid government
mandates that could increase costs and decrease innovation.
Second, none of the legislation being considered today
would address the price of prescription drugs, but may instead
increase costs not only by limiting choice but by stacking the
deck in favor of drug companies when it comes to negotiations
for rebates. We have to be cognizant of what happens when one
side in a negotiation gets confidential information about their
competitors' negotiated rates. It only leads to higher costs.
Instead, we encourage the subcommittee to address the
actual cause of the affordability challenge: the price set by
the drug company and the rampant patent abuses that have
blocked competition. To that end, we greatly appreciate the
leadership of many members of this subcommittee who have
supported policies to ensure more competition and choice by
getting generics and biosimilars to market without delay.
Thank you for inviting me to appear before the subcommittee
today. Our companies exist to secure savings and improve health
outcomes for plan sponsor employers, unions, and government
programs, and, most importantly, the patients we serve. I hope
that you will keep this important and valued role front of mind
as you consider these bills as well as my written testimony,
which details unintended consequences about the specific bills
before you.
We look forward to continuing our work with you and the
patients and payers we serve to secure affordability, access,
and adherence to the medications Americans need. I am happy to
answer any questions.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Bass follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Guthrie. Thank you.
Mr. Connell, you are now recognized for 5 minutes for your
opening statement.

STATEMENT OF BRIAN CONNELL

Mr. Connell. Thank you, Chairman Guthrie and Ranking Member
Eshoo, and members of the committee. My name is Brian Connell,
and I serve as the executive director of Federal affairs at the
Leukemia & Lymphoma Society, where our mission is to cure blood
cancer and to improve the quality of life for patients and
their families.
We were founded by 2 parents who had suffered the
unimaginable loss of their 16-year-old son to leukemia. In the
nearly 75 years since our founding, the nonprofit started by
that one couple has invested $1.6 billion in research aimed at
creating a world in which cancer patients survive their blood
cancer and thrive after treatment.
The good news is that we have made incredible progress.
Several cancers considered death sentences not long ago,
including the leukemia that sparked our founding, are now
highly survivable. The bad news is that we have much more work
to do, and it goes far beyond medical research. The work ahead
includes both ensuring that every patient can access the care
that they need and relieving patients of the terrible financial
burden that comes with that care.
The work is urgent. This year alone, more than 180,000
Americans will receive the life-changing news that they have a
blood cancer. Each of these individuals and their families will
be thrust into an overwhelming, impersonal maze of provider
institutions and insurance rules with potentially ruinous out-
of-pocket costs around every corner.
For a patient with private insurance, a diagnosis of acute
leukemia will rack up an average of more than $800,000 in
treatment costs in the first year alone. The costs that are not
borne directly by patients in the form of deductibles and
copays are often foisted upon consumers and public insurance
programs. Too often, those insurance companies and public
officials then respond by inventing new ways to shift costs
back onto patients. We see higher deductibles, additional
noncovered care, increased coinsurance, rising premiums, more
red tape, stricter eligibility criteria for insurance. The list
goes on.
And this is why patients need bold action to make sure that
the system is sustainable for patients today and into the
future. We are encouraged that many of the proposals that the
committee is considering today to promote--will promote
healthcare competition and encourage meaningful transparency.
We share these goals because we believe that increased
competition and transparency have real potential to realign
incentives to achieve the improved outcomes--health outcomes
that we are looking for while lowering costs for patients,
consumers, employers, and taxpayers.
The system is riddled with perverse incentives and a
frustrating lack of transparency, so the opportunities are
plentiful. I will just give two quick examples.
First, the disparity in Medicare's reimbursement for the
same service across provider settings is one of the incentives
that has led to a dramatic rise in hospital acquisitions of
physician practices. Hospitals acquiring physician offices
leads to the result that we have seen in the past few years of
the share of cancer drug infusions happening in hospital
outpatient facilities has increased nearly 300 percent. And
when a hospital purchases a physician practice, the shift in
reimbursement increases the patient's out-of-pocket costs
without corresponding improvement to the quality of their care.
Cancer patients should not pay more simply because the
nameplate on the clinic door says ``Hospital'' rather than
``Physician Office.''
Second, the lack of transparency in the pharmacy supply
chain has led to the proliferation of so-called spread pricing.
Spread pricing is a practice in which the PBM administering a
drug's plan charges the plan far more for a drug than the
acquisition cost. One study found that PBMs administering
Medicaid pharmacy benefits across the country paid roughly $84
per tablet for a critical cancer drug called Imatinib while
charging the State Medicaid programs as much as $296 per tablet
for the same drug. And this difference adds up. The State of
Ohio reported that its Medicaid program had lost more than $233
million in potential savings due to spread pricing in a single
year.
These are big problems, but we are encouraged by this
committee's bipartisan work to take on these tough issues.
Reforming these incentives will make a meaningful and lasting
impact on the lives of patients with cancer. So we look forward
to continuing to partner with you to promote transparency and
competition across every area of the healthcare system. Thank
you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Connell follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Guthrie. Thank you. The Chair now recognizes Mr.
Cavanaugh for 5 minutes for questions.
Mr. Cavanaugh. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Guthrie. I mean for--excuse me--to--your opening
statement.

STATEMENT OF SEAN CAVANAUGH

Mr. Cavanaugh. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I thank the
subcommittee for inviting me today to discuss strategies for
increasing transparency and competition in healthcare.
My name is Sean Cavanaugh. I am the chief policy officer at
Alidade. We help independent primary care practices deliver
better care to their patients and thrive in value-based care.
Previous to Alidade, I was at CMS Innovation Center and also
served as director of the Center for Medicare. I am proud to
continue the movement to better care at lower cost in the
private sector.
Alidade works with more than 1,500 independent primary care
practices, including 200 FQHCs and rural health centers across
45 States to make them successful in value-based care. These
practices care for 2.2 million beneficiaries in value-based
care contracts. More than half of the practices have fewer than
10 clinicians. Sixty percent of them are in primary care
shortage areas. And Alidade is now what is called a public
benefit corporation. That means explicitly our mission is to
improve healthcare in a way that is good for patients, good for
practices, and good for society.
And Alidade is producing meaningful results. Our estimates
are that in 2022 our Medicare ACOs are projected to save
Medicare more than $535 million. Prior-year data from CMS,
official data, in 2021 Alidade sponsored 4 of the top 10
performing ACOs in the United States. And one of those four,
our Mississippi ACO, was an FQHC-only ACO, was the fourth-
highest saver in the United States.
And these savings were generated through real improvements
in the care for Medicare beneficiaries: more primary care
delivering better diabetes control, more blood pressure
screening leading to fewer hospitalizations and emergency room
visits. The data clearly show that ACOs grounded in advanced
primary care can deliver better care at lower cost. But that
approach is under threat from consolidation and anticompetitive
forces.
And let's be clear: The evidence is overwhelming. Hospital
mergers are steadily increasing. Horizontal consolidation leads
to higher prices. Vertical consolidation leads to higher
prices. And there is no clear evidence that consolidation leads
to higher quality. Provider concentration increases the
bargaining power of large health systems, which allows them to
demand higher prices from health plans. And unfortunately,
COVID may have accelerated these trends. Small physician
practices and safety net hospitals entered the pandemic with
vulnerable financial positions and were less likely to access
emergency relief funding.
This committee has an opportunity to take meaningful action
to promote competition and transparency in this country. First
and foremost, we need to invest more in primary care. That
means both Community Health Centers but also independent
practices. And I thank this committee for its work recently in
looking at workforce, which is critical.
Second, we need to put an end to unnecessary facility fees
and move to site-neutral payments. Facility fees are part of
the financial engine that hospitals rely on to acquire
independent practices and reduce competition in their markets.
Independent practices and Community Health Centers struggle to
recruit new physicians because they cannot compete with
hospitals that are receiving higher payments. And these
facility fees, of course, also raise out-of-pocket costs to
Medicare beneficiaries. Congress and CMS have taken some
actions toward site neutrality, but the overwhelming majority
of services are still receiving higher payments when they are
in the hospital--provider-based clinics.
I would also note there are other policies not in front of
the committee today that the Congress should consider,
including prohibiting anticompetitive contracting by healthcare
providers such as gag clauses, antitiering, antisteering
clauses, as well as all-or-nothing clauses.
There are--we could optimize some of the incentives in the
Medicare shared savings program. We have been talking to CMS
about this, especially for rural providers. We could improve
access to capital for independent practices, reform CON rules
in States, reinvigorate antitrust enforcement, and regulate
anticompetitive data sharing practices.
Thank you again for the opportunity to testify, and I look
forward to working with this committee on this bipartisan work.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Cavanaugh follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Guthrie. I thank you for your testimony. The Chair now
recognizes Ms. Schuman for 5 minutes for your opening
statement.

STATEMENT OF ILYSE SCHUMAN

Ms. Schuman. Thank you. Chair Guthrie, Ranking Member
Eshoo, and distinguished subcommittee members. Thank you for
the opportunity to testify on behalf of the American Benefits
Council.
The council represents over 220 of the world's largest
corporations advocating on a full range of employee benefit
issues. Employers play a critical role in the healthcare system
and have a vested interest in securing the health and well-
being of their employees.
Employers are also deeply concerned about rising healthcare
costs and are increasingly frustrated by fundamental failures
in the healthcare marketplace that stifle competition, cloud
line of sight into price and quality information, impede
innovation, and ultimately increase costs.
The only way to truly make healthcare more affordable for
working families is to understand and address these root causes
of rising healthcare costs by increasing transparency and
competition.
Hospital price increases are key drivers of recent spending
growth among the privately insured. The most important driver
of higher hospital prices is, in turn, the rise of hospital
monopolies that use their market power to demand higher and
higher prices. And at the same time, many hospital systems are
becoming vertically integrated, with physician organizations
raising prices. These higher hospital prices are coming without
an improvement in the quality of care. In fact, provider
consolidation leads to less bang for the buck.
The Council strongly supports legislation to expand site-
neutral payment reforms. Often physician offices are being
purchased by hospitals and simply rebranded as part of a
hospital's outpatient department in order to collect the
resulting higher payments. Such legislation, by aligning
payment differentials across sites of service, removes a
powerful incentive for provider consolidation and corrects a
significant distortion leading patients to higher-care
settings.
Employers recognize that hospitals are an essential
component of the Nation's health system, particularly during
the pandemic, and understand that some hospitals are facing
financial challenges. A recent Health Affairs article examined
the financial performance of large, nonprofit hospital systems
in the post-COVID era and revealed a more complex financial
picture. Investment losses accounted for approximately 85
percent of overall financial losses. This analysis suggests
that investment losses are actually the primary driver of these
losses, not increased labor and supply costs. Employers,
patients, and taxpayers should not have to foot the bill for a
hospital's risky financial position.
Hospitals are also able to use a billing practice which is
fueling acquisition of physician practices because they are not
required to specify where services are provided. The Council
strongly supports legislation that will promote honest billing
practices by helping patients--payers to distinguish between
sites of care.
The Council also strongly supports the bipartisan
Transparent Price Act. A competitive and value-driven
healthcare market is predicated on transparency. Effective
transparency tools in the hands of employers and consumers can
be transformative, making healthcare both simpler and more
affordable. Unfortunately, far too many hospitals across the
country remain out of compliance, or meaningful compliance,
with the hospital transparency rule. Codifying and
strengthening the rule, including through increased maximum
penalties, is essential to realizing its objective.
The Council also strongly supports the PBM Accountability
Act. The current rebate structure is complex and opaque, and
employers continue to encounter barriers to PBM pricing
transparency. With the three largest PBMs controlling 80
percent of the market, employers--even very large employers--
are not going to have the leverage in contract negotiations
that they need. Federal legislation requiring strong
transparency and accountability for PBMs to employers, their
primary clients, is essential to employer efforts to manage
prescription drug costs.
While employers continue innovating and exploring
strategies to lower costs, Federal legislative solutions are
needed to create a more competitive and transparent healthcare
marketplace. This hearing and the solutions under review today,
therefore, represent a critical step towards making healthcare
more affordable.
I appreciate the opportunity to testify, and look forward
to answering any questions.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Schuman follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Guthrie. Thank you. I thank you for your testimony.
The Chair now recognizes Mr. Adler for 5 minutes for your
opening statement.

STATEMENT OF LOREN ADLER

Mr. Adler. Thank you, Chairman Guthrie and Ranking Member
Eshoo and members of the subcommittee. Thank you for the
opportunity to testify today on the crucial topic of increasing
transparency and competition in healthcare.
My name is Loren Adler. I am a fellow and associate
director at the USC-Brookings Schaeffer Initiative for Health
Policy at the Brookings Institution here in DC. I study a wide
range of topics, including healthcare market competition,
provider payments, and prescription drug policy. And relevant
to today's hearing, much of my current research is focused on
private equity and health plan acquisitions of physician
practices.
The healthcare industry has experienced significant
consolidation over the last decades. Horizontal consolidation,
such as the merging of hospitals or physician groups within the
same geographic market, unambiguously leads to higher prices
for consumers, lower wages for workers, and seemingly actually
diminished quality of care. With a greater market power as an
employer locally, there is also evidence that hospital mergers
reduce the wages paid to nurses and other hospital staff with
industry-specific skills.
And vertical consolidation involving hospitals and
physician groups has also accelerated. Today about two in five
doctors now work for a hospital or a practice that is at least
partially owned by a hospital. And more and more evidence
suggests that this vertical consolidation appears to drive up
costs for consumers with unclear impacts on the quality of
care.
And now we are seeing growing vertical consolidation
between health plans and physician groups, PBMs, and specialty
pharmacies. And we have strong evidence that insurer-provider
integration is being leveraged to accelerate coding of their
Medicare Advantage enrollees to generate higher government
payments than were intended, costing taxpayers billions.
Fundamentally, I want to leave members of the subcommittee
with one key message: We need to stop digging the hole deeper.
Even with overwhelming evidence of the harms caused by provider
consolidation, too little is done to just stop digging the hole
deeper. We need to cut it out with policies that encourage
consolidation, and we need better data to get a full picture of
what is going on to better limit anticompetitive conduct.
There are a wide array of policy options that could enhance
competition in healthcare markets, you know, from greater
antitrust oversight to Medicare Advantage reform to changes in
Medicare payment policies. Today I will try to narrow my focus
on two main points relevant to proposals that are under
consideration by this subcommittee today.
One, Medicare rates are intended to reflect the costs of
providing services for an efficient provider. As such, Medicare
should not be paying more for the same exact service when it is
delivered in a hospital outpatient department rather than a
physician's office, provided that the physician's office
setting is safe and clinically effective for most patients.
This policy change has widespread bipartisan support in the
policy community, across--basically, any think tank you talk to
supports this policy. Lobbyists are pretty much the only
opposition, really, to this policy.
Number two, increased transparency can both facilitate
stronger research and oversight and, in certain circumstances,
drive price competition by helping patients select lower-cost,
higher-quality providers.
With respect to site-neutral payments, to illustrate this
issue I want to consider the example of a Medicare patient
receiving a level two nerve injection, as I think one of the
congressmen brought up earlier, because it is the example in a
MedPAC report, so--right?
Let's take this. If the patient receives this injection at
a physician's office, she would owe $51 in coinsurance on a
$256 total cost. Now, let's say that a hospital buys that
physician's practice and converts it into a hospital outpatient
department. The care remains the same. It is the same doctor
providing the care, but now that same patient receiving the
same service will owe nearly three times as much. They would
owe $148 in coinsurance on a total payment of $741. This
payment disparity not only increases costs for beneficiaries
and taxpayers but encourages hospitals to buy up physician
practices, leading to market consolidation and increased
healthcare costs that spill over to the commercial market as
well.
Small efforts have been made to move toward site-neutral
payments, but more work is needed. Legislative proposals under
consideration today to eliminate this payment disparity for
low-complexity services would result in substantial savings for
beneficiaries and taxpayers while fostering greater competition
in physician markets.
And it is important to note here today that we are focused
on lower-complexity services where we are saying to equalize
payments. We are primarily here talking about office visits,
imaging, and drug administration.
And lastly, for transparency, that is also crucial.
Specifically with systematic data about provider ownership
arrangements and commercial market prices and volumes,
researchers could better identify the effects of various forms
of healthcare consolidation and elucidate solutions. The
opacity of payment flows between specific actors in the drug
supply chain similarly inhibits quality research, and evidence
suggests that patients can make use of transparent pricing
information for more shoppable services.
The committee's focus on bipartisan policies to improve
healthcare, competition, and transparency is a welcome sight.
And thank you again for the opportunity to testify today.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Adler follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Guthrie. Thank you. We thank you for your testimony,
all the witnesses' testimony. We will now move into Members'
questions, and I will recognize myself for 5 minutes for
questions.
So, Ms. Bass, we were talking earlier that we had some of
the same professors. You probably studied harder than I, so I
appreciate that, and look forward to your responses on some of
these questions that I have.
But on the rebate model--so we are interested in the rebate
model--and the, I guess, concern is that it incentivizes brand
manufacturers to deliver higher rebates to ensure their
products land on the formularies. And I know there is the
opposite side that says the brand manufacturers choose to set
up prices high. But the reality is that the rebate model seems,
in our research, to incent manufacturers to keep prices high to
get rebates to get on the formulary. And that affects
somebody's paying out of pocket at the counter.
So if the manufacturers could just lower their prices to
get on the formulary, rather than give rebates, why wouldn't
they?
Ms. Bass. Thanks for that--the talk button helps, doesn't
it?
Thank you so much for that question. So you are asking
about why manufacturers don't just lower their price. And I
think we have seen recently that, in fact, manufacturers do
sometimes lower their prices. We know that rebates are not
correlated with pricing. Medicare Part B gets no rebates, and
prices go up at virtually the same amount that is happening on
the Medicare Part D side.
The insulin example shows you that manufacturers will, in
fact, lower their prices, and only manufacturers can control
how the prices are set. So I think we just fundamentally
disagree with the premise that rebates have anything to do with
driving up prices.
Mr. Guthrie. That is kind of the point. You know, we did
have some--we had a hearing, and it the was oversight
committee, actually, the oversight committee that Mr. Griffith
now chairs. And we had all the manufacturers, we had the PBMs,
we had all the group, and we really kind of focused on insulin
prices. And coming out of that hearing is when, all of a
sudden, the prices started dropping.
So it just didn't seem like until we exposed the price,
that it was--I mean, this is kind of the concern, is that --
what we want, what kind of came out of this, and kind of the
genesis for a lot of this work for everybody--I am not just
talking to you, Ms. Bass--is that people will react different
if they know the price. And if it is inefficient, then the
market is going to demand that it change and move forward.
And so, Ms. Schuman, I have a kind of a conglomerate
business in my area who have several businesses, but grocery
stores and they have supplier retail pharmacy. And they came to
me and says, ``Look, we are paying this amount of money for our
employees to go to the pharmacy,'' and very few employers have
this information because they pay for their employers to go the
pharmacy benefit. But since they also own the pharmacy, they
don't know what the pharmacy is getting reimbursed. And they
sit down, and sit down with their insurance company, and the
insurance company, ``Well, we will give you a break,'' because
they were going to say we are not going to let you negotiate on
our behalf anymore, because we don't--this is--look at the
spread between what we are paying and what we are receiving.
And so it gets back to making sure people have access to
prices, and prices information, and how they react to that.
And so my question: Do employers readily have access to
information related to the prices that--so the PBMs will
receive for their drug that they are selling it to you
differently, do they have access to that information?
Ms. Schuman. Employers don't know what they don't know. And
I think that is the issue.
And I think the definitions keep changing about whether
something, a rebate, whether it is another fee. And as I
mentioned in my testimony, trying to interject all of this
transparency, which is, again, foundational for employer
efforts to try to manage drug costs, you know, they don't
necessarily have the leverage in those contract negotiations to
make sure they have the specificity of definitions. And they
are shapeshifting, perhaps, on the part of different revenue
streams.
And that is why I think this is a really critical market-
based solution to require transparency, to require sunshine and
daylight, so employers truly know where that money trail is so
they can make sure that they are spending their resources
wisely.
Mr. Guthrie. So it is just difficult to get information.
And I guess what I am trying to get at, so the other
argument would be--somebody has made this argument to me--is
that, well, employers have the information, and they get to
decide do they want to pay a lower monthly premium or do they
want higher rebates and--a lower monthly premium and higher
rebates, or they are going to have a higher monthly premium.
Are you guys seeing that kind of information and making those
kind of negotiations?
Ms. Schuman. Well, you know, that is--even large employers,
even very large employers have significant challenges, have run
up to significant challenges just getting a hold of that
information. And that information is so critical to have in
hand for employers so they can decide what is the best way to
make healthcare for their employees more affordable.
Mr. Guthrie. OK, thank you.
Well, I wish I had more time to ask questions. I only have
5 more seconds, so I will yield back to myself and I will
recognize the ranking member for 5 minutes for questions.
Ms. Eshoo. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you to all of
the witnesses. I have a few comments to make before I get to my
questions.
On PBMs, Ms. Bass, I am pleased to hear that you support
getting generics and biosimilars to market, but I find it
hypocritical when I hear time and time and time again that
plans are often blocked by PBMs from offering the lowest-priced
generic. Let me give you an example. The nonprofit Civica Rx in
California has manufactured a prostate cancer drug for $160,
but PBMs are not letting that cheap drug on insurers'
formularies. Instead, the $160 drug is being blocked from the
market so that PBMs can take a larger cut, and the larger cut
is priced at $3,000.
So I hope our committee really stands up to what needs to
be done relative to PBMs, because there is a lot of work to do
there.
To the hospitals, on the whole issue of site neutral, we
need to get a clear explanation from hospitals on why, after
hospitals acquire physician practices, the prices for the
services provided by the acquired physicians increases by 14
percent. It is the same doctor, it is the same service, it is
the same site, but 14 percent more really doesn't make sense.
So I think that we are going to need more from the
hospitals, and I say that really respectfully. Obviously, I
love all the hospitals in my district, i.e., you have to love
all the hospitals. Look what they have been through with their
teams during the pandemic.
To Ms. Schuman, thank you for the written testimony. I just
want to highlight something, because hospitals are telling us
about--so much about their losses that in--investment losses
accounted for approximately 85 percent of overall financial
losses.
Now, there is some background in that, but for the large
ones to have lost that kind of money because of what they
invested in the stock market, I think that the committee needs
to take that into consideration.
So to Brian Connell, thank you for the work that you have
done, your testimony today, and for working with us on
spreading out the costs, which are capped, thank God, for
Medicare beneficiaries and out of pocket, being able to spread
that. I want to talk to you about the MVP.
Can you explain why this new definition of best price is
needed to allow for more value-based payment models?
And in your testimony you recommend that value-based models
need to protect patients from undue cost burdens. Do you have
suggestions in that area for us, as we really hone the
legislation and tailor it really well?
Mr. Connell. Yes, thank you for the question, and thank you
again for your work and many folks on this committee's work on
lowering Part D costs. As you are referencing, this is
incredibly important progress made last year.
But to your question on Medicaid best price and its impact
on value-based purchasing, we think value-based agreements have
a lot of potential. In cancer care, where we have, you know,
some potentially curative therapies, some therapies that, you
know, might add a little bit of benefit, some that people
question the benefit, there is no reason to pay the same for
all of those different therapies. There should be rewards for
innovation and for making a real impact on patient quality.
And so what we see with the best price rules that we have
today is that there is a challenge where, if you have an
agreement between a manufacturer and a Medicaid program to pay
less for a patient where the drug did not work for them, they
didn't respond and it had no clinical benefit, right now that
lower price that the--that would be reimbursed for that patient
where there was no benefit, even if it is just 5 percent of
patients did not respond, low--if you have a reduced cost, that
cost could become--that price for the drug could become the
price for all Medicaid patients because it is the lower price
being paid by Medicaid.
And so, without the flexibility to make sure that lower
price can be allowed without drawing down the price for every
patient--because there could be some patients that are
responding perfectly to that, and really need a better price.
So----
Ms. Eshoo. That is----
Mr. Connell. I think reforms are necessary there.
Ms. Eshoo. That is helpful. Thank you for everything that
you do.
Mr. Loren, real quickly on the transparency for PBMs, I
think it is a critical first step to their practices. It drives
up drug prices, allows God knows what. What would you add to
that?
Mr. Adler. Sure. So----
Ms. Eshoo. How would you address this?
Mr. Adler. Yes, thank you for the question. So--sure, so I
think you are right, and the Congressional Budget Office has
said that they think there are some savings, if sort of
temporary, to kind of giving some more information to employers
so they know what is going on.
I actually also think there is a lot of value that would be
gained from transparency more broadly, and making available all
of the various payment flows that go between actors, specific
actors in the pharmaceutical supply chain, so we can really get
at some basic questions in drug pricing that we just don't have
the data for at the moment.
Ms. Eshoo. Great, thank you.
Mr. Guthrie. Thank you.
Ms. Eshoo. Thank you to all the witnesses.
Mr. Guthrie. The gentlelady----
Ms. Eshoo. I yield back.
Mr. Guthrie. Thank you. The gentlelady yields back. The
Chair now recognizes Dr. Burgess from Texas for 5 minutes.
Mr. Burgess. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I do want to
thank all of our witnesses for being here today.
You can see how extremely important this is. And for all of
the discussion that Congress never works together, I think you
see the interest is genuine, and it is bipartisan.
Ms. Thompson, let me start with you. We had a press release
in September 2022 by the American Hospital Association that
stated that 136 rural hospitals closed from 2010 to 2021.
Obviously, we have got the pandemic in there, and a record 19
closed in 2020 alone. We continue to receive requests for
expanding payments to these hospitals. Many of those expanded
payment requests are granted. And yet the closures continue to
be reported or threatened.
So the question I would have, is it possible that
permitting a new type of entrepreneurial hospital, such as
those built and owned by physicians, could be given a chance in
rural--other areas, and it would not be risking existing
hospitals at all because they are already closing in those
areas?
Ms. Thompson. Thank you very much for that question,
Congressman Burgess, and thank you for your support of the
Medicaid DSH bill. We really appreciate what that will do for
vulnerable patients in vulnerable communities.
Physician-owned hospitals are very different than
freestanding community hospitals. Data has shown that physician
hospitals can pick and choose the patients that they see, and
those patients are typically wealthier and less complex to
treat. The OIG, the GAO, MedPAC have had some studies in this
space.
And so additionally, some of these physician-owned
hospitals don't have emergency rooms or backup services. And
that means that patients, if something goes wrong, they rely on
their community hospital. I think we would be concerned if
physician-owned hospitals, given the workforce shortage, were
to grow in rural areas such that they would pull workforce from
the freestanding emergency--from the freestanding community
hospital, and thus they might not be able to fulfill their
mission of 24/7 backup services.
Mr. Burgess. We are talking about areas where the existing
hospitals have already closed, and we are trying to provide
access for patients.
Again, I do not understand why a fundamentally different
model could not be entertained, even as a demonstration
project. I have already referenced earlier in the previous
panel, a hospital down on the Rio Grande Valley was doing an
excellent job of providing service to uninsured and
underinsured patients. They do that every day of the week down
there. I mean, that is their business model.
And I will just tell you, and I have shared with the
committee before, a brilliant paper written in Health Affairs--
now it has probably been 10 years ago, I may have even been the
one who wrote it--but look, as a physician, I want to go where
my time is going to be maximized. And in a physician-owned
hospital, a physician-owned-hospital-run operating room, I will
just tell you they are much more efficient. There is the pride
of ownership. Doctors care about how their patients are taken
care of.
And again, I know you have heard me say it over and over
and over today, and you all have emphasized, as well, the
vertical integration that is occurring where hospitals are
buying doctors, and yet doctors can't buy hospitals. I mean, it
just fundamentally makes no sense.
Do you think that CMS appropriately adjusts payments to
hospitals according to the risk of the patient?
And if not, can you suggest how CMS could improve its risk
adjustment methodology to prevent hospitals from cherry-picking
sicker patients?
Ms. Thompson. So I think that there is a lot to explore in
terms of the risk adjustment. I think that different settings
of care have different costs associated with them. The fact
that freestanding community hospitals have the 24/7 emergency
room and backup and standby services is more expensive. I know
that we are held to higher regulatory requirements and
conditions of participation, et cetera.
Mr. Burgess. Well, let me ask you this. When an insurance
company acquires a hospital and a hospital acquires a medical
practice, do they require the doctors to use that hospital?
Ms. Thompson. Depending on their insurance, my guess is
yes.
Mr. Burgess. Yes. The answer is yes.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Guthrie. Thank you. The gentleman yields back. The
Chair now recognizes Mr. Cardenas from California for 5
minutes.
Mr. Cardenas. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I would
like to thank the witnesses for joining us and providing your
expertise on these important issues, and also providing that
not only to us but to the American people who are watching.
At the last hearing we had on transparency in this
committee, I asked about the use of non-English languages in
both the insurance and hospital transparency rules. I am
concerned that these rules do not take into consideration
constituencies like the majority of the constituents in my
district that primarily speak Spanish as their first language.
Mr. Adler, do you have any idea how many hospitals and
insurers post information in Spanish and other non-English
languages?
And how can requiring a greater range of languages improve
access to critical care and information?
Mr. Adler. Sure, thank you for the question, Congressman
Cardenas.
So I don't know that I have a concrete answer to exactly
what share of hospitals or insurers have posted this
information in Spanish or other languages. Certainly, it is
some. I have seen, you know, some of these tools on insurer
websites, where you can access this information in Spanish.
I think you are kind of really focused on the consumer-
facing tools here, right? These sort of data have kind of the
researcher side for people like me, and then the--right? And
then the sort of consumer-facing angle here.
I do think, you know, especially on sort of the insurer-
facing tools that are under consideration by this subcommittee
today, to sort of expand upon, it would be useful to require,
right? I mean, it is a very common language in this country to
speak Spanish. So I think it is important to require that,
right, that these data are available both in English----
Mr. Cardenas. Would providing this important information in
multiple languages, would that help with healthcare, or would
it be not important?
Mr. Adler. I think it would help. I think transparency can
help. Transparent data on prices, particularly for folks who
are in their deductible, so they are kind of bearing the full
cost of these services--we have evidence that, on net, it does
seem to lead to sort of better shopping, at least for a subset
of services here--you know, imaging, for instance--and that it
can lead to lower prices.
I don't think this is, like, changing the whole healthcare
system here----
Mr. Cardenas. Sure.
Mr. Adler. But I think it is--you know, modest steps in the
right direction are important here.
Mr. Cardenas. I think it would be an added benefit to
everyone and to healthcare overall. So thank you.
And also, as it relates to access, I am worried about the
impact of hospital consolidation on access to care in medically
underserved communities. Mr. Cavanaugh, in your testimony you
note that consolidation has accelerated, and smaller providers
and safety net hospitals are among the most likely to need the
resources that bigger systems can provide. So, Mr. Cavanaugh,
can you describe the impact of these consolidations?
And also, would you expect there to be implications for
access quality and affordability for patients because of
accelerated consolidation?
Mr. Cavanaugh. Certainly. Thank you for that question. Yes.
As I said, we work with independent practices in 45 States. And
if a practice is independent today, it is fiercely independent.
It has had multiple opportunities to sell to an insurer, to a
hospital system. So we have seen the impact of
anticompetitive--when the hospitals do consolidate, and if a
practice stays outside of that consolidation, we have seen
difficulties in remaining in the hospital's own self-insured
network.
So literally we have had hospital systems say to our
practices, ``If you want to see our employees, you need to
join--either you sell your practice or join our CIN.'' So I
think that impacts access. Certainly, as we have all documented
on the Medicare side and other places, the facility fees raise
the costs. Anytime costs go up, you need to be concerned about
access, particularly for lower-income communities.
So I think those are all legitimate concerns that flow from
consolidation.
Mr. Cardenas. Thank you.
Ms. Schuman, I want to talk about transparency and PBMs.
How would requiring reporting of certain drug pricing
information held by the PBMs benefit employers and plan
sponsors who provide health insurance coverage?
Ms. Schuman. Well, first of all, they need to know where
the money is going. They need to understand what the true cost
of drugs are. They need to understand where these different
revenue streams are going. Are they flowing back to the plan
sponsor to the employer to share those savings with employees?
And the fact remains that, as I said before, they don't
know what they don't know. So having this transparency is
really foundational to restoring, I think, competition in--with
respect to drug pricing and, ultimately, enabling employers to
have the tools they need to better manage those costs.
Mr. Cardenas. Can you give an example of what this
committee can do to help with that transparency and pricing
issue?
Ms. Schuman. Well, the PBM transparency legislation, for
one, is just so critical to these efforts, again, to enshrine
in legislation so there is this certainty that employers have,
that they know that they are going to be able to have access to
this information, to be able to have----
Mr. Cardenas. Thank you.
Ms. Schuman [continuing]. The definitional specificity----
Mr. Cardenas. Thank you.
Ms. Schuman [continuing]. About what is going to be
covered. So, yes, that is a very important piece of
legislation.
Mr. Cardenas. Thank you.
I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Guthrie. Thank you. The gentleman yields back. The
Chair recognizes Mr. Griffith for 5 minutes for questions.
Mr. Griffith. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Adler, site-neutral payments, the examples that you
gave in your oral testimony, I think it all makes sense. If you
are getting, you know, a shot, outpatient, it doesn't matter
whether it is in the doctor's office or at the hospital or a
facility owned by the hospital.
But on Ms. Thompson's side of the ledger--and this is what
we have to try to sort out--you have a patient who is in the
hospital. It may be the same procedure or the same shot that
could, if that patient were in better health, be done
outpatient. But they are not outpatient, they are in the
hospital.
So I noticed that you talked about outpatient in your oral
testimony. You said outpatient comparisons. Is that because you
recognize that if the patient has other issues and is already
in the hospital, there is going to be more cost with having
round-the-clock care?
Mr. Adler. Sure. So thank you for that question,
Congressman Griffith.
So certainly, for--once the patient is on an inpatient
basis--for instance, this is actually not--this doesn't apply,
so there is a whole different Medicare payment system for
inpatient. For--you know, if this is a drug administration, you
know, billing on the outpatient side, even on the hospital's
campus, right, I think it is an important--the argument that
the--Ms. Thompson was making here, right, is important for why
we might not want to equalize payments for more complex
surgeries, like a--for a complex surgery or an emergency room
visit.
But the services that we are talking about today, or that
the subcommittee bills are focused on today, are very--we are
talking about low-complexity services, where we have not seen--
the data shows there aren't--don't seem to be any cost
differences between providing that service to a----
Mr. Griffith. Right.
Mr. Adler [continuing]. Between a sicker patient or a less
sick patient.
Mr. Griffith. My next set of questions will be both to you
and to Mr. Cavanaugh. And I don't--I am uncomfortable with all
the consolidations. I agree with that.
On the other side of the coin, in my district, particularly
in the historical coal fields of southwest Virginia, is one of
the most economically stressed regions in the country. None of
us like the fact that we no longer have any competition. But we
had two hospital chains a number of years ago. They looked at
it. One of them was looking for a partner from outside the area
so they could keep competition going. We couldn't keep our
hospitals open if we didn't do something. And the two chains in
east Tennessee, in Mrs. Harshbarger's district and in my
district, they merged to form one. Is it ideal? No.
But can you each recognize that sometimes in particularly
economically stressed areas we may need that consolidation? I
know it is a completely different animal when large hospital
chains are buying up doctors' practices, but this is a little
bit different animal. If you could each speak to that.
Mr. Adler. Yes, I will jump in quickly. So, yes, I mean, I
think fundamentally you are correct, that this is--I think you
do need to think about it differently when you are talking
about an area with lower population, and, you know, especially
lower population and lower-income folks there, where there are
inevitably going to be some rural areas in America that can
just only really support one hospital.
I want to say what I am sort of focusing on here is the
sort of, you know, where a lot of people live, but in the
bigger urban markets or suburban markets, where I think that
competition----
Mr. Griffith. And because I have time limitations, would
that pretty much be your answer, as well, Mr. Cavanaugh, or do
you have a different twist?
Mr. Connell. Similar, except I would say, yes, rural
hospitals, safety net hospitals--certainly don't want to hurt
them financially. So if you wanted to do site neutral and then
funnel some of that money back to those facilities through some
other mechanism that doesn't incentivize consolidation, I think
that would be fine.
Mr. Griffith. All right. I appreciate that.
PBMs, a lot of attention here today on that. My experience
talking with constituents is there are occasions, Mr. Adler,
where the PBMs, for whatever reasons, actually end up--if you
use your insurance, which buys through the PBM, you are paying
more than you would have paid if you just paid cash. Is that
still the case?
Mr. Adler. Yes, that is--in certain circumstances, yes.
Mr. Griffith. Ms. Bass, how can that possibly be? I mean,
if you all are looking out for the consumers, and you keep
talking about how you are trying to save money, how can it
possibly be that the consumer has to pay more if they use an
insurance company that uses one of your affiliates, one of your
corporate PBMs?
Ms. Bass. Thank you for the question, Congressman. That is
an unusual situation. Our companies are cognizant of it. Some
of it has to do with the benefit design chosen by the
employers. And as we have learned more about that, our
companies have developed programs to address it.
Mr. Griffith. So you wouldn't oppose our bill that says we
are not going to let that happen anymore. I have got to move
on.
Ms. Schuman, you raised an issue on transparency earlier,
and I do support transparency. And if you were--not that you
had to, but if you were listening to my testimony earlier--or
my questioning earlier when the witness was in front of us, I
talked about a disrupter.
This company allows you to get whatever drugs approved by
the FDA, but you, based on transparency, can find where you can
get it the cheapest. And if you get it below the median price,
you get to put that money on account or hit a button that says
send me the check. Do you like that concept, at least in
principle?
Ms. Schuman. Well, what I like the concept of is making
sure you know that you are paying for value. And that is,
ultimately, what we are talking about. And that is ultimately
why transparency is so important to make sure employers and
also patients and consumers are paying for value. And without
transparency, they don't know that.
Mr. Griffith. I appreciate it. My time is up.
I yield back.
Mr. Guthrie. Thank you. The gentleman yields back. The
Chair now recognizes Ms. Blunt Rochester for 5 minutes for
questions.
Ms. Blunt Rochester. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you
to our witnesses for being here today.
I am pleased that we are holding this hearing so we can
better understand how transparency can lead to lower cost for
patients, particularly with respect to drug prices. And I would
like to discuss the role of pharmacy benefit managers and the
role that they play in the drug supply chain.
We know that PBMs play a dual role in managing negotiations
with pharmaceutical manufacturers to determine the price a plan
will pay for drugs on their formulary, while at the same time
working with insurance plans to determine how drugs for their
enrollees will be covered.
PBMs also manage relationships with pharmacies. My
understanding is that many of these arrangements are opaque and
hard to decipher, not only for patients but also for plan
sponsors and other participants in the drug supply chain.
Mr. Adler, can you clearly explain the role PBMs play in
the drug supply chain and why the practices utilized by PBMs
often lack transparency?
Mr. Adler. Sure, thank you for the question. So, I mean, I
think you described the sort of role well of PBMs, right? The--
fundamentally, the PBM's role is to negotiate lower drug prices
on behalf of purchasers. And, certainly--right--and plans
wouldn't hire them if they weren't getting them lower prices,
right? I think that part is fundamental.
Why there is a lack of transparency, fundamentally, because
it is not in their competitive interest to have that data be
transparent. They think it is in their--each PBM thinks it is
in their interest to have that data be secret. And that is sort
of why I think, you know, employers, for instance, very much
want to see that data, and I think, from my researcher-biased
perspective, I think I would very much like to see that data.
Ms. Blunt Rochester. I think--you go right into my next
question, which is do PBMs take advantage of misaligned
incentives that allow them to retain profit instead of
effectively lowering prices for patients at the pharmacy
counter?
Mr. Adler. Sure. So to some degree. But I do want to--
right--I think it is still worth noting that PBMs are
generating lower costs than--and drug prices than they would be
without them.
But yes, I mean, I--to me, sort of the core issue in the
PBM industry is just high levels of consolidation. There are
three PBMs that dominate the market, and other insurers have to
contract with those PBMs, for instance. Some of them have their
own PBMs but often still have to use them. And I think one of
the fears, from a sort of antitrust perspective here, is that
those big PBMs might not give as good deals to the other
insurers, and sort of entrench their market position there.
Ms. Blunt Rochester. And I think this also goes without
saying, because we have talked a lot about transparency, but do
you believe increasing transparency related to PBM practices
will provide plan sponsors with better tools to leverage power
prices for--lower prices for patients?
Mr. Adler. Sure. So on the margin, yes. So I do think,
again, this is up--I agree with the Congressional Budget Office
here, who has made this sort of point here, that there are some
subset of purchasers here where having this information
probably gives them information to lower prices. I don't know
how long-term of a thing that is going to be, because there
will be sort of--these are private actors, and they will try to
renegotiate contracts and stuff like that. But there is always
a little bit of a game of Whac-a-mole. But I do think there are
benefits.
Ms. Blunt Rochester. And my last question to you is how
might comprehensive pharmacy DIR fee reform or clawbacks be an
important element of the strategy to manage the rising drug
costs for Americans?
Mr. Adler. I think it could help. I mean, I will just sort
of turn to--I think, when you are talking about drug prices,
you know, the bigger picture issues are, you know, competition
in the drug industry on the pharmaceutical, you know,
manufacturer side of things, or price regulation in the form
of, you know, provisions like in the Inflation Reduction Act.
Ms. Blunt Rochester. OK. Thank you, Mr. Adler. I agree that
increasing transparency is also an important tool to rein in
PBM practices and reduce costs. And while these are important
first steps, much more work, as you have said, will need to be
done to address the role of PBMs in increasing patient out-of-
pocket costs. I am really pleased to be working with my
colleague Congressman Buddy Carter on additional reforms, and I
look forward to more discussions about PBMs, DIR fees, and
insurance plan practices that keep patient costs from going
higher and that really deal with making sure that the quality
of care, the value of the care is what is our priority.
Thank you, and I yield back.
Mr. Guthrie. Thank you. The gentlelady yields back. The
Chair now recognizes Mr. Latta of Ohio for 5 minutes for
questions.
Mr. Latta. Well, thanks, Mr. Chairman, and also thanks to
our panel.
Ms. Thompson, if I could start my questions with you.
Currently over 62 percent of hospitals in the State of Ohio are
operating in a loss, resulting in cuts to services within
maternity wards and behavioral health clinics. And in my
district, the 5th, which has many rural areas, tight budgets,
staff burnout, and overregulation are often cited as the main
contributing factors for reduction in care and facility
closures. For example, over 50 percent of doctors and nurses
say they spend more time in front of a screen fulfilling
compliance requirements than they do treating patients.
Would you discuss in detail any regulatory barriers or
requirements that are hindering the workforce and provision of
care?
And what ideas would you have to fix it? Because I--the
question I ask them every time I met one of our facilities in
my district, because I look around and I go, you know, who is
practicing medicine sometimes? But----
Ms. Thompson. Thank you for that question. There are a
number of regulatory burdens that are facing our hospitals and,
really, our caregivers in those hospitals today.
I think one of the biggest areas is prior authorization
delays and denials, where physicians and others are spending
more time on the phone, trying to get their patients into a new
setting of care. You might be aware that it has been very
difficult over the past year-plus for hospitals to discharge
patients to the next level of care, whether that is a postacute
care setting or whether it is a skilled nursing facility,
mainly because it is hard to get patients out of the hospital
due to workforce issues in other places, but also because of
these delays and denials in care. So I think that one of the
biggest areas where we might be able to find savings is there.
And there's also just a lot of administrative expenses that
I think can be streamlined and processed, so that we can both
save some money in the system, make it more efficient, and then
also to free up time for our clinicians so that they can see
their patients.
Mr. Latta. And just out of curiosity, a followup on that,
because when, you know, you are on the phone and you are trying
to get some procedure done, how often is it then that it
finally does come through, they say, ``OK, you can go ahead and
do it, you can get that procedure''?
Ms. Thompson. You know, that is interesting. I don't have
the exact statistic for you, but I do know that a lot of
payment denials are overturned after--let me see, the OIG
report, I think, said that there were 13 percent of payment
denials or prior authorization denials, and maybe 18 percent of
payment denials that were overturned because they actually
adhered to Medicare fee-for-service requirements. So MA plans
were putting on greater restrictions under fee-for-service.
But how many times or how long it takes for those denials
to get overturned, I don't even know. But it is an interesting
statistic that we can try to find for you.
Mr. Latta. Well, thank you very much.
Ms. Schuman, you mentioned in your testimony that the
national healthcare costs are expected to grow at an annual
rate of 5.1 percent from 2021 to 2030. You know, in your
opinion, how can Congress get more employers involved so that
the burden of covering this increase does not fall on the
Federal Government?
Ms. Schuman. Yes, so absolutely. I mean, employers are, you
know, as I said, deeply concerned about rising healthcare
costs. And I think that is what is so critical for employers
who ultimately are looking at ways to offer higher-quality,
more affordable care to their employees about addressing the
root causes of rising healthcare costs.
And again, that is why the proposals that we are talking
about today around transparency and competition are really
handing tools to employers to be able to deliver higher-
quality, more equitable care to their employees. And I think,
really, you know, taking aim at those payment policies, even
in, you know, the Medicare space that really drive the broader
market and broader distortions, and certainly Medicare payment
policies that drive more consolidations impact not just
Medicare patients but all patients.
Mr. Latta. Well, you know, from the--from what you have
heard here today, you know, are there any other proposals that
you would have that might not be on the table today that would
help?
Ms. Schuman. Absolutely. I think just following up on the
vein of really taking aim at some of these anticompetitive
contracting clauses, for example, and I think that is something
that Mr. Cavanaugh mentioned. What are hospitals able to do?
Why are they taking advantage of this monopoly power? It is
simple market dynamics. When you are a larger hospital system,
you bought up the competitors, you bought up the rivals, you
have more leverage, and you can charge higher prices.
And you can also, with that leverage, enter into contracts
with plans, with health plans that restrict their ability to
try to promote higher-value care, to direct through plan
design, to incentivize their employees to go to a different
hospital, to a different practice that maybe is less expensive
and higher quality.
So I think, also, proposals that take aim at those
anticompetitive contracting clauses that tie the hands of
employers from pursuing these value-based designs is also
really critical.
Mr. Latta. Well, thank you very much.
And Mr. Chair, my time is expired, and I yield back.
Mr. Guthrie. Thank you. The gentleman yields back. The
Chair just wants to make everybody aware there is a vote on the
floor. So we are probably going to see where we can go, but
probably get at least one more question in, and then we have to
break and come back afterwards.
So the Chair now recognizes the Chair of the full
committee, Chair Rodgers, for 5 minutes.
Mrs. Rodgers. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I too have concerns
about prior authorization and denials within Medicare. I just
want everyone to be aware there is a bill in this package--it
is one that I am leading--that would address the vertical
integration and transparency.
So we have heard in our previous hearings from experts,
patients, and employers about how transparent prices can lower
healthcare costs. And this morning Administrator Brooks-LaSure
reaffirmed this administration's belief in price transparency.
I wanted to ask each one of you, yes or no, do you believe that
price transparency will put downward pressure on costs?
Ms. Thompson. Yes.
Ms. Bass. Price transparency that doesn't expose
competitive data to competitors PBMs support.
Mrs. Rodgers. Thank you.
Mr. Connell. Yes.
Mr. Cavanaugh. Yes.
Ms. Schuman. Yes.
Mr. Adler. Yes.
Mrs. Rodgers. Thank you.
Just as a followup, then, Ms. Bass, the overwhelming
opinion from experts, including CBO, is that price transparency
lowers cost. In virtually every other part of our economy,
consumers know the price they pay. So just--I would like to
hear some more about why you think PBMs should be treated
specially and not required to be transparent.
Ms. Bass. Thank you for that question. PBMs fully agree
that data that will help lead to lower costs--that people can
actually use to lower costs--should be transparent. We have no
disagreement about that.
But where we have a slight quibble is, for example, in
Federal bidding for contracts, you don't have those bidders bid
openly so that every competitor knows what the competitor's
best price is. You don't do that. You make those sealed bids so
that people will be incented to bid as low as possible to get
the business. That is the kind of thing that we are concerned
about. We think that if every drug manufacturer knew what the
other's best deal was, they wouldn't be as willing to go as
deep as they are currently going. That is the one quibble we
have.
Beyond that, we--our companies make tools available so
that, at the prescribing point of prescription, doctors can
just know what the cost sharing is going to be for a given
patient, and that the patients know what is going to be on
their formulary. Our companies are very transparent in their
contracts with employers, and respond to employers' requests
for information, and put that in contracts.
So we respectfully think that, just with respect to
competitors knowing what their competition's best bid is, that
would be the problem.
Mrs. Rodgers. OK, I appreciate that. Would--could you cite
specific examples where price transparency has resulted in
increased prices, cost?
Ms. Bass. There have been cases in the past--there is a
concrete case, and we have promised to get that information to
your staff. The Justice Department, in a recent case, went
through why it thought it was a bad idea to put competitors'
information out. The FTC in the past has said that putting out
competitors' information leads to tacit collusion. We strongly
believe that this is basic economic theory and that when
competitors know each other's data, prices go up.
Mrs. Rodgers. Well, I understand that we have heard this
before, that we have cited this concrete case. I will just say
that this is based upon a study of Danish concrete in the 1990s
that CBO's own words said ``was based on a small sample of
plants over a short period,'' and how that is comparable to
2023 American healthcare system I am not sure really applies,
and I just encourage all of the stakeholders to bring
constructive feedback to these proposals.
Simply saying no to price transparency is unacceptable. And
I think what you are hearing today is that both Republicans and
Democrats are--believe that this is fundamental, that we must
address the price transparency, and just--we are anxious to get
your feedback and want to have future engagements that reflect
that.
Mr. Connell, the Leukemia & Lymphoma Society advocates on
behalf of over 1.5 million Americans living with or in
remission from blood cancers. Between 2015 and 2019,
chemotherapy in free-standing provider offices fell by 5.4
percent, while the volume of chemotherapy delivered for
outpatients increased by 27.8 percent.
What do seniors pay if they get chemotherapy in a
provider's office, compared to a hospital outpatient setting?
Mr. Connell. Significantly more is the short answer. It
depends on the drug. But provider--or patients who are going to
get their chemo at an outpatient facility, whether that is
attached to a hospital or off campus, are paying significantly
more than they would pay in out-of-pocket costs, which are
astronomical, I will say, at the baseline.
So when you start to multiply those, it gets really, really
burdensome for patients, and it pays a lot more if you are at a
hospital setting than if you are at the physician office----
Mrs. Rodgers. So are there any reasons they should get the
chemotherapy in a hospital outpatient setting?
Mr. Connell. You know, there is--every clinical case is
different. There are some patients who do need to get their
care closer to a hospital, but there is no need at the baseline
to say that a patient with the same risk score should be
getting the same drug at a different price at a different
setting.
Mrs. Rodgers. OK. Thank you very much.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Guthrie. Thank you. The Chair yields back. We do have
two more that are present we just sent to vote, so they showed
up to do their questions, so we are going to have to adjourn
and come back.
However, we are going to do one more question. You have one
on your side, and then we will return after votes. So we have a
vice chair of the committee, Dr. Bucshon, 5 minutes.
Mr. Bucshon. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I thank the witnesses
and everyone in the audience and everyone watching.
You know, the ground has shifted on a lot of these issues,
and I would encourage all the witnesses to recognize the
shifting of the ground in a bipartisan way. I have been working
on some of these issues for the 12 years I have been in
Congress, talking to stakeholders, trying to find common
ground. And by some of the testimony here today, it is pretty
clear that that is not going to be possible, maybe, and that
disappoints me.
But I want to emphasize the resolve of Congress to address
these issues on behalf of the people we represent. We are
being--we are--every day, when I am in Indiana, people are
demanding that we address these issues. And that is where this
is coming from. And it is going to happen.
Ms. Thompson, everybody here supports hospitals, but the
fact of the matter is hospital expenses from 2019 to 2022
increased by less than overall inflation. So did they go up?
Yes, but inflation was higher overall. And the labor cost
surges that many hospitals were experiencing during COVID,
those were real. Every hospital had to have traveling nurses.
Things like that are beginning to subside, and contract labor
costs were down 20 percent year over year, in one recent report
from HCA.
In 2021, operating margins went up to a record high,
despite COVID relief going down. And that is according to
MedPAC. It is not my opinion.
And in 2022, many hospitals said they have lost money,
but--and that is probably true for the rural hospitals, and
some that I represent, but the reality is there are serious
questions in the larger hospitals. In fact, one study which has
already been quoted a couple of times today of the--of 10 large
nonprofits found that 85 percent of the losses were isolated to
the hospitals' investment portfolios, and actual patient
revenues year over year were slightly positive.
Of course, the S&P 500 grew by nearly 90 percent from 2019
to 2021. So yes, in 2022 we all lost money in the market,
including hospitals.
So I guess my question is, are nonprofit hospitals able to
cover their investment losses with the gain, the market gains,
they achieved prior to the market softening?
I mean, what is the balance, what is on their balance
sheet?
Ms. Thompson. Well, thank you, Congressman Bucshon, for
that question, and thank you for sponsoring the SAVE Act to
protect our healthcare workers.
Mr. Bucshon. You are welcome.
Ms. Thompson. We appreciate that.
Hospitals don't rely on--well, let me take that back.
Because investments change every year, plus or minus, we really
look at our patient care margins. And yes, MedPAC found a
positive patient care margin. But when MedPAC looked at
Medicare margins, they were down at negative 8-something
percent in 2021, moving to negative 10 percent in 2023.
So right now, Medicare is not covering the cost of its
care. Because of that, it is important for hospitals to have
financial reserves to cover such things like----
Mr. Bucshon. OK, fair enough.
Ms. Thompson [continuing]. A once-a-year pandemic.
Mr. Bucshon. Fair enough. I have got other things.
So, I mean, I just want to say Federal Government shouldn't
be subsidizing losses in the stock market to some of the
largest health systems in the country. And that is where
transparency comes in. Honestly, I didn't even know myself the
extent of the investment portfolios of some of the largest
health systems in the country. It is in the billions and
billions of dollars, as they come out and tell the public they
are losing money. That is just not right. I mean, OK, you could
be losing money on the patient volume, I understand, and on
Medicare. But overall, I mean, come on.
I mean--and so my goal is to reduce the--honestly, overall,
it is to reduce incentives for hospitals to monopolize
healthcare markets, which can increase costs for everyone. And
I feel strongly about this because in 2005 my medical practice,
in which I was a partner, was purchased by a hospital system in
Evansville, Indiana, Ascension Hospital. And that was based
essentially on neutral site building. It was based on the fact
that we--the reimbursement had gone to where we couldn't
recruit doctors, we just couldn't afford it because we were
getting paid a third of what the hospital three blocks away
would be for the same tests. The hospitals acquired the primary
care doctors, forced them to send their ancillary services to
the hospital. So not only were we getting paid less, but we
didn't have the patients.
So, I mean, I have been involved in this for 25 years, and
the argument from the hospitals about their cost of care is
totally valid. And I think I have told you that, some of the
cases you make about complexity of care, and I am empathetic.
But please, again, everybody, including the PBMs, work with
this committee to find commonsense solutions to prevent
consolidation and get the cost down. That is what I am asking.
I yield back.
Mr. Guthrie. Thank you. The gentleman yields back, so the
committee will stand at recess and just be close by. And all
you people here, that--if you haven't testified before, you
know where to be, but just be close by. And as soon as the
third--we have three votes, and as soon as the third vote is
conducted, we will----
Mr. Bucshon. Mr. Chairman?
Mr. Guthrie [continuing]. Come straight back.
Mr. Bucshon. Can I submit two things for the record real
quickly, prior to the recess?
Mr. Guthrie. Any objection to his submission to the record?
Mr. Bucshon. One is a letter that Mr. Adler actually signed
on to regarding reforms in neutral site billing, and one is a
hot-off-the-presses article about how health system Kaiser
Permanente is to combine with hospital operator Geisinger, and
Kaiser is creating a new subsidiary called Risant Health, and
their aim is to acquire four or five more hospital systems
across the country, further evidence of consolidation.
Mr. Guthrie. Without objection, so ordered.
[The information appears at the conclusion of the hearing.]
Mr. Guthrie. So the committee will stand at recess until
the call of the Chair following the third vote.
[Recess.]
Mr. Bucshon [presiding]. The committee will come to order.
I now recognize the gentleman from Ohio for 5 minutes for
his questioning.
Mr. Johnson. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you
to our panelists for being here this afternoon for this very
important hearing.
As this subcommittee looks at a number of proposed pieces
of legislation to address staggering healthcare costs Americans
face every day, it is crucially important to hear from all ends
of the spectrum, from patients to hospitals. So thank you all,
all of you witnesses here today, for engaging in this
conversation.
Like many of my colleagues, I am a believer in the power of
the free market. Business will flow to quality and
availability, and supply will dictate the demand when you have
those. But for that to happen, all involved must have access to
the necessary information to make informed decisions. Consumers
must be able to know that they are buying--what they are
buying, and patients must be able to know what the cost of care
is to make those informed decisions.
Now, I have heard from many in the healthcare space that
the cost of implementing and complying with some of the
proposed transparency legislation at issue today, legislation I
believe is critically important, is too much of a burden. So my
first question to Ashley Thompson--I don't--my glasses--there
you are, way down at the end. Thank you, Ashley. Could you
explain the impact of reporting requirements for hospitals,
particularly those hospitals participating in the 340B program?
Ms. Thompson. Yes, thank you for that question. The 340B
program is of immense value to the patients and the communities
we serve. And right now, hospitals are reporting--were
reporting to CMS on the Medicare cost report, were reporting to
the IRS on schedule H, and were reporting to HRSA right now,
who audits the program and annually recertifies the ability for
hospitals to participate. So there's a number of reporting
requirements going on today.
I understand that the bill that is before this committee
would have additional reporting requirements, and I think that
we would welcome the opportunity to discuss them. I think that
they are metrics that are being gathered, that we have some
concerns that they might not show the true value of the
program. So collecting the metrics, you might not, for example,
understand that hospitals are using the program to purchase or
to hire----
Mr. Johnson. Right.
Ms. Thompson [continuing]. Two new behavioral health nurses
for a clinic.
Mr. Johnson. Right. Well, you know, I am a big fan of 340B.
It is something I constantly hear about when I am talking to
hospitals in my district. It is a very rural district. It is a
lifeline to them. My district, like many other rural areas,
relies on the 340B program to help healthcare--to make
healthcare more affordable for patients. So I want the program
to succeed in the long term, but I am getting increasingly
concerned that some nonprofit 340B hospitals are abusing the
program rules to actually deprive patients of the types of
support that 340B was intended to provide.
For example, many of our largest hospital systems,
beneficiaries of the 340B program, complain about the cost of
price transparency compliance, yet they have signed an HHS
Health Sector Climate Pledge to, among other things, designate
an executive-level lead for their work on reducing emissions by
2023 and conduct an inventory of scope 3 emissions by the end
of next year. Now, I am not sure how this relates to delivering
affordable, quality healthcare, but it sounds awfully expensive
to me.
Mr. Chair, I ask to consent to put into the record the HHS
list of hospitals that have signed that pledge.
Mr. Bucshon. Without objection.
[The information appears at the conclusion of the hearing.]
Mr. Johnson. So, Ms. Thompson, back to you again. I find it
hard to believe that some hospitals complain that they are
unable to shoulder the burden of transparency--they say it
costs too much--yet they can afford the not-so-little cost of
climate-resilient infrastructure. Are hospitals taking
advantage of the 340B program and, rather than ensuring the
savings are being passed onto patients, are instead using these
savings to further their liberal ESG agenda?
Ms. Thompson. No, the hospitals that are participating in
340B use those savings in a number of ways for their
communities, whether it is to provide free and discounted drugs
to those in need, whether it is mobile----
Mr. Johnson. Well, that is what they are supposed to use
them for. But how can they say that the cost of price
transparency is too expensive when they are spending money--and
they are a 340B hospital, they get money through the 340B
program--price transparency is too expensive, but they have got
the money to spend on ESG and climate change. Can you help me
deconflict that?
Ms. Thompson. I know that our hospitals are very supportive
of price transparency. And as you heard earlier this morning,
we are at 70 percent compliance with the rule. I know that
those hospitals that are having the most problem with----
Mr. Johnson. Well, compliant with the rule, but a lot of
those hospitals are putting ``N/A'' and blanks and spaces in
the data rather than putting the actual price. And we see
that--we can see that because we are getting the prices from
the insurance companies. So though we know that they have got
the prices, they are just not putting them in the database.
So I am just not sure there is not abuse here, Mr.
Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Bucshon. The gentleman yields back. I now recognize Dr.
Schrier for 5 minutes.
Ms. Schrier. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you to all
of the witnesses for coming today for this discussion about how
we can increase transparency and lower costs and foster more
competition and improve care for patients.
Mr. Cavanaugh, I am going to start, and then my first
question will be directed to you. I just wanted to talk a
little bit about innovation and competition and creative ideas
that we are getting ideas about all around the country on how
to improve care and decrease cost, because our country spends a
tremendous amount of money on healthcare with lackluster
outcomes.
I am a big supporter of the Innovation Center and CMS,
CMMI, and there are lots of pilot projects out there. Not every
model deployed is successful, but they are taking a stab at it.
And so much work has gone on at the State level and State
Medicare and Medicaid systems, thanks to flexibility for States
to partner with local entities and just try out new ideas and
see what works.
Direct primary care is one example of that, and employers
around the country are reporting up to 20 percent savings on
the total cost of care for their employees by providing better
healthcare up front, sort of loading more on the primary care
provider in that setting, reducing unnecessary ER visits,
hospital visits, specialty care, and drastically reducing
expenses. So I am excited to be working with my colleague Dan
Crenshaw on this--these efforts.
Of course, direct primary care can also incentivize worse
outcomes, right? It could discourage patients from coming in.
It could mean that expensive tests just don't happen. And so it
is really important to track outcomes. And what I haven't
really seen is a larger effort to track what works and what
doesn't, and where the successes are and what we should roll
out in other States and around the country.
And so I was just wondering, Mr. Cavanaugh, what has your
experience been, even particularly with direct primary care,
and what can Congress and industry do together to improve this
work being done and roll it out elsewhere?
Mr. Cavanaugh. Sure. Thank you for that question. Alidade
practices are not direct primary care practices in the way that
you mean, but there are some analogies, which is we are--our
practices are going to Medicare, to Medicare Advantage plans,
to Blue Cross plans, to--even to Medicaid plans and saying we
will accept accountability for the total cost of care for your
line beneficiaries.
And importantly, and this is--gets to your question about
skimping on care--also taking accountability for the quality of
care that is delivered and the access, because you are--there's
two ways to save money, a bad way and the right way, which is
focusing on prevention, wellness, transitions. And that is
what, I think, actually has been proven over and over again
through the Medicare Shared Savings Program.
There have been not just--Alidade is probably the biggest,
but there are other organizations that have used this primary
care approach, held accountable by Medicare and others on the
quality measures, and been very successful in reducing costs.
That is one of the reasons I am here today, which is we can't
get everybody to do this because, if systems consolidate, there
is no impetus for them to do this, right? If they are going to
be able to consolidate and negotiate higher fee-for-service
rates, why do the hard work of learning population health,
preventive care? And trust me, it is hard work, and it is
different from the way the health system was oriented in the
past.
So I would love to look at the bill you are developing. We
are not a primary care--excuse me, we are not direct primary
care. But I do see analogies of focusing on better care at
lower cost through, primarily, primary care.
Ms. Schrier. Thank you for mentioning consolidation,
because that is another one of my concerns, and I am hearing a
lot of echoes of that today with my colleagues.
And you are right. When employers have a choice in who to
contract with, their health insurance companies, they are
looking at who can give the best bang for the buck, the best
care. And when there is consolidation, there is no competition,
prices go up, and care potentially can go down because there is
no competition.
Thank you, and I will--unless anybody else has a comment on
direct primary care.
Ms. Schuman. I just wanted to weigh in from the employer
perspective, because you mentioned employers and really looking
to get the best bang for their buck for their employees. And
that means cost, and it means quality.
And employers are really incubators of innovation, and have
really looked to models like primary care as ways to drive a
healthier workforce later on and saving healthcare costs later
on. So we would love to just follow up with you on your
efforts. Thank you.
Ms. Schrier. Thank you. Perfect timing. I yield back.
Mr. Bucshon. The gentlelady yields back. I now recognize
the gentleman from Florida, Mr. Bilirakis, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Bilirakis. Thank you, Doctor, I appreciate it.
Mr. Cavanaugh, the Providers and Payers Compete Act draft
would ensure HHS is taking into account the effect of
regulatory changes to Medicare payment systems on provider and
payer consolidation, both horizontally and vertically. I have
been an advocate of ensuring that policies within the Medicare
physician fee schedule, for example, work best for patients
access--patient access and don't adversely cause local
providers to close their doors and join a larger health system.
You say in your testimony that both types of consolidation
have led to higher prices for patients. Can you provide insight
into this trend and perspective on whether HHS should be taking
these considerations into account as it conducts annual payment
rulemaking under Medicare?
Mr. Cavanaugh. Certainly anything that gets policymakers to
think longer and harder about whether public policy is
contributing to consolidation is something that deserves
support.
I would just say, in the meantime, we know there are
specific--rather than--I mean, in addition to focusing on
future policies, we should look at existing policies that we
know are part of the problem.
This committee, to its credit, has site-neutral bills
before it. I would encourage you to look there. But I agree
that, if there's ways to get policymakers--and I was formerly
one myself--to focus more on this--because I do think it is the
major challenge before us in getting our health system to pivot
to one that is focused on value and not just focused on price
and consolidation.
Mr. Bilirakis. Very good, thank you. As cochair of the
Congressional Rare Disease Caucus, I know the challenges that
rare disease patients face in terms of getting treatments to
market in the first place.
Despite the FDA regulatory challenges, we have seen some
incredible advances in cell and gene therapies. Yet even after
approval, unfortunately, the current pricing structure in place
causes additional barriers, unfortunately, to access for these
patients. That is why I am grateful for Chairman Guthrie's
bill, the Medicaid VBPs for Patients, or the MVP Act, is on the
docket.
So, Mr. Connell, can you speak to the potential that
reducing payment barriers can have, such as following for more
value-based payment arrangements on blood cancer and other rare
diseases?
And how can we also ensure the innovation pipeline is
strong to give hope to so many patients that currently don't
have approved treatments or cures?
If you could answer those questions, I would appreciate it.
Elaborate, please.
Mr. Connell. Yes, I appreciate that. You know, we--there is
a truism that we get what we reward, and so we should be
rewarding quality. We should be rewarding improved outcomes. We
want patients to have better outcomes. That is what we should
be paying for. So we want more value-based agreements.
We want more ways that we can reimburse, whether it is to
physicians or for drugs, in ways that actually do promote what
we want, which is more investment in the type of innovation,
the type of new therapies that are going to be really life-
changing for patients. Because you mentioned it is a challenge
on the rare disease space, and blood cancers are largely rare
diseases, a whole collection of them. Under the mantles of
just, you know, three or four names are hundreds of diseases.
And so the market is not there necessarily for any one
disease in a way that really creates market problems now in
terms of bringing products to patients. And so we see
tremendous potential in trying to come up with value-based
agreements that do reward that patient-centered innovation,
that really make a difference for patients, and use that as a
way forward to really get the type of drugs that are most
valuable for cancer patients.
Mr. Bilirakis. Thank you very much.
And Mr. Chairman, I yield back the rest of my time.
Mr. Bucshon. The gentleman yields back. I now yield to Dr.
Joyce for 5 minutes.
Mr. Joyce. Thank you for yielding, Dr. Bucshon. This
hearing today is incredibly apropos because of the timing. I
just received notification that Kaiser Permanente is acquiring
Geisinger Health System in my home State of Pennsylvania.
Let's start with addressing, first of all, though, H.R.
977. We all know that our society is full of experts, each
owning their own workplace. We know that lawyers own law firms.
We know that auto mechanics own auto garages. We know that
chefs own restaurants. Yet we stop doctors like myself from
owning a hospital because they have earned a medical degree. I
would like to add my voice to those who are supporting H.R.
977, which would repeal this incredibly misguided restriction.
One of the most disturbing trends that we see in healthcare
that defies logic is the prices that insurers pay for medicines
that have been broadly flat or declining. Yet patients continue
to pay higher prices. In 2021 the net price for medicines, the
price after all rebates are paid to PBMs, grew just 1 percent.
Meanwhile, insurers and middlemen continue to increase their
profits while pocketing the rebates and pocketing the discounts
from patients.
Mr. Connell, do you think it is fair that patients could
pay more for their medicine than the insurer or the PBM paid?
Does that not defeat the entire point of what insurance is for?
Mr. Connell. I don't think it is fair. I think that we
should try to make sure that patients pay the lowest amount
possible, because we know that for every dollar you increase in
someone's cost sharing, that patient is less likely to actually
get the care that they need. And so we should be getting those
copays as low as possible.
Mr. Joyce. Thank you.
Ms. Schuman, if prescription drug prices were more
transparent, do you think that this would happen?
Ms. Schuman. I think that prescription drug prices being
more transparent is the only way for this to happen. It may not
be the last step, but it has to be the first step.
Mr. Joyce. And I agree that that first step must be taken,
and I think that is one of the points of this hearing today.
Currently, PBM compensation is, quote, ``linked'' to a
percentage of the list price of a drug, which incentivizes
higher list prices and more rebates that the insurers and PBMs
pocket rather than passing it on to the patient.
Do you believe, Ms. Schuman, that we should delink this
compensation based on list price through the supply chain to
encourage lower list price?
Ms. Schuman. Well, I think we need to look at the entire
ecosystem, the drug pricing ecosystem, and have more
transparency throughout the entire drug pricing system.
And why transparency is such a critical first step is you
are able to see those links, you are able to see whether--what
those incentives are, and what--and how that is really
translating into, ultimately, lower costs for employers and,
ultimately, employees too. So I think that is why I said
transparency is, I think, the necessary first step, so
employers have line of sight into whether or not they and their
employees are actually benefiting from that.
Mr. Joyce. And I agree, transparency is ultimately
important, but the next step has to be de-linking the
compensation based on the price list.
On another subject, Mr. Connell, I understand that in 2022
Medicare paid 141 percent more in a hospital outpatient setting
than in a freestanding provider office for the first hour of
chemotherapy infusion, including both the professional and the
facility fees. Mr. Connell, what does this 141 percent premium
for the hospital setting mean for cancer patients and the costs
that they face at this incredibly important time of their
lives?
Mr. Connell. Yes, it means that they pay more. Right now,
patients pay, essentially, 20 percent in Medicare Part B of
whatever the cost, the underlying cost, of the service is. And
so, if you have that higher underlying cost--so if you have
that markup that happens when someone is getting that chemo at
the hospital setting--then you have a patient who is paying
more because they are paying a higher amount from their 20
percent.
And there are some ways to help patients deal with that.
Medigap is one, but if you are a blood cancer patient you can't
get a Medigap plan. If you get diagnosed, they will not sell
you a Medigap plan. And so there are patients who are paying
that full 20 percent, and they really feel it when the cost
goes up like it does if you go to a hospital----
Mr. Joyce. It certainly seems unfair at such a critical
stage of their lives, as they are battling for the life that
they want to lead.
Mr. Adler, according to MedPAC, in 2022 Medicare paid 105
percent more in on-campus hospital outpatient departments than
in freestanding offices for a midlevel office visit. Can you
please elaborate on the economic incentives such a payment
disparity creates for consolidation and the acquisition of
physician practices?
And do you feel that there is a way to move to site-neutral
payments for these visits without risking patient outcomes?
Mr. Adler. Sure. So I think that is very important to move
in that direction, right?
I think the financial incentive created by this market
distortion that you are describing is very large. So for an
independent physician in 2016, integrating with a hospital
would have increased the total annual Medicare payments for
their services by $141,000. This is, like, per year, per
physician, that is how much money is on the table. And as Mr.
Cavanaugh was saying earlier, right, this is just a very big
incentive for hospitals to buy out practices and for physicians
to go work for hospitals because they just have a lot more
money to deal with for the exact same set of services.
I think if--just moving to site-neutral payments, where we
are focused here on lower complexity services, right--it is
imaging, drug administration, office visits, as you were just
describing--it is hard to imagine there would be any adverse
effects on patients, and we have not seen that from the steps
that Congress took in this direction in 2015.
Mr. Joyce. My time has expired, but I want to reiterate
from the onset that any action this committee takes must
carefully balance maintaining access to care across all
communities, especially in rural settings.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I yield.
Mr. Bucshon. The gentleman yields back now. I now recognize
Mrs. Harshbarger for 5 minutes for her questions.
Mrs. Harshbarger. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you all for being here. You know, I am glad to be
talking about transparency. And, you know, I looked up the
definition of ``transparency,'' and it says it is the quality
of being easy to see through. That makes no sense about
healthcare.
But Ms. Schuman, this week I introduced a bipartisan bill,
along with colleagues Reps. Spanberger and Miller-Meeks and
Krishnamoorthi, and it is called the PBM Sunshine and
Accountability Act. And what this bill does, it requires public
reporting of PBM financial information that the HHS Secretary--
he already gets that, and--under current law--but it will
enhance the reporting to include other things like the rebates,
the fees that PBMs and its financial affiliates receive from
drug manufacturers and health insurers.
Would it be helpful to employers if group health plans were
able to view publicly reported data on PBM aggregate rebates,
including those captured by GPOs, or Group Purchasing
Organizations?
Ms. Schuman. I do believe that it would indeed be helpful
to employers if they were able to view this publicly reported
data on PBM aggregate rebates, including those by these Group
Purchasing Organizations. Only with more fulsome transparency
around the extent of drug manufacturer rebates received by PBMs
can employers begin to understand the value that PBMs are
generating from administering their drug benefit for their
employer-sponsored plan.
And with this increased information, employers will be
better positioned to negotiate for reduced administrative fees
from their PBMs.
Mrs. Harshbarger. Yes, especially self-funded employers.
Would it be helpful for employers to know the highest and
lowest retained rebate percentages across all contracts, so
employees could see where they fall?
Ms. Schuman. Yes, absolutely. That also would be very
helpful information for employers. It will help employers
understand where their contract falls relative to other
employers and whether they may have an opportunity to negotiate
for additional pass-through rebate revenue.
So again, I think it is really important to have this
information to help manage a plan's----
Mrs. Harshbarger. Yes.
Ms. Schuman [continuing]. Overall drug spend and also
ensure that there is no overcompensation.
Mrs. Harshbarger. You know, we have--the biggest employer
in Tennessee is in the city I live in, and if I went to tell
their benefits manager about the discrepancy in payment from
specific PBMs they had contracted with, do you know it would
negate my contract? I could not tell them, because that was a
stranglehold on me, and I think that is unacceptable, to try to
save somebody's money and they tell you you can't do it.
Mr. Connell, in your view, does it make sense that, if
hospitals have to post laboratory test prices, that retail labs
should be required to as well?
Mr. Connell. Yes, yes, it does make sense. I know patients
like patients with blood cancer get a lot of lab tests, and
they get very frustrated by the lack of transparency we see
today.
Mrs. Harshbarger. Yes, because they are totally different,
aren't they?
Mr. Connell. Yes.
Mrs. Harshbarger. Do you think patients would be able to
compare cash prices, or should be able to compare cash prices
for tests at retail labs versus hospital labs?
Mr. Connell. Yes.
Mrs. Harshbarger. Do you think competition makes everything
better, Mr. Connell?
[Laughter.]
Mr. Connell. I think so, yes.
Mrs. Harshbarger. I believe so.
Mr. Connell. I think so.
Mrs. Harshbarger. I think I agree with you.
You know, something interesting, I know that in the
healthcare world NPIs--if you have two different offices,
physicians are required to have two NPIs, just like pharmacies
are. And I have been reading some things about, you know, when
hospitals buy provider practices, and the same provider
practices then change your billing methods, you know, generally
to generate higher reimbursement for their services. These
providers, when they are purchased by hospitals, they can use
that hospital's NPI. And I don't think that is--you know, there
has to be some kind of differentiation. And there were three
things that, you know, we have researched that looks like may
help with that.
If you require--do you think that if these--and this goes
to Mr. Adler--do you think that if these hospitals or these
off-campus facilities were required to get a different NPI,
that that would fix a lot of this issue?
Mr. Adler. Sure. So I think in the commercial market, which
is where this would be meaningful--so I think it would help. I
don't think it fixes everything, but certainly you talk to
insurers, and sometimes they will say, ``We have a contract
with the hospital that says we do not pay more for an off-
campus outpatient department visit,'' for instance, but they
literally cannot figure out whether it is an off-campus
facility or an on-campus facility.
Mrs. Harshbarger. I know. How can you, if you have got the
same NPI?
Mr. Adler. Yes, exactly. And it is hard to do that.
I mean, I think the Medicare policy is still where more of
the money is, but I do think that is an important step.
Mrs. Harshbarger. And Mr. Connell, we had the CMS
Administrator here earlier talking about how it was a Stark law
violation if, like, for example, Tennessee Oncology mailed to
their patients in rural areas if they were too sick to pick the
drug up, or if they didn't have transportation because it was a
couple of weeks ago, and they interpreted an FAQ to do that.
What do you think about that?
Mr. Connell. I think there are so many ways in which things
like Stark--and we talked about Medicaid best price--things
that do have an important role also have unintended
consequences that definitely need to be addressed.
Mrs. Harshbarger. I think it was pretty ludicrous, and even
the HHS Secretary told us he would work with our committee to
change that, and negate that particular FAQ.
And I guess, with that, I have asked the important
questions, and so, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Bucshon. The gentlelady yields back. I recognize Dr.
Miller-Meeks, 5 minutes.
Mrs. Miller-Meeks. Thank you, Mr. Chair, and thank you to
all of our witnesses that--who are here today, testifying.
Mr. Adler and--or Mr. Loren Adler, excuse me, thank you for
testifying before the committee. As you know, we are
considering multiple site-neutral payment bills, and I
understand that you have written about this topic before.
And let me also state that I am a physician who has done
both military medicine, private practice, academic medicine,
and then been a hospital employee.
You stated specifically that site-neutral payments should
ultimately be applied to a much broader set of clinical
services, and then in the 2014 MedPAC recommendations at both
off-campus and on-campus HOPDs as well as ambulatory surgery
centers.
Furthermore, you stated that increased hospital ownership
of physician practices can also drive up costs for private
payers by increasing the prices they pay for physician services
and the possible hospital services as well. Can you detail how
not having site-neutral payments harms our healthcare system
and how vertical integration leads to increased costs for
patients?
Mr. Adler. Sure, and thank you for the question,
Congresswoman.
So, yes, I mean, I think fundamentally, not having site-
neutral payments creates a very large financial incentive to
go--for a doctor to go work for the hospital, or for the
hospital to go out and buy up physician practices. And as you
are saying, right, that has effects on commercial markets, as
well, right?
We have more and more evidence now that this vertical
consolidation, when the hospital goes and buys up a bunch of
physician practices, has--tends to increase costs. And some of
that is--it is straight arbitrage, right? This is taking
advantage of a Medicare policy where--said earlier, it is
basically--it is $140,000 more per year per physician that you
get if you do the same set of services in a hospital outpatient
department rather than an independent office. That is 2016
numbers, so probably multiply that by a bit to get to modern
dollars.
Mrs. Miller-Meeks. It was one of the things that myself and
others talked about during the debates on the Affordable Care
Act, and we were very concerned about that amount of
consolidation. And in 2010 there were 50 percent of physician
practices that were independent, and now there is 20 percent.
So thank you.
Mr. Connell, Congress has always tried to make healthcare
more affordable for patients as well as more accessible. But
health plans and PBMs continue to increase deductibles, use
more coinsurance than copays, and are making patients pay based
on the list price of medicine. With ever-increasing insurance
costs, millions of hardworking Americans are having to choose
between affording, you know, lifesaving medicines or putting
food on the table for their families.
On top of that, PBMs have adopted schemes like accumulators
and maximizers that force patients to pay even more out of
pocket for their drugs, while PBMs, which lack transparency,
pocket the money for their own profits.
As a State senator in 2019, I actually passed PBM
transparency in the State of Iowa. I was not able to get the
rebates through, but we are still working on getting that
transparent data all this time later.
I also worked in a bipartisan manner to introduce HELP
Copays Act with my colleagues Representative Carter, DeGette,
Clarke, and others. This is a bipartisan bill that would
prevent PBMs from enacting these schemes, and I am disappointed
that it is not included in the hearing today, but I think that
it will in the near future.
Do you agree that PBMs and insurers should let cost-sharing
assistance count towards patients' out-of-pocket costs and
deductibles?
Mr. Connell. Yes, it is a great question, and you are
dealing with an enormous challenge that is really, really
important for patients.
I mean, we see patients, you know, get caught in the middle
of a fight between payers and manufacturers of drugs. And so
you have, you know, high costs that are dealt with with high
cost sharing, and then you have manufacturer assistance, which
is certainly an imperfect solution but to a real problem. And
then you have copay accumulators, copay maximizers, these
solutions that have tried to again continue this fight that
happens with, really, industries with patients caught in the
middle.
And so we have heard situations where you have patients who
have been caught, where their assistance goes away as a result
of this back and forth between industries. And that is an
enormous problem for patients, because if they are left holding
the bag, if they are left with $5,000, $6,000 of out-of-pocket
costs, that is prohibitive for a lot of people in this country.
A lot of people cannot afford even a cancer medication if it is
going to come with a cost so high.
And so we do have patients--we have data patients will walk
away from the pharmacy counter. I think Mr. Carter mentioned
this earlier in his experience, and many people in healthcare
have the same experience of working with folks who have a
treatment, the good--the bad news is you get a cancer
diagnosis, the good news is maybe you have a treatment that
they think will work. You go to the pharmacy counter. Right now
we have data that shows that that cost is over $2,000. Then you
have 40 percent of patients walking away from the counter
without that therapy.
Mrs. Miller-Meeks. Thank you.
And Mr. Loren Adler, does the current system ever expose
patients to a situation where they might pay more than the net
price of the drug?
Mr. Adler. Sure. So there are certainly situations where
that happens.
Mrs. Miller-Meeks. Thank you.
I yield back.
Mr. Bucshon. The gentlelady yields back. I recognize Mr.
Carter from Georgia for 5 minutes.
Mr. Carter. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I am going to jump
right into it. You know where I am on this issue, so I don't
think anybody needs to be prepped with it. Three companies
controlling 80 percent of the market, the vertical integration
that exists where the insurance company that owns the PBM that
owns the pharmacy, and many times employees to provider, you
are all aware of the FTC and the study they are doing,
something I asked for 8 years ago. Finally, 7\1/2\ years later,
it happens. Well, I am glad it is happening.
You know, one of the most egregious practices that I ever
witnessed in anything was the gag clause that I was able to get
passed in legislation to do away with--where we and--as the
pharmacists weren't able to tell--and the gentleman just
mentioned--about sometimes the copay is more than the actual
cost of the medication. But if we were to tell that, we would
be kicked out of the network by the PBMs, another egregious
practice of the PBMs.
Ms. Bass, how--let me ask you, and Representative Miller-
Meeks just mentioned the HELPs copay bill, helping ensure lower
patient copays, and how the accumulators are being used and not
being used, and the fact that the patient assistance, the cost-
sharing assistance to patients aren't being credited to their
copay or to their deductible.
Why is that? What is the justification that the PBMs use
not to do that? Why am I having to introduce this legislation
that would force them to do that?
Ms. Bass. [Inaudible.]
Mr. Carter. I can't hear you, I am sorry.
Ms. Bass. I keep forgetting to push the talk.
Mr. Carter. That is OK.
Ms. Bass. I apologize. I appreciate the question.
Coupons are a marketing device by drug manufacturers who
set high prices for their products. They are considered an
illegal kickback in Medicare, and they are used by
manufacturers to get around formularies.
Formularies are designed by independent expert clinicians.
And our company's view is that the plan sponsor has chosen a
formulary, and that the cost-sharing----
Mr. Carter. And what do you base that formulary on?
Ms. Bass. The formulary is based on clinical evidence,
independent clinical----
Mr. Carter. Clinical evidence, and not ever on price. Price
never enters into it?
Ms. Bass. The P&T committees tell the PBM, ``These are the
drugs you have to have on the formulary,'' and when there are
drugs that are----
Mr. Carter. They tell them that specific drug, or that
class of drug?
Ms. Bass. Sometimes specific drugs. And when there are
drugs that compete with each other, they say, ``These are drugs
that you can go out into the market and get to compete on''----
Mr. Carter. And you base it purely on therapeutics, and not
on price at all?
Ms. Bass. The must-haves are purely on therapeutics, and
the must-not-haves, because of safety issues.
Mr. Carter. So you are saying, yes, you base it all on
therapeutics, and never on price.
Ms. Bass. I am saying----
Mr. Carter. Mr. Connell, let me ask you. What kind of
financial burdens in the--financial burdens, let's start with
that first--does it create for patients when they are not able
to use these cost-sharing cards for their deductible or for
their copay?
Mr. Connell. Well, benefit designs really foist a lot of
expense onto patients, so deductibles are getting larger. A lot
of times there is no separate deductible for pharmacy. And so,
as a result, if you have a $5,000 deductible in your plan, then
when you go to that pharmacy for the first time to fill that
drug for the first time that year, you are going to pay
$5,000----
Mr. Carter. So we can really question whether or--excuse
me, what the intent is of that cost sharing. It may be so that
the patient can get the drug because they can't afford their
copay, or they can't afford their deductible, and not that
there is some marketing ploy, as was described.
You know, let me ask you this--and, you know, never ask a
question you don't know the answer to. What about adherence?
What does it do to adherence?
Mr. Connell. It has a tremendous impact on adherence. I
think you mentioned the study that talks about $2,000, which is
in Medicare Part D, and the same study also has information on
commercial claims. And we see patients--over 30 percent, I
think, and Part D, certainly over 40 percent--where, if they
faced $2,000 for that first script--and you certainly face that
with a high deductible--then if you face $2,000, you are--40
percent of those patients are walking away from the pharmacy
counter without it.
Mr. Carter. Absolutely. And I can tell you, again, from
experience as a pharmacist, that they don't it--that it
decreases adherence, because they don't come back. They don't
get their medication because they can't afford it. And I have
witnessed that firsthand.
Finally, Mr. Connell, let me ask you, do you agree that
these cost-sharing plans should go toward the deductible and
toward the cost-sharing?
Mr. Connell. I think we should look at all the solutions. I
am excited that you all have a solution out there that would
try to, like, apply as much assistance as possible to patients
who need it. You know, we have at LLS a copay assistance
program. There's lots of nonprofits out there. Manufacturers--
--
Mr. Carter. Absolutely, absolutely. And that is why we had
to introduce this legislation. Again, as Representative Miller-
Meeks indicated, it is not on the--not in the markup right now,
but I hope it will be, and I think it will be.
And, Mr. Chairman, I thank you, and I yield back.
Mr. Bucshon. The gentleman yields back.
Ms. Bass, with all due respect, we know for a fact that
PBMs keep drugs off of formularies because of cost.
The gentleman has yielded, and I now yield to Ms.
Schakowsky for 5 minutes.
Ms. Schakowsky. Thank you so much, and I really appreciate
the opportunity to waive on to this wonderful committee.
So, you know, I have throughout my career been so concerned
about the cost and accessibility of healthcare, and we have
seen the cost continuing to get higher and higher. The, you
know, higher premiums, higher out-of-pocket costs. And we know
that right now over 40 percent of Americans face medical debt
right now, and half of all Americans have difficulty affording
their healthcare costs. Half of all Americans.
And meanwhile we have seen hospital mergers, and
acquisitions are growing. And there is plenty of evidence that
are saying that, when that happens, studies have shown that it
can also raise the cost. So Mr. Adler, you said--where are you?
I am sorry, just walked in. There you go.
Mr. Adler, in your testimony you do discuss the significant
increase in consolidation and how it can lead to higher prices.
I wonder--you have probably gone over that already, but I
wonder if you could just say something about that, and if you
think that there are any things that the Congress can actually
do to address this issue.
Mr. Adler. Sure. Thank you for the question, Congresswoman.
So fundamentally, yes, you are 100 percent correct. The
consolidation that we have seen, particularly of hospitals, two
hospitals merging, one hospital acquiring another, has been
very clear evidence at this point that that increases costs and
tends to decrease quality, actually, right?
Those costs then flow through to--right--we keep talking
about kind of people paying a lot of money in their deductible.
Fundamentally, that is because we have high healthcare prices,
drug prices, or hospital prices. That is really kind of the
crux of why folks are paying a lot of money here. And now we
have a lot of evidence, there is new evidence that has come out
that very clearly ties hospital mergers to reductions in
employee wages. That--right--when hospitals merge----
Ms. Schakowsky. Yes.
Mr. Adler [continuing]. It means workers in the area get
paid less.
Ms. Schakowsky. So the workers have paid a price as well,
you are saying.
Mr. Adler. Correct.
Ms. Schakowsky. Private equity has gotten involved. You
know, we are talking about reimbursement to these companies,
often from the Federal Government, because this is healthcare
costs, and I wonder if you could talk a little bit about the
role of private equity.
Mr. Adler. Sure. So that is a--very happy to talk, this is
where a lot of my research is nowadays.
So, yes, we have seen--I think private equity has come in,
particularly in the last decade or so, and been a very big
accelerator of these consolidation trends we have seen, and
also sort of picking out some areas where hospitals sort of
hadn't done the consolidation already. So they got into
dermatology or ophthalmology, where there wasn't a lot of
hospital ownership, and really sort of drove things there such
that you see, you know, 10 percent of docs and a lot of
specialties work for a private equity company or--in research
we have coming out soon--that more than 20 percent of emergency
physicians work for a private equity company right now.
Ms. Schakowsky. Oh, no. I have been fighting for lower
healthcare costs and Medicare for All kinds of policies, and it
just seems like now the Big Money people are getting in.
Mr. Cavanaugh--let me see my time--you have also discussed
in your testimony how consolidation is leading to higher costs,
and I wonder if you could discuss ways that you think--if you
think--that Congress can address this.
Mr. Cavanaugh. Certainly. Thank you for the question. Yes,
I think I would summarize it by saying consolidation is sort of
the antithesis of value-based care.
So we are all trying to do better care at lower cost.
Medicare has programs through the Medicare shared savings
program, and there has been success. But consolidation allows
providers to avoid the need to move to value-based care,
because it allows them to bargain more aggressively with
insurers and get higher prices and not engage in the activities
that would lead to better care at lower cost. So I think that
is the real problem. Some of the bills get at some of the
things that are feeding it, but ultimately that is the problem
we need to address.
Ms. Schakowsky. So let me just end with this. You know, I
really support efforts to strengthen transparency so that we
are even requiring that we get reports on ownership, we know
who is owning, including private equity. I am not so sure that
everyone is really aware of who is making the decisions, who is
owning this maybe on the sidelines. And I really think that we
ought to have transparency requirements. What do you think
about that?
Either one of you, anyone.
Mr. Adler. I will just say that it is very difficult, as a
researcher who has tried to do this, to nail down what sort of
entities own physician practices, for instance. There really is
not good data out there. And one of the bills before the
subcommittee today would require entity-level reporting. So
physician group and hospital-level reporting on the parent
company name, the address, and the ownership structure of those
physician practices, and make that data publicly available. I
think that would do a huge service to being able to understand
the effects of private equity and other corporate forms of
ownership.
Ms. Schakowsky. I really agree, Mr. Adler, and hopefully we
can do something about it.
Thank you, I yield back.
Mr. Bucshon. The gentlelady----
Ms. Schakowsky. Thank you so much.
Mr. Bucshon [continuing]. Yields back. I now recognize Ms.
Matsui for 5 minutes.
Ms. Matsui. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and Ranking Member
Eshoo, for holding this hearing and allowing us to waive on
to--allowing me to waive on to join this important
conversation. I would like to discuss the 340B drug pricing
program, which is the subject of one of the transparency bills
before the committee today.
For years, I have worked to strengthen this program on a
bipartisan basis. This includes transparency and
accountability. While some of these bills are ostensibly about
transparency, in reality I think they would disincentivize
participation in 340B. I know HRSA has requested the authority
to audit how entities use their savings, and I want to support
their work. But this bill adds a number of burdensome reporting
requirements that are unrelated to how 340B operates.
Ms. Thompson, help us to understand why the reporting
requirements in this bill do not actually reflect the true
value of the true--of the 340B program.
Ms. Thompson. Thank you for this question. As you know,
hospitals already report quite a bit on the 340B program to CMS
and its cost report to the IRS in Schedule H and as well to
HRSA, as you mentioned.
The provisions in the bill are metrics, and I think that
those metrics, looking at payer mix and looking at every single
clinic that receives 340B payment, I think that the metrics
will mask all the good work that is being done from the
program. It will be very difficult to identify, for example,
that a hospital is using the savings to purchase or--sorry, I
should say to hire a couple of behavioral health specialists to
work in an opioid clinic, or to provide the amount of free or
discounted drugs to needy patients or the mobile mammography
unit that is out in the community finding breast cancer. I am
not sure that those metrics will really be able to show the
good works that are being done.
Ms. Matsui. Right, thank you. You know, I support measures
to strengthen program integrity, as we all should.
In addition, I know there is already a movement towards
transparency around 340B savings. For example, in your
testimony you mentioned the good stewardship principles. Some
hospitals in my district have adopted these to help them share
how 340B benefits their communities. Ms. Thompson, is it
possible to craft reporting requirements that demonstrate the
true value of 340B?
Ms. Thompson. Well, we would be very interested in working
with you on that. I think that the good steward principles have
been a good step forward, and we have been working with our
hospitals to encourage them to share with their communities
what they are doing with those savings as well. So we would
be--welcome the opportunity to work with you here.
Ms. Matsui. OK. So what kind of activities could we support
that would not be captured by the requirements in this bill?
Ms. Thompson. I think that we would really need to reflect
on additional reporting requirements, because there are so many
already upon hospitals. And I really do feel that HRSA has the
authority to make sure that the program is being implemented as
intended and that it audits hospitals to make sure that they
are conforming to the program as written. So I am just not sure
additional reporting requirements are needed at this time, but
happy to speak with you and others on the committee to discuss
further.
Ms. Matsui. Thank you. At the last hearing on transparency,
we heard from a witness from Pullman Regional Hospital. He
explained how burdensome it already is for entities to
participate in 340B. From certifying eligibility every year to
preparing for audits to simply administering the program, it is
a lot of work. And I am really concerned that some of these new
requirements proposed would be near impossible for some
entities to comply with.
Ms. Thompson, would these requirements even be workable for
hospitals, especially rural hospitals and others with limited
resources?
Ms. Thompson. I think that you are absolutely right. We
have heard from many of our small, rural hospitals that are so
grateful for this program, because out of everywhere, I think,
the 340B savings in rural communities has really provided a
lifeline for these hospitals.
They have limited staff. You know, in many of the critical
access hospitals, the CEO is also the COO----
Ms. Matsui. Right.
Ms. Thompson [continuing]. And the CFO and the janitor who
changes the light bulb. So any additional requirements that's
necessary, you hope that they are not so high a barrier that it
decreases the ability of providers to access the funds that
might be available. And for 340B, we all have to say that these
are no additional costs to taxpayers or the Government. It is
really savings on drugs.
Ms. Matsui. Thank you very much, Ms. Thompson, and I look
forward to working with you. Thank you.
I yield back.
Mr. Bucshon. The gentlelady yields back.
Mr. Pence is going to--Mr. Pence, are you ready for your 5
minutes?
I now recognize the gentleman from Indiana, Mr. Pence, for
his 5 minutes.
Mr. Pence. Thank you, Chairs McMorris Rodgers, Guthrie, and
Ranking Member Pallone and Eshoo for holding this hearing, and
thank you to the witnesses today.
Hoosiers and all Americans are facing higher medical costs
and fewer options for care, particularly in rural communities.
Complex medical fee structures, surprise billing, and confusing
coverage plans have further eroded patient trust in our
healthcare system. Improving healthcare price transparency,
however, could inject needed competition for healthcare
facilities and, ultimately, lower costs for patients. This is
especially needed in the Hoosier State, which consistently
ranks among having some of the highest hospital prices in the
country.
Across southern Indiana, rural facilities are closing at an
alarming rate, going bankrupt, lowering access to care for
vulnerable communities. Lack of competition has left patients
with fewer alternatives to access care, particularly in rural
communities across Indiana's 6th District, often an hour or
more drive.
These issues are exasperated by unsustainable workforce
shortages and skyrocketing labor costs. There have been recent
efforts to improve transparency, such as the Pence-Trump
administration's 2019 HHS rule requiring hospitals to disclose
standard charges, as well as the transparency and coverage
requirements for health insurers. However, it is clear there is
still more that needs to be done so that Hoosiers and all
Americans can make the best medical decisions for themselves
and their families.
Mr. Adler, several years ago Congress took steps to
harmonize Medicare payments between various sites of care for
the same services provided through a site-neutral payment model
for certain services. However, many outpatient facilities were
grandfathered in by the legislation, making the services
covered under the new policy a relatively small portion of
outpatient services. If this policy were to be expanded, do you
think there are ways to ensure rural hospitals continue to
receive sufficient support and provide healthcare access to
rural patients?
Mr. Adler. Thank you, Congressman. So, yes, I think, as you
say, right, this was a pretty small-step policy that was passed
in 2015 that tried to move in this direction. Basically, it
grandfathered anyone who was--even had their outpatient
department under construction at the time back then. You know,
the data is basically less than 1 percent of outpatient
services were covered by that bill.
I think moving towards getting rid of that grandfathering
entirely would, right, save money for taxpayers and patients,
reduce incentives to consolidate. And I don't--do not see that
there would be--right? We are talking about pretty low-
complexity services here. To think that this would sort of have
issues on access seems unlikely. And if you do, if you are
concerned about that, this isn't the policy to sort of toy with
that, right?
I think Mr. Cavanaugh was saying this earlier, but if that
is the issue, one, right, there is another bill that is, for
instance, getting rid of the--or delaying the DSH cuts. Or you
could increase the physician fee schedule or, you know, other
hospital payment rates, right? Even if you did this without
saving a ton of money, you would at least be still reducing the
incentive for hospitals to consolidate and buy up all the
physician practices in an area.
I just think there are other policies that, if you want to
kind of deal with that issue, that are better uses.
Mr. Pence. All right, then, kind of from there, do you
think it makes more sense to further explore transparent and
accountable methods of directly supporting rural and medically
underserved hospitals than an opaque and complicated network of
cross-subsidies?
Mr. Adler. Sure, right? I fundamentally think that if the
goal is to support rural hospitals, I think directly doing that
is the best way. Right now we have all of these policies that
kind of do that, kind of don't do it perfectly. I think sort of
directly funding that is a much better sense than having, oh,
you get to--you know, when, you know, the hospital buys up your
physician practice, all of a sudden you owe three times more
money on the service you were getting a week ago.
Mr. Pence. Yes, I--you know, just kind of as we are sitting
here and I am wrapping up, you know, I have a number of rural
hospitals. I will tell you that two of them are probably in the
red right now in a big way. And one of them went bankrupt about
3 years ago, and if it hadn't been some of the bailout or
relief that was provided during COVID, they--some of them would
be closed today.
So I think we really have to figure out ways to kind of
separate rural from some of the other conversations we have,
and with that I yield back.
Mr. Bucshon. The gentleman yields back. I now recognize Mr.
Allen from Georgia for 5 minutes.
Mr. Allen. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you for
allowing me to waive on to this important hearing.
Well, you know, we are going to repeat it again. What we
are here today is to address costs by increasing transparency
and competition rather than price setting that we have seen
happen with some drug prices, or with this Medicare for All
business. But--and that is where I come from, the business
world, very competitive, very transparent. Our clients, our
contracts provided for audits and things like that so that, you
know, we hid nothing from them. And that is kind of the way the
free market works out there. And what we have here is a little
different.
Mr. Adler, a bill that I cointroduced that we are
discussing today, the Drug Price Transparency and Medicaid Act,
would stop the harmful spread pricing practices some pharmacy
benefit managers use, where they underreimburse pharmacies
while overbilling State Medicaid programs.
Last Congress the Congressional Budget Office estimated a
version of this legislation would save approximately 1 billion
in Federal dollars. Can you speak to the implications that the
practice of spread pricing has on businesses, and the benefit
that the healthcare markets would see if we were to implement a
ban on spread pricing across the board?
Mr. Adler. Sure, thank you for the question, Congressman.
I think it is--honestly, I think it is hard to perfectly
game things out, in part because these are private actors who
will just come--try to come up with other ways to do very
similar things. And you have already seen a lot of the big PBMs
already kind of move away from spread pricing.
I think an important thing just to keep in mind here is
that, right, employers also often want maybe not spread
pricing, but they are--right?--cost-sharing is part of the
thing, right? There are two sides of this negotiation here. So
often the employer sort of wants part of the benefit design as
well here.
I do think transparency is useful here to know exactly what
money is flowing where, and I think that can be useful. But I
think that is sort of where more of the sort of benefits are.
Mr. Allen. Ms. Schuman, I have long been concerned with the
lack of transparency in the healthcare industry, particularly
as it relates to healthcare middlemen like pharmacy benefit
managers. Can you talk more about PBM transparency and how we
can restructure the current rebate system to be more easily
understood by employers, plan participants, and beneficiaries?
Ms. Schuman. Well, let me just thank you very much for that
question, and let me just start off by saying that employers,
even very large employers, are frustrated by the complexity and
opaqueness of the rebate structure, and they need to have the
information. They don't know what they don't know. I have
repeatedly said that. But that is the issue. And that is why it
is so critical for them to be able to have reporting from the
PBMs about the revenue streams to be able to find out that,
really, they are paying for value, that their patients, that
their workers are paying for value.
And I think it is so important to enshrine this in
legislation because, number one, employers need the certainty
of knowing that this is there. They also need to know that
there's the clear definitions in statute about what needs to be
reported. And I think, most importantly, the transparency needs
to be robust enough that it captures the PBM business model not
just today but how it is going to evolve tomorrow as well.
Mr. Allen. Well, I served on the Healthy Future Task Force,
and I couldn't have any of those experts that we talked to--
could tell me how to peel the onion back and find out where all
the money is going.
I recently took a trip to Israel, and pretty much I talked
to folks about their healthcare, and they were pretty happy
with it. Currently, Israel spends less than 8 percent of their
GDP on healthcare. We are close to 20 percent. Obviously, we
are in a worldwide competition here. We need to be looking
where--at where our healthcare dollars are being spent.
Many attribute our increased healthcare prices in part to
consolidating by merging hospitals and to--consolidation by
merging hospitals and pharmaceutical groups. Health
Subcommittee, can you speak to how the hospital consolidation
and acquisition of physician practices impacts employers, and
why this is such an important issue to them?
Ms. Schuman. Yes. Well, thank you. Thank you so much.
And it impacts employers because it impacts employees. It
impacts costs. I mean, ultimately, that is what we are here
today, is figuring out what those root causes of higher
healthcare costs are and to address them. And consolidation,
overwhelmingly, is fueling higher healthcare costs.
So if we are going to really tackle lower healthcare costs
at their core, which is what employers want to be able to
deliver--high value, affordable care for their employees--they
care about consolidation, they care about Medicare policies
that are fueling consolidation.
Mr. Allen. Exactly, and the Federal Government. Yes. Thank
you.
Mr. Chairman, I am out of time, and I yield back.
Mr. Guthrie [presiding]. Thank you. The gentleman yields
back.
Seeing no other Members present for questions, the first
thing I will do is ask unanimous consent to insert in the
record the documents included on the staff hearing documents
list.
Without objection, so ordered.
[The information appears at the conclusion of the hearing.]
Mr. Guthrie. You want to comment here? You are sitting
here, do you have a final comment? You would just like a couple
of minutes?
Ms. Eshoo. I would just like to thank you, Mr. Chairman,
all the members of the committee, most especially all of the
witnesses. Whether I agree or disagree with you, it is very
important that you are here. I think that, you know, to a
person--well, maybe not to a--well, just--I am getting myself
in a little trouble here.
[Laughter.]
Ms. Eshoo. You did a great job, and I think that you
answered--with your answers you were highly instructive to all
of the members of the committee. So I truly thank you.
You heard Members complimenting the panel, and we usually
do in a very nice way, but it was effusive today on both sides.
So know that you are helping to move the needle, and it is so
important for the people of our country. They are so hungry and
so in need of these changes.
And I often say to my constituents most people don't know
who I am, they don't know what I am doing, but the words that
we write walk into people's lives. So, Congress willing, we
will write very good words to walk into people's lives. So
thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Guthrie. Thank you. And I just want to sum up as well.
Thanks for everybody being here. It has been a long day, very
informative.
We are going to be working together, because we want to
deliver the world-class care that you all deliver at the price
that--Ms. Schuman, representing the employer-based plans and
the individuals who buy their own coverage that have the price
that we can afford to pay, and then people know what the prices
are so they can make decisions for themselves. So we really
appreciate you being here.
I will remind Members that they have 10 business days to
submit questions for the record, and I ask the witnesses to
respond to the questions promptly. Members should submit their
questions by the close of business on May the 10th, so you
should have questions before May the 10th, and I ask for your
prompt consideration and responses.
And without objection--I see no objection--the committee
is--subcommittee is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 3:27 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]
[Material submitted for inclusion in the record follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
