- EXAMINING THE ROOT CAUSES OF DRUG SHORTAGES: CHALLENGES IN PHARMA- CEUTICAL DRUG SUPPLY CHAINS

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

EXAMINING THE ROOT CAUSES OF DRUG SHORT-
AGES:  CHALLENGES  IN  PHARMACEUTICAL
DRUG SUPPLY CHAINS

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT AND
INVESTIGATIONS

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND
COMMERCE
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION
__________

MAY 11, 2023
__________

Serial No. 118-35

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Published for the use of the Committee on Energy and Commerce

govinfo.gov/committee/house-energy
energycommerce.house.gov
______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

55-967 PDF                 WASHINGTON : 2024

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE

CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington
Chair
MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas            FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey
ROBERT E. LATTA, Ohio                  Ranking Member
BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky              ANNA G. ESHOO, California
H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia         DIANA DeGETTE, Colorado
GUS M. BILIRAKIS, Florida            JAN SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois
BILL JOHNSON, Ohio                   DORIS O. MATSUI, California
LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana               KATHY CASTOR, Florida
RICHARD HUDSON, North Carolina       JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland
TIM WALBERG, Michigan                PAUL TONKO, New York
EARL L. ``BUDDY'' CARTER, Georgia    YVETTE D. CLARKE, New York
JEFF DUNCAN, South Carolina          TONY CARDENAS, California
GARY J. PALMER, Alabama              RAUL RUIZ, California
NEAL P. DUNN, Florida                SCOTT H. PETERS, California
JOHN R. CURTIS, Utah                 DEBBIE DINGELL, Michigan
DEBBBIE LESKO, Arizona               MARC A. VEASEY, Texas
GREG PENCE, Indiana                  ANN M. KUSTER, New Hampshire
DAN CRENSHAW, Texas                  ROBIN L. KELLY, Illinois
JOHN JOYCE, Pennsylvania             NANETTE DIAZ BARRAGAN, California
KELLY ARMSTRONG, North Dakota, Vice  LISA BLUNT ROCHESTER, Delaware
Chair                            DARREN SOTO, Florida
RANDY K. WEBER, Sr., Texas           ANGIE CRAIG, Minnesota
RICK W. ALLEN, Georgia               KIM SCHRIER, Washington
TROY BALDERSON, Ohio                 LORI TRAHAN, Massachusetts
RUSS FULCHER, Idaho                  LIZZIE FLETCHER, Texas
AUGUST PFLUGER, Texas
DIANA HARSHBARGER, Tennessee
MARIANNETTE MILLER-MEEKS, Iowa
KAT CAMMACK, Florida
JAY OBERNOLTE, California
------

Professional Staff

NATE HODSON, Staff Director
SARAH BURKE, Deputy Staff Director
TIFFANY GUARASCIO, Minority Staff Director

Subcommittee on Oversight and Investigations

H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia
Chairman
MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas            KATHY CASTOR, Florida
BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky                Ranking Member
JEFF DUNCAN, South Carolina          DIANA DeGETTE, Colorado
GARY J. PALMER, Alabama              JAN SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois
DEBBIE LESKO, Arizona, Vice Chair    PAUL TONKO, New York
DAN CRENSHAW, Texas                  RAUL RUIZ, California
KELLY ARMSTRONG, North Dakota        SCOTT H. PETERS, California
KAT CAMMACK, Florida                 FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey (ex
CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington     officio)
(ex officio)

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hon. H. Morgan Griffith, a Representative in Congress from the
Commonwealth of Virginia, opening statement....................     1
Prepared statement...........................................     4
Hon. Kathy Castor, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Florida, opening statement.....................................    10
Prepared statement...........................................    12
Hon. Cathy McMorris Rodgers, a Representative in Congress from
the State of Washington, opening statement.....................    14
Prepared statement...........................................    16
Hon. Frank Pallone, Jr., a Representative in Congress from the
State of New Jersey, opening statement.........................    19
Prepared statement...........................................    21

Witnesses

Alex Oshmyansky, M.D., Ph.D., Chief Executive Officer/Founder,
Mark Cuban Cost Plus Drug Company..............................    24
Prepared statement...........................................    26
Anthony Sardella, Chair, API Innovation Center, and Adjunct
Professor and Senior Research Advisor, Center for Analytics and
Business Insights, Washington University in St. Louis..........    35
Prepared statement...........................................    37
Laura Bray, Founder and Chief Change Maker, Angels for Change....    44
Prepared statement...........................................    46
Fernando J. Muzzio, Ph.D., Distinguished Professor of Chemical
and Biochemical Engineering and Director, NSF Engineering
Research Center on Structured Organic Particulate Systems,
Rutgers University.............................................    58
Prepared statement...........................................    60

EXAMINING THE ROOT CAUSES OF DRUG
SHORTAGES: CHALLENGES IN PHARMA-
CEUTICAL DRUG SUPPLY CHAINS

----------

THURSDAY, MAY 11, 2023

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Oversight and Investigations,
Committee on Energy and Commerce,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 10:30 a.m. in
the John D. Dingell Room 2123, Rayburn House Office Building,
Hon. Morgan Griffith (chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Members present: Representatives Griffith, Duncan, Palmer,
Lesko, Crenshaw, Rodgers (ex officio), Castor (subcommittee
ranking member), Schakowsky, Tonko, Ruiz, Peters, and Pallone
(ex officio).
Staff present: Kate Arey, Digital Director; Sean Brebbia,
Chief Counsel, Oversight and Investigations; Lauren Eriksen,
Clerk, Oversight and Investigations; Peter Kielty, General
Counsel; Emily King, Member Services Director; Karli Plucker,
Director of Operations (shared staff); Gavin Proffitt,
Professional Staff Member; John Strom, Counsel, Oversight and
Investigations; Michael Taggart, Policy Director; Joanne
Thomas, Counsel, Oversight and Investigations; Austin Flack,
Minority Junior Professional Staff Member; Waverly Gordon,
Minority Deputy Staff Director and General Counsel; Tiffany
Guarascio, Minority Staff Director; Liz Johns, Minority GAO
Detailee; Will McAuliffe, Minority Chief Counsel, Oversight and
Investigations; Christina Parisi, Minority Professional Staff
Member; Greg Pugh, Minority Staff Assistant; Harry Samuels,
Minority Oversight Counsel; Andrew Souvall, Minority Director
of Communications, Outreach, and Member Services; and Caroline
Wood, Minority Research Analyst.
Mr. Griffith. The Subcommittee on Oversight and
Investigations will now come to order.
The Chair recognizes himself for 5 minutes for an opening
statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, A REPRESENTATIVE
IN CONGRESS FROM THE COMMONWEALTH OF VIRGINIA

Good morning, and welcome to today's hearing. This
morning's hearing will examine the very serious and growing
problem of prescription drug shortages.
Americans need more reliable access to lifesaving drugs.
According to the American Society of Health-System Pharmacists,
we currently have over 247 active drug shortages. Between 2021
and 2022, drug shortages increased by almost 30 percent. It is
unbelievable that in our great country there is a shortage of
drugs to treat childhood cancer, and that is just one example.
It is even more galling when you consider that most shortages
are in the generic drug space, where there should be
competition. The median price of a drug in shortage between
2013 and 2017 was less than $9 per treatment dose.
Generic drugs account for 90 percent of all prescriptions
but only 17 percent of drug spending. Generics are perhaps the
only significant segment of our healthcare industry where costs
have not increased faster than inflation. The generic
pharmaceutical industry is plagued with a myriad of issues
leading to drug shortages.
We have an economic environment so unappealing to
manufacturers that lifesaving drugs are produced by one or, at
most, two companies worldwide, often at unsustainably,
artificially low prices. There is a broad consensus that the
root cause of drug shortages is a profound market failure
caused by economic forces unique to the drug market.
Middlemen such as Pharmaceutical Benefit Managers, PBMs, or
group purchasing organizations, GPOs, do not care to look for
ways to mitigate shortages. By one count, for every $100 spent
on a generic prescription drug, $44 goes not to the
manufacturer, not to the producer, but to a middleman. The
three largest Pharmaceutical Benefit Managers control around 80
percent of the commercial drug sales.
The 4 largest group purchasing organizations control 90
percent of the medical supply market and have massive market
power. They could help end drug shortages by prioritizing
generic drugs' availability and quality. Instead, they use
their market power to force a race-to-the-bottom pricing
without consideration for quality or availability. Their
contracts with generic drug manufacturers consist of a take-it-
or-leave-it approach, leaving the generic manufacturer with the
option of either complying or losing access to the market. Many
of them choose to lose that access and just go out of business.
Over the past 10 years, the United States has seen dozens
of generic drug manufacturing facilities close, and this
shortage problem isn't limited to just closings. The typical
generic drug has just two manufacturing facilities. We
currently do not fully utilize the factories that we have. As
Professor Sardella notes, we only use about half of our current
generic manufacturing capabilities. We now have fewer
manufacturing facilities both in the U.S. and globally, and our
supply chain has proven to be fragile and vulnerable to
disruption. Forty percent of generic drugs are made at a single
facility, thus even a temporary shutdown of a single facility
triggers a shortage.
We are also far too dependent on foreign countries for
generic drugs and active pharmaceutical ingredients, or API,
especially China and India. Our dependance on China represents
a serious national security risk. China's new interpretation of
its national security law may actually make FDA's already
anemic inspection program in that country a crime.
As we are holding this hearing, FDA Commissioner Califf is
appearing before our Health Subcommittee. All too often his
agency has made drug shortages worse and left us more
vulnerable. The FDA's response to shortages is to allow for
foreign-made generics and API to come unfettered to the U.S.
market. The FDA claims to be focused on collecting information,
but it does not effectively use the information that it already
has.
We need an FDA that prioritizes applications from U.S.
manufacturers and gives companies the flexibility to address
shortages with resources based here. Solving drug shortages is
going to require an all-of-the-above approach. Purchasers of
generic drugs must incentivize quality and reliability in
generic drugs, and we must always keep in mind the human toll
of drug shortages.
I look forward to hearing from our witnesses today, who are
working in innovative ways to help solve drug shortages.
I thank you all for being here, and I yield back.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Griffith follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Griffith. I now recognize the gentlelady from Florida,
Ms. Castor, ranking member of the subcommittee, for her 5-
minute opening statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. KATHY CASTOR, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF FLORIDA

Ms. Castor. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you
for calling this critical hearing on the root causes of drug
shortages.
These drug shortages are becoming more prevalent due to a
warped marketplace. And as a witness, Professor Laura Bray, in
her testimony stated, no patient should have to hear the words,
``We do not have medicine to treat you.''
Drug shortages in America are at a 5-year high. In 2022 we
experienced a 30 percent jump in the number of drugs in
shortage. FDA has documented 136 drugs on its shortage list,
and healthcare providers suspect the actual number is far
higher. These shortages can last years, and some critical drugs
have been in shortage for over a decade. The impacts of these
shortages on our neighbors receiving cancer care, children and
their caregivers, are incredibly upsetting because when drugs
are in short supply lifesaving care can be delayed, can be
canceled, patients may be placed on medication that is less
effective or more expensive.
The cascading impacts of not receiving appropriate medicine
can impair a person's ability to live a full life, to attend
school, to work. Plus, it can lead to increased costs of care
and more serious health complications like adverse drug
reactions, increased hospitalizations, or even death.
Children and their providers can be hit particularly hard
by drug shortages. Children's hospitals often frantically
respond to these shortages by scrambling for necessary and
appropriate drugs. They have to devote additional staff time
and resources to finding appropriate replacement drugs and
determine the appropriate dosage for the replacement drug. Is
it safe for children? It takes children's hospitals 50 percent
longer to address shortages than other hospitals because of the
time needed to compound replacement products into pediatric
dosage forms. And it is so costly. One drug in shortage alone
can cost a children's hospital north of $50,000 in labor and
substitute products.
So we have got to get ahead of these shortages before they
happen so that our neighbors and providers are not blindsided
and left scrambling to find workarounds.
This past winter's triple epidemic of the flu, RSV, and
COVID-19 were exceedingly difficult because shortages of basic
medicine like Tylenol and ibuprofen ultimately got so severe
that retailers began imposing purchase limits at the counter,
sending parents searching multiple locations for medication to
take care of their families. FDA took the action it could
within its limited authority to ensure that more products were
available for consumers, but the current haphazard approach of
addressing crisis episode by episode is not working to give
American families the certainty and the quality of care they
need and deserve.
So together we need to require greater transparency from
manufacturers about where they source raw materials for drugs.
We know that 72 percent of manufacturers supplying the U.S.
market with active pharmaceutical ingredients, or API, are
overseas, mostly in India and China, and the percentage of APIs
manufactured in those countries by volume may be higher. I sit
on the Select Committee on the Strategic Competition between
the U.S. and the Chinese Communist Party, and API manufacturing
is another example how overreliance on raw materials from China
creates real-life risks to the well-being of Americans.
Greater transparency will help us better understand where
we need to shore up the domestic production and invest in new
technologies. But the need to address shortages doesn't end
with manufacturers. We need to make sure that the anticonsumer
behavior by intermediaries like PBMs and GPOs does not create
affordability barriers for patients that magnify the effects of
drug shortages for families in need.
And we have a model, Mr. Chairman, for action, for
bipartisan action. When faced with a semiconductor shortage,
Congress acted to adopt the CHIPS and Science Act and invest in
Americans and our supply chains. Drug shortages will also
require a coordinated approach across government but with
manufacturers, providers, and payers to create domestic
production, to shore up supply chains, and revitalize
scientific research that hopefully will strengthen our economy
and our healthcare system.
I hope that our witnesses today can help us better
understand the reasons why shortages occur and persist and how
better and smarter tools would improve insight into the supply
chain to better guide strategies to strengthen it. By better
understanding the root causes of these shortages, Congress and
our public health institutions can enact policies to address
them.
I am really looking forward to our witnesses today and
covering this topic. So thank you all for being here.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Castor follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Ms. Castor. And I yield back my time.
Mr. Griffith. I thank the gentlelady for yielding back and
now recognize the chairwoman of the full committee, Mrs.
McMorris Rodgers, for her 5 minutes of opening statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, A
REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF WASHINGTON

Mrs. Rodgers. Good morning. Our goal today is to examine
the complex challenges and root causes that lead to drug
shortages.
Just last November, in September--in Spokane parents were
shocked that Amoxicillin, a common antibiotic, wasn't readily
available at pharmacies. Parents had to contact multiple
pharmacies and talk to the doctor to get alternatives, which is
no small effort when your child is sick.
Our committee has exposed the harmful consequences of
consolidation, Federal programs, and malincentives that distort
the market and make it more difficult for patients to get
lower-cost medication. Sometimes it is because these
medications are not on pharmacy or hospital shelves or because
they are not covered by insurance. These market distortions
hinder the adoption of quality generic drugs and weaken the
drug supply chain.
The FDA has not been an effective partner in combating drug
shortages. Even after Congress provided FDA new authority in
2020 to get more information regarding where American
prescription drugs are made, we still do not have good data on
where either finished medications or active pharmaceutical
ingredients, or APIs, are sourced.
FDA last testified that around 80 percent of API facilities
and 60 percent of finished dosage facilities are overseas,
including India and adversarial countries like China. These are
countries who limit our foreign drug inspection program's
ability to operate adequately. It is an enormous problem if we
cannot properly inspect the quality of the ingredients in
common drugs Americans rely on.
This situation not only raises concerns over drug quality,
but it also poses a significant threat to national security. If
adversarial countries were to cut off the supply of necessary
APIs to manufacturers, American patients' lives could hang in
the balance.
Further, the COVID-19 pandemic taught us that we cannot
rely on the Chinese Communist Party, which blocked the export
of PPE and other critical supplies, lied about positive case
numbers, and has refused to cooperate into any meaningful
investigation into the origins of COVID-19.
As we strive to strengthen our supply chain, we must
encourage American innovation, increase domestic manufacturing
capabilities, and promote the adoption of quality generic
drugs. And we need a system that acknowledges and rewards such
innovation.
In 2019 HHS programs accounted for 40 percent--41 percent
of all prescription drug spending. Yet those programs may have
unintended consequences leading to unsustainably low prices or
incentivizing middlemen to get the best deal at the expense of
a secure supply chain. We should look at all Federal programs
this committee oversees to help create a more secure and
reliable drug supply chain for our Nation.
We have gathered a diverse group of witnesses with
expertise into the pharmaceutical drug supply chain to help us
start to dig into these complex programs and challenges and
what potential solutions there are, whether in American
manufacturing or in trying to innovate around middlemen in the
system.
We will also hear from Laura Bray on why this work to stop
shortages is so important. Laura has heard many times what no
parent wants to hear, that there is a shortage of medicine
needed to treat her doctor's--or her daughter's cancer.
As I close, I want to note that I am encouraged by the
bipartisan approach to this hearing. This is a critical issue
that transcends political party lines, and I am confident that
by working together we can help ensure more people like Laura's
daughter get the lifesaving care and medicines that they need
when they need it. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mrs. Rodgers follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Griffith. I thank the gentlelady for yielding back. I
now recognize the ranking member of the full committee, Mr.
Pallone, for his 5-minute opening statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. FRANK PALLONE, Jr., A REPRESENTATIVE
IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF NEW JERSEY

Mr. Pallone. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Today we are examining the root causes of drug shortages,
which negatively impact the health and well-being of so many
Americans. Drug shortages are not a new issue, but
unfortunately, they are currently at a five-year high.
Shortages can last anywhere from a year to over a decade, with
15 critical drugs in shortage for over 10 years. This past year
alone, we have seen harmful disruptions in the availability of
children's pain medication and medication to create--or to
treat conditions like ADHD. And these shortages can result in
delayed care, ineffective treatment, increased
hospitalizations, and even death.
So we need to do more to prevent these drug shortages,
including building a robust and resilient drug supply chain.
This is not only critical to the health and well-being of
Americans, but also to our national security. However, we
cannot effectively tackle the challenges associated with drug
shortages without more information about the current supply
chain. Key gaps remain in our understanding of how drugs are
manufactured and brought to market.
The Administration for Strategic Preparedness and Response
has shared that there can be up to 20 key materials per
pharmaceutical. However, our public health agencies currently
do not know which materials are used in the production of each
drug and in what quantity. We also do not know the quantity of
active pharmaceutical ingredients used in drugs for the U.S.
market that is manufactured overseas. And while we know that 72
percent of active pharmaceutical ingredient manufacturers
serving the U.S. market are overseas, we do not know the actual
volume of the ingredients that they manufacture, and that
number is likely much higher than the 72 percent.
So FDA has some limited tools to examine the supply chain.
Recently, as part of the CARES Act, Congress took bipartisan
action to start addressing drug supply chain information gaps.
The law included a requirement that manufacturers develop risk
management plans and annually report to FDA on the amount of
each drug they make available for commercial distribution. This
is a step in the right direction, providing us more information
than we had before. And while it has been useful, it is not
enough to fully address drug shortages caused by supply chain
issues.
FDA has repeatedly told us that, with its limited tools, it
is simply not capable of using its existing authorities to
directly prevent or mitigate a shortage. For example, FDA's
current reporting requirements don't allow the agency to
determine which suppliers of active pharmaceutical ingredients
manufacturers rely on. This makes it difficult to predict how a
disruption with one supplier would affect a manufacturer's
ability to produce their drugs.
FDA's tools are even more limited when it comes to
forecasting and anticipating changes in demand. We have seen
how sudden spikes in demand for certain drugs can cause a
shortage, most recently in the market for Adderall and
children's pain medication. However, manufacturers are not
required to report those demand surges to FDA, which means FDA
may lack the information it needs to foresee a shortage.
Without that information, FDA can't take the necessary action
to identify new manufacturers, expedite additional inspections,
or review new products that can fill gaps.
So giving FDA these tools will allow the agency to
understand why these shortages occur so that we can take action
to predict and address them. I would like to hear from our
witnesses how greater visibility into the supply chain will
help alleviate challenges that drive disruptions in drug
availability. And most importantly, I look forward to
discussing how more reliable access to important drugs would
improve the lives of patients and their families.
So I am pleased the subcommittee is also hearing from
experts about what we can do to increase pharmaceutical
manufacturing efficiency for greater domestic production.
I especially want to thank Professor Muzzio from Rutgers
University in my congressional district for being here today.
Dr. Muzzio directs Rutgers' Center for Structured Organic
Particulate Systems, and he is a national leader in the
development of continuous manufacturing methods and
technologies, which will help us improve drug manufacturing
efficiency and quality.
Dr. Muzzio was also instrumental in supporting passage of
my legislation, the National Centers of Excellence in Advanced
and Continuous Pharmaceutical Manufacturing Act, which
President Biden signed into law last year. And that law
empowers the FDA to partner with universities around the
country to further develop continuous manufacturing technology,
which will, hopefully, strengthen domestic pharmaceutical
manufacturing and help prevent future drug supply chain
shortages.
So thank you for being here today, Dr. Muzzio.
Thank you to all the witnesses.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Pallone follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Pallone. And with that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Griffith. I thank the gentleman for yielding back. That
concludes the Members' opening statements.
I remind all Members that, pursuant to committee rules, the
Members' opening statements will be made a part of the record.
We want to thank all of our witnesses for being here today
and take the time to testify before our subcommittee.
Each witness will have the opportunity to give an opening
statement, followed by a round of questions from Members.
Our witnesses today are Dr. Alex Oshmyansky, CEO/founder of
the Mark Cuban Cost Plus Drug Company; Anthony Sardella, chair,
API Innovation Center; Laura Bray, founder, Angels for Change;
and Fernando Muzzio, distinguished professor of chemical and
biochemical engineering at Rutgers University, which I learned
is in Mr. Pallone's district.
We do appreciate you all being here today, and we look
forward to hearing from you on this important issue. And thank
you so much for taking your time.
As you know, and as you are aware, this committee is
holding an oversight hearing, and when doing so we have the
practice of taking our testimony under oath. Do any of you have
an objection to testifying under oath?
Seeing that no one has objected, we will proceed.
Further, you are advised that you are entitled by counsel--
you are entitled to have counsel present with you, pursuant to
House rules. Do any of you wish to have your counsel present
with you today?
All right, seeing that none have desired to have their
counsel with them, would you all rise and raise your right
hand, please?
[Witnesses sworn.]
Mr. Griffith. Recognizing that all responded in the
affirmative--and you all can be seated, thank you--recognizing
that all have responded in the affirmative, I would say that
you are now sworn in and under oath, subject to the penalties
set forth in title 18, section 1001 of the United States Code.
All right. We got through all the legal mumbo jumbo that we
needed to get through. We will now recognize Alex Oshmyansky
for his 5-minute opening statement.
Dr. Oshmyansky. Alex is fine.
Mr. Griffith. All right.
Dr. Oshmyansky. First, thank you so much to the
subcommittee.
Mr. Griffith. Yes, we need you to turn on the mike and----
Dr. Oshmyansky. Hear me?
Mr. Griffith. Yes, maybe pull it up a little bit so you are
loud enough. We could hear you, but then nobody at home----
Dr. Oshmyansky. Oh, but no one else. Got you.
Mr. Griffith [continuing]. Or on C-SPAN can hear you.
Dr. Oshmyansky. OK.

STATEMENTS OF ALEX OSHMYANSKY, M.D., Ph.D., CHIEF EXECUTIVE
OFFICER/FOUNDER, MARK CUBAN COST PLUS DRUG COMPANY; ANTHONY
SARDELLA, CHAIR, API INNOVATION CENTER, AND ADJUNCT PROFESSOR
AND SENIOR RESEARCH ADVISOR, CENTER FOR ANALYTICS AND BUSINESS
INSIGHTS, WASHINGTON UNIVERSITY IN ST. LOUIS; LAURA BRAY,
FOUNDER AND CHIEF CHANGE MAKER, ANGELS FOR CHANGE; AND FERNANDO
J. MUZZIO, Ph.D., DISTINGUISHED PROFESSOR OF CHEMICAL AND
BIOCHEMICAL ENGINEERING AND DIRECTOR, NSF ENGINEERING RESEARCH
CENTER ON STRUCTURED ORGANIC PARTICULATE SYSTEMS, RUTGERS
UNIVERSITY

STATEMENT OF ALEX OSHMYANSKY, M.D., Ph.D.

Dr. Oshmyansky. Well, first off, thank you so much to the
committee and the subcommittee for inviting me to speak today.
It's an honor and a privilege.
As I speak here today, there are approximately 200 drug
products listed as in shortage on the U.S. FDA shortage
database. Many of these medicines are critical lifesaving
medications such as albuterol, the treatment for an acute
asthma attack. Several chemotherapeutic drugs for cancer are in
shortage.
The rates of morbidity and mortality for pediatric cancers
in the U.S. have gone up in recent years, as the medications
necessary to treat them are increasingly unavailable. The
majority of these medications are relatively simple to make and
have been available for decades. How is it that they are
unavailable in the United States, the wealthiest country in the
history of human civilization?
The root underlying causes are complex and multifactorial.
However, Mark Cuban Cost Plus Drug Company is working
diligently in the background to try to address drug shortages
through a combination of innovative technologies and business
model innovation.
We have constructed an advanced pharmaceutical
manufacturing plant in Dallas, Texas. The facility utilizes
robotic fill finish technology optimized by AI machine vision
systems that are designed to incorporate single-use disposable
components. The robotic manufacturing systems installed at our
manufacturing facility can transition between making batches of
different types of medication within hours, rather than months,
with full FDA cGMP compliance. This allows us to very rapidly
pivot from making one drug type to another in order to address
pharmaceutical drug shortages as they arrive.
In principle, we can have a new manufacturing line up in 4
hours. In combination with a regulatory strategy as a 503(b)
compounding site, we are very rapidly able to pivot from making
a shortage drug product with full compliance with FDA
regulations.
In addition, within the next few months, we will be
launching Mark Cuban Cost Plus wholesale, which will enable
independent pharmacies, clinics, and hospitals to get access
not just to our products, but products from any pharmaceutical
manufacturer at a true, transparent price. This will enable us
to ensure distribution of products outside of the conventional
distribution oligopolies.
Our pilot manufacturing facility is currently completing
its validation process and is expected to begin commercial
sales later this year. It has an estimated capacity of between
1 and 2 million sterile doses of medication a year, either
prefilled vials or syringes. Initial products will include
pediatric chemotherapy agents, lidocaine, and essential ICU
medications. However, we will be nowhere near meeting the
national demand for these products.
Mark Cuban Cost Plus has also drafted preliminary designs
for a much larger facility, based on similar technologies that
would hopefully be able to alleviate the majority of acute drug
shortage issues in the United States. We believe such a
facility would cost approximately $300 million to construct,
based on current estimates. We believe that through a private-
public partnership or otherwise, through government investment,
we will be able to build the infrastructure necessary to ensure
pharmaceutical drug shortages no longer affect the health of
Americans.
Thank you so much.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Oshmyansky follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Griffith. Thank you.
And we now recognize Mr. Sardella for his 5-minute opening
statement.

STATEMENT OF ANTHONY SARDELLA

Mr. Sardella. Good morning. I'd like to thank Chairman
Griffith, Ranking Member Castor, and the distinguished members
of the committee for holding this meeting. And it's a privilege
to speak with you. My name is Tony Anthony Sardella. I'm an
adjunct professor at the Olin Business School at Washington
University. I'm also the university's senior analyst for their
Center for Analytics and Business Insights, and also chair a
new nonprofit that is dedicated to the reshoring of API to the
United States, the API Innovation Center.
The economic viability of the generic pharmaceutical
industry, which represents over 90 percent of the medications
prescribed in the United States, is diminishing and
contributing to supply disruptions, drug shortages, with
significant negative implications for U.S. health security.
Economic conditions indicate that this environment will only
worsen, further jeopardizing the quality and the stability of
our Nation's pharmaceutical supply chain.
COVID-19 revealed the country's overreliance on foreign
production of essential drugs. My research revealed that the
United States has no domestic-based supply for approximately 83
percent of the top 100 generic medicines prescribed in America.
These are highly prescribed medicines such as cardiovascular,
atorvastatin, and lisinopril that many patients leverage and
rely on every single day.
The principal driver to strengthen our health security and
keep our Nation's drug supply chain secure is economics, not
just logistics. We must address the economic instability of the
generic pharmaceutical market. We must expand public and
private partnerships and incentivize domestic drug
manufacturing.
Generic drugs are commodity products, and because they are
substitutable, price becomes the dominant factor in any type of
market competition. Since 2016, the generic industry has
experienced price erosion greater than 50 percent. An average
high-volume 30-count bottle of medicine is now less than $1.50,
the equivalent of 5 cents per tablet.
But there is a high cost to low prices. The implications
are significant. Reduced earnings lead to cost cutting and
reduced ability to invest in new product development, factory
maintenance, and innovation. The economic pressures facing
generic manufacturers are contributing to increased quality and
compliance risks, as they are unable to expend capital to
address FDA warning letters, evidenced by greater than 1 in 4
prescriptions in the U.S. are filled by a company that has
received an FDA warning letter in the last 26 months.
No single entity can solve this complex problem and
challenge to strengthen our domestic manufacturing. It requires
a coordinated approach between the public and private sector.
It involves, first, the derisking of the adoption of advanced
manufacturing technologies that will make the U.S.
manufacturing globally competitive.
Second, it involves leveraging existing available generic
manufacturing infrastructure. In September last year I
published a study that revealed that, of the 37 U.S. generic
manufacturing sites surveyed in my research, they were
producing at just half of their annual production capacity. And
by repurposing the existing auto manufacturing base, 57 percent
of the U.S. manufacturing sites could be operational in 1 year,
and 86 within 2 years, which equates to 30 billion capsules and
doses of essential and critical medicines within a 2-year
period.
Third, several market-based solutions exist to foster
industry investment in domestic manufacturing and ensure a
long-term, sustainable U.S.-based supply. The driver of price
erosion for generics is the inability to differentiate on
product quality, a dimension of market competition in virtually
every other market.
Quality price trade-offs can be addressed by creating
transparent quality scores that enables competition on a
dimension beyond only price while incentivizing manufacturers
with strong quality.
Leveraging the buying power of the Federal Government,
which accounts for approximately 34 percent of total healthcare
spending in the United States, with sourcing policies that
favor and incentivize domestic manufacturing or manufacturers
with strong compliance records--which is a practice already
employed in Germany, Brazil, India, and China--is another
important instrument to incentivize U.S.-based manufacturing.
Improving provider reimbursements for U.S.-made generics
and realigning preferred drug list formularies can also drive
incentives.
I'd like to thank the committee for your time and the
opportunity to share my research, data, and perspective
pertaining to the pharmaceutical supply chain and drug
shortages.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Sardella follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Griffith. Thank you for yielding back.
I now recognize Ms. Bray for her 5-minute opening
statement.

STATEMENT OF LAURA BRAY

Ms. Bray. Good morning. I'm Laura Bray, chief change maker
at Angels for Change, a volunteer-supported organization on a
mission to end drug shortages. I appreciate the opportunity to
speak here today and represent the patient voice.
Thank you for your leadership and bipartisan work to
prevent and end drug shortages.
Four years ago my husband Mike and I were sitting in a
hospital room when our child, Abby, was diagnosed with
leukemia. At that moment we became caretakers while our child
began to fight for her life. We were told we were lucky that
this leukemia, unlike many other pediatric cancers, has a cure:
a miracle protocol, a cocktail of drugs given in certain
timeframes but leading to very successful treatment.
The doctors used these success numbers--above 90 percent--
to provide assurances but also to alert us that compliance was
the single most effective thing, as her parents, we could do
every day for her survival. With our trusted physicians,
nurses, care team, and child life specialists, we became a team
using every tool available to ensure our child's compliance of
this cocktail.
When a child doesn't want to take her meds anymore, when
they can't take the pain of being poked and prodded again, when
they lose their hair, when it's just too much, we all focus on
the importance of the medicine for their survival.
I was sitting in a hospital room with Abby when I first
heard the words, ``We don't have the drug needed today. It's on
shortage.''
My Abby, our fierce middle child, caught it right away, and
said, ``I thought I needed this. Does this mean I die?''
Before that moment, I didn't know our pharmaceutical supply
chain was broken. I had the same questions she had. I told her
the only thing I could: ``We're going to try to find it.''
With no experience, using my background as a business
professor, the help of friends and family and Google, we
successfully found the medicine. But it didn't end there.
Abby's protocol was impacted by a drug shortage again and then
again--three lifesaving shortages in nine months, different
drugs, different root causes. It wasn't enough that my 9-year-
old had to consider her mortality because of cancer. She also
had to consider it again because our supply chain was not
making enough medicines of the drugs I told her would save her.
This experience haunted me, and I began to ask questions
about how common it was for patients to experience something
like this. I was surprised by how easy it was to find the
answers. Twenty years of research outlining this drug shortage
crisis. There had been calls to actions. There had been
hearings like this going back many, many years.
If we had these answers, why did my child and our family
have to go through this? It was such a cruel place to find
ourselves. I knew no patient should have to go through a search
again alone.
So with my friends and family joined in the mission, we
launched Angels for Change in 2019, becoming the only patient
advocacy organization with a mission to end drug shortages in
the United States. And almost immediately, patients began to
call. Eventually, hospitals began to call too. I connected with
members of the supply team, the supply chain. We learned from
each other. I asked the members to become change makers with
me.
The patients stuck in the drug shortage, they are our
purpose. But it was the people that make up the supply chain
that stepped up and took on collaborative, patient-focused work
with us that gave me hope. To date, we have helped patients and
hospitals find hundreds of courses of medicine stuck in this
broken supply chain during three dozen different drug
shortages.
Proactively, we foster stakeholder collaboration to build
resiliency, convening members at our summit and helping to
launch the End Drug Shortages Alliance, which now has 162
supply chain members ready to do this work. These collaborative
spaces have led to innovative pilot programs like our Project
Protect.
Through prediction, a small manufacturing incentive grant
of $100,000, we created gap supply of 2 essential medicines.
Those medicines went short, and it was accessed 650,000 times
last year for patients in need. This type of multistakeholder
resiliency work must be supported and scaled.
Building a resilient supply chain will take more
transparency, redundancy, and connectivity. Our pathway forward
is built on six principles. I've outlined them in our written
testimony. Every stakeholder will need to do their part, but
together we can ensure no child will ask their parent, ``Will I
die if I don't get my medicine?''
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Bray follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Griffith. Wow, thank you.
Dr. Muzzio, your 5-minute opening statement. Thank you.
Dr. Muzzio. Thank you. Can you hear me?

STATEMENT OF FERNANDO J. MUZZIO, Ph.D.

Dr. Muzzio. So, Chairwoman Rodgers, Chairman Griffith,
Ranking Member Pallone, Ranking Member Castor, members of the
subcommittee, my name is Fernando Muzzio. I'm a distinguished
professor of chemical and biochemical engineering at Rutgers
University, and I'm the director of CSOPS, which is an NSF
engineering research center focused on developing
pharmaceutical products and processes. I greatly appreciate the
opportunity to appear in this hearing to talk about the root
causes of drug shortages, and also share some views on how
advanced manufacturing could help mitigate this problem.
I want to make two facts, and I appreciate that my
testimony may be a little different than the other witnesses'.
The first fact is that we know that the proximate cause of
more than 60 percent of shortages is quality issues, whether
those quality issues are caused by economic reasons or
something else, but quality issues cause the majority of the
shortages.
The second fact is that advanced manufacturing methods can
improve quality and quality control and therefore may help
reduce the incidence of some of these issues. Let me explain
why.
In the traditional batch manufacturing approach, a
manufacturer takes a large amount of ingredients, say 500
kilograms, puts that into a process unit, implements the
process, then the material moves to another piece of equipment,
and another piece of equipment, and after several steps over
many hours to make a large number of product units, let's say a
million tablets or a million vials. And then they take 10 to 30
samples from that million tablet batch, send them to the lab,
get results, assume that those results are representative of
the whole batch, and make the decision to release the product
based on those results.
The process is time-dependent. Things are changing as you
are going through this particular traditional process, and that
can affect the quality of the product over time. And this
provides also a very limited opportunity to observe product
quality. In contrast, continuous manufacturing is capable of
much better quality control.
First of all, the ingredients come into the process at a
fixed ratio. They move gradually but continuously from process
unit to process unit, but we keep the process very close to
steady conditions so that every portion of material experiences
the same process. There is only a small amount of materials in
the process at any time, but for every small portion of
material, we monitor quality in real time. And this allows us
to diagnose quality issues in real time, exclude faulty
material from what's going to be dispensed to patients, and
minimize quality failures.
Where are we in implementing this? Well, we started 17
years ago in our center. There were other efforts at the same
time. We established a full ecosystem of industry, government,
and academia, attracted over $120 million in funding for this
work, and we built and demonstrated the first continuous
manufacturing line that operated in a full state of control,
and then supported Johnson & Johnson and other companies in
commercially implementing these technologies.
In more recent developments--and I want to give credit to
the FDA for this--the FDA emerging technology teams has
accepted 42 proposals for continuous manufacturing review. They
have actually, as of March, approved 13 continuous
manufacturing applications.
Direct compression, which is the most common type of
continuous manufacturing, has now graduated as an emerging
technology. They led the approval by the International
Conference on Harmonization of what is called Q13, the global
guidance in continuous manufacturing, and we have collectively
built widespread consensus, including the U.S. Government
through multiple administrations, that advanced and continuous
manufacturing could be part of the solution.
Now, this also produces an important opportunity for our
country. Given the advantages of continuous manufacturing, we
expect that there will be hundreds of billions of dollars
manufactured by continuous manufacturing. We can agree that we
would like that manufacturing to happen in the U.S. Now this is
feasible, and it can be done in a sustainable manner because
continuous manufacturing requires less unskilled labor, which,
because that kind of labor is cheaper in other countries, has
been one of the reasons why manufacturing moved to those other
countries.
However, it's important to recognize that implementation of
these technologies requires knowledge, requires training, and
requires access to infrastructure.
We expect other developments in the next few years. For
example, we expect that we will be able to implement what we
would call advanced batch manufacturing, where we will use many
of the techniques developed for continuous manufacturing, now
adapted for batch, to be able to inspect 100 percent of the
product stream so that every single product unit is analyzed in
real time, and faulty product is sent to scrap.
We also expect that we're going to expand continuous
manufacturing to generics, over-the-counter products,
manufacture of active pharmaceutical ingredients and
intermediates, as well as injectables, including biologics, and
that we will use similar methods to create other advanced
technologies such as distributed manufacturing.
All of this is possible, but to achieve this we really need
centers of excellence that will work in a sustained manner in
reenergizing the partnership between government, regulators,
and academia so that we can create places where all of the
workforce can be trained, the know-how is available, and we can
support industry, continue to move forward.
As in Public Law 117-328, these centers would also make
possible to implement a national strategy in workforce
development that is needed to facilitate this.
So in concluding, I would request please that my full
written testimony be included in the record, and I will be
happy to answer any questions that I may. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Muzzio follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Griffith. Thank you very much for your testimony. Thank
you to all the witnesses. At this point, we will begin the
questioning process, and I will begin with 5 minutes of
questioning.
Dr. Sardella, can you repeat for us--I think this was in
your testimony--what percentage of the generic drugs are
manufactured in facilities that have received an FDA warning
letter?
Yes, turn your mike on.
Mr. Sardella. One out of four prescriptions in the United
States over the last 26 months.
Mr. Griffith. So roughly 25 percent.
Mr. Sardella. Correct.
Mr. Griffith. In over how many months?
Mr. Sardella. Twenty-six, the last 26 months.
Mr. Griffith. And some of those FDA warning letters stay
open for years, do they not?
Mr. Sardella. That is correct. And the industry is less
able, due to low margins, to be able to address them. And so
their options are shutter, not comply, or continue to operate.
And----
Mr. Griffith. Let's talk about noncompliance, because while
some of these warning letters may be on things that folks back
home might think are trivial and so forth, but there was an
open warning letter on the New England Compounding Company at
the time that they produced a sterile injection which cost--I
believe it was 38, 40 lives, several of whom were in my area.
My district was impacted by that outbreak. And that was a
warning letter because people were trying to cut costs.
And so I want folks back home--and I think you would agree
with me that when you have 25 percent of your generic medicines
being manufactured under a warning letter, most of it is not
going to be a big deal, but some of it might be a big deal, and
this is a concern that we need to take, as a nation. Would you
agree?
Mr. Sardella. I agree, Chairman. In that spectrum there are
very much warning letters that don't imply any type of safety
issue, but there's also those that do, and those are
significant and have dire consequences.
Mr. Griffith. Yes, and that is my concern here, is that,
you know, in our race to save a few pennies here and there, we
are sacrificing both availability that Ms. Bray talked about
and quality.
All right, back to my real questions, the ones that I had
prepared in advance. In your white paper, Dr. Sardella, you
wrote that it is unrealistic to fully move our API sourcing and
manufacturing onshore. Instead, you propose the U.S. API
industry should achieve a minimum level of self-sustainability.
Explain that for me.
Mr. Sardella. We've done some research that estimates the
cost to bringing the top 40 prescribed medicines and the top 40
essential medicines. We feel this would begin to stabilize the
U.S. supply chain, reshoring those productions to the United
States.
Our estimates are that that would cost less than $2
billion, which is less than 1 percent of our total spend on
pharmaceuticals for those generics, and allow us to have
greater certainty and control of our drugs, knowing that the
APIs are the clinical part of the drug that allows it to be a
great therapeutic. So----
Mr. Griffith. And would you agree with me that it is
likely, if we were to do something like that, that then that
would also encourage other folks to maybe make some APIs that
weren't in the top 40?
Mr. Sardella. That's exactly correct. If we can think of
them--we use at the API Innovation Center the construct of
critical and essential. If one--critical being ones that are
critical to our national security. Those cardiovasculars that
we take, patients take every single day, they're not in
shortage, but they're core to our national security.
The ability to incentivize production of those drugs here
in the United States will allow for capability to produce the
essentials in the United States, and therefore solving two of
the issues: national security and our drug shortage for our
essential medicines.
Mr. Griffith. All right. You also talked about supply chain
challenges and how that is exacerbated by inflexible
regulations. Could you expand on that?
And are there lessons we can learn from our experience in
moving up the speed on COVID-19 that we should look to extend?
Mr. Sardella. Yes. Well, I think on COVID-19 there are some
efforts to allow for greater inspections of different
facilities to allow for better quality to be produced. I think
a couple of the key things that we've learned is any type of
expedited approvals or processing allow for faster time to
market, allowing companies to have a quicker return on their
investment on their capital.
Mr. Griffith. I have got one more question for you--and I
had some for the others, so I apologize, but I am running out
of time. Group purchasing organizations are considered the
price setters for generic medications in our pharmacy supply
chain, and they seem to create marketing efficiencies. What
role have they played in creating current--the current
environment where we have shortages, and what accountability is
there for GPOs when shortages occur?
Mr. Sardella. The GPOs are contributing significantly to
the aggregation of profits to them versus the manufacturers.
They're putting the manufacturers out of business, first.
The second--I would caution--as we develop policy to
address GPOs, recognize that any redistribution of those
profits would go to foreign manufacturers, not U.S., because
that's where they're getting their supply. If the goal is to
create a sustainable, strong economic, U.S.-based supply,
that--those incentives have to be established before the--
addressing the GPOs concentration of profits.
Mr. Griffith. All right. I appreciate it. My time is up,
and so I will now recognize the ranking member of the
subcommittee, Ms. Castor, for her 5 minutes of questioning.
Ms. Castor. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Professor Bray, I am so proud that a working mother from
the Tampa Bay area of three children who grappled with a
pediatric cancer diagnosis for her young daughter used her
business acumen to start a nonprofit to help solve the drug
supply shortage. It's a remarkable story, and your voice is
very important in this discussion.
So you explained your daughter went to one of the premier
children's hospitals in America, St. Joseph's Children's
Hospital in Tampa, and yet they are grappling constantly with
shortages of lifesaving drugs. What did you learn as you dug
into it as to the root causes of the drug shortages, and why is
it impacting children especially?
Ms. Bray. Thank you. Thank you for addressing me, and thank
you for having this meeting today.
So first, pediatrics are uniquely vulnerable to drug
shortage because we're a smaller patient population. And when
you have a broken marketplace, the smaller samples will always
fall out.
And then pediatric cancer is even a smaller niche of that
small, broken place. And what we found is that, actually,
pediatric cancer is 90 percent more likely to go into shortage,
their drugs, and they stay short 30 percent longer. But it's--
compounds because their treatment is multilayered and relies on
many different drugs and very specific protocols. So one or two
drugs, in short, can have drastic problems to their--to a
pediatric cancer diagnosis.
What we have found, both, you know, initially, when we
navigated the supply chain for my own child, but then as chief
change maker at Angels for Change, we navigate this crisis for
patients and hospitals all the time. I like to say, you know,
the four P's, we're stuck here at the bottom: That's the
physician, the pharmacist, the purchaser, and the patient.
We're the consumer of these goods, and we do not have a lot of
power during a time of disruption. And so together we can
navigate this crisis a little bit better and be a unified
voice.
And so one thing we have found is that collaboration during
a time of drug shortage would really help. This marketplace is
deeply fragmented. Everyone, I think, talked about transparency
today. We do need transparency. There's gaps in knowledge. And
until we have a clear picture, we can't address the right
solutions for the right problems. And those are the redundant
solutions that are--my other wonderful panelists have talked
about.
No one solution is going to fix this. It will be
multilayered and redundant. But to do that we have to be
connected as an entire supply chain. All members must be at the
table. There is a space for all of us, especially the patient.
Ms. Castor. So you did this. You mentioned in your
testimony you actually initiated something called Project
Protect, where you just dived in and tried to actually create a
certain supply chain for certain drugs and shortages. How did
that work?
Why did--why was it left to you, without much help from
government agencies that should be helping?
Ms. Bray. Well, I think there's a role for scalability of
innovative programs that have been working already, for sure.
So Project Protect, it was--there's a lot of discussion
about whether prediction can ever fix this, and I believe it
can. Any healthy supply chain--we're in the world of blockchain
and AI, that's the stuff I talk about in my business classes
and, you know, why wasn't this supply chain, you know, in the
new millennia of supply chain management?
And so I was like, we've got to start with prediction. So
we got to--we got to prove that. So we used prediction and
said, what drugs do we think might go short? We picked two.
There's a lot of work underway on prediction. I encourage that
work to be scaled.
And we then went to a small onshore manufacturer, a 503(b),
like Alex talked about, and said, ``What would it cost you and
how much time would it take to ensure this for the American
people if it did go short?''
They surprised me by saying about 60 days and $100,000. I
said, ``Each?'' And they said no, for both. So I wrote a grant
and signed an agreement with them and told them be ready to
supply if this--if it goes short. It did go short, and----
Ms. Castor. And these drugs were?
Ms. Bray. Pardon?
Ms. Castor. Name the drugs.
Ms. Bray. It was potassium chloride and sodium chloride,
and it was accessed 650,000 times last year during a time of
shortage. So it didn't stop the disruption. What it was was gap
supply, efficient, flexible gap supply that was incentivized by
the marketplace and a private--public-private partnership.
I think this is a model that can be duplicated over and
over and over again to protect the American people during a
time of disruption. And then we do need to do all the work to
help eliminate some of this disruption that the rest of my
colleagues have talked about.
Ms. Castor. Thank you, Professor.
Ms. Bray. Thank you.
Mr. Griffith. The gentlelady yields back. I now recognize
the chairwoman of the full committee, Mrs. McMorris Rodgers of
Washington, for her 5 minutes of questioning.
Mrs. Rodgers. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I wanted to start
with Dr. Alex.
In your written testimony you describe how a PBM will
negotiate rebates and then keep a percentage of the rebate
negotiated. How do these negotiated rebates distort the drug
market?
And specifically, can you explain how rebates negotiated by
PBMs contribute to high drug prices, shortages of essential
medicines, or the race-to-the-bottom pricing that undermines
our drug supply chain, and the impact that this has on
patients, providers, and pharmacies?
Dr. Oshmyansky. Sure thing. So, you know, the PBMs, I kind
of think of them in my head as payment processors, sort of
similar to Visa or MasterCard. And many years ago they
realized, ``Hey, we're processing all the payments, we can
negotiate for drug prices on behalf of the people we're
processing payments for.''
And the way they decided to go about it was to negotiate a
rebate. They wouldn't charge you for this service of
negotiation, they would just take a cut of the rebate back off
of a list price. And it soon became very readily apparent that
the biggest way to make this cut of the rebate as big as
possible was to make the rebate as big as possible. So the
standard rebate on a generic drug product now is between 85 and
88 percent. And where else in life do you get an 88 percent
discount? Like, something's a little off.
So--and they capture, you know, let's say 10 percent for
the sake of talking, percent of that rebate. That serves to,
you know, increase the cost of the actual drug by 60 to 100
percent, with none of that actually going to the manufacturer
itself.
One of the big misconceptions we have at Cost Plus is that
we're able to somehow better negotiate the price of these
medications, or we get a better price. We don't. We actually
pay more. Manufacturers like working with us because we're a
small entity as opposed to one of these big purchasing
conglomerates. So they--we actually pay them marginally more
than the competition, and yet we're able to still save patients
significant amounts of money.
And that 88 percent discount, let's say, that can be just
an average. We've seen much more extreme discounts--or rebates,
rather. Imatinib, the chemotherapy agent, has a list average
wholesale price, the generic, of $10,000 for a month's supply.
Meanwhile, we sell it at our website with--and again, paying
more than other suppliers--for $30, about $30, for that same
month supply. And the actual adjudicated cost, so the actual
price patients pay, we see at the counter at, like, CVS or
Walgreens is 2,000, $3,000 for a month supply. And that's not
going to the manufacturer. So it's just extreme distortions in
the way drugs are paid for.
Mrs. Rodgers. Thank you. Thank you for that. And I don't
think that there is a single, all-encompassing solution for
shortage problems.
Would you speak to how transparency, additional
transparency, might help?
Dr. Oshmyansky. Oh, sure. You know, I think if patients,
providers, payers just know what these medications actually
cost and what percentage are going to intermediaries in the
supply chain, you know, I think if patients learned that most
of the money they were spending on insulin went not to the
insulin manufacturer but to the intermediaries in the supply
chain, you know, I think that would incentivize, you know, a
change in the way the supply chains work to have, you know, as
my colleagues have been saying, more of the revenue going to
the people that do the actual hard work of the manufacturing
itself.
And forgive me, I didn't answer your last question entirely
as to, you know, what are the dynamics that lead to only a few
manufacturers getting contracts. Because of the oligopolies at
the levels of the purchasers, the sourcing programs, rebate
aggregators, GPOs, all of these subsidiary entities of the big
purchasing conglomerates, only a couple companies can win that
battle for the contract. And say there's 12 manufacturers. If
only two or three win the contracts, you know, the others have
no incentive to keep their supply chains open.
Mrs. Rodgers. Thank you.
Dr. Oshmyansky. So if we just create an open marketplace
where, you know, the manufacturers themselves can compete on
quality----
Mrs. Rodgers. Thank you. I am going to--I am running out of
time here. I had--and I wanted Dr. Sardella--I am going to have
to ask others--to address you.
I wanted to give--Ms. Bray, you started talking about the
potential of public-private partnerships, and I just wanted to
give you my remaining time to talk--just hear some more about
the potential to help meet--solve this problem.
Ms. Bray. Thank you. And I just realized I never mentioned
Abby is doing great. She's thriving. She's 13 today, and
entered survivorship this spring.
Mrs. Rodgers. Oh, that is great to hear.
Ms. Bray. So just--since I never mentioned that.
You know, any healthy, you know, important supply chain
relies on partnership, and every member will need to have a
place at this table, especially when we talk about
incentivizing the right motives.
The FDA's 2019 ``Root Causes, Possible Solutions'' report
stated in the executive summary, ``Enduring solutions will take
multistakeholder efforts and rethinking business practices.''
That's basically all I've been doing since we founded.
How do I collaborate with as many people as possible in the
supply chain? It includes the FDA, it includes the supply chain
members, it includes the manufacturers and the hospitals.
How do we align our incentives to get as many patients the
needed drugs that they deserve? And that's, you know, the one
message I want to say: We need to be connected and collaborate,
but then there needs to be tools of connectivity so we can
scale.
Mrs. Rodgers. Thank you.
Ms. Bray. Thank you.
Mrs. Rodgers. Thank you very much, thanks for being here.
I yield back.
Mr. Griffith. The gentlelady yields back. I now recognize
the ranking member of the full committee, Mr. Pallone, for his
5 minutes of questions.
Mr. Pallone. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I am still concerned
that FDA lacks the information it needs about how
pharmaceutical products are produced and real-time data
regarding changes in supply and demand for drugs and their key
ingredients, so let me ask Dr. Muzzio: What gaps remain when it
comes to our knowledge of the pharmaceutical supply chain, in
your opinion?
Dr. Muzzio. I'm sorry, I didn't hear you.
Mr. Pallone. Let me get closer to the mike here. Dr.
Muzzio, what gaps remain when it comes to our knowledge of the
pharmaceutical supply chain?
Dr. Muzzio. Well, there are many. In addition to the ones I
have mentioned, I want to point out that there is an additional
factor that I'm very concerned about, which is in reading all
the government reports on this issue, you know, on the last
couple of years, there is only barely a mention of the chemical
building blocks that are needed to make the drug substances.
So the discussion is, you know, who makes the finished
product, or who makes the drug substance, but then it turns out
that, to make the drug substance, you need to have access to
pieces of that molecule. And there is very, very limited
knowledge of where those pieces come from, except to say that,
for many APIs made in India, which we consider a friendly
nation, in many cases the building blocks also come from China.
So we might have to go earlier upstream the supply chain to
ensure that we are able to actually make things in friendly
shores, including our shore. So I think that's a big gap in our
understanding of how--you know, where shortages come from.
There's been instances where key starting materials were found
to be contaminated and that triggered a whole sequence of
events, then bringing other problems as we go--as we went down
the supply chain. So I think that those are important issues.
I am aware of efforts at USB, for example, to create a
substantial map of the entire supply chain. I don't think they
are unique. There is another organization doing something
similar. I don't recall their name right now. I think that's a
very important effort that also needs to be supported and
strengthened and, you know, completed.
And we need tools that will allow us to update the model of
the supply chain dynamically. One important thing is to realize
that it's not a static object, that once you describe it, it
remains like that forever. It changes all the time. So we need
not only to inventory the pathways, we also need to create
methods to update the model of the supply chain very rapidly
every time the conditions change. Otherwise, we would be
fighting last year's war, so to speak.
Mr. Pallone. All right, thank you. So let me go to
Professor Bray.
Where have you seen FDA work most effectively in its
response to drug shortages, and how could additional visibility
into the supply chain strengthen that work?
Ms. Bray. Thank you for asking. I believe the Office of
Drug Shortage at CDER is doing a lot of great, patient-focused
work, and it's actually led by people who were our healthcare
providers. And I think they're doing great work, we work
together often. They're open to communication and feedback, and
I'm very appreciative for the work that they do during a time
of crisis.
Where we could get better is a lot of the approaches are
reactive, and there's missing gaps of information, just like
everybody has said. So I would like to do a mindset shift on
drug shortages as a crisis, and that mindset shift is to change
from a focus of mitigation to ending. And so, when you think
about the fact that our current strategy for drug shortages is
a word called ``mitigation,'' mitigate means what do we do with
available supply? And when you ask that question, the answers
and next questions are, ``Who gets it?'' and ``Who doesn't?''
And all you get is disparity and plays for mistrust and power.
The question we need to be asking, it's a full dynamic
shift, and it is, how do we end drug shortages? When we ask
that question, it's how much supply do we need for the American
people? How do we ensure that we have access to that supply,
and how do we make sure that supply gets to the people when
there's disruption?
And you can see how quickly that mindset shift gets to very
different solutions. One is potentially reactive that is
repeated over and over again for 20 years, and one is proactive
that can work to secure the supply chain for all patients and
make a more resilient supply chain. Thank you.
Mr. Pallone. Well, thank you both, and thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
Mr. Griffith. The gentleman yields back. I now recognizes
the gentleman from South Carolina, Chair of our Energy
Subcommittee, Mr. Duncan, for his 5 minutes of questioning.
Mr. Duncan. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Dr. Sardella, your white paper does a great job in
outlining the current state of U.S. API infrastructure and its
potential effects on national security. Your paper discusses
the vulnerabilities of U.S. pharmaceutical supply chain. In
particular, you highlight our reliance on foreign sources for
the active ingredients in our pharmaceutical drugs. Can you
please share with the committee the potential risk or
consequences that such a dependency poses to U.S. healthcare
system?
Mr. Sardella. Two real risks that we experienced during
COVID.
The overreliance on foreign manufacturers leave us
vulnerable not just to demand shocks like COVID but also supply
shocks due to geopolitical tensions. During COVID, India had to
stop any export in order to ensure the safety of their own
population, which--and, in fact, cut off supplies to the United
States for critical medicines that we required.
Second, the chief economist in Beijing--we don't have to
think it might happen--intimated that our drug supply chain
was, in fact, a lever to ensure that we cooperated as a country
on geopolitical issues ranging from trade to Taiwan.
So we've experienced the risks of being overreliant
already, from a geopolitical perspective as well as from a
supply to citizens.
Mr. Duncan. It points to the need to onshore both
pharmaceuticals, microchips, energy sources, because in a time
of war or a pandemic like we saw, when the United States of
America is reliant on sources for any of those things from
overseas, then systems stop and the ability to provide the
medication that our constituents need is important. So the need
to onshore that is important.
But when we talk about drug shortages, you have got to keep
in mind that in many instances making generic drugs is simply
not profitable. So let's shift to generic. In those situations,
the manufacture does not have the resources or economic
incentive to invest in the manufacturing of those products to
keep them on the market, especially if it's a loss leader.
So could you speak--with the passage of the Inflation
Reduction Act, which is a misnomer, is it possible that brand
products selected for negotiation have generics in development?
And if a drug selected for negotiation makes it harder or
less profitable for generics to come to market, could we see an
increase in the shortages?
Mr. Sardella. Well, first, in regards to the shortages from
overreliance, the strategy should not be to just move the same
type of manufacturing to the United States to produce them at
economic low profitability or losses. It should be to leverage
the advanced technologies, technologies that Fernando mentioned
such as continuous flow, that allow for significant cost
reductions.
The API Innovation Center is focused on a series of
oncology drugs. We took a crisis in oncology, the drug called
lomustine, built a consortium of innovators who had developed
new, novel techniques to produce it using continuous flow,
existing manufacturers with capacity to produce it here in the
United States on behalf of the Glioblastoma Foundation.
It also engaged with critical entities such as Emerson that
makes the control systems. It took numerous stakeholders. The
impact of that is a 90 percent cost reduction on a drug that
now, all of a sudden, becomes feasible to manufacture in the
United States for the Glioblastoma Foundation.
So it requires very much technology to do that, to compete
long term. It also requires changing to incentivize that U.S.-
based manufacturer, allowing for changes in formularies and
preferred drug lists to, in fact, allow for that manufacturer
with advance technologies that are more environmentally
favorable, less footprint, as well as economically more
favorable, to be chosen in the formulary.
Mr. Duncan. Is the hangup to do that the FDA?
Mr. Sardella. There's numerous instruments that can be
brought to bear that wouldn't require significant legislative
change in regards to allowing it. So there's an ability to
designate on those formularies what the requirements are for
preferred drug. And it could be U.S.-made, made from a facility
that has no warning letter. And third, using even advanced
technologies, which would allow for more energy efficiency,
lower environmental footprint, and as well, higher quality
standards, as Fernando had indicated.
This is within our grasp, very reasonable grasp.
Mr. Duncan. Thank you so much.
Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Griffith. The gentleman yields back. I now recognize
the gentleman from New York, Mr. Tonko, for his 5 minutes of
questioning.
Mr. Tonko. Well, I thank the Chair and ranking member for
the opportunity today and welcome the witnesses.
Getting ahead of drug shortages will allow us to increase
access to lifesaving medications for patients when they need
them most. As we have seen this past year, shortages can happen
because of unanticipated spikes in demand for drugs. I am
thinking today about parents of sick children who couldn't
obtain children's Tylenol during this year's confluence of RSV,
COVID-19, and influenza, or people with ADHD who could not
consistently obtain important medications because of an
anticipated surge in demand due to a sharp increase in
prescriptions through the pandemic.
One of my constituents from Saratoga Springs shared how she
could no longer find her daughter's medication. And she said,
``As a mother, I can't believe this, that a child that needs
medication can't get it.'' It is a sentiment of both shock and
outrage I share along with many of my constituents.
My understanding is that, without more drug information
about the demand for drugs, we don't know how much production
is required to meet that need. For example, a study in 2022
from Brandeis University found that there was a shortage of
naloxone, a critical drug used to reverse overdose in nearly
every U.S. State. The study found that the shortage was in part
created because there was no comprehensive data on how much
naloxone was needed and who was using it. So I want to be sure
our agencies have all the tools they need to be able to
accurately gauge demand fluctuations so that we know where we
need to fill in gaps.
You noted in your testimony, Professor Bray, that FDA
currently has limited visibility into spikes in demand for
pharmaceutical drugs. Why is having greater visibility into
that demand for prescription drugs so important, and what would
having that information allow FDA to do?
Ms. Bray. Thank you for asking. Well, I think we've spent a
lot of time talking about the supply-side issues of this
crisis, but there are demand-side issues. And just because we
fix the supply-side issues doesn't mean patients are going to
get equal and disparity-free access. So we at Angels for Change
spend a lot of time making sure available supply onshore is in
the right place at the right time, instead of stuck somewhere
in the supply chain.
So it does--we are blind a lot when we don't know what's
happening with spikes of demand. The entire supply chain is.
And so when we throw in a potential solution based on old
information, what happens is that solution actually works, but
then a spike of demand makes it fail, and then it builds
additional distrust in the entire supply chain.
So I do think--I often am flying blind about what's going
on with the demand, and where the actual drug is, and it is a
very laborious noneconomies-of-scale process built on a
painstaking network of American people who care. Like, emails
and phone calls, ``What are we doing? Where is it?'' This is
unnecessary. We could have, you know, not--but it's not just
the information, it's what are we going to do with it? What's
the tool we're going to do to make sure people have access?
And then you got to the beginning--the beginning part of
your question was actually about Adderall and amoxicillin. You
know, it's the information before then. Those were predictable.
There were people who are subject matter experts who knew those
things were happening, who tried to ring those bells well
ahead. And some of us put in some safeguards because of them.
And so we need data that leads to prediction so that we don't
have disruption, and that's the key.
And just like my colleague said, there is amazing work
being done. We have many times worked with USP and their
medicines supply map. They are doing unbelievable work mapping
the entire global supply chain. It isn't effective until it's
used to solve it for the American people.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you.
And Dr. Oshmyansky, you, in your testimony, share that the
manufacturing systems used in your facility can transition
between making batches of different medications within hours,
when it usually takes months. How would collecting greater
insights into unanticipated demand allow facilities like yours
to respond in a nimble and agile way to a shortage?
Dr. Oshmyansky. Oh, sure. So the longest lead time item for
our manufacturing is not really switching over to supply lines.
It's sourcing the active ingredient.
So our plan is to have a portfolio of active ingredient of
the drugs we anticipate will go into shortage, send them to
independent laboratories for quality and safety testing. That
process takes a few months. Once we've done that process, we
don't need to repeat it. But if we can anticipate what the drug
shortages are predicted to be ahead of time, we can have that
API in our portfolio ready to go.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you so much.
And with that, Mr. Chair, I yield back.
Mr. Griffith. I thank the gentleman for yielding back. I
now recognize the gentleman from Texas, Mr. Crenshaw, for his 5
minutes of questioning.
Mr. Crenshaw. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you for this
hearing, and thank you to our witnesses for being here today.
It is an important subject.
You know, in the Houston area, just outside my district,
Texas Children's Hospital, 80 percent of their patients are
impacted by drug shortages. That is the whole hospital. They
currently have 101 medications on back order, 350 medications
on allocation, where they are limited in the quantity that they
can produce. Eight of these are chemotherapy agents that are
used in first-line treatment of pediatric cancer.
So I want to, in as little time as possible--because this
is a much longer conversation--but Mr. Sardella, I want to
figure out how this supply chain looks with active
pharmaceutical ingredients to the--in the best way that we can.
Eighty-five percent of APIs are from foreign countries. Sixty
percent of our finished dose forms are from foreign countries.
And, you know, a lot of people wonder why.
So what is in an API? Just a variety of other chemicals? Is
there--are there--is there, like, a top three chemicals that
are in APIs? Can you describe that really quickly?
Mr. Sardella. Yes, and you bring up an excellent point. The
API itself is the chemical that produces the medicinal effect.
It is the most important element in that capsule tablet, in
that drug.
Mr. Crenshaw. But the----
Mr. Sardella. The remaining elements are elements that
allow for either the transport through your digestive system or
other type of elements to allow it to survive and be effective.
And quite interesting, what you bring up is something that
we've seen. It's API, even we've heard capsules or the caps of
a bottle will be in shortage and have a supply chain challenge
which may prevent--we always think of just the active--but all
these other areas, the excipients, et cetera.
Mr. Crenshaw. But I want to focus on APIs for a second. So
an API is a chemical, but it is a chemical made up of other
chemicals.
Mr. Sardella. Correct.
Mr. Crenshaw. Right? And where do those other chemicals
come from?
Mr. Sardella. Oh, yes.
Mr. Crenshaw. You know, and----
Mr. Sardella. So----
Mr. Crenshaw. Go ahead.
Mr. Sardella. Yes. So we are reliant on what would be
called starter materials. And these are the original chemicals
that allow us to make those APIs. The majority of them are
carbon-carbon, carbon-nitrogen, carbon-oxygen bonds. They're
the foundational elements.
To build a sustainable API, we need to also allow for the
creation of starter materials here in the United States.
Mr. Crenshaw. And this is--I do have a point to this. So
those starter materials are widely available in the United
States.
Mr. Sardella. Mm-hmm.
Mr. Crenshaw. Right? They are generally derived from
petrochemicals. So, like, benzene, which is like a natural gas-
derived chemical, is used to make ibuprofen.
Mr. Sardella. Mm-hmm.
Mr. Crenshaw. I didn't know that. We have a lot of natural
gas and benzene. Like, these are easy base chemicals to get. So
we are exporting these base chemicals to other countries so
they can make the APIs, so they can send back those APIs to us
to make the more advanced drugs, the final product, and then we
complain about our supply chains.
What is stopping us from cutting out that middleman? Is it
a policy issue? Is it a market issue? What is happening there?
Mr. Sardella. It would be having economically viable
domestic API manufacturers that can be the purchasers of those
starter materials.
Mr. Crenshaw. OK.
Mr. Sardella. That would be the key to its consumption and
use here in the United States.
Mr. Crenshaw. Nobody just--nobody has had that business
idea?
Mr. Sardella. Well, the APIs, a majority of the generic
ones, are not economically viable to produce in the United
States. And so they've been offshored. And so that demand, that
U.S. domestic demand----
Mr. Crenshaw. Why aren't they economically viable? What do
they state as their reasons for not opening up shop?
Mr. Sardella. Yes, they'll cite lower labor costs as one
reason. They'll cite economies of scale, government incentives
that these other countries have received to build their
facilities. Even right now, India is subsidizing new facilities
being built so that they wouldn't be reliant on China----
Mr. Crenshaw. Well, in a very short amount of time we did--
we did get a lot out of you, so I appreciate it, but I want
to--I want to move on, please, to Laura Bray.
Thank you for being here with Mother's Day coming up, and
the problem we have with especially cancer drugs for kids. So
real quick, what roadblocks are currently in place at the FDA
that really create the problem you are trying to solve? What
would be your top three? Or one.
Ms. Bray. So, I mean, I think part of the problem here is
this is a very, very large risk solution for any one member to
take on, right? So there are a lot of barriers everywhere.
There's not just barriers in one member, there is a lot of risk
of any one member taking----
Mr. Crenshaw. I totally get that. But I--you know, we have
to focus on one thing, and I like to focus on the FDA. So,
like, from your perspective, what would change at the--what
would be a better way the FDA would do business that would help
what you are trying to accomplish?
[No response.]
Mr. Crenshaw. It is OK if you are not--if it is----
Ms. Bray. I--you know, I think we all have--every member
needs to come to this table because it is so multifaceted, and
there are true and real reasons for every single policy that
has been put in place. But we're--keep putting policies on top
of policies of broken marketplace. And so I think we all need
to be at the table saying, here's the solution, here's what my
part can do, here's what my part can do.
And so to pick one thing from one member to do, as my
colleague said, it's such a dynamic marketplace, it would
quickly become extinct, right?
Mr. Crenshaw. Yes.
Ms. Bray. We need to all be at the table.
Mr. Crenshaw. We need solutions. You know, and----
Ms. Bray. So the----
Mr. Crenshaw [continuing]. So, you know, one of the things
I would point out----
Ms. Bray. So the solutions are we've got a six-point plan.
It's first, align the incentives and motives. Everybody
needs to be at the table, aligning those motives.
It's employing prediction and forecasting, followed by
being ready to supply the American people.
Then we have to empower the collaboration of this
multifaceted supply chain.
Patients need to be at the center of the solution, so we're
ending shortages instead of mitigating them.
And we need to establish an entrance and exit ramp so that
the marketplace can evolve without patients getting left
behind.
That's the steps. And it's multilayered.
Mr. Griffith. The gentleman----
Mr. Crenshaw. I appreciate it, I yield back.
Mr. Griffith [continuing]. Yields back, but we may very
well have some what we call QFRs, questions after the hearing,
and we will get an opportunity to answer at that time.
I now recognize the gentlelady from Arizona, Mrs. Lesko,
for her 5 minutes of questioning.
Mrs. Lesko. Thank you, Mr. Chair, and thank you for all of
you being here. I apologize, I had to go to another committee
hearing and come back here.
Mr. Sardella, a key role of the FDA's mission to ensure
drug safety, effectiveness, and ultimately, availability
includes its foreign and domestic drug manufacturing facility
inspections program. While the COVID-19 pandemic effectively
halted nearly all overseas inspections for 2020 and part of
2021, the number of inspections conducted both in the U.S. and
overseas has been precipitously declining since 2016.
In 2019, in its 2019 report of FDA inspection data, the GAO
identified FDA's inability to oversee the global supply chain
as a high-risk issue and concluded with recommendations to the
agency to increase the number of inspections of foreign drug
establishments.
Unfortunately, GAO's 2022 followup report on FDA's
inspection capabilities did not conclude that the agency is in
any better off--is any better off in conducting timely and
reliable foreign inspections. In fact, GAO found that the share
of foreign facilities that have not been inspected in over 5
years has increased from 30 percent in 2020 to nearly 80
percent in 2022.
Furthermore, GAO shared that the FDA inspected just 6
percent of facilities overseas in 2022. Given that most U.S.
drugs and APIs are manufactured in foreign facilities, this
raises serious concerns with FDA's ability to ensure the
quality and availability of human medical products manufactured
overseas.
So my question to you is, how critical are timely and
effective inspections of both domestic and foreign
manufacturing facilities for ensuring the security of our drug
supply chain?
Mr. Sardella. They're absolutely essential for us ensuring
the quality and the safety of the medicines that U.S. citizens
consume.
They're also extremely important in ensuring the stability
of the market because, through those inspections, the ability
to understand which manufacturers are complying, which
manufacturers are delivering on quality manufacturing
processes.
And then the next element there is incentivizing that,
rewarding those that don't have any warning letters for decades
and decades, as opposed to those who, in fact, would. The
ability to make that distinction on quality is to have a robust
inspection, auditing process that allows us to make those
distinctions, both to ensure the market is stable and to allow
for safety of the medicines.
Mrs. Lesko. I agree, and I think most U.S. people would be
surprised at the low number of inspections that are going on
for the drugs that they are taking each and every day, and
foreign drug makers.
This past December the President authorized $10 million for
a pilot program to increase the number of foreign inspections
at the FDA. However, the agency has cited challenges in the
agency's ability to recruit and retain investigators as a major
factor in the delay or dereliction of timely foreign
inspections.
Again, Mr. Sardella, how confident are you that this pilot
program will close the gap in the share of overseas
establishments that remain uninspected, while there remains a
fundamental challenge within FDA to retain investigators and
prioritize foreign inspections?
Mr. Sardella. Yes, I feel FDA is no dissimilar to any
organization in its struggles to develop talent, recruit talent
to conduct its efforts. I feel they, like all organizations,
will be challenged to be able to allow for the right workforce
that enables them to go overseas as well as globally to do
their inspections.
I also feel that there's other opportunities to allow for
understanding the quality of medicines that are more technical
in nature versus only inspection in nature.
Modernizing the monitoring systems. Fernando had talked
about the new emerging advanced manufacturing technologies,
control systems that monitor the productions every second as
these medicines are produced. Those will allow inspection and
observation without being at the facility, only through data
transport in real time, every second. Those will be very
transformational capabilities that we should look into and
enable the FDA to utilize and leverage.
Mrs. Lesko. Thank you, and I yield back.
Mr. Griffith. I appreciate the gentlelady yielding back. I
now recognize Dr. Ruiz of California for his 5 minutes of
questioning.
Mr. Ruiz. Thank you, and thank you all for your testimony
today.
Drug shortages have serious impacts on quality and safety
of patient care in this country. Before Congress I practiced as
an emergency physician at Eisenhower Medical Center in
California. I have seen firsthand the effects that drug
shortages can have on patients, their providers, and their
families by causing delayed care or second-choices treatments,
especially when I want to intubate a patient and we don't have
succinylcholine, and I have to use another paralytic that is
not used very often, OK?
Professor Bray, how have you seen shortages play out for
patients seeking emergency care?
Ms. Bray. Thank you for asking. There is severe patient
impact happening every day, and not just in missing, skipping,
or changing doses. Ninety percent of oncologists state that
drug shortages have led to patient harm, up to death.
We also can't forget the emotional trauma that you're
putting on a family in a medical crisis. Patients deserve
access to these medicines. The patient--the physicians and
nurses and care team who are trying to solve these crises and
save them deserve easy and equal access to these medicines.
Mr. Ruiz. Thank you. Generic drugs are particularly
vulnerable to shortages: 40 percent of drugs--40 percent of
drugs--have only one manufacturer, and most generic drugs have
only one competitor per drug. Having limited sources for
essential drugs or medical supplies is dangerous, particularly
when an emergency strikes.
So, for example, when Hurricane Maria devastated Puerto
Rico in 2017, a major saline manufacturer was damaged. This
caused a shortage for hospitals throughout the country of this
very basic and critical lifesaving medical supply.
Dr. Muzzio, can you--how can the Government support more
diversified drug manufacturing that is less susceptible to
supply chain disruptions?
Dr. Muzzio. Thank you for the question. We've been looking
at this very carefully because, as my colleagues mentioned,
there are a number of economic constraints. And we have also a
30-year history now of offshoring and losing manufacturing
shares. So the reversal of that process is going to take
sustained plan over many years with, you know, a lot of insight
into not only how to make it profitable again but also how to
regain the know-how that we have lost and how to build better
systems that are more nimble, able to do more flexible
manufacturing of a larger number of products. I'm very
encouraged by some of the things that I've been hearing.
One way the Government can do it is by recognizing the
following. There are reasons why the generic manufacturers are
having trouble implementing the newer technologies, right? They
cost a lot of money, they take a long time, and they don't have
access in-house to people with the knowledge. So this is the
perfect opportunity to create, again, centers of excellence,
places where we have the knowledge, we have the people, and we
have the equipment needed to implement the solutions, working
closely with contract manufacturers that can then very rapidly
pick up the required manufacturing tasks----
Mr. Ruiz. Thank you.
Dr. Muzzio [continuing]. Like 503(b)s or other
manufacturers. It will take a network----
Mr. Ruiz. Thank you.
Dr. Muzzio [continuing]. To solve the problem.
Mr. Ruiz. Center of excellences.
Mr. Sardella, in its July 2021 Report on Supply Chain
Resiliency, the White House proposed several recommendations to
strengthen the generic market. The report recommended providing
greater predictability in production costs, pricing, and volume
sold to manufacturers, as well as increasing government and
private-sector flexibility in contracting and sourcing. How
would enacting these recommendations help strengthen the
generic market and help prevent future shortages?
Mr. Sardella. The ability to have certainty in your demand,
from a business perspective, would drive economic investment
and production of these.
A common instrument of contracting in the United States
Government is what's called the IDIQ--Indefinite Demand,
Indefinite Quantity. There's no ability to have certainty in
your investments if you have an indefinite demand or an
indefinite quantity. Solidifying those quantities, the years of
demand, will allow for businesses to make investments and
understand their return to their shareholders or to their
owners.
Mr. Ruiz. Thank you.
So drug shortages cause severe adverse health outcomes and
are an urgent problem. We need to support policy and resources
that help address supply chain vulnerabilities so that
shortages are less frequent and can be quickly addressed, stat.
I yield back.
Mr. Griffith. I thank the gentleman for yielding back. I
now recognize Mr. Palmer of Alabama for his 5 minutes of
questions.
Mr. Palmer. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you for holding
the hearing, and for the witnesses' testimony today.
Dr. Sardella, one of the things that I am concerned about
is the FDA's role in the shortages. And in your testimony you
mentioned the expensive and complex compliance challenges that
so many drug companies face.
In a previous Congress, we had had a number of hearings
related to drug manufacturers and the massive increase in cost,
and one of the things that we discovered was how regulations
had forced a lot of companies either out of business or into
being sold to other companies so that the company that bought
them basically became the sole manufacturer. We saw that with
drugs like insulin and EpiPens, things like that.
I just want your thoughts, a little more clarity from what
you said in your testimony about how this is impacting the cost
and availability of these drugs.
Mr. Sardella. Yes. So, as a manufacturer, if we start with
the understanding that their profitability is already low, when
they have a warning letter from the FDA there is therefore an
expense that they have to incur to bring the facility up to
standards to meet that. Sometimes the businesses cannot
afford--their return on their capital is so low already, less
than 5 percent--I mean, in business school we teach if you're
anywhere below 20 percent you should be out of business.
So then when you couple the request to have to comply, the
facility will shutter. They will not make the investment. Only
4 percent in recent data--from numbers in the 2020s, only 4
percent of the FDA warning letters are now being addressed, a
drastic drop, and that's a result of their inability
economically to resolve them. So the facilities shut down.
Akorn, a facility, just recently shut down.
Mr. Palmer. Right, I saw that.
Mr. Sardella. Nesher, as well.
Mr. Palmer. Yes. And then, when you combine that with the
need to upgrade the manufacturing processes with newer
equipment and things like that, and the stranded cost that's
involved in that, plus for newer drugs the stranded costs
involved in that, it really becomes an economic issue in many
respects that we have to address.
And again, listening to your testimony and reading your
testimony, you make excellent points about the order of
magnitude increases in drug production if we--if the companies
had the ability to upgrade their equipment.
Would you think that incentives or tax credits, things like
that, would be helpful to companies?
Mr. Sardella. Incentives, very much. One we are--we have an
example.
The API Innovation Center is working with the State of
Missouri. The State of Missouri is funding the derisking of
their adoption of new technology. So what we've done, as a
nonprofit, we've procured the new advanced manufacturing
technology, developed it, and are placing it in existing
Missouri manufacturing, manufacturers that have been there,
some for 100 years, some new ones for 30 years, and some for
just 10 years. And that now is being able to bring supply for
cancer drugs like lomustine and a suite of an additional six.
In some respect, those incentives derisk the adoption, very
effective. The one element of the tax incentive is when you
have an industry with such low profitability, tax incentives
are less effective than creating certainty of demand by
changing formularies.
Mr. Palmer. Well, you set me up perfectly for where I want
to go with this.
And this is a little different direction, Mr. Chairman,
because in 1996 the Clinton administration repealed section 936
of the U.S. Internal Revenue Code, which provided tax
incentives for drug manufacturers, and it had a devastating
impact on the pharmaceutical industry in Puerto Rico. And what
people don't realize is that, of U.S. territories, including
the States, Puerto Rico even today still manufactures more
pharmaceutical products than any State, including Indiana.
But after the repeal of 936 we saw an exodus of drug
manufacturers to other countries. In a number of respects I
remember Horizon Pharma out of Chicago moved enough of their
production and headquarters to Ireland because if they reached
a certain percentage of foreign ownership they were not subject
to U.S. taxes, and their tax went down to 12\1/2\ percent.
So what do you think about reinstating section 936, and
particularly in how it would impact our ability to produce the
drugs that we need?
Mr. Sardella. Yes, I don't know the regulation or
legislation well enough to comment, but I do believe tax in
that case would be a strong instrument to incentivize
manufacturing in the U.S.
Mr. Palmer. Well, it was a huge industry in Puerto Rico. It
was--obviously, the problems were compounded with Hurricane
Maria years later. I think it was 8 years later, that.
Mr. Chairman, I think that is something that we need to
explore. We might not be the right committee for that since it
is a tax issue, but I do think it is part of the solution.
I yield back.
Mr. Griffith. I thank the gentleman for yielding back.
Seeing no further Members wishing to ask questions, I would
like to thank each of our witnesses for being here today. Thank
you all so much.
In pursuance of committee rules, I remind Members they have
10 business days to submit additional questions for the
record--that is the QFR, questions for the record--and I ask
that witnesses submit their responses within 10 business days
upon receipt of those questions.
Without objection, this committee is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 12:15 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]

[all]
