- CYBERSECURITY AT NASA: ONGOING CHALLENGES AND EMERGING ISSUES FOR INCREASED TELEWORK DURING COVID 19

[House Hearing, 116 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

CYBERSECURITY AT NASA:
ONGOING CHALLENGES AND EMERGING ISSUES
FOR INCREASED TELEWORK DURING COVID 19

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON SPACE AND AERONAUTICS

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE, SPACE,
AND TECHNOLOGY
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED SIXTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

SEPTEMBER 18, 2020

__________

Serial No. 116-81

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Science, Space, and Technology

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://science.house.gov

______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
41-348 PDF           WASHINGTON : 2021

COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE, SPACE, AND TECHNOLOGY

HON. EDDIE BERNICE JOHNSON, Texas, Chairwoman
ZOE LOFGREN, California              FRANK D. LUCAS, Oklahoma,
DANIEL LIPINSKI, Illinois                Ranking Member
SUZANNE BONAMICI, Oregon             MO BROOKS, Alabama
AMI BERA, California,                BILL POSEY, Florida
Vice Chair                       RANDY WEBER, Texas
LIZZIE FLETCHER, Texas               BRIAN BABIN, Texas
HALEY STEVENS, Michigan              ANDY BIGGS, Arizona
KENDRA HORN, Oklahoma                ROGER MARSHALL, Kansas
MIKIE SHERRILL, New Jersey           RALPH NORMAN, South Carolina
BRAD SHERMAN, California             MICHAEL CLOUD, Texas
STEVE COHEN, Tennessee               TROY BALDERSON, Ohio
JERRY McNERNEY, California           PETE OLSON, Texas
ED PERLMUTTER, Colorado              ANTHONY GONZALEZ, Ohio
PAUL TONKO, New York                 MICHAEL WALTZ, Florida
BILL FOSTER, Illinois                JIM BAIRD, Indiana
DON BEYER, Virginia                  FRANCIS ROONEY, Florida
CHARLIE CRIST, Florida               GREGORY F. MURPHY, North Carolina
SEAN CASTEN, Illinois                MIKE GARCIA, California
BEN McADAMS, Utah                    THOMAS P. TIFFANY, Wisconsin
JENNIFER WEXTON, Virginia
CONOR LAMB, Pennsylvania
------

Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics

HON. KENDRA HORN, Oklahoma, Chairwoman
ZOE LOFGREN, California              BRIAN BABIN, Texas, Ranking Member
AMI BERA, California                 MO BROOKS, Alabama
ED PERLMUTTER, Colorado              BILL POSEY, Florida
DON BEYER, Virginia                  MICHAEL WALTZ, Florida
CHARLIE CRIST, Florida               MIKE GARCIA, California
JENNIFER WEXTON, Virginia

C  O  N  T  E  N  T  S

September 18, 2020

Page

Hearing Charter..................................................     2

Opening Statements

Statement by Representative Kendra Horn, Chairwoman, Subcommittee
on Space and Aeronautics, Committee on Science, Space, and
Technology, U.S. House of Representatives......................    10
Written Statement............................................    11

Statement by Representative Brian Babin, Ranking Member,
Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics, Committee on Science,
Space, and Technology, U.S. House of Representatives...........    12
Written Statement............................................    14

Written statement by Representative Eddie Bernice Johnson,
Chairwoman, Committee on Science, Space, and Technology, U.S.
House of Representatives.......................................    15

Witnesses:

Mr. Jeff Seaton, Chief Information Officer (Acting), National
Aeronautics and Space Administration
Oral Statement...............................................    16
Written Statement............................................    19

The Honorable Paul K. Martin, Inspector General, National
Aeronautics and Space Administration
Oral Statement...............................................    28
Written Statement............................................    30

Dr. Diana L. Burley, Ph.D., Vice Provost for Research, American
University
Oral Statement...............................................    39
Written Statement............................................    41

Discussion.......................................................    46

Appendix: Answers to Post-Hearing Questions

Mr. Jeff Seaton, Chief Information Officer (Acting), National
Aeronautics and Space Administration...........................    62

The Honorable Paul K. Martin, Inspector General, National
Aeronautics and Space Administration...........................    71

Dr. Diana L. Burley, Ph.D., Vice Provost for Research, American
University.....................................................    73

CYBERSECURITY AT NASA: ONGOING

CHALLENGES AND EMERGING ISSUES FOR

INCREASED TELEWORK DURING COVID-19

----------

FRIDAY, SEPTEMBER 18, 2020

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics,
Committee on Science, Space, and Technology,
Washington, D.C.

The Subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 11:01 a.m.,
via Webex, Hon. Kendra Horn [Chairwoman of the Subcommittee]
presiding.

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairwoman Horn. Good morning, everyone. I'd like to
welcome our distinguished panel of witnesses, Members, and
those viewing remotely, to today's Space and Aeronautics
Subcommittee hearing on ``Cybersecurity at NASA: Ongoing
Challenges and Emerging Issues for Increased Telework During
COVID-19''.
In early 2020 the world was caught off guard with the
rapid and dramatic onset of the coronavirus. NASA (National
Aeronautics and Space Administration), like many Federal
agencies, and consistent with the Office of Management and
Budget (OMB) Guidance, rapidly shifted to telework operations
to ensure the health and safety of its more than 17,000 civil
servant employees and extensive contractor workforce. To its
credit, NASA prepared for the transition, having held an
agency-wide telework exercise in early March to test expanded
telework operations, and today 75 to 80 percent of NASA civil
servants continue to work remotely, handling proposal reviews,
project oversight and inspections, development work,
engineering analysis, and other activities.
The shift to increased telework at NASA raises many
questions, front and center, cybersecurity. What does the
increase and extended use of telework mean for protecting
NASA's intellectual property, personally identifiable
information (PII), and mission operations? How do the cyber
challenges related to increased telework affect the agency's
overall cybersecurity risk posture, and what steps is NASA
taking to ensure the effectiveness of its cybersecurity efforts
during the pandemic and beyond? These are some of the questions
today's hearing will explore, because what's clear is that NASA
is a target. And I want to pause here for a moment to note an
article in The Hill today where the Justice Department has
brought charges against Iranian nationals for hacking U.S.
satellite companies, so I think this is incredibly timely. And
a recent NASA IG (Inspector General) report stated that, given
NASA's mission, and valuable technical and intellectual capital
it produces, the information maintained within the agency's IT
(information technology) infrastructure presents a high value
target for hackers and criminals.
In 2019 NASA Administrator Jim Bridenstine stated at an
agency town hall that NASA is the most attacked agency in the
Federal Government when it comes to cybersecurity. Past data
breaches and system intrusions at NASA and its facilities have
resulted in large amounts of stolen data, installation of
malware, copying, modifying, and deleting sensitive files, and
accessing NASA servers, including those supporting missions.
The Department of Homeland Security's (DHS's) Cybersecurity
Infrastructure Security Agency, which is a mouthful, of
course--but a very important agency has issued specific alerts
on vulnerabilities related to telework during the pandemic, and
encourages organizations to adopt a heightened state of
cybersecurity.
In April 2020 the agency's then Chief Information Officer
(CIO) notified employees of increased hacking attempts on the
agency's systems, and in June 2020 media articles reported that
malicious actors congratulated NASA and SpaceX on a crewed
demonstration flight, and then announced they had allegedly
breached and infected a NASA contractor, specifically one that
provides information technology cyber securities--and
cybersecurity services to the agency. If true, that's a
concerning report, and part of the reason we're here today.
Protecting NASA's IT and data during the pandemic demands
vigilance, however, NASA's cybersecurity challenges don't begin
and end with the COVID-19 crisis. Multiple NASA IG and GAO
(Government Accountability Office) reports have identified
weaknesses and ongoing concerns with NASA's information
security. Further, they've ranked this issue as a top agency
challenge. Ensuring effective cybersecurity at NASA becomes
even more pressing given rapid advances in IT supply chain
risks, NASA's culture of openness and partnerships, and the
overall increase in space activities.
NASA is a national treasure. Its missions continue to
inspire both young and old, and NASA's cutting edge space
technologies, research, and space flight experience are the
envy of the world. NASA's accomplishments wouldn't be possible
without computers, software, and information systems. Will
NASA, or any organization, ever be 100 percent risk free from
cyber threats? Probably not. Is there room for improvement?
Absolutely there is. I hope that today's hearing will give an
understanding of the challenges and risks posed by increased
telework, and whether or not NASA is organized and resourced
sufficiently and effectively to mitigate those risks. The
bottom line is we need to ensure that NASA has the tools that
it needs, and takes the necessary actions to ensure the
agency's success, safety, and security during COVID-19 and
beyond, and I look forward to our witnesses' testimony today.
[The prepared statement of Chairwoman Horn follows:]

Good morning. I'd like to welcome our distinguished panel
of witnesses, Members, and those viewing remotely, to today's
Space and Aeronautics Subcommittee hearing on ``Cybersecurity
at NASA: Ongoing Challenges and Emerging Issues for Increased
Telework During COVID-19''.
In early 2020, the world was caught off guard with the
rapid and dramatic onset of the coronavirus. NASA, like many
Federal agencies, and consistent with Office of Management and
Budget guidance, rapidly shifted to telework operations to
ensure the health and safety of its more than 17,000 civil
servant employees and extensive contractor workforce.
To its credit, NASA prepared for the transition, having
held an agency-wide telework exercise in early March to test
expanded telework operations. Today, 75 to 80 percent of NASA
civil servants continue to work remotely handling proposal
reviews, project oversight and inspections, development work,
engineering analysis, and other activities.
The shift to increased telework at NASA raises many
questions. Front and center is cybersecurity.

What does the increase and extended use of
telework mean for protecting NASA' intellectual property,
personally identifiable information, and mission operations?

How do the cyber challenges related to increased
telework affect the agency's overall cybersecurity risk
posture?

And what steps is NASA taking to ensure the
effectiveness of its cybersecurity efforts during the pandemic
and beyond?
These are some of the questions today's hearing will
explore, because what's clear is that NASA is a target.
A recent NASA IG report stated, ``Given NASA's mission and
the valuable technical and intellectual capital it produces,
the information maintained within the Agency's IT
infrastructure presents a high-value target for hackers and
criminals.''
In early 2019, NASA Administrator Jim Bridenstine stated at
an agency town hall that ``NASA is one of the--it is the most
attacked agency in the Federal government when it comes to
cybersecurity.'' Past data breaches and system intrusions at
NASA and its facilities have resulted in large amounts of
stolen data; installation of malware; copying, modifying, and
deleting sensitive files; and accessing NASA servers, including
those supporting missions.
The Department of Homeland Security's Cybersecurity and
Infrastructure Security Agency--CISA--has issued specific
alerts on vulnerabilities related to telework during the
pandemic and encourages organizations ``to adopt a heightened
state of cybersecurity.''
In April 2020, the agency's then-chief information officer
notified employees of increased hacking attempts on the
agency's systems. And in June 2020, media articles reported
that malicious actors congratulated NASA and SpaceX on a crewed
demonstration flight, and then announced they had allegedly
breached and infected a NASA contractor, specifically one that
provides information technology and cybersecurity services to
the agency. If true, that's a concerning report, and part of
the reason we're here today.
Protecting NASA's IT and data during the pandemic demands
vigilance. However, NASA's cybersecurity challenges don't begin
and end with the COVID crisis. Multiple NASA IG and GAO reports
have identified weaknesses and ongoing concerns with NASA's
information security; further, they have ranked the issue as a
top agency challenge.
Ensuring effective cybersecurity at NASA becomes even more
pressing, given rapid advances in IT, supply chain risks,
NASA's culture of openness and partnerships, and the overall
increase in space activities.
NASA is a national treasure. Its missions continue to
inspire both young and old and NASA's cutting-edge space
technologies, research, and spaceflight experience are the envy
of the world. NASA's accomplishments wouldn't be possible
without computers, software, and information systems.
Will NASA or any organization ever be 100 percent risk-free
from cyber threats? Probably not. Is there room for
improvement? Most definitely, yes.
I hope today's hearing will give us an understanding of the
challenges and risks posed by increased telework, and whether
or not NASA is organized and resourced to effectively mitigate
those risks. Bottom line: we need to ensure that NASA has the
tools and takes the necessary actions to ensure the agency's
success, safety, and security, during COVID, and beyond.
I look forward to our witnesses' testimony.

Chairwoman Horn. So I think we are--there he is----
Mr. Babin. Hey, Chairman.
Chairwoman Horn. Ranking Member Babin, I'm glad you were
able--I know that technology can sometimes, speaking of
technology, be a little bit of a challenge, but glad you made
it through. So the Chair now recognizes Ranking Member Babin,
and my good friend from Texas, for an opening statement.
Mr. Babin. Absolutely, thank you. We have three computers
here. We couldn't get on, but I got on with my telephone, any
way we can do it, I'm glad to be with you.
Chairwoman Horn. And--innovation and ingenuity, I love it.
Mr. Babin. Absolutely. OK. Well, thank you so much. NASA
is one of the best-known organizations in the entire world. Its
successes with the Mercury, Gemini, Apollo, Shuttle, and
International Space Station programs, along with its
breathtaking scientific discoveries and jaw-dropping robotic
probes attract worldwide attention. Unfortunately, that
attention comes with many challenges. The technologies that
NASA develops are also sought after by criminal entities,
unscrupulous foreign governments, and destructive vandals.
Because many of these technologies have both civil and military
applications, these challenges are particularly great, and this
is a topic that this Committee has focused on for decades.
Mr. Martin testified before the Investigations and
Oversight Subcommittee almost 10 years ago on the topic of
information security. At that hearing he testified that an
unencrypted laptop was stolen from NASA that resulted in the
loss of the ``algorithms'' used to control the Space Station,
as well as personally identifiable information, and
intellectual property. Similarly, the U.S.-China Economic and
Security Review Commission noted, in its 2011 report to
Congress, that the Terra and Landsat 7 satellites experienced
at least two separate instances of interference apparently
consistent with cyber activities against their command and
control systems.
More recently the NASA IG issued its yearly FISMA (Federal
Information Security Management Act) report in July, which
found that ``Information systems throughout the agency face an
unnecessarily high level of risk that threatens the
confidentiality, the integrity, and availability of NASA's
information.'' The report concluded that, ``It is imperative
the agency continue its efforts to strengthen its risk
management and governance practices to safeguard its data from
cybersecurity threats.'' And last month the IG issued another
report on NASA's use of non-agency IT devices and found that
NASA, ``is not adequately securing its networks from
unauthorized access by IT devices.'' The NASA IG is currently
tracking 25 open recommendations for the Office of the Chief
Information Officer. These do not include IT and cybersecurity
recommendations to mission directorates or other organizations
in the NASA enterprise.
And while this may seem startling, there are specific
reasons that many of the recommendations remain open. For
instance, agency-wide guidelines and best practices are often
general rules and principles that are not optimized to specific
agencies unique capabilities, expertise, and challenges. For
instance, NASA is the world leader in designing, building,
operating, and communicating with spacecraft. This expertise
resides within the mission directorates, and at the centers who
have cultivated this expertise over many decades. In some
instances they actually developed the software, information
systems, and underlying technologies that industry and the rest
of the government adopted and embraced. In even more extreme
circumstances, they continue to use one-off operating systems
that, while perhaps not compliant with OMB derived
governmentwide guidance, are arguably more secure because of
their uniqueness and their obscurity. Efforts to bring these
systems and technologies into compliance with a one-size-fits-
all cookie cutter approach developed for commercial enterprise
systems could actually introduce more risk into the system.
This isn't to excuse NASA's cybersecurity shortcomings, as
identified by the IG and GAO over the years. Lost laptops,
unsecured devices, unauthorized access to systems, and lapsed
ATOs, or authorization to operate, and poor inventory
management are all cause for concern. Which brings us to the
situation that NASA currently faces.
The COVID-19 challenge requires most of NASA's employees
and contractors to work remotely. And while NASA has embraced
teleworking for years, the expansion of this practice
introduces a larger target and more vulnerabilities for
malicious actors to exploit. In addition to teleworking
challenges, I'm also interested in understanding what level of
insight that NASA has on contractor cybersecurity as NASA moves
more to public-private partnerships. And finally, it's worth
noting that President Trump recently issued Space Policy
Directive Number Five, focused on cybersecurity principles for
space systems. And while it is not COVID-focused specifically,
it is particularly timely, given today's hearing and
demonstration of the administration's forward-looking
leadership on this very topic.
I look forward to hearing more about these important
issues, and what NASA plans to do to mitigate them, as well as
what Congress and the administration can do to help. So, with
that, Madam Chair, I yield back.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Babin follows:]

NASA is one of the best-known organizations in the world.
Its successes with the Mercury, Gemini, Apollo, Shuttle, and
International Space Station programs--along with its
breathtaking scientific discoveries and jaw-dropping robotic
probes--attract worldwide attention. Unfortunately, that
attention comes with challenges. The technologies that NASA
develops are also sought-after by criminal entities,
unscrupulous foreign governments, and destructive vandals.
Because many of these technologies have both civil and military
applications, these challenges are particularly grave.
This is a topic that this Committee has focused on for
decades. One of our witnesses, NASA Inspector General Martin,
testified before the Investigations and Oversight Subcommittee
almost ten years ago on information security. At that hearing,
he testified that an unencrypted laptop was stolen from NASA
that ``resulted in the loss of the algorithms'' used to control
the space station, as well as personally identifiable
information and intellectual property.
Similarly, the U.S. China Economic and Security Review
Commission noted in its 2011 report to Congress that the Terra
and Landsat-7 satellites ``experienced at least two separate
instances of interference apparently consistent with cyber
activities against their command and control systems.'' More
recently, the NASA Office of the Inspector General issued its
yearly FISMA report in July, which found that ``. . .
information systems throughout the Agency face an unnecessarily
high level of risk that threatens the confidentiality,
integrity, and availability of NASA's information.'' The report
concluded that ``. . . it is imperative the Agency continue its
efforts to strengthen its risk management and governance
practices to safeguard its data from cybersecurity threats.''
And last month, the NASA Office of the Inspector General issued
another report on NASA's use of non-agency IT Devices that
found that ``NASA is not adequately securing its networks from
unauthorized access by IT devices.'' The NASA Inspector General
is currently tracking 25 open recommendations for the Office of
the Chief Information Officer. These do not include IT and
cybersecurity recommendations to Mission Directorates or other
organizations in the NASA enterprise.
While this may seem startling, there are specific reasons
that many of the recommendations remain open. For instance,
agency-wide guidelines and best practices are often general
rules and principles that are not optimized to specific
agencies unique capabilities, expertise, and challenges. For
example, NASA is the world leader in designing, building,
operating, and communicating with spacecraft. This expertise
resides within the Mission Directorates and at the Centers who
have cultivated this skillset over decades. In some instances,
they actually developed the software, information systems, and
underlying technologies that industry and the rest of the
government adopted and embraced.
In even more extreme circumstances, they continue to use
one-off operating systems that, while perhaps not compliant
with OMB-derived government-wide guidance, are arguably more
secure because of their uniqueness and obscurity. Efforts to
bring these systems and technologies into compliance with one-
size-fits-all, cookie-cutter approaches developed for
commercial and enterprise systems could actually introduce more
risk. This isn't to excuse NASA's cybersecurity shortcomings as
identified by the IG and GAO over the years. Lost laptops,
unsecured devices, unauthorized access tosystems, and lapsed
ATOs (or ``Authorization to Operate''), and poor inventory
management are all cause for concern.
Which brings us to the situation NASA currently faces. The
COVID-19 challenge requires most of NASA's employees and
contractors to work remotely. While NASA has embraced
teleworking for years, the expansion of this practice
introduces a larger target and more vulnerabilities for
malicious actors to exploit.
In addition to teleworking challenges, I am also interested
in understanding what level of insight NASA has on contractor
cybersecurity as NASA moves more to public-private
partnerships. Finally, it's worth noting that President Trump
recently issued Space Policy Directive 5 focused on
cybersecurity principles for space systems. While it is not
focused on COVID specifically, it is particularly timely given
today's hearing and demonstrates the Administration's forward-
looking leadership on the topic.
I look forward to hearing more about these critical issues,
what NASA plans to do to mitigate them, as well as what
Congress and the Administration can do to help.
Thank you, I yield back.

Chairwoman Horn. Thank you, Ranking Member Babin, for your
opening statement. I think it's safe to say we share many of
the same concerns in this area, and I'm excited and grateful
for the opportunity for this hearing today. If there are any
Members who wish to--at this point, if there are any Members
who wish to submit additional opening statements, your
statements will be added to the record at this point.
[The prepared statement of Chairwoman Johnson follows:]

Good morning Chairwoman Horn, Ranking Member Babin, and
Members of the Subcommittee. To our witnesses, welcome and
thank you for being here.
As we ushered in 2020 and a new decade, none of us could
have predicted that we'd be here today, six months into a new
way of living and working in order to protect our own and
others' health from COVID-19.
Thanks to the internet, information technology, and
communication services, many Americans can continue to interact
with family and friends-albeit virtually-and work remotely.
That includes NASA's workforce.
To its credit, NASA is accomplishing a lot in this virtual,
telework environment, though some mission-essential employees
are still working on-site.

NASA and its partner, SpaceX, successfully carried
out a commercial crew demonstration mission to the
International Space Station;

the Orion program completed key reviews to certify
that the crew vehicle is ready for flight;

engineers are operating some science spacecraft
from their homes; and

the OSIRIS-REx team successfully completed a final
dress rehearsal in advance of collecting samples from asteroid
Bennu next month.
I'm pleased that NASA's can-do spirit is prevailing,
despite the challenges of this pandemic. But with so many
important NASA operations being carried out away from the
institutional security of NASA facilities, I'm concerned about
cybersecurity.
Space is hard and risky, and NASA has exceptional skills at
managing risk. When it comes to cybersecurity and information
technology management, however, NASA struggles.
The agency continues to lack a cybersecurity risk
management strategy, as recommended by GAO, and both GAO and
the NASA Inspector General have cited information security as a
top challenge for NASA.
Unfortunately, NASA's lagging performance on cybersecurity
isn't new, it's a continuing problem. For many years, NASA IG
and GAO reports have identified deficiencies and management
challenges in NASA's information security.
And now, with COVID, NASA-like other organizations-must
protect against cyber criminals and malicious actors who are
increasing their efforts to access government, business, and
personal data and IT systems while employees work from home.
I have no doubt that NASA officials are working hard to
keep the agency's IT systems and data safe, and I understand
they are making some progress.
However, long-standing, recommended actions to improve
NASA's cybersecurity have been left undone. In addition, the
agency's approach to IT security is fragmented and the Chief
Information Officer continues to lack the ability to manage
NASA's cybersecurity efforts across the agency. NASA can and
must to better.
In closing, NASA is a catalyst for inspiration, an engine
of discovery and innovation, and a world leader in the peaceful
uses and exploration of outer space.
We can't afford to let bad actors and cyber criminals
threaten the safety and success of NASA's science, aeronautics
research, space technology, and human spaceflight programs.
I look forward to hearing from our witnesses on what is
needed to ensure that robust and effective cybersecurity
protections are in place at NASA now, during COVID-19, and into
the future.
Thank you, and I yield back.

Chairwoman Horn. And now I'd like to introduce our
witnesses. Our first witness today is Mr. Jeff Seaton. In April
2020 Mr. Seaton was named NASA's Chief--Acting Chief
Information Officer--Acting Chief Information Officer, let's
see if I can get that out right. Prior to his current position,
Mr. Seaton served as NASA's Deputy Chief Information Officer,
and spent 7 years as the Chief Information Officer at NASA's
Langley Research Center. He began his career with NASA in 1991
as a research engineer, designing robotic systems for space-
based applications, and also served as Langley's Chief
Technology Officer and Deputy CIO. Mr. Seaton received a
Bachelor's Degree and Master's Degree in Electrical Engineering
from Virginia Tech. Welcome, Mr. Seaton. We're glad you're with
us today.
Our next witness is Mr. Paul Martin, Inspector General for
the National Aeronautics and Space Administration. Mr. Martin
has been the NASA Inspector General since 2009, and prior to
his appointment at NASA, he served as the Deputy Inspector
General at the Department of Justice. He also spent 13 years at
the U.S. Sentencing Commission, including 6 years as the
commission's deputy staff director. Mr. Martin received a
Bachelor's Degree in Journalism from Pennsylvania State
University, and a Juris Doctorate from Georgetown University
Law Center. Welcome, Mr. Martin.
Our third and final witness today is Dr. Diana Burley. In
July 2020 Dr. Burley was appointed as Vice Provost for Research
and Professor of Public Administration at American University.
Prior to her current position, Dr. Burley spent 13 years as a
professor of human and organizational learning at George
Washington University, where she was the inaugural Chair for
the Human and Organizational Learning Department, and the
Director of Executive Leadership doctoral program. She has also
managed a multi-million-dollar computer science education and
resource portfolio for the National Science Foundation. Dr.
Burley received a Bachelor's Degree in Economics from The
Catholic University of America, a Master's in Public Management
and Policy from Carnegie Mellon University, and Master's and
Doctoral Degrees in Organizational Science and Information
Policy, also from Carnegie Mellon University. Welcome, Dr.
Burley.
As our witnesses, you should you know you each have 5
minutes for your spoken testimony. Your written testimony will
be included in the record for this hearing. When you have
completed your spoken testimony, we will begin with questions,
and each Member will have 5 minutes to question the panel.
We'll start today with Mr. Seaton. Mr. Seaton, you're
recognized for 5 minutes.

TESTIMONY OF MR. JEFF SEATON,

CHIEF INFORMATION OFFICER (ACTING),

NATIONAL AERONAUTICS AND SPACE ADMINISTRATION

Mr. Seaton. Thank you, Chairwoman Horn, Ranking Member
Babin, and Members of the Subcommittee on Space and
Aeronautics, for allowing me to appear before you today and
talk about NASA's information technology infrastructure, and
our efforts to manage and protect that infrastructure during
the COVID-19 pandemic. Thankfully, due to strategic investments
made over the last several years, NASA was well positioned to
keep our missions moving forward by shifting the majority of
our workforce to telework last March. As a result, NASA has
never been closed, and our workforce has continued to work
remotely in a productive, and often creative, manner, despite
the highly contagious COVID-19 virus. With strict safety
protocols in place, NASA is now gradually allowing more
employees onsite, based on factors such as local conditions,
and guidance from the CDC (Centers for Disease Control) and
other Federal partners. Let me assure you, the safety of our
workforce remains our top priority. At the same time,
protecting and effectively operating our IT infrastructure
continues to be another top, massive focus.
IT plays a critical role of every aspect of NASA's
missions. However, effective IT management is not an easy task.
As NASA's Acting Chief Information Officer, it's my job to
balance implementing innovative, mission-enabling IT
capabilities with operational efficiency and effective
cybersecurity to guard against evolving threats. During the
pandemic the demands and expectations placed on NASA's IT
infrastructure have been incredibly high, and the threats from
external actors remain an ongoing concern. However, with hard
work, dedication, and innovation, NASA's CIO team has risen to
the challenge of keeping our missions moving forward. For
example, OCIO (Office of the Chief Information Officer) helped
rapidly develop software to track cases of onsite COVID-19
exposures, while also meeting all security and privacy
requirements. Additionally, with OCIO's help, NASA continues to
hire and onboard new employees, contractors, and interns with
innovative approaches to provisioning and maintaining IT
systems and tools remotely.
For NASA employees the pandemic has dramatically changed
the way that we work. While many employees already teleworked
at least occasionally before the pandemic, having 90 percent of
employees teleworking at the same time has been game changing.
NASA employees have significantly increased their use of
virtual collaboration tools, such as Webex and Microsoft Teams,
so we can interact with each other face to face while sharing
virtual collaborative workspaces. Employees are dependent on
NASA's virtual private network (VPN) to connect securely to
internal networks and systems. Before the pandemic, our highest
VPN connection rate was about 12,000 users in a single day.
Today our VPN is supporting almost 40,000 daily users, with an
availability exceeding 99 percent, thanks to architectural and
capacity improvements implemented over the past 24 months.
Like other Federal agencies, NASA's IT infrastructure is
under constant attack from well-resourced and highly motivated
domestic and foreign adversaries, and we remain a popular
target today. Therefore, we continue to strengthen our
technical and procedural capabilities to proactively defend and
protect our systems and data. While the reported number of
attempted cyber incidents continues to increase partly because
we have greater visibility into our network today, I'm
confident that NASA is appropriately addressing and
strengthening our response to these threats.
In Fiscal Year 2020 NASA developed a continuity of
operations capability to further enhance our security
operations center (SOC), located at the Ames Research Center.
Previously, if SOC operations were disrupted, we had a limited
ability to identify, detect, and respond to incidents. Today
NASA SOC operations span multiple centers, allowing us to
maintain 24 by 7 SOC operations at all times, even if there is
an isolated disruption. With strengthened tools and
capabilities, NASA is transitioning from a largely reactive to
a more proactive cybersecurity posture. As the pandemic
worsened in April, NASA even moved the SOC to remote operations
to ensure employee safety, and we did so without negatively
impacting our network or our cybersecurity capabilities.
In closing, I want to personally thank not only my OCIO
staff and leadership, but the entire NASA workforce for their
hard work, and the personal sacrifices they've made during this
challenging time. Our employees are finding new ways to keep
missions moving forward, support each other, balance work and
family pressures, and even dedicate their expertise and
personal time to developing technologies that are aiding in the
national response to the coronavirus. While no one is sure what
the future holds, NASA's senior leaders, including myself, are
committed to keeping the NASA workforce safe, and providing
them with the IT tools and infrastructure they need to continue
executing our missions. I want to assure you that protecting
and evolving NASA's IT infrastructure is, and will remain, a
top agency priority. Thank you for the opportunity to testify
before you today, and I look forward to answering any of your
questions. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Seaton follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairwoman Horn. Thank you very much, Mr. Seaton. Mr.
Martin, recognized--you are now recognized for your testimony.

TESTIMONY OF THE HONORABLE PAUL K. MARTIN,

INSPECTOR GENERAL, NATIONAL AERONAUTICS

AND SPACE ADMINISTRATION

Mr. Martin. Thank you, Chairwoman Horn, Ranking Member
Babin, and Members of the Subcommittee. The NASA Office of
Inspector General has conducted a significant amount of
oversight work to help NASA improve its information technology
governance, while securing its networks and data from cyber
attacks. Over the past 5 years we issued 16 audit reports, with
72 recommendations related to IT governance and security.
During this same period we've conducted more than 120
investigations involving intrusions, denial of service attacks,
and data breaches on NASA networks, several of which have
resulted in criminal convictions. My testimony today is
informed by this body of audit and investigative work.
The soundness and security of its data and IT systems is
central to NASA's success. The agency spends more than $2.2
billion a year on a portfolio of IT assets that include
hundreds of information systems used to control spacecraft,
collect and process scientific data, and enable NASA personnel
to collaborate with colleagues around the world. Given the
valuable technical and intellectual capital NASA produces, its
IT systems present a high value target for cyber criminals. The
past 6 months in particular has tested the agency, as more than
90 percent of NASA's workforce moved from onsite to remote work
due to the pandemic. During this period, NASA has experienced
an uptick in cyber threats, with phishing attempts doubling,
and malware attacks rising substantially. This morning I offer
three observations about the state of NASA's IT security and
governance to provide context for the scope of its challenges.
First, our concerns with NASA's IT governance security are
wide-ranging and longstanding. For more than 2 decades NASA has
struggled to implement an effective IT governed structure that
aligns authority and responsibility commensurate with the
agency's overall mission. Specifically, the agency's CIO has
limited oversight and influence over IT purchases and security
decisions within mission directorates and at NASA centers. This
de-centralized nature of NASA's operations, coupled with its
historic culture of autonomy, have hindered the CIO's ability
to implement effective enterprise-wide IT governance. Moreover,
NASA's connectivity with educational institutions, and other
outside organizations, and its vast online presence of 3,000
web domains, and more than 42,000 publicly accessible data
sets, offer cyber criminals a larger target than most other
government agencies.
Second, despite positive forward momentum, the agency's IT
practices continue to fall short of Federal requirements. For
example, in 2019, for the fourth year in a row, NASA
performance during our annual FISMA review remained at level
two out of five, meaning the agency has issued, but has not
consistently implemented, important policies and procedures
defining its IT security program. And third, like many other
public and private organizations, NASA struggles to find the
right balance between user flexibility and system security. For
example, for years NASA permitted personally owned and partner
owned mobile IT devices to access non-public data, even if
those devices did not have a valid authorization. Today NASA
employees and partners can use non-agency mobile devices to
access e-mail if the user installs security software known as
mobile device management.
However, an OIG (Office of Inspector General) audit last
month found that NASA was not adequately securing its e-mail
networks from unauthorized access by these personally owned
devices. Although NASA has deployed technologies to monitor
unauthorized connections, it has not fully implemented controls
to remove or block those devices. Moreover, the agency's
December 2019 target for installing these controls was delayed
due to technological issues and pandemic-related center
closures. Until these enforcement controls are fully
implemented, NASA faces an elevated risk of a breach.
Finally, as part of its MAP (Mission Support Future
Architecture Program) initiative, NASA plans to centralize and
consolidate IT capabilities. The CIO's office expects to
complete its MAP assessment by March 2021, with implementation
on its institutional systems beginning later that year. As MAP
unfolds, we plan to assess whether this enterprise-level
alignment has strengthened cybersecurity at NASA. I look
forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Martin follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairwoman Horn. Thank you, Mr. Martin. Dr. Burley, you're
recognized for your testimony.

TESTIMONY OF DR. DIANA L. BURLEY, PH.D.,

VICE PROVOST FOR RESEARCH, AMERICAN UNIVERSITY

Dr. Burley. Thank you. Subcommittee Chairwoman Horn,
Ranking Member Babin, and distinguished Members of the
Committee, thank you for the opportunity to appear before you
today. As the Nation continues to navigate the complex and
uncertain environment of the global pandemic, it is vital that
we engage in a robust discussion on the cybersecurity related
challenges and emerging issues for increased telework during
this time. At American University we are guided by our
strategic plan, Changemakers for a Changing World. AU empowers
graduates to navigate, shape, and lead the future of work, and
AU researchers are pushing the boundaries of discovery in
healthcare, data science, social equity, and security. In my
remarks today, which are shaped by a decades-long career
leading cybersecurity initiatives, I will highlight how the
interplay of these areas supports the development of a holistic
strategy to address cybersecurity issues surrounding the
exponential growth in telework during this unprecedented time.
Concerns over exposure to COVID-19 have accelerated a mass
migration to virtual settings. While teleworking arrangements
have existed for years, never before had we seen the range and
volume of remote workers or remote working environments.
Employees across the spectrum of demographic categories and
technical abilities are now working remotely, and engaging with
their employers, colleagues, and customers through a digital
interface, and on a range of devices. Securing this activity
necessitates that we recognize both the technical needs and the
environmental factors that shape that behavior. Consider the
following. Novice users and novice experiences create
vulnerabilities. In the hurried transition to remote work,
agencies did not have sufficient time to prepare novice users
for the complexity of their newly virtual working environments.
Where overall security is more reliant upon individual
decisions made by employees and non-employees alike, even
seasoned users who have developed behaviors in accordance with
onsite protections face new challenges, and can find themselves
less prepared to avoid the vulnerabilities exposed by the
remote working environments. Employees are working under
duress. COVID-19 continues to drive economic instability,
health-related concerns, anxiety, and confusion. Employees are
worried about meeting their basic needs, and are less likely to
attend to seemingly lower priorities like cybersecurity. Cyber
criminals exploit targets of opportunity. The shift in activity
provides a larger attack surface, and leads to more
opportunities for cyber criminals to use social engineering
techniques such as fraud, misdirection, and disinformation to
exploit those vulnerabilities.
Users bring their entire selves online. If we use the
public health analogy of treating the whole patient, we can
strengthen the efficacy of guidance to engage in robust cyber
hygiene activities. In public health practice, successful
treatment is inextricably linked to the social and
environmental conditions of its patients. Today, in the midst
of the COVID-19 pandemic, we must recognize that while basic
cyber hygiene practice is relatively doable under normal
circumstances, these are not normal times. Our workers are
distracted, frightened, and fatigued. This is especially true
for the most vulnerable users. As such, strategies to
strengthen the cybersecurity of teleworkers must consider the
full spectrum of user experiences and address the complex
realities of their needs.
The points I have just outlined represent only a snapshot
of the benefit of using a holistic approach to reduce the
impact of cybersecurity related vulnerabilities. I have long
advocated for this type of approach. Now, and with a greater
sense of urgency, we must collaboratively develop interventions
that address the dynamic interplay between technical and
environmental variables that shape the cybersecurity posture
across the broad range of teleworkers as they navigate the
COVID-19 environment. I look forward to continued engagement
with this esteemed Committee to develop concrete strategies
that raise awareness of the threat, encourage actions that
increase the cybersecurity of the Nation's employees, and
protect our most vulnerable citizens. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Burley follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairwoman Horn. Thank you very much, Dr. Burley. At this
point we will begin our first--with our first round of
questions, and the Chair recognizes herself for 5 minutes.
Thank you to our witnesses today. It's clear that these
are important issues, and there's a lot of things to tackle.
And I want to start, Mr. Seaton, with some questions about
contractors, as--and cybersecurity contractors, especially
given the increased use, and the significant use of contractors
within NASA's workforce. So I have a number of questions, I'm
going to try and get through as many as we can. Some of them
are just yes or no, then we'll get to a few other things.
So what we know, and I mentioned the article today in The
Hill, is that our systems are--there's a lot of information
that hackers are very interested in, and the contractors that
NASA works with are integral to our Nation's space agency. So
my first question is, are there FAR clauses, Federal
Acquisition Regulation clauses, that specifically refer to
contractor cybersecurity requirements?
Mr. Seaton. Yes, there are, and we include those in our
agency contracts to ensure that our providers follow the
cybersecurity requirement.
Chairwoman Horn. OK. So let me follow up on that for a
moment, because--so those are NASA cybersecurity requirements?
Because we asked earlier this year about associated FAR
language, and NASA's response was that there are no FAR
requirements, there are no FAR clauses. But to--do those fall
under NASA requirements in contracts?
Mr. Seaton. We have a NASA FAR supplement, and to get
specifics on what those requirements are included via that, I
can certainly take a question for the record to get that.
Chairwoman Horn. OK. Absolutely. And so, when those
clauses are included, is it NASA that signs off on the
cybersecurity? Are there waivers? What--who signs off on the
requirements for cybersecurity, that they've been met?
Mr. Seaton. Well, we have automated tools to be able to
ensure that our contractors are complying with the requirements
when they're connecting to any NASA system, just as any NASA
employee would. So, as was mentioned in the earlier testimony,
we've put in place controls, and are continuing to strengthen
those controls, to ensure that only authorized devices can
connect to our networks and systems.
Chairwoman Horn. OK. And who has oversight of contractor
cybersecurity protocols? Is that through your office? Are you
able to conduct oversight and audits of cybersecurity practices
by contractors?
Mr. Seaton. Ultimately. I am the Acting Information
Officer, and so cybersecurity is my responsibility, and so it
would be me and my team that ensures compliance with the
cybersecurity requirements.
Chairwoman Horn. OK. And do you feel like you have
sufficient oversight, and insight, and ability to do that
within your authorized--within your authorities?
Mr. Seaton. Yes, I would say that I do believe that,
within NASA, I've been given the appropriate authority and
support, but I will say that the environment is continuing to
change, and it's a dynamic landscape, as IT is no longer just
the computer and the laptop on your desk, but expands to
operational technology work. IT is embedded within systems, and
so I would say it's challenging with that evolving landscape,
and so we continue to mature our processes.
Chairwoman Horn. OK. Thank you. Stepping back to the
challenges from this year during COVID-19, I'll have a question
for Mr. Martin and Mr. Seaton, and hopefully we'll have time to
get to Dr. Burley, about a broader--the memo, Mr. Seaton, that
your predecessor published on April 8 warned of increased
attempts in cyberattacks, and--especially during COVID-19, and
I'm--my first question is--to you, actually, then to Mr.
Martin, how has the rate of cyberattacks changed since that
memo in April, and what steps has the OCIO taken to respond to
those increased attempts?
Mr. Seaton. Well, we have seen an increase in phishing
attacks, and a lower level of some other attacks, but honestly,
the change to the pandemic operating model is consistent with
how NASA has operated in the past. We've supported a mobile
workforce, and so have put in place controls and technologies
to mitigate against some of these threats, including automated
prevention of phishing attacks. Because, when it comes down to
it, you and I are the most vulnerable part of our IT security
environments, the people, and so we try to put in place
automated controls to actually make that easier for our
employees, and I've, seen significant improvements in phishing
protections over the last 2 years.
Chairwoman Horn. Thank you, and quickly, Mr. Martin, my
time is coming to an end, but what is your confidence level in
NASA's ability to sufficiently address and increase--the
increase in cyber threats as reported by the OCIO?
Mr. Martin. Overall I think they're making incremental
improvement. They're heading in the right direction, but--and I
think there's a real--new realization over the last couple
years of the expanse and significance of the challenge, so I
think we're very, very cautiously optimistic.
Chairwoman Horn. Wonderful. Thank you very much. I now
recognize Ranking Member Babin for 5 minutes of questions.
Mr. Babin. Thank you, Madam Chair. I think I'm unmuted.
Hopefully I am. I want to address this to Chief Information
Officer Mr. Seaton. Two weeks ago President Trump signed Space
Policy Directive Number Five, which focused on cybersecurity
principles for space systems. SPD-5 states, ``It is the policy
of the United States that executive departments and agencies
will foster practices within government space operations, and
across the commercial space industry, that protect space
assets, and their supporting infrastructure, from cyber
threats, and ensure continuity of operations.'' My question is
this. As NASA increases its use of public/private partnerships,
how will it ensure that contractors comply with this policy
without implementing regulations?
Mr. Seaton. Yeah, thank you for the question. Yeah, so
SPD-5, we appreciate the administration and this Congress's
focus on space cybersecurity, because that's critically
important to us. We're currently in the process of reviewing
and analyzing SPD-5, but the good news is we see a lot of
consistency with best practices that we are already
implementing, and will continue to look to strengthen our
cybersecurity, both within our missions, as well as with our
contract partners.
Mr. Babin. Absolutely. Thank you so much. My next question
would be to Inspector General Paul Martin. Your office issued a
report on JPL, Jet Propulsion Laboratory's, cybersecurity
management last year. JPL, unlike other NASA centers, is
managed by a contractor, of course that's Cal Tech. The report
highlights the fact that NASA's contract with Cal Tech did not
include relevant requirements from NASA IT security policies.
And so has the OIG conducted a review of other NASA contractors
to determine if their contracts include necessary clauses
pertaining to IT security, and if so, how many has your office
conducted?
Mr. Martin. Thank you, Mr. Babin. We have not conducted a
separate audit looking at that specific issue. Although, if I
could double back, the concerns we had when NASA entered into a
new 5-year contract with Cal Tech, that the contract was absent
the significant IT oversight provisions. We have since followed
up and found out that JPL has issued, and NASA has accepted,
and we've reviewed, and they do meet the criteria that we were
concerned about. So the Federal imposed oversight, IT
oversight, is going to happen at JPL, so we're pleased for
that.
Mr. Babin. OK. Thank you. And does the OIG conduct
compliance audits to determine if contractors are fulfilling
their contractual obligations pertaining to information
security, and if so, how many has your office conducted there?
Mr. Martin. Again, we conduct a significant number of
program audits that look at the programs that are run by these
contractors, and part of that review includes a detailed dive
into the contracts to make sure that the IT security
requirements are not only in the contract, but they're actually
followed.
Mr. Babin. Is this a more appropriate role for the NASA
CIO or procurement office to conduct, rather than the OIG?
Mr. Martin. Well, I think the--certainly the CIO's office
and procurement have to ensure at the outset that the
appropriate security issues and safeguards are contained in the
contract themselves, and ongoing--good contract management
would show that you need to ensure that they're being
effective. Now, the OIG has limited capacity, like most
organizations, and so we're going to try to target the more
high risk, high value operations that NASA has to do a deep
dive audit.
Mr. Babin. OK. And then, as this very hearing
demonstrates, NASA and the Nation have adopted
videoconferencing to adapt to social distancing requirements.
Has NASA identified any vulnerabilities with commercial
videoconferencing platforms? Are certain videoconference not
allowed for NASA use based on technical characteristics or
concerns over foreign influence? I would just say--what every
one of you have to say. Just a short, concise answer.
Appreciate it.
Mr. Seaton. Yes, I'll start with that, and say we have a
set of approved tools that have gone through the appropriate
security validation, which includes assessing any threats
externally to those environments, and, outside of that, other
tools are not approved for use within NASA.
Mr. Babin. OK. And then----
Mr. Martin. NASA OIG is using those approved tools.
Mr. Babin. OK. All right, good. And, Dr. Burley, did you
want to add to that at all?
Dr. Burley. Most agencies and other organizations have
their list of approved tools.
Mr. Babin. OK. Well, Madam Chair, I've spent all my time,
so I will yield back, and I want to thank all the witnesses. We
appreciate it very much. Yield back.
Chairwoman Horn. Thank you very much, Ranking Member
Babin. And, Mr. Perlmutter, you're recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Perlmutter. Thank you, Madam Chair, and I think one of
the biggest problems with this remote stuff is when somebody
like Dr. Babin is walking around with his phone, and I feel
like we're in The Blair Witch Project, but that's a whole other
problem. My questions are for you, Dr. Burley, and Mr. Seaton
mentioned the most vulnerable spot for, you know, hacking and
cybersecurity is the individual, the person. And when you were
testifying, you talked about novice users, you know, not
familiar with the equipment or security protocol, employees
under duress, worried about their basic needs, and not the more
refined things like cybersecurity, you know, that folks are
having trouble because they're distracted, frightened, and
fatigued, I think were your terms. So what--I mean, it almost
feels not that the CIO should be involved, but the Personnel
Department is really the--one of the keys here. So what do you
see, whether it's NASA, or generally across the agencies, being
done to help the individuals kind of get through this very
anxious period and maintain cybersecurity?
Dr. Burley. Thank you for your question. But--so you're
absolutely right in that it needs to be a collaboration between
the IT Department and the H.R. (human resources) Department.
So, first, every agency has a set of cybersecurity awareness
programs that they have in place, and that really guide not
only behavior within the organization, within the walls, but
also outside. Those awareness programs need to be adapted,
recognizing that the employees are working in a different
environment, they're working remotely, and they're working
around other people. It's not just them. It's also----
Mr. Perlmutter. Right.
Dr. Burley [continuing]. Family members, and others who
are in their environments. And so we have to take a hard look
at those awareness programs, and recognize that they need to be
adapted based on the current realities of work. And second,
yes, absolutely, human resource professionals need to be
involved to provide the kind of support to our employees that
they need so that they are able to focus on not only doing
their work, but doing their work in a secure manner.
Mr. Perlmutter. And I guess I hadn't even thought of it,
but obviously we should think of it, people are working from
home, the kids are in the background, or, you know, whoever
might be in the background, so it isn't like you're in the
office at NASA headquarters, where everything's pretty safe and
secure. So I think, Madam Chair, I'm going to yield back, but I
do think this really is cooperation, certainly between the H.R.
Department and all of the technology folks. And Mr.--I mean,
all three of our speakers have sort of focused on that, but I--
in this pandemic, that's critical, and I yield back.
Chairwoman Horn. Thank you very much, Mr. Perlmutter. Mr.
Posey, you're recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Posey. Thank you, Madam Chair, for holding this
hearing on this important issue regarding cybersecurity at NASA
during COVID-19. Just to recap, in June 2020 NASA's Inspector
General stated NASA's high profile and sensitive technology
makes the agency an attractive target for computer hackers and
other bad actors. And, as stated earlier, during the COVID-19
pandemic, many NASA and contractor employees are teleworking,
and possibly making the agency a bigger target. In June 2020
report the Inspector general said it's vital that the agency
develop of its information security program to protect the
confidentiality, integrity, and availability of its data,
systems, and networks. This is not a new problem facing NASA.
An assessment by the National Academy of Public Administration
(NAPA) concluded back in 2014 that NASA networks are
compromised, and that individuals are not being held
accountable.
It's not a new concern for us either. I included language
in the House-passed NASA authorization bill back in 2015 to
address this by requiring a report on how NASA would safeguard
its networks and protect against control violations. The
Inspector General also made the nine recommendations to NASA,
including making sure the risk information security system
compliance and data protection capabilities are updated to keep
the data secure. And the Inspector General concluded that the
threats are increasing, and that it is imperative for NASA to
continue its efforts, and strengthen its risk management
government practices to safeguard its data from cybersecurity
threats.
So, Inspector Martin, first, it was noted that NASA is an
attractive target for computer hackers and bad actors. Is China
one of those bad actors, and does China present a cybersecurity
threat to NASA? And, besides securing its information
technology, what steps has NASA done to secure its supply chain
from China hackers? And has NASA, or the Inspector General,
criminally reported a cybersecurity case involving China to the
Department of Justice yet?
Mr. Martin. Yes, yes, no. I'm joking. That was a lot of
questions. China is one of the foreign entities out there.
China's not the sole entity, country, out there that is seeking
NASA's very valuable intellectual property. NASA is taking
steps, and has been, to secure its intellectual property and
its networks from attack both from China and from a series of
other countries, and also local hackers. So yes, NASA is--we
have conducted a series of criminal investigations, and we work
with the FBI (Federal Bureau of Investigation) and
counterintelligence officials when we get leads on these
issues.
Mr. Posey. Good, thank you. And Mr. Seaton, with
cybersecurity threats increasing, has NASA taken the necessary
actions to address the assessment of the National Academy of
Public Administration back in 2014, and the nine
recommendations identified by the Inspector General, to keep
the data security?
Mr. Seaton. Yes. I'm happy to report that we closed out
all of the recommendations, there were quite a few, in the NAPA
report, and those have been implemented, and I do think that
they improved our security and our practices.
Mr. Posey. OK, thank you. Dr. Burley, should the National
Academy do another study to examine the vulnerabilities that
teleworking presents?
Dr. Burley. The opportunity for associations and National
Academies to do studies gives us an in depth look, and so I
would say yes.
Mr. Posey. Thank you, Madam Chair. I yield back the
remainder of my time.
Chairwoman Horn. Thank you, Mr. Posey. The Chair now
recognizes Mr. Beyer for 5 minutes.
Mr. Beyer [continuing]. My mute button. Thank you, Madam
Chair, very much. Mr. Seaton, thank you very much for joining
us today. In your testimony you mentioned that in the course of
the pandemic you were able to onboard new employees, new
interns, and, amazingly, our office has been able to do the
same, wonderful interns and new staff. We've also been able to
safely ensure that all staff and interns have House-issued
equipment, including laptops and phones. So the--in the OIG
report, I was surprised that personally owned devices could
connect to internal systems, and that OIG was critical of your
not monitoring--enforcing the rules associated with granting
access to the NASA networks. So how do you make sure that new
employees will be given the proper equipment, and if they're
not getting NASA issued equipment, how do we ensure that those
personal devices are secured?
Mr. Seaton. Yes, thanks, great question. We actually do
require the use of NASA-provided equipment for our new
employees and interns, so we do provide them with the tools
that they need. Recently, within the last 2 years, it was my
office that changed the policy that was referred to earlier,
where, yes, previously we did allow personal devices to
connect. That is no longer allowed by policy. The only
allowance is for a mobile device that has a mobile device
management software that we provide that creates a secure
container, and a secure connection, back to our e-mail and
calendaring systems, if an employee will consent to us managing
their personal device with that software. That's the one case
where we do allow that.
Where we do have opportunities to continue to strengthen
our architecture is implementing the automated controls to
ensure that that is what's happening. So network access
control, and the pandemic, has actually impacted our
implementation there, pushing out that schedule into next year,
but we've made significant progress through DHS, the CDM
(Continuous Diagnostics and Mitigation) Program, to know what's
on our network, and who's on our network, and have a little bit
more to do there.
Mr. Beyer. Good, good. Thank you. That's encouraging to
know, because I'm sure the stuff you have is much more
important than the thing that's on my network. Mr. Martin, you
talked about the malicious intrusions in the NASA systems, you
know, unauthorized access to Deep Space Network. Other than the
personally identifiable information, what are they after, and
how much of this is China, Russia, the other nations that are
interested in space, and will this affect, or could this
affect, our lunar missions or Mars mission, James Webb, and
some of the really big important things that NASA's doing?
Mr. Martin. Thank you, Congressman Beyer. NASA has vast
troves of important intellectual capital that it has spent
decades amassing, and so I think folks are--country actors are
after that information, the innovations that NASA's so famous
for around the world. There's everything from PII, there's
contractual data on the systems, so there's just a vast and
wide array. And, again, we've had--NASA, unfortunately, has
been under attack from both domestic and foreign cyber
criminals, and so it is just an ongoing, incredibly difficult
issue to keep NASA's defenses up.
Mr. Beyer. OK, thank you very much. And, Professor Burley,
you know one of the challenges NASA has, obviously is that
they're so decentralized. So many of us have NASA facilities
near or close, and so a one size fits all is always going to be
difficult. Are there other examples of systems, especially
Federal systems, that are similarly decentralized that have
been able to effectively secure their IT systems? Are there
anybody for NASA to imitate or emulate?
Dr. Burley. I think that the CIO from NASA would know
better, but there are many different decentralized systems,
both within the Federal Government and outside, that could be
used as a guide to at least begin to think about best practices
and other strategies for securing the networks.
Mr. Beyer. Let me pivot to Mr. Seaton, then, quickly,
because I know, like, Department of Commerce had 13 different
CIOs. Do you have the same challenge within NASA?
Mr. Seaton. Yeah. So there's one CIO, but there are center
CIOs. They all report to me. We have a single IT strategy, and,
for almost a decade now, we've been working to integrate and
operate as a cohesive unit, acknowledging that there are some
uniquenesses at our centers, but implementing consistent
policies, and moving toward enterprise services and contracts.
So I think we are moving in the enterprise direction very
significantly.
Mr. Beyer. Thank you very much. And, Madam Chair, I yield
back.
Chairwoman Horn. Thank you very much, Mr. Beyer. Mr.
Garcia, you're recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Garcia. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman, appreciate it,
and appreciate the testimony and the witnesses today. Very
exciting times for NASA, and also very challenging, with very
unique dynamics in play here. I guess I've got a few questions,
and probably directed to all of you, Mr. Seaton, Mr. Martin,
and Dr. Burley. I come from a company where I was a program
director for a large air breather program, and it was both
classified and unclassified elements to it. One of the big
challenges that we had as a large prime was that the classified
elements fell under NISPOM (National Industrial Security
Program Operating Manual) requirements, which I think were
effectively what Chairwoman Horn was asking about on the
classified side, as far as our compliance and requirements.
Those requirements led to onerous costs to suppliers, and to
the lower level supply chain folks.
What is NASA doing, I guess, to make sure that the small
businesses that are a critical element of your supply chain
aren't necessarily getting overwhelmed with either
cybersecurity requirements, or cybersecurity development work,
software development work, and therefore almost being dissuaded
from entering into this industry, into this support chain? Are
we able to provide GFI, or government furnished IP (Internet
Protocol) to make sure and flow down to the lower level
suppliers to make sure that they're baking in some of these
cybersecurity elements into their respective programs, or how
do we communicate, I guess, with those lower tier supply chain
folks? I guess, Mr. Seaton, we can start with you.
Mr. Seaton. Sure. I will say that is a challenge. Making
sure that all of our suppliers and providers appreciate the
significance of cybersecurity, and are building that into the
solutions they deliver, is a requirement of doing business
today, right, today with supply chain risk management. Just in
August Section 889 was enacted, that requires us to certify
that anybody we're doing business with complies with supply
chain restrictions that are Federal-wide. So we're working with
our providers and suppliers to make sure they understand, and
that they build that into their practices.
Mr. Garcia. Yeah, I just, you know, we ought to just make
sure we're balancing the risk mitigation efforts, which are
absolutely critical and essential. We have to do it with the
cost elements, and the, you know, just making sure that we're
not driving some of these key suppliers out of business, or out
of our industry, or out of your business, right? I know that's
a delicate balancing act as well.
Mr. Seaton. True. The cost of having a compromise is
significant too, though, so you're right, it is a balancing
act, and we'll continue to try to work.
Mr. Garcia. Are the primes, or tier one suppliers,
actively looking to package up programs or software, you know,
programs to download to the lower level suppliers, or is it
sort of ad hoc, depending on what the threat is, and what the
threat mitigation measure is?
Mr. Seaton. Yeah. Unfortunately, I really can't speak to
the individual practices of the companies and suppliers.
Mr. Garcia. OK. And then I guess just characterizing
classified versus unclassified, are you able to speak to what
percentage of your networks are on unclassified networks, and
is one of the sides lagging the other? In other words, do you
see, you know, more threats on the classified side, or fewer
threats, but maybe more, you know, more critical impact to
those networks? Or how would you characterize the deltas there
between unclassed versus the high side?
Mr. Seaton. Yes, and my office is responsible for the
unclassified side. We work with our Office of Protective
Services on the classified side. I can't really speak in this
forum to kind of the division there, but I will say that
oftentimes compromises on the unclassified side can be used to
propagate to other systems that--and so that's a concern, even
on the unclassified side.
Mr. Garcia. OK, great. Yeah. And, Mr. Martin or Dr.
Burley, I don't know if you guys care to comment on either of
those topics there.
Mr. Martin. We have little or no work on the classified
side at NASA.
Mr. Garcia. OK. That's good to know. OK. So I would just,
you know, we hosted a small business summit with Kevin McCarthy
as well, and with the NASA Administrator Bridenstine a couple
of weeks ago. The cost of entry into the supply chain for all
space programs is pretty high for some of these small
suppliers, so I would just end with let's try to enable them,
let's make sure we're giving them the tools to be successful
and be able to defend not only their networks but yours,
obviously, as your suppliers as we navigate this challenge, and
hopefully look to synergize lessons learned and download those
through contract requirement flow-down documents accordingly.
So, really appreciate your guys' time, and good luck with the
upcoming launches as well, guys, thank you. I yield back.
Chairwoman Horn. Thank you, Mr. Garcia. And now, for the
honorary Member of our Subcommittee, who is reliable and with
us, Mr. Weber, you're recognized for 5 minutes. If we can get
you unmuted. There you go.
Mr. Weber. There we go. There's a lot of people who want
to mute me, but nonetheless, thank you for that, Chairwoman,
and I appreciate the opportunity of being here. You actually
asked a question to Mr. Seaton earlier, I think, about how many
intrusion attempts per month that NASA identified last year,
and I want to kind of follow up on that by saying how does that
compare, Mr. Seaton, to the intrusion attempts per month this
year during COVID? Are you making a distinction there?
Mr. Seaton. Yeah, so--not that direct comparison, and we
see fluctuations based on our insight, and that insight, as I
mentioned, is increasing, so sometimes that is the cause for a
higher number. But we have seen an increase in phishing attacks
and malware attacks at various times throughout the pandemic.
That hasn't been steady, it's been fluctuating.
Mr. Weber. Any idea or guess, 10 percent, 20 percent, five
percent, increase?
Mr. Seaton. At one point, over a given period of time, we
saw a doubling of phishing attacks, but, again, there have been
other weeks where it's been lower. So I do think, because of
the pandemic, people are looking for the opportunity to attack,
and will continue to.
Mr. Weber. Well, there's been a lot of discussion about,
you know, having personal devices, and being at home, and those
kinds of security firewalls, if you will. And if it's sensitive
information, I know you said you worked with the FBI and some
of their forces, or task force, I forget the terminology you
used, that sensitive information, if you could get it to us, it
would be interesting for us to have, get it to my staff. And I
want to follow up in your discussion with Mr. Garcia. You all
talked about, well, before I do that, let me go to Mr. Martin
really quick.
Mr. Martin, understanding that this hearing is supposed to
be merely focused on cyber threats during COVID, since you're
here with us, I thought it'd be appropriate to discuss some of
the things we've been talking about with China, for example.
Intellectual property threats to the aerospace U.S. supply
chain, you all talked about it a little bit, I think, with Mr.
Garcia. During this week's Air Force Association Aerospace and
Cyber Conference it was revealed that a longtime DOD
(Department of Defense) and NASA launch provider, UL Lab,
proactively, I don't know if you're familiar with this,
proactively identified and cut ties with the supplier that was
a security risk due to Chinese ownership. Were you aware of
that, Mr. Martin?
Mr. Martin. I was not, Congressman.
Mr. Weber. OK. Well, in comments earlier, I think I'll go
back to Mr. Seaton, with his exchange with Garcia, he said he
couldn't speak to suppliers or speak for the suppliers. Is that
what you were saying to Mr. Garcia?
Mr. Seaton. I said that I could not speak to how they were
structuring their business operations to meet the Federal
requirements.
Mr. Weber. Shouldn't that be something that we're looking
at? I mean, I don't mean to sound too skeptical, but shouldn't
NASA and actually, all of our U.S. space and defense companies
should be taking a proactive posture to know exactly what
safeguards are in place for a supply chain?
Mr. Seaton. Totally agree. So how they go about doing it,
is what I'm saying, that we're not in their business
operations. Validating that they are complying with the
requirements is something that we've been doing for years with
our supply chain risk management efforts, ensuring the things
that we buy are free of risks through coordination with the
FBI, and now making sure that, even within their organizations,
they do not have IT equipment provided by prohibited providers.
So, yes, we are actively involved in ensuring that level of
compliance.
Mr. Weber. Well, you say how they go about it you're not
necessarily involved in, but shouldn't there be some level of
protocol, for lack of a better term, some threshold, some
safeguard, they have to meet minimum safeguards, and somebody
has to be looking over their shoulder in that regard? Is that
fair to say?
Mr. Seaton. Yeah. Again, compliance with our cybersecurity
requirements is absolutely critical, and that is our
responsibility. How they--their business practices is what I'm
saying that we are not getting in the middle of.
Mr. Weber. Would you say that, in this particular
instance, where that supplier was identified, that it would be
worthwhile to go back and see exactly how that happened, how
that supplier got the proverbial camel's nose under the tent?
Mr. Seaton. I think it's in the Federal Government's best
interest to understand where vulnerabilities emanate from, so,
certainly.
Mr. Weber. Whose responsibility is that?
Mr. Seaton. I think it's a shared responsibility.
Mr. Weber. Between who?
Mr. Seaton. Between the Federal agencies that are
responsible for our cybersecurity policy, as well as an agency
that would be interacting with a specific provider.
Mr. Weber. Is that something you could follow up with our
office on, and tell us who those agencies are, and who has
responsibility for that agency? And I'm talking about
addressing this particular instance, and how it was discovered,
and how we got there, and what steps are going to be taken to
prevent similar occurrences. Can you follow up with us on that?
Mr. Seaton. Certainly. We'll take that as a question for
the record, yes.
Mr. Weber. OK. Well, I appreciate that. Madam Chair, I
yield back.
Chairwoman Horn. Thank you very much, Mr. Weber.
Appreciate your questions, and, as always, your participating
in the Subcommittee. I think--I have a few more questions I
want to follow up with, and we'll have an opportunity for the
Members to do another round of questions, if everyone is
available to stay, since we're still--we still have time.
I have--I want to follow up on a couple of things, going
back to some of the earlier questions about--one about the
unauthorized devices, or personal devices, and then I do want
to follow up Mr.--on Mr. Weber's line of questions a little bit
more. Mr. Martin, the August 2020 IG report on unauthorized
devices, which was of course just this year, on NASA's network
cites CIO's office, saying that there--currently no
authoritative way to obtain the number of partner-owned IT
devices. And I know, Mr. Seaton, you mentioned that you're not
allowing that anymore, but it seems that that's still
happening. So, Mr. Martin, I'm wondering what the risks are of
not being able to identify, and why that may be the case, from
your perspective, in this report? And then, Mr. Seaton, I want
to follow up with you about what NASA's doing to improve its
understanding and insight into those devices. So, Mr. Martin,
if you want to start with that?
Mr. Martin. Sure. If I could say at the outset, NASA--as I
said in my oral remarks, NASA has been searching for that
balance between user flexibility and system security, and
during the 10 years that I've been at NASA, it has somewhat
wildly lurched from those extremes. I remember early on, a
number of years ago, where they had a BYOD policy, which was a
bring your own device policy, and that's how sort of forward
leaning NASA was about allowing employees, and even
contractors, to use their personal devices.
Now, in the last couple years, NASA has taken a much more
measured approach, and have focused recently, but there are
still gaps that remain in the security of these mobile devices.
So, as you indicated, in the report that we issued just last
month, they have implemented software, but they haven't fully
implemented the controls to remove or block devices from NASA
systems that shouldn't be on that NASA system. And they're also
not adequately monitoring the business rules for granting
access with a personal device to NASA's network. They're not
enforcing consistently the business need for that, and they're
also not ensuring that each of the mobile devices, the personal
mobile devices that connect to the system, don't violate supply
chain rules.
Chairwoman Horn. OK. Thank you very much, Mr. Martin. Mr.
Seaton, I know you've taken steps in that direction. Can you
speak to, I know there's been a delay, but the--what you're
doing, what NASA's doing, to address these holes? It sounds
like you've made progress, but what are--what is NASA and what
is the CIO doing to address these other outstanding issues?
Mr. Seaton. Sure. Actually, as an agency, I believe--I
think we have been a leader in implementing the--DHS's
continuous diagnostic and mitigation program, where CDM phase
one identified what was on the network, and so we had tools in
place to automatically detect what's on the network. Phase two,
which we are in the middle of implementing right now, is
controlling who is on the network, and that gets to the network
access control element that Mr. Martin spoke of. And, again, I
think in the--we will in the coming year, be able to enable
those controls to be able to have a technology-based way to
enforce the policy that has been issued by my office.
Chairwoman Horn. Thank you very much. And, just following
up on a couple of Mr. Weber's questions, in terms of the
insight, getting back to the--some of the first questions about
contractor requirements, and how we control for suppliers and
information, there's a balance between overly burdensome
requirements and the opportunity for bad actors to influence or
to gain access, and I'm wondering, Mr. Martin, what you see as
potential authorities that NASA may need to be able to have
additional insight, or control, or contracting provisions to
ensure that there's compliance all the way up and down the
supply chain. Is it with the primes, or are there other
provisions that may be needed?
Mr. Martin. I'm actually going to answer that question by
focusing in house on NASA. We have commented for the last--we
did an audit in 2014, and a follow-up in 2017, and one of our
concerns was just how NASA is structured, where--is Jeff, or
whoever's sitting in the CIO's position, doesn't have full
insight into all of NASA's systems. In fact, doesn't have full
control over the IT spend, and enforcing the IT security
requirements, particularly in mission systems and center
systems. Jeff and his colleagues have full control over what's
known as the institutional systems, but they make up about 25
or 30 percent of NASA's overall budget, so the lack of insight
and oversight wielding the stick that controls the money on the
end of it is a real governance issue.
Chairwoman Horn. Thank you very much, Mr. Martin. And, Mr.
Seaton, do you want to speak to that quickly? It sounds like
you need--to be able to do that you need additional
authorities, or insight and oversight.
Mr. Seaton. Actually, I think that that has been changing.
I sit on the Agency Program Management Council, the Mission
Support Council, and the Acquisition Strategy Council as a full
member, so I have insight into major agency decisions, and the
administration fully supports the programs and plans that we're
putting in place, and then the collaboration with the missions
to ensure their systems are secure, where we now have much more
widespread, effective, consistent approaches to authorities to
operate. And I've been working with the Council of Deputies
within NASA to ensure that we have the appropriate mission
leadership, senior executives, designated as authorizing
officials for those mission systems. So I do think we're making
significant progress, excuse me.
Chairwoman Horn. Thank you very much, Mr. Seaton. Mr.
Babin, you're recognized for 5 minutes. Do you have more
questions?
Mr. Babin. Yes. Can you hear me? OK, thank you. I do have
some more questions. I wanted to address this to all the
witnesses, if possible. How many intrusion attempts per month
did NASA identify last year? How does that compare to the
intrusion attempts per month this year, during COVID? And if
this information is sensitive, please provide a response to the
staff after the hearing concludes.
Mr. Seaton. Yeah. If I could take the specifics as a
question for the record, but I can speak in more general terms.
As I mentioned before, I think the measurement of intrusions
continues to fluctuate based on our insight into the network,
and that has increased. So, in some cases, where we see an
increase in intrusions, it's because we're seeing more of
what's happening, and we're to the point now we've got, I
think, a pretty solid visibility into our network today. But
then a comparison of specific month by month, we'll have to
take that and get back to you.
Mr. Babin. OK. All right. Thank you. I think I will yield
back for Madam Chair.
Chairwoman Horn. Thank you very much, Mr. Babin. Mr.
Beyer, you're recognized.
Mr. Beyer. Madam Chair, I have no more questions. I keep
learning, but I yield back.
Chairwoman Horn. Excellent. Thank you. Mr. Garcia?
Mr. Garcia. Thank you, Madam Chair. Just a real quick
question. You know, the old adage that the best defense is a
good offense is kind of appropriate here. Mr. Seaton, are you
happy with the support that you're getting form other
government agencies? In terms of the development at a national
level we develop offensive cyber capabilities. That informs
your defensive cyber techniques and vulnerabilities. Are you
comfortable and satisfied with the communications, I'll just
say, to other government agencies that should be informing you
as to where the state-of-the-art is going, in terms of
offensive cyber capabilities which may, you know, be in the
hands of the bad guys, and be within our own domestic networks?
If not, where can we help to maybe, you know, improve your
ability to leverage the developments of other equities outside
of NASA?
Mr. Seaton. Yeah, I think the administration's been very
supportive of our need to continue with the appropriate focus
on cybersecurity, and I think that NASA has effective
relationships with our counterparts that can provide us
counterintelligence information, as well as, you know, best
practices on cybersecurity, the Federal CIO Council, the CIOs
across the Federal agencies engaging to share information is
another effective mechanism for that information sharing.
Mr. Garcia. OK. So the historical, I'll call it just
historical evidence over the last call it two years, though,
have there been any surprises, I guess, from the threats where
it was a completely unknown rider coming in through an unknown
technique or vulnerability that really hadn't been discussed? I
know that there's sensitivities around how much you can say
here, but, you know, any sort of unknown riders that just
completely caught you off guard that we ultimately found out
another equity throughout the government maybe had been aware
of?
Mr. Seaton. Yeah. I think, because of the dynamic
landscape, we're going to face surprises. We want to minimize
those, right?
Mr. Garcia. Sure, sure. Yeah.
Mr. Seaton. But I will say that there have been times when
other agencies have observed activity, and contacted NASA, and
then we would partner on that. So, again, I think the
communication mechanism--mechanisms are there.
Mr. Garcia. That's good. Well, that's encouraging to hear.
A lot of these lessons learned have been learned, you know,
several times before, so we can avoid duplication of lessons
learned, especially in this cyber domain. That's a huge benefit
to you guys.
Mr. Seaton. Certainly.
Mr. Garcia. Thank you. I yield back, Madam Chair.
Chairwoman Horn. Thank you very much, Mr. Garcia, and
thank you to all of our Members for their thoughtful,
intentional questions, and to all of our witnesses. It's clear
that these are critically important issues that NASA is facing,
as well as some important lessons learned during COVID-19, as
Dr. Burley stated, that these are not normal times, so our
strategies during COVID-19 are important, but also inform
cybersecurity more broadly. And I think that it sounds as--that
NASA is making progress, but that, as a--as the authorizing
Committee, we want to ensure that you have sufficient
authorities and funding capabilities to have strong
cybersecurity practices and protocol in place, and we continue
to move forward with the recommendations and implementations
from the GAO, and other strategies that ensure not just the 25
percent that you have authority--direct authority over, but the
contractors, especially given some of the things that we have
seen.
So, unless any of our Members have further questions,
we'll bring this hearing to a close today. I want to thank
again the witnesses for your testimony, and for your time, and
for what you do. The record will remain open for 2 weeks for
additional statements from the Members, and additional
questions of the Committee, or that the Committee or Members
may ask of the witnesses. Thank you all again for your time.
The witnesses are excused, and the hearing is now adjourned.
Thanks, everybody.
[Whereupon, at 12:20 p.m., the Subcommittee was
adjourned.]

Appendix

----------

Answers to Post-Hearing Questions

Answers to Post-Hearing Questions

Responses by Mr. Jeff Seaton

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Responses by the Honorable Paul K. Martin

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Responses by Dr. Diana L. Burley, Ph.D.

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
