- SPACE SITUATIONAL AWARENESS: KEY ISSUES IN AN EVOLVING LANDSCAPE

[House Hearing, 116 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

SPACE SITUATIONAL AWARENESS:
KEY ISSUES IN AN EVOLVING LANDSCAPE

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON SPACE AND AERONAUTICS

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE, SPACE,
AND TECHNOLOGY
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED SIXTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

FEBRUARY 11, 2020

__________

Serial No. 116-68

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Science, Space, and Technology

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://science.house.gov

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
39-617PDF                  WASHINGTON : 2020

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE, SPACE, AND TECHNOLOGY

HON. EDDIE BERNICE JOHNSON, Texas, Chairwoman
ZOE LOFGREN, California              FRANK D. LUCAS, Oklahoma,
DANIEL LIPINSKI, Illinois                Ranking Member
SUZANNE BONAMICI, Oregon             MO BROOKS, Alabama
AMI BERA, California,                BILL POSEY, Florida
Vice Chair                       RANDY WEBER, Texas
LIZZIE FLETCHER, Texas               BRIAN BABIN, Texas
HALEY STEVENS, Michigan              ANDY BIGGS, Arizona
KENDRA HORN, Oklahoma                ROGER MARSHALL, Kansas
MIKIE SHERRILL, New Jersey           RALPH NORMAN, South Carolina
BRAD SHERMAN, California             MICHAEL CLOUD, Texas
STEVE COHEN, Tennessee               TROY BALDERSON, Ohio
JERRY McNERNEY, California           PETE OLSON, Texas
ED PERLMUTTER, Colorado              ANTHONY GONZALEZ, Ohio
PAUL TONKO, New York                 MICHAEL WALTZ, Florida
BILL FOSTER, Illinois                JIM BAIRD, Indiana
DON BEYER, Virginia                  FRANCIS ROONEY, Florida
CHARLIE CRIST, Florida               GREGORY F. MURPHY, North Carolina
SEAN CASTEN, Illinois                VACANCY
BEN McADAMS, Utah
JENNIFER WEXTON, Virginia
CONOR LAMB, Pennsylvania
VACANCY
------

Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics

HON. KENDRA HORN, Oklahoma, Chairwoman
ZOE LOFGREN, California              BRIAN BABIN, Texas, Ranking Member
AMI BERA, California                 MO BROOKS, Alabama
ED PERLMUTTER, Colorado              BILL POSEY, Florida
DON BEYER, Virginia                  PETE OLSON, Texas
CHARLIE CRIST, Florida               MICHAEL WALTZ, Florida
JENNIFER WEXTON, Virginia
VACANCY

C  O  N  T  E  N  T  S

February 11, 2020

Page

Hearing Charter..................................................     2

Opening Statements

Statement by Representative Kendra Horn, Chairwoman, Subcommittee
on Space and Aeronautics, Committee on Science, Space, and
Technology, U.S. House of Representatives......................     9
Written Statement............................................    10

Statement by Representative Brian Babin, Ranking Member,
Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics, Committee on Science,
Space, and Technology, U.S. House of Representatives...........    11
Written Statement............................................    13

Statement by Representative Frank D. Lucas, Ranking Member,
Committee on Science, Space, and Technology, U.S. House of
Representatives................................................    14
Written Statement............................................    15

Written statement by Representative Eddie Bernice Johnson,
Chairwoman, Committee on Science, Space, and Technology, U.S.
House of Representatives.......................................    16

Witnesses:

Dr. Brian Weeden, Director of Program Planning, Secure World
Foundation
Oral Statement...............................................    18
Written Statement............................................    20

Mr. Daniel Oltrogge, Co-Director, Space Safety Coalition, Founder
and Administrator, Space Safety Coalition, AIAA Space Traffic
Management Space Governance Task Force Chairman, Official
International Standards Organization (ISO) representative to
the United Nations Committee for the Peaceful Use of Outer
Space (UNCOPUOS)
Oral Statement...............................................    43
Written Statement............................................    45

Professor Joanne Gabrynowicz, Professor Emerita of Space Law,
University of Mississippi Law Center
Oral Statement...............................................    59
Written Statement............................................    61

Professor Danielle Wood, Director of the Space Enabled Research
Group, Assistant Professor of Media Arts & Sciences and
Aeronautics & Astronautics, Massachusetts Institute of
Technology
Oral Statement...............................................    73
Written Statement............................................    75

Dr. Ruth Stilwell, Adjunct Professor, Norwich University, Senior
Non-Resident Scholar, Space Policy Institute, George Washington
University
Oral Statement...............................................    82
Written Statement............................................    84

Discussion.......................................................    99

Appendix: Answers to Post-Hearing Questions

Dr. Brian Weeden, Director of Program Planning, Secure World
Foundation.....................................................   114

Mr. Daniel Oltrogge, Co-Director, Space Safety Coalition, Founder
and Administrator, Space Safety Coalition, AIAA Space Traffic
Management Space Governance Task Force Chairman, Official
International Standards Organization (ISO) representative to
the United Nations Committee for the Peaceful Use of Outer
Space (UNCOPUOS)...............................................   119

Dr. Ruth Stilwell, Adjunct Professor, Norwich University, Senior
Non-Resident Scholar, Space Policy Institute, George Washington
University.....................................................   134

SPACE SITUATIONAL AWARENESS:
KEY ISSUES IN AN EVOLVING LANDSCAPE

----------

TUESDAY, FEBRUARY 11, 2020

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics,
Committee on Science, Space, and Technology,
Washington, D.C.

The Subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 2:40 p.m., in
room 2318 of the Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Kendra
Horn [Chairwoman of the Subcommittee] presiding.
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairwoman Horn. This hearing will come to order. Without
objection, the Chair is authorized to declare recess at any
time. Good afternoon. Thank you for your understanding that we
were on the floor in votes. Very glad to have you here, and
welcome to everyone who is here, and to our witnesses. We
appreciate you being here today. In today's hearing we're going
to address and--one of the most important and rapidly evolving
issues facing our ability to operate in space: space
situational awareness.
At present the Department of Defense's public catalog
reports over 20,000 space objects, and with the event of mega
constellations, and an increasing amount of players, space is
only going to get more crowded. In fact, a June 2019 assessment
predicted that more than 20,000 satellites would be launched
into orbit by 2030 based on announcements of new planned
commercial constellations. Space situational awareness allows
us to track and monitor the number and location of space
objects, how to characterize a space environment, and identify
any potential collisions and--that could be avoided.
A good example of the need for better space situational
awareness occurred just a few weeks ago, when officials were
closely monitoring two dead satellites with interest and
concern. The two satellites, one a NASA satellite, and one an
Air Force experimental spacecraft that was launched in 1967,
were expected to pass extremely close to each other at speeds
of 32,000 miles per hour. If these satellites were closer than
estimated, it could've led to a collision creating thousands of
pieces of space debris that could have potentially devastating
impacts on other operating spacecraft. Satellite and spacecraft
operators need reliable space situational awareness to respond
to collision threats, because a moving satellite or spacecraft
involves time, money, and resources, such as fuel, and the
accuracy of situational awareness data, and the reliability of
collision warnings are all things that need to be considered.
The bottom line is that space situational awareness, and
ensuring the safety and sustainability of the space
environment, is an issue that affects our civil space program,
our commercial space sector, and our national security space
activities, and it's a problem we need to understand and begin
to address now. Space is a critical part of our infrastructure.
It enables our Nation's commerce, agricultural productivity,
banking, and many other aspects of our day to day lives.
Imagery and data from orbiting weather satellites and precision
navigational and location data from the Global Positioning
System, GPS, are essential to countless aspects of national
security and commerce. Threats to safety and sustainability of
the space environment would have far reaching implications for
U.S. Government, commercial, and non-U.S. operations in space,
and our Nation's reliance on space activities.
Today's hearing, and the testimony of our witnesses, is a
critical start to exploring this topic, because while the
problem of space situational awareness is ever more pressing,
how we manage it is equally important. This start must include
a clear and thorough examination of the rapidly evolving nature
of this issue, the broad range of stakeholders involved, and
the international and legal aspects of the changing landscape
of space situational awareness.
To that end, provisions in the bipartisan H.R. 5666 NASA
Authorization Act of 2020 begin to scratch the surface on
improving space situational awareness. Some of the provisions
include authorizing NASA (National Aeronautics and Space
Administration) to carry out research and development
activities on space situational awareness and orbital debris
mitigation, directing NASA to conduct an SSA (space situational
awareness) research and technology strategy, and directing the
administrator, and other relevant Federal agencies, to carry
out international discussions and capacity building on orbital
debris removement--removing--excuse me, removal. Let's see if I
can get that word out. The provisions in H.R. 5666 and today's
hearing are what I anticipate will be the first steps in a
series of Subcommittee and Committee activities on space
situational awareness. Future Subcommittee activities will need
to consider the technical capabilities, authorities, and roles
and responsibilities for effective, ongoing space situational
awareness data and information services.
In closing, space situational awareness is not a U.S.
issue. Space knows no national boundaries, and the solutions
for ensuring sustainability in space must be international.
However, leadership in this effort should come from the United
States. We, in collaboration with our international partners,
must shape the practices and behaviors of space operators we
expect others to follow in ensuring the safety and
sustainability of the space environment.
[The prepared statement of Chairwoman Horn follows:]

Good afternoon, and welcome to our witnesses. Thank you for
being here today. In today's hearing we will begin to address
one of the most pressing and rapidly evolving issues facing our
ability to operate in space, Space Situational Awareness.
At present, the Department of Defense's public catalogue
reports over 20,000 space objects. With the advent of mega
constellations and an increasing amount of players, space is
only going to get more crowded. In fact, a June 2019 assessment
predicted that more than 20,000 satellites would be launched
into orbit by 2030 based on announcements of new planned
commercial constellations.
Space situational awareness allows us to track and monitor
the number and location of space objects, how to characterize
the space environment, and identify any potential collisions so
they can be avoided.
A good example of the need for space situational awareness
occurred just a few weeks ago, when officials were closely
monitoring two dead satellites with interest and concern. The
two satellites, one a NASA satellite and one a U.S. Air Force
experimental spacecraft launched in 1967, were expected to pass
extremely close to each other at speeds of over 32,000 miles
per hour. If these satellites were closer than estimated, it
could have led to a collision creating thousands of pieces of
space debris that could potentially have devastating impacts on
other operating spacecraft.
Satellite and spacecraft operators need reliable space
situational awareness to respond to collision threats. Because
moving a satellite or spacecraft involves time, money, and
resources such as spacecraft fuel, the accuracy of the
situational awareness data and the reliability of collision
warnings need to be considered.
The bottom line is that space situational awareness and
ensuring the safety and sustainability of the space environment
is an issue that affects our civil space program, our
commercial space
sector, and our national security space activities. And it
is a problem we need to understand and address now.
Space is part of our infrastructure. It enables our
Nation's commerce, agricultural productivity, banking, and many
other aspects of our day-to-day lives. Imagery and data from
orbiting weather satellites and precision navigational and
location data from the Global Positioning System (GPS) are
essential to countless aspects of our national systems and
commerce. Threats to the safety and sustainability of the space
environment would have far-reaching implications for U.S.
government, commercial, and non-U.S. operations in space and
our Nation's reliance on those space activities.
Today's hearing and the testimony of our witnesses is a
critical start to exploring this topic. Because while the
problem of space situational awareness is ever more pressing,
how we manage it is equally important.
This start must include a clear and thorough examination of
the rapidly evolving nature of this issue, the broad range of
stakeholders involved, and the international and legal aspects
of the changing landscape for space situational awareness. To
that end, provisions in the bipartisan H.R. 5666, the NASA
Authorization Act of 2020, begin to scratch the surface on
improving space situational awareness. Some of these provisions
include:

authorize NASA to carry out research and
development activities on space situational awareness and
orbital debris mitigation;

direct NASA to conduct an SSA research and
technology strategy; and

direct the Administrator, along with other
relevant Federal agencies, to carry out international
discussions and capacity-building on orbital debris removal.
The provisions in H.R. 5666 and today's hearing are what I
anticipate will be the first steps in a series of Subcommittee
and Committee activities on space situational awareness. Future
Subcommittee activities will need to consider the technical
capabilities, authorities, and roles and responsibilities for
effective, ongoing space situational awareness data and
information services.
In closing, space situational awareness is not a U.S.
issue; space knows no national boundaries and the solutions for
ensuring sustainability in space must be international.
However, leadership in this effort should come from the United
States. We, in collaboration with our international partners,
must shape the practices and behaviors of space operators we
expect others to follow in ensuring the safety and
sustainability of the space environment.
Thank you.

Chairwoman Horn. Thank you, and I now recognize Ranking
Member Babin for his opening statement.
Mr. Babin. Thank you, Madam Chair. Great to be here today,
and thank you to all you witnesses. Today's hearing on space
situational awareness, or SSA, is a continuation of the
Committee's longstanding interest in this very topic. We've
held numerous hearings over the last several years and
considered two significant pieces of legislation last Congress,
the American Space Commerce Free Enterprise Act and the
American Space Safe Act. I urge my colleagues to once again
please consider these important bills.
SSA is an important topic for this Committee to consider,
but we should do so in a very deliberative manner. Near-misses
in space attract media attention and calls for draconian
regulations, but overreacting could be just as detrimental to
our Nation's space enterprise. That being said, there are many
things we probably all agree on. First, we need better data.
The Department of Defense currently operates the lion's share
of sensors that inform our understanding of where objects are
in orbit, and that will not change. Furthermore, the DOD
(Department of Defense) does not release all of its data
because of national security concerns, and that is also
understandable.
Other elements of the Federal Government play an important
role as well. NASA, and more specifically the Johnson Space
Center, which I proudly represent, and the Goddard Space Flight
Center, are involved in SSA. They sit side by side with the
military to monitor satellites and debris in space to ensure
the International Space Station and science satellites are
safe. But the information the government and private sector are
relying on to make sound decisions needs to be improved.
Uncertainty about current data is too high, which leads to both
unnecessary alerts, and unpredicted conjunctions.
The second issue that we should all agree on is that the
DOD should get out of the SSA business. DOD will always
maintain sensors for tracking objects in space in order to
protect our national security, but they are not the appropriate
agency to interact with the private sector, or with our
international partners. For this reason, the administration
proposed that the Department of Commerce serve as the
government's commercial storefront, if you will, for SSA.
Commerce can then partner with the private sector, which is
something they do well. Commerce already houses the National
Institutes of Standards and Technology, the world leader in
developing standards, manages export controls for satellite
technology through the Bureau of Industry and Security, and
coordinates spectrum issues through the National
Telecommunications and Information Administration.
Commerce also houses the National Weather Service that
conducts forecasts and issues alerts to protect life and
property, operates a fleet of weather satellites under NOAA
(National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration), and is the
only agency that has statutory authority to license activity in
space, space-based commercial remote sensing. They also have a
history of providing a light touch with emerging industries.
Commerce stood up the Internet Corporation for Assigned Names
and Numbers, or ICANN, through a contract with a nonprofit
organization. ICANN was the organization responsible for
developing policies, coordinating best practices, and managing
the processes that led to a stable Internet. We've already seen
the space community adopt a similar approach on our own.
Several years ago operators founded the Space Data
Association to share information and to improve safety. The
Space Data Association demonstrates how the private sector can
collaborate and innovate. More recently, the Space Safety
Coalition was established to provide similar capabilities for
operators in low Earth orbit. Companies are also providing data
and services on the open market. They are developing cost-
effective, timely, and accurate SSA data, often relying on off-
the-shelf and non-military technologies. In some cases,
commercial capabilities are superior to DOD's. This is good
news for America, and for the global community, and we should
help those nascent industries to grow.
The third issue that we should all agree on is that we
need to develop better standards and better practices. Rather
than imposing a top-down regulatory burden on an emerging
sector, we should adopt a crawl, walk, run approach. In this
regard, the International Agency for Space Debris Coordination
Committee, IADC, is an interesting case study. NASA developed
its own orbital debris guidelines that were eventually adopted
by the entire Federal Government, and then accepted by most
space-faring nations, as part of the IADC process. The
guidelines are consensus-based principles that inform
spacecraft development and operations, and could form the basis
for developing rules of the road going forward. This could be
augmented by contributions from the insurance industry, similar
to the role they played in the early days of maritime shipping.
I believe that we can all work together, and this will be to
ensure space remains a safe environment for future generations
without stifling industry with burdensome regulations before
they ever launch.
I want to thank our witnesses for appearing today, and I
yield back, Madam Chair.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Babin follows:]

Today's hearing on space situational awareness, or ``SSA,''
is a continuation of the Committee's longstanding interest in
the topic. We've held numerous hearings over the last several
years and considered two significant pieces of legislation last
Congress: the American Space Commerce Free Enterprise Act and
the American Space SAFE Act. I urge my colleagues to once again
consider these important bills. SSA is an important topic for
this Committee to consider, but we should do so in a
deliberative manner. Near-misses in space attract media
attention and calls for draconian regulations, but overreacting
could be just as detrimental to our Nation's space enterprise.
That being said, there are many things we probably all
agree on.
First, we need better data. The Department of Defense (DOD)
currently operates the lion's share of sensors that inform our
understanding of where objects are in orbit. That won't change.
Furthermore, the DoD does not release all of its data because
of national security concerns. This is understandable. Other
elements of the federal government play an important role as
well. NASA, and more specifically the Johnson Space Center,
which I proudly represent, and the Goddard Space Flight Center,
are involved in SSA. They sit side-by-side with the military to
monitor satellites and debris in space to ensure the
International Space Station and science satellites are safe.
But the information the government and private sector are
relying on to make sound decisions needs to be improved.
Uncertainty about current data is too high, which leads to both
unnecessary alerts and unpredicted conjunctions.
The second issue that we should all agree on is that the
DoD should get out of the SSA business. DoD will always
maintain sensors for tracking objects in space in order to
protect national security, but they are not the appropriate
agency to interact with the private sector or international
partners. For this reason, the Administration proposed that the
Department of Commerce serve as the government's ``commercial
storefront'' for SSA. Commerce can then partner with the
private sector, something they do well.
Commerce already houses the National Institutes of Standard
and Technology, the world-leader in developing standards,
manages export controls for satellite technology through the
Bureau of Industry and Security, and coordinates spectrum
issues through the National Telecommunications and Information
Administration. Commerce also houses the National Weather
Service that conducts forecasts and issues alerts to protect
life and property; operates a fleet of weather satellites under
NOAA; and is the only agency that has statutory authority to
license activity in space--space-based commercial remote
sensing. They also have a history of providing a lighttouch
with emerging industries.
Commerce stood up the Internet Corporation for Assigned
Names and Numbers (ICANN) through a contract with a non-profit
organization. ICANN was the organization responsible for
developing policies, coordinating best practices, and managing
the processes that led to a stable internet.
We've already seen the space community adopt a similar
approach on their own. Several years ago, operators founded the
Space Data Association to share information and improve safety.
The Space Data Association demonstrates how the private sector
can collaborate and innovate. More recently, the Space Safety
Coalition was established to provide similar capabilities for
operators in low Earth orbit.
Companies are also providing data and services on the open
market. They are developing cost effective, timely, and
accurate SSA data, often relying on off-the-shelf and non-
military technologies. In some cases, commercial capabilities
are superior to DoD's. This is good news for America and for
the global community, and we should help these nascent
industries to grow.
The third issue we should all agree on is that we need to
develop better standards and practices. Rather than imposing a
top-down regulatory burden on an emerging sector, we should
adopt a crawl, walk, run approach. In this regard, the
International Agency Space Debris Coordination Committee (IADC)
is an interesting case study. NASA developed its own orbital
debris guidelines that were eventually adopted by the entire
federal government and then accepted by most spacefaring
nations as part of the IADC process. The guidelines are
consensus-based principles that inform spacecraft development
and operations, and could form the basis for developing rules
of the road going forward. This could be augmented by
contributions from the insurance industry similar to the role
they played in the early days of maritime shipping.
I believe we can all work together to ensure space remains
a safe environment for future generations without stifling
industry with burdensome regulations before they ever launch. I
want to thank our witnesses for appearing today, and yield back
my time.

Chairwoman Horn. Thank you, Mr. Babin. The Chair now
recognizes the Ranking Member of the Full Committee, Mr. Lucas,
for an opening statement.
Mr. Lucas. Thank you, Chairwoman Horn, for holding this
timely hearing on the situational awareness in space. Only two
weeks ago we saw the importance of this issue, as two defunct
Federal satellites, each traveling at 17,500 miles per hour,
came dangerously close to each other 560 miles above
Pittsburgh. While there was no threat to those on the ground,
the collision in space could've been significant because the
debris would impact other satellites, and potentially even
threaten astronauts aboard the International Space Station,
depending on the orbit. The satellites ultimately passed each
other without incident, but there were widely varies estimates
of their chances of colliding, ranging from one in 100 to one
in 1,000.
Limitations on tracking data and the satellites' exact
characteristics and orientation leads to this kind of
uncertainty, which is problematic. For instance, most of the
data on objects in space comes from the Department of Defense.
While DOD provides data to the international community and the
private sector, national security concerns limit the fidelity
of the data it can release. The private sector, however, is
emerging as an important partner in this equation. Companies
are beginning to provide not only visualization products and
services, but also sensor data. Furthermore, companies that
operate satellites typically have better data on their
satellites than anyone else. Nonprofit groups, like the Space
Data Association, and the newly formed Space Safety Coalition,
are partnering with government agencies, commercial satellite
operators, space data providers, and the international
community to provide solutions to the challenge of space
situational awareness, space debris mitigation, and space
traffic management.
The Trump Administration is also paying attention. Vice
President Pence, and the National Space Council, released two
important policies related to the topic before us today. Space
Policy Directive No. 2 calls for streamlining space
regulations, and Space Policy Directive 3 calls for a
coordinated space traffic management effort to ensure safety,
stability, and innovation in space. The principles in these
policies track directly with the positions this Committee has
advocated in numerous hearings over the last decade.
Furthermore, this Committee passed two critical pieces of
legislation out of the House in the previous Congress that
related to space situational awareness and space traffic
management, the American Space Commerce Free Enterprise Act,
sponsored by Ranking Member Babin, and the American Space Safe
Management Act, would go a long way to advancing the
development of standards, best practices, and rules of the road
in a way that would not stifle the private sector.
The Administration also proposed giving the Department of
Commerce, rather than the Department of Defense, the
responsibility to issue notices of potential collisions. DOD
would prefer to focus its efforts on supporting our troops and
national security. The Department of Commerce already has
experience dealing with the private sector to assist commerce.
They also license commercial remote sensing satellite
operators, operate a fleet of government weather satellites,
protect critical technologies from export, provide safety
notifications and forecasting for weather, and understand how
to manage technology in a manner that fosters innovation. The
Office of Space Commerce and the Department of Commerce is
already up and running, and has served a similar function,
coordinating the interactions with the U.S. Government,
international partners, and the private sector related to
global positioning policies as the host of the Position,
Navigation, and Timing National Coordination Office.
Unfortunately, our friends in the Minority over on the
Senate Appropriations side are preventing the Department of
Commerce from reorganizing in a way that can advance space
safety. If we want to seriously address the problem of tracking
space debris, advance our space object tracking capacities, and
develop best practices and rules of the road for operating in
space, the first step is allowing the Office of Space Commerce
to be the commercial storefront for space situational awareness
data. The government can then partner with the private sector
and international community to share data and establish
consensus-based norms of behavior. This will go a long way to
ensuring Earth orbit remains useful for future generations.
I look forward to working with my colleagues here on the
Committee, as well as Appropriations, the Administration, and
the private sector to advance common sense policy solutions
related to space object tracking. Thank you, and I yield back
the balance of my time, Madam Chairman.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Lucas follows:]

Thank you, Chairwoman Horn, for holding this timely hearing
on situational awareness in space. Only two weeks ago we saw
the importance of this issue, as two defunct government
satellites, each traveling at roughly 17,500 miles per hour,
came dangerously close to each other 560 miles above
Pittsburgh. While there was no threat to those on the ground, a
collision in space could be significant because the debris
could impact other satellites or even potentially threaten
astronauts aboard the International Space Station depending on
the orbit.
The satellites ultimately passed each other without
incident, but there were widely varied estimates of their
chances of colliding--ranging from 1 in 100 to 1 in 1000.
Limitations on tracking data and the satellites' exact
characteristics and orientation lead to this kind of
uncertainty, which is problematic. For instance, most of the
data on objects in space comes from the Department of Defense
(DOD). While the DoD provides data to the international
community and the private sector, national security concerns
limit the fidelity of the data it can release.
The private sector, however, is emerging as an important
partner in this equation. Companies are beginning to provide
not only visualization products and services, but also sensor
data. Furthermore, companies that operate satellites typically
have better data on their satellites than anyone else. Non-
profit groups like the Space Data Association and the newly
formed Space Safety Coalition are partnering with government
agencies, commercial satellite operators, space data providers,
and the international community to provide solutions to the
challenge of space situational awareness, space debris
mitigation, and space traffic management.
The Trump Administration is also paying attention. Vice
President Pence and the National Space Council released two
important policies related to the topic before us today. Space
Policy Directive 2 calls for streamlining space regulations and
Space Policy Directive 3 calls for a coordinated space traffic
management effort to ensure safety, stability, and innovation
in space.
The principles in these policies track directly with the
positions this Committee has advocated for in numerous hearings
over the last decade. Furthermore, this Committee passed two
critical pieces of legislation out of the House in the previous
Congress that relate to space situational awareness and space
traffic management. The American Space Commerce Free Enterprise
Act, sponsored by Ranking Member Babin, and the American Space
SAFE Management Act, would go a long way to advancing the
development of standards, best practices, and rules of the road
in a way that would not stifle the private sector.
The Administration also proposed giving the Department of
Commerce, rather than the Department of Defense, the
responsibility to issue notices of potential collisions. DoD
would prefer to focus its efforts on supporting our troops and
national security. The Department of Commerce already has
experience dealing with the private sector to assist commerce.
They also license commercial remote sensing satellite
operators; operate a fleet of government weather satellites;
protect critical technologies from export; provide safety
notifications and forecasting for weather; and understand how
to manage technology in a manner that fosters innovation.
The Office of Space Commerce at the Department of Commerce
is already up and running and has served a similar function
coordinating interactions with the U.S. government,
international partners, and the private sector related to
Global Positioning System policies as the host of the Position,
Navigation, and Timing National Coordination Office.
Unfortunately, Democratic Senate Appropriators are
preventing the Department of Commerce from reorganizing in a
way that can advance space safety. If we want to seriously
address the problem of tracking space debris, advance our space
object tracking capabilities, and develop best practices and
rules of the road for operating in space, the first step is
allowing the Office of Space Commerce to be the ``commercial
storefront'' for space situational awareness data. The
government can then partner with the private sector and
international community to share data and establish consensus-
based norms of behavior. This will go a long way to ensuring
Earth orbit remains useful for future generations.
I look forward to working with my colleagues here on the
Committee, as well as Appropriators, the Administration, and
the private sector to advance common-sense policy solutions
related to space object tracking.
Thank you and I yield back the balance of my time.

Chairwoman Horn. Thank you, Mr. Lucas. If there are Members
who wish to submit additional opening statements, your
statements will be added to the record at this point.
[The prepared statement of Chairwoman Johnson follows:]

Thank you, Chairwoman Horn, for holding today's hearing on
space situational awareness, and thank you to each of our
witnesses for your thoughtful prepared testimony.
During the 116th Congress, the Committee on Science, Space,
and Technology has been focusing on a number of complex issues,
including artificial intelligence, cybersecurity, climate
change, and energy innovation to name just a few. The oversight
we have been conducting has helped inform our Committee's
consideration of potential policy options in each of those
areas. Today, the Space Subcommittee will be examining another
multifaceted and complex issue-namely the sustainability of the
space environment in which we and other nations carry out our
space activities.
Outer space is vast. However, some of the orbits around
Earth are becoming crowded, and spacecraft are becoming
increasingly vulnerable to impacts from space debris. The
dangers from space debris are coming at a time when nations are
increasingly looking to space to support their national
objectives, whether they be scientific, commercial, or national
security-related.
Space situational awareness--SSA--involves collecting
location data on space objects, processing that data to
characterize the space environment, and developing techniques
to support satellite operators so that they can avoid potential
collisions in space. SSA provides the foundation for any
technical or potential future regulatory measures that might be
needed to ensure safe operations in space.
Of course, because the problem is global in nature, it will
be essential that the United States work collaboratively with
our international partners if we are to achieve a sustainable
approach to dealing with the challenge posed by space debris.
There are many facets of the SSA problem that will need to
be addressed. Namely, what technical capabilities are needed?
How will government, commercial, and academic entities
contribute to and share space situational awareness data and
information? What legal and policy questions will need to be
considered?
I hope that today's hearing will provide us with a good
introduction to the challenges and opportunities associated
with space situational awareness. I also hope to hear from our
witnesses about what issues the Committee should prioritize as
it begins its work on this important issue.
Our Committee's work in this complex and important area is
just beginning today, and I anticipate that we will be carrying
out additional hearings and oversight on space situational
awareness, orbital debris, and space traffic management over
the remainder of this Congress.
I again want to commend Chairwoman Horn and Ranking Member
Babin for holding today's hearing, and with that I yield back.

Chairwoman Horn. At this time I'd like to introduce our
witnesses. Our first witness today is Dr. Brian Weeden,
Director of Program Planning for Secure World Foundation, which
promotes cooperative solutions for space sustainability and
peaceful uses of outer space. Dr. Weeden served 9 years as an
officer in the United States Air Force, working in space and
ICBM operations, and he directed the Orbital Analyst Training
Program that improved space situational awareness as a part of
the U.S. Strategic Command's Joint Space Operation Center. Dr.
Weeden received a Bachelor of Science Degree in Electrical
Engineering from Clarkson University, a Master of Science
Degree in Space Studies from the University of North Dakota,
and a Doctorate in Public Policy and Public Administration in
the field of Science and Technology Policy from George
Washington University. Welcome, Dr. Weeden.
Our next witness is Mr. Dan Oltrogge. Did I do it right?
OK. I've been practicing, so I'm going to keep practicing.
Oltrogge is the founder and administrator of the Space Safety
Coalition, which leads the Best Practices for Sustainability of
Space Operations Initiative. Mr. Oltrogge is the chair of the
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics', AIAA,
Space Traffic Management Space Governance Task Force, and he
serves as the International Standards Organization
representative to the U.N. Committee for the Peaceful Uses of
Outer Space. Mr. Oltrogge received a Bachelor of Science Degree
in Aerospace, Aeronautical, and Astronautical Engineering from
Iowa State University, and a Master of Science Degree in
Aerospace Engineering and Astrodynamics from the University of
Southern California. Welcome.
Our next witness is Professor Joanne Irene Gabrynowicz,
Professor Emerita of Space Law, and Director Emerita of the
National Center for Remote Sensing, Air and Space Law at the
University of Mississippi Law Center. Professor Gabrynowicz is
also Editor-In-Chief Emerita of the Journal for Space Law. In
addition, she is the Director of the International Institute of
Space Law, IISL, and is an official observer for the IISL to
the U.N. Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space. She
received her Bachelor's from City University of New York, and
earned her Juris Doctorate from the Cardoza School of Law.
Professor Gabrynowicz has also testified before the
Subcommittee previously. Welcome back, Professor Gabrynowicz.
Our next witness today is Professor Danielle Wood,
Assistant Professor in Media Arts and Sciences in the
Department of Aeronautics and Astronautics at the Massachusetts
Institute of Technology. Professor Wood also leads the Space
Enabled Research Group within MIT Media Lab, which harnesses
space technology to address development challenges around the
world. Prior to serving as faculty at MIT (Massachusetts
Institute of Technology), Professor Wood held positions at NASA
headquarters, NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, Aerospace
Corporation, Johns Hopkins University, and the United Nations
Office of Outer Space Affairs. She received a Bachelor of
Science Degree in Aerospace Engineering, a Master of Science
Degree in Technology Policy, and a Doctorate in Engineering
Systems from MIT. Welcome, Dr. Wood.
Our next witness is Dr. Ruth Stilwell, Executive Director
of Aerospace Policy Solutions, LLC, an adjunct professor at
Norwich University, and a senior non-resident scholar at the
Space Policy Institute of George Washington University. A 25-
year air traffic controller, Dr. Stilwell now manages a
consulting firm offering strategic advice and research services
for integration of aviation and commercial space operations.
Among other areas, Dr. Stilwell also serves on the Technical
Committee on Human Space Flight Safety of the International
Association for the Advancement of Space Safety, which is
developing safety guidelines for human commercial space flight.
Dr. Stilwell received a Bachelor's in Labor Studies at the
National Labor College, and she earned a Master's in Public
Administration, and a Doctorate in Public Administration, from
the University of Baltimore. Welcome, Dr. Stilwell.
As our witnesses, you should know you will each have 5
minutes for your spoken testimony. Your written testimony will
be included in the record for this hearing. When you have
completed your spoken testimony, we will begin with questions.
Each Member will have 5 minutes to question the panel, and we
will start with Dr. Weeden. Dr. Weeden?

TESTIMONY OF DR. BRIAN WEEDEN,

DIRECTOR OF PROGRAM PLANNING,

SECURE WORLD FOUNDATION

Dr. Weeden. Madam Chair, Ranking Member, other
distinguished Members of the Subcommittee, thank you for the
opportunity to testify today on this important issue. Secure
World Foundation is dedicated to ensuring the long-term
sustainability of space activities so that all of humanity can
continue to use space for benefits on Earth. Space situational
awareness is the foundation of space sustainability, and
working to improve SSA capabilities for all space actors is a
major part of our work.
As was referenced earlier, on January 29, 2020, two dead
U.S. Government satellites nearly collided about 560 miles
above the city of Pittsburgh. The last actual on-orbit
collision between two satellites occurred on February 10, 2009,
when a dead Russian Cosmos satellite collided with an active
U.S. Iridium commercial communication satellite. The Iridium-
Cosmos collision generated nearly 2,000 tracked pieces of
orbital debris bigger than a softball, most of which will
remain on orbit for decades to come. Thankfully, in this latest
incident, both objects passed by each other harmlessly, at an
estimate distance of about 60 feet.
Comparing the two events highlights what has and has not
changed with SSA in the intervening 11 years. The biggest
change is the availability of SSA data, and who is providing
it. In 2009 the only public source of data on close approaches
between space objects was the U.S. military's Joint Space
Operations Center. By contrast, the first public notice of the
incident this past January came from a tweet sent 3 days before
the event by an American commercial SSA company, LeoLabs, which
operates its own network of ground-based tracking radars that
feed into its own catalog of space objects.
What has not changed is that we cannot yet predict whether
two objects in orbit will or will not collide. We can only give
an estimated probability of collision, which may change over
time. In 2009 the Iridium-Cosmos collision served as a wakeup
call for the entire space community to the threat that orbital
debris poses to active satellites, as well as the importance of
SSA for detecting and avoiding future collisions. Eleven years
later, this most recent incident should serve as an alarm bell
that there's a lot more still to do.
As a result of the Iridium-Cosmos collision, U.S. policy
was changed in 2010 to broaden the SSA mission of the U.S. Air
Force to provide close approach warnings to all satellite
operators globally. This was an important step that has
improved the situation, but only so much. SSA capabilities
today are dangerously insufficient to deal with the emerging
challenges from the growing number of space actors, large
constellations, orbital debris hazards, and a more complex and
competitive geopolitical environment.
The key policy issue still to be resolved is the
transition of responsibilities for civil SSA from the
Department of Defense to another agency as the first step in
establishing a national space traffic management regime. The
executive branch has worked on this issue for 8 years, across
both the Obama and Trump Administrations, resulting in Space
Policy Directive 3, issued by the Trump Administration in June
2018. However, Congress has not yet enacted the required
changes in authorities or budget to implement SPD-3, or an
alternative, and thus the issue hangs in limbo.
Beyond SSA itself, there is the broader issue of
implementing a holistic strategy for ensuring the long-term
sustainability of space in accordance with existing national
policy direction. While the United States has made limited
progress on developing orbital debris mitigation standards, it
has made zero progress on developing capabilities to remove the
existing debris, let alone actually doing so. Neither have made
much progress on implementing a space traffic management
regime, enforcing debris mitigation standards, or modernizing
the oversight and licensing of commercial space activities, all
of which relies on improved SSA capabilities.
It is critical that Congress act on this issue now.
Improving SSA is fundamental to everything the United States
does in space, and all the benefits we derive from space. This
includes protecting human exploration in science, ensuring
critical weather and climate data, protecting important
national security capabilities, and enabling economic growth
and innovation in the commercial space sector. Taking the
appropriate policy steps on civil SSA will enable a giant step
toward ensuring the long-term sustainability of space
activities for the United States, and that humanity can
continue to use space for benefits on Earth. Thank you for your
time, and I welcome your questions.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Weeden follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairwoman Horn. Thank you, Dr. Weeden. Mr.--I'm going to
get it right--Oltrogge. Thank you. I will have it down, because
I've got Professor Gabrynowicz, so next time you're here, I'm
going to have it down pat. You're recognized.

TESTIMONY OF Mr. DANIEL OLTROGGE, AIAA

SPACE TRAFFIC MANAGEMENT SPACE GOVERNANCE

TASK FORCE CHAIR, FOUNDER AND ADMINISTRATOR

SPACE SAFETY COALITION, OFFICIAL

INTERNATIONAL STANDARDS ORGANIZATION (ISO)

REPRESENTATIVE TO THE UNITED NATIONS

COMMITTEE FOR THE PEACEFUL USE

OF OUTER SPACE (UNCOPUOS)

Mr. Oltrogge. Madam Chair Horn--Chairwoman Horn, Ranking
Member Babin, and distinguished Members of the Subcommittee,
thank you for the opportunity to testify today on space
situational awareness, or SSA, and space traffic management, or
STM. Responsible SSA and STM are essential to maintaining the
long-term sustainability of space activities, space governance,
and national security.
Why are we here today? It's because the many benefits we
derive from space, and the welfare of our astronauts,
spacecraft, and commercial space industry are all on the line.
Today's U.S. flight safety capabilities are insufficient. They
produce too many false alarms to be considered decision
quality, and the vast majority of lethal objects remain
untracked. New capabilities are set to track these small
objects, substantially increasing the number of collision
warnings. In addition, the U.S. commercial space industry has
filed applications for 58,000 new spacecraft into orbit in the
next 10 years, 15 times more than any other country, and eight
times more than all other countries combined. The U.S. is all
in on the bow wave of large constellation initiatives, an
investment that will lead to socioeconomic and technological
progress in agriculture, banking, navigation, communications,
and Earth remote sensing. So we must ensure the sustainability
of space as a vital resource.
There are many definitions for SSA and STM, as described
in my written testimony. For this session, I will use these
definitions shown. SSA and STM can help avert situations like
the near collision of two dead spacecraft last month, which
could've produced 12,000 new pieces of space debris. We need to
make such headlines go away. Such a large-scale collision would
reverberate through our burgeoning $1 trillion to $3 trillion
space economy, sowing uncertainty and damaging growth.
Left unchecked, the situation may worsen to a cycle of
cascading collisions known as the Kessler Syndrome, rendering
the use of space unsustainable. If we surpass this ecological
threshold, there is no return. We've been lucky so far, but the
clock is ticking.
SSA helps lower collision risks. Observing space objects,
fusing data, and solving orbits, and detecting and
characterizing collision threats enable spacecraft operators to
mitigate the threat.
Today's congested environment challenges operators to
understand which conjunctions are too close. The number of
false alarms and missed alerts is overwhelming spacecraft
operators to the point that they sometimes ignore the warning
and go home, wondering if they will have a job the next day--
true story. The number of objects in space requiring tracking
is increasing, a trend spurred by the disastrous Chinese ASAT
tests in 2007, and the Iridium-Cosmos collision in 2009.
Today we're only tracking an estimate 4 percent of space
debris that can terminate a spacecraft mission. This, along
with outdated space tracking algorithms, resulting
inaccuracies, insufficient quality control, and a lack of
transparency degrade flight safety.
You may be familiar with the space debris situation
through the enthralling, but inaccurate, movie ``Gravity.''
Like the film, the depiction at the upper right seems to
indicate that spacecraft cannot possibly survive. In actuality,
the density of space debris does continue to increase,
presenting significant challenges to space sustainability.
I've described our legacy of space debris that New Space
large constellations now inherit, and need to operate in.
Applications have now been filed to build, launch, and operate
over 58,000 more spacecraft within the next 10 years alone.
While acknowledging that only a portion of these applications
will yield operational spacecraft, we can still expect the
active spacecraft population to become four to ten times larger
within the next decade. This year alone, the active space
population is on track to double. As depicted here, large
constellations will experience millions of close approaches,
requiring thousands of avoidance maneuvers.
You can think of SSA as a functional chain. The collective
performance of this entire chain determines the actionability
of the SSA information. The old adage that a chain is no
stronger than its weakest link was in play in the 2009 Iridium-
Cosmos collision, where a planned maneuver was missed,
resulting in a miscalculated collision risk more than a
trillion, trillion, trillion off.
These are the basic qualities of viable SSA and STM
systems. Paired with advanced astrodynamics algorithms,
actionable notifications of impending threats can be provided.
In closing, U.S. SSA and STM services are failing to
address global needs at the same time as the commercial space
sector is experiencing explosive growth. The lack of a
cohesive, properly resourced U.S. Space Traffic Management
Program places the U.S. at risk of losing this vital initiative
to other countries. To avert this, I recommend that you work
together to take the six actions listed here. These actions
cannot be accomplished without the full support of Congress.
The long-term sustainability of the space environment, the rich
set of socioeconomic benefits of operating in space, and the
success of the U.S. commercial space industry are all at risk.
The time for action is now. Thank you for your attention.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Oltrogge follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairwoman Horn. Thank you, Mr. Oltrogge. Professor
Gabrynowicz?

TESTIMONY OF PROFESSOR JOANNE GABRYNOWICZ,

PROFESSOR EMERITA OF SPACE LAW,

UNIVERSITY OF MISSISSIPPI LAW CENTER

Ms. Gabrynowicz. Chairwoman--excuse me. Chairwoman Horn,
Ranking Member Babin, Members of the Committee, thank you for
inviting me here. I was asked to provide a brief overview of
the law applicable to SSA, and today that is an amalgam of
treaties, contracts, and national law and regulation. A key
element of SSA is orbital debris, so I will address the legal
regimes and available juridical fora regarding debris. I will
conclude by raising two crucial SSA issues for which new law is
needed, the need to formulate international agreements to
establish internationally recognized norms, and to prevent
small conflicts from escalating, and two, the--addressing the
gap in United States regulations regarding U.S. private sector
activities on orbit.
Space is governed by an inter-related collection of space
specific treaties. The first, and most important, of these is
the Outer Space Treaty and it recognizes that space use and
exploration shall be in accordance with international law,
including the Charter of the U.N. This means that space is also
governed by public and private international law, and includes
international humanitarian law. The Outer Space Treaty also
provides that a State Party has the obligation to avoid harmful
contamination and harmful interference with the use of space.
Regarding SSA and debris, the Liability Convention is of
particular relevance. It codifies two liability regimes, a
fault-based negligence regime which is applicable in space and
an absolute liability regime for harm caused on Earth and to
aircraft in flight. Excuse me. An additional set of guidance,
but non-treaty based, is the guidelines provided by the Inter-
Agency Space Debris Coordination Committee. It provides
guidance regarding orbital debris, and contains a set of
voluntary orbital debris mitigation guidelines which were
adopted by the U.N. General Assembly. They are not legally
binding, but they do provide persuasive authority for
addressing orbital debris mitigation.
At the national level, orbital debris is slowly evolving
as a matter of law. It is specifically addressed in the
national laws of Austria, China, France, Japan, and in the
United States. In the United States, orbital debris is
addressed as part of licensing space-based applications. There
are a number of different available juridical fora for the
adjudication of conflicts regarding debris and SSA. They
include diplomatic channels, which is the first and preferred
option, a Claims Commission that can be established under the
Liability Convention, as well as the courts, and tribunals, and
agencies of launching States. And also, of course, if there are
any additional agreements between and among States outside of
the treaty regime that is applicable to conflict resolution.
Recently, formal arbitration has been added to the roster
of conflict resolution options through the Permanent Court of
Arbitration. However, as a practical matter, these are unlikely
to be used either by nation-states or governmental space
actors. A juridical forum of any kind means rendering control
of the situation to the forum. Nation-states are sovereigns,
and giving up control is anathema to their nation--nature.
Additionally, the possibility of exposing acutely sensitive
technological and operational information is antithetical to
some national interests.
There are two issues for which law is still needed for
SSA. At the international level, we need agreements to
establish internationally recognized norms, and to prevent
small conflicts from escalating into large conflicts. There is
little political will currently for making new legally binding
treaties, and recent action indicates there may be declining
support for non-binding options. Nonetheless, new agreements,
both binding and non-binding, are needed. The issues that must
be addressed include the balancing of national security, value
of data, and the need to share data, applicable conflict
mechanisms, legitimacy of non-governmental data providers,
mistrust issues between governmental and non-governmental
providers, and the commercialization of SSA data.
At the national level there exists a regulatory gap in the
United States regulations. Currently there are no Federal--
there's no Federal agency that has the jurisdiction to
authorize and continually supervise private sector on-orbit
activities, and this is occurring at the same time that the
United States is planning to increase its reliance on the
private sector. In 2015 the Congress required a report from the
Office of Science and Technology Policy on how the United
States could authorize such private sector activities, and OSTP
(Office of Science and Technology Policy) proposed legislation
that would establish an inter-agency process. To date, due to
political forces, this has not yet been done.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Gabrynowicz follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairwoman Horn. Thank you, Dr. Gabrynowicz. Dr. Wood,
you're recognized.

TESTIMONY OF PROFESSOR DANIELLE WOOD,

DIRECTOR OF THE SPACE ENABLED RESEARCH GROUP,

ASSISTANT PROFESSOR OF MEDIA ARTS & SCIENCES

AND AERONAUTICS & ASTRONAUTICS,

MASSACHUSETTS INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY

Ms. Wood. Thank you, Chairwoman Horn, and I express my
thanks to Ranking Member Babin, and to the Members of all the
Subcommittee and the full Committee. All of us have the
privilege and responsibility to lay a foundation for a
sustainable space environment, to make it a safe environment,
to perform missions without undue risk of harm. In one sense,
we are here because space activity brings tremendous social,
economic, and cultural value on Earth. I lead a research group
called Space Enabled at the MIT Media Lab. Our mission is to
reduce barriers to applying space technology in support of a
thriving society on Earth, and to work toward space
sustainability.
In a recent keynote speech before the American Institute
of Aeronautics and Astronautics, I highlighted the ways that
the aerospace industry must contribute to global challenges,
such as climate change, global economic inequality, human
migration, and public health. Space is the perfect vantage
point from which we watch our home planet of Earth. As a former
member of NASA's Earth Science Team at Goddard Space Flight
Center, I advocate for the societal value of NASA's fleet of
Earth observation satellites. It is clear from satellite data
that our civilization is facing several inter-related crises of
sustainability that span our oceans, our lands, our
atmospheres, our glaciers, and Earth's orbit. In each of these
zones, our economic activities deposit unmanaged populations of
waste. Carbon dioxide in our atmosphere, plastics in our ocean,
and objects in Earth's orbit. Our civilization has the
opportunity right now to review how we will manage this waste,
and create a sustainable future.
The United States has a leadership role to play in
response to this integrated crisis, or opportunity, of global
sustainability on land, in the ocean, in the atmosphere, and in
space. Today I'd like to recommend several policy actions. No.
1, the U.S. Government should adopt a commitment to space
sustainability as a principle driving space activity. No. 2,
the U.S. Government should continue to engage deeply as a
leader in international space fora, and look for ways to build
common vision with emerging space nations. No. 3, the U.S.
Government should ensure there's adequate funding and mandates
allocated to improve space situational awareness, and develop
concepts related to space traffic management. As noted in the
seminal Outer Space Treaty, space is the providence of all
humankind. I spent much of the last 15 years performing
academic research about the applications of space, using
Africa, Latin America, and Southeast Asia, and studying their
national space programs.
Every country on Earth is a space country, but this does
not mean that all countries enjoy equal access to the benefits
of space. The countries that have been most active in pursuing
space activity, including the United States, we are also the
countries that have created the most risk for future
sustainable space operations. That is why U.S. leadership is so
important. We must take an integrated and long-term approach to
defining space situational awareness, and ask questions about
future trends. Where will objects be located in space in future
operations? What are the impacts of currently crowded orbits?
What is the demand from industry to use certain orbital
regimes? Who are the new players in space? What are the
sustainable options for expanding space activities? Our close
collaborators in the International Space Station, especially in
Europe and Japan, are actively innovating in methods to
increase space sustainability through programs dedicated toward
orbital debris removal, as well as better understanding SSA,
and thinking about STM.
Chair--Ranking Member Babin mentioned the idea of
promulgating better practices in space, and one approach to do
this is through a positive incentive not through government
activity, but through non-government activity. I'm actually
collating a team that's creating such an incentive system. It's
called the Space Sustainability Rating. An international team
is designing this rating that includes the World Economic
Forum, the European Space Agency, Bryce Space and Technology,
the University of Texas at Austin, as well as my institution at
MIT.
The Space Sustainability Rating will be a score that any
satellite operator can apply to receive. As part of the process
of creating the rating, we are engaging with many of the
companies that are proposing unprecedented business models to
its large constellation of satellites. We hope that governments
will join us by promoting this methodology as a way to
recognize responsible behavior in space. Here in the U.S., this
work will be particularly relevant to those that are providing
review of commercial space operations, especially the FAA
(Federal Aviation Administration), NOAA, and FCC (Federal
Communications Commission). Our activity is really aligned with
the 21 guidelines for long term sustainability of outer space
coming out of the U.N. COPUOS (Committee on the Peaceful Uses
of Outer Space).
As we've mentioned, there's also a need for further
thoughts on space traffic management. My research team has
performed a study showing the great interest of countries
around the world, including Latin America, Africa, and in
Eastern Europe, and their desire to be part of the dialog to
design a future STM, so it's beneficial that the U.S. shows
leadership by also building strong international relationships
with these emerging space players to build a vision for global
STM. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Wood follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairwoman Horn. Thank you, Dr. Wood. Dr. Stilwell?

TESTIMONY OF DR. RUTH STILWELL, ADJUNCT PROFESSOR,

NORWICH UNIVERSITY, SENIOR NON-RESIDENT SCHOLAR,

SPACE POLICY INSTITUTE,

GEORGE WASHINGTON UNIVERSITY

Dr. Stilwell. Chairwoman Horn, Ranking Member Babin,
distinguished Members of the Subcommittee, thank you for the
opportunity to appear before you today. Working as an educator
in public administration, and a researcher in the policy and
regulatory aspects of space situational awareness and space
traffic management, it is an honor to present come of my
findings to you today. Space traffic management as a field of
study represents a developing need to prevent collisions
between objects in space both operating in, and transiting
through, shared orbital domains. The reliance on the vastness
of space as a mitigation for collision risk is no longer
viable, given the current demand.
The commercialization of space is not new, but its current
rate of growth is unprecedented, and without structural change
to the manner in which space is managed, the sustainability of
the orbital domain is in question, both threatening national
space assets, and constricting a vibrant and growing sector of
our economy. Approaching the policy question of space traffic
management as a decentralized safety service, rather than a
regulatory function, can help provide clarity on the
appropriate role of the international community, the
government, and the private sector.
The first question that arises in a discussion of space
traffic management is who has the authority over the orbital
domain? Quite simply, how do you regulate it if you don't own
it? This is where we find clear parallels to the maritime
domain. Safety on the high seas is assured by the application
of international standards and agreements enforced by the State
under whose flag the vessel operates. This aligns with the
continuing supervision provisions of the Outer Space Treaty. It
does not rely on one authority, but rather on the agreement of
the seafaring nations of the world to enforce agreed-upon
standards.
While we consider the prevention of collisions in space
when we discuss space traffic management, the sustainment and
protection of the orbital domain includes issues that go beyond
tactical collision avoidance, and have additional parallels to
international maritime operations. Debris, contamination, and
salvage affect both domains, and we can look to maritime law as
a model. Debris mitigation and remediation guidelines to
prevent major debris-generating events require international
agreement to be sustainable and effective. By dividing the
concept of space traffic management into its component parts,
the policy framework and appropriate structures become more
clear.
The foundational element, space situational awareness,
provides the information infrastructure upon which the safety
regime can be built. This includes the detection, collection,
and dissemination of information on the location and trajectory
of natural and man-made objects in space. There are many
sources of data, including space surveillance, observation, and
operator data. Built on top of that is the Conjunction
Assessment and Alerting Service. Currently both services are
provided by a single entity through the U.S. Government, but we
are already seeing commercial providers. This clearly
illustrates that there is a path to a decentralized model for
space traffic management, however, this will not occur
organically.
The transition from a service provided by the United
States military on a no-cost basis to every satellite operator
in the world to one where there are multiple providers who can
provide conjunction assessment and alerting services tailored
to the needs of individual operators requires a structured
transition with deliberate oversight. The steps needed to build
a decentralized STM include, one, the international agreement
on standards of behavior for the purpose of collision
avoidance. This is a government function that cannot be
delegated. The creation of standards and best practices can,
and should, be driven by industry, but transforming those
standards and best practices into an international agreement is
the role that only governments can fill. Two, processes and
agreements for the collection, validation, and sharing of space
situational awareness information, including space surveillance
and operator information. This is a joint effort between
government, industry, and academia to create a robust system
that allows for inputs of space situational awareness data from
multiple sources, including the intent data from operators.
And, finally, the expansion of a market for conjunction
assessment and alerting services.
Under the current model, hundreds of thousands of
conjunction messages are generated every year, resulting in
only a few hundred avoidance maneuvers. The industry bears an
enormous cost in evaluating these assessments. A competitive
commercial market incentivizes investment in analytics tailored
to customer needs. This is not a unique concept. It bears a lot
of similarity to the National Weather Service and the GPS
models. In both cases, services built primarily for government
purposes are provided to the private sector, and support a
robust and innovative commercial industry. Using these models
can provide a path that allows for the transition from the
current state to a decentralized global model that ensures a
sustainable space environment.
I thank you for your time and attention to this important
issue, and I welcome your questions.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Stilwell follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairwoman Horn. Thank you, Dr. Stilwell, and thank you to
all of the panelists for your incredible detailed, and
comprehensive, and important testimony that really touches on
the wide variety of issues. At this point we'll begin our first
round of questions, and the Chair recognizes herself for 5
minutes.
Given the breadth, and the depth, and the scope of the
issues that we're facing, I want to start out by asking all of
the panelists this question, that, you know, while many people
are eager--while there are many of us that are eager to settle
the questions about U.S. agency roles, public, private, what
is--how--what is that right balance? And we'll consider some
more of those as we carry out our work. I think further
identifying the scope and prioritizing the order of addressing
the solutions is something that we need to start with, and I'd
like to ask each of you, and we'll just go down the line, to
briefly identify the most pressing issue, and how you would
propose to address it. So we'll just start with you, Dr.
Weeden.
Dr. Weeden. Yeah. So--thank you for that. My most pressing
issue is the policy question. I mean, that's partly because I'm
a policy wonk, so I think that's, you know, I--lot of time on,
but I currently think all the other issues, on improving the
technology, improving the coordination, all hinge on that
policy question. So, for me, the most important thing is that
transition of the civil SSA responsibility to wherever it's
going to go, and making sure that happens in a smooth manner,
as mentioned by other ones, is the most important thing. And I
believe all the other issues on improving the accuracy, and
collecting more data, and better data fusion, and sharing, and
collaboration all flows out of that decision.
Chairwoman Horn. Thank you.
Mr. Oltrogge. Yeah, thanks for that question. It's going
to seem like I'm giving two most important things, but it's
really one. It's transitioning to an entity that nurtures and
facilities commercial innovation and better algorithms. This is
something that we have not made good headway on, and I think
that's crucial that we get that going. And, as I showed in my
presentation, we need to get going now. Thank you.
Chairwoman Horn. Thank you.
Ms. Gabrynowicz. I believe it's going to be crucial to
have an interdisciplinary response to SSA. I think we
absolutely need international agreements to address a lot of
the things that the panel said, but that has to rest on a
bedrock of agreed upon technical standards, and the acceptance
of providers to provide the data. And so there needs to be an
interdisciplinary approach in which the technology is the
foundation for implementing the policy and the law.
Chairwoman Horn. Thank you. Dr. Wood?
Ms. Wood. Thank you. I would like to actually sort of echo
and repeat many of the things the other panelists said, so what
I'd like to add is the idea of having integrated cross-agency
commitment to the various needs, whether it's looking at
improving research in an academic setting, and making sure it's
funded, so we can bring in new technology and a new workforce,
at the same time as having new operational activities. So I
think what's needed is coordination across agencies.
Chairwoman Horn. Thank you.
Dr. Stilwell. I think it's clear that the first step needs
to be establishing who is the lead authority for the government
in advancing this work forward.
Chairwoman Horn. Um-hum.
Dr. Stilwell. When it comes to international agreement,
that clarity is essential, and there is a lot of work going on
in a lot of different places. Without a clear understanding of
which agency is the lead agency, I think we will not make
progress.
Chairwoman Horn. Thank you very much. And, following on
from that, I think the critical question is addressing the
patchwork that we have identified as part of the problem of
international coordination, Federal regulations, debris
mitigation, all of the things that have been addressed. And I'm
going to ask this for all the panelists, we'll just go back in
the other direction, so you get to go twice in a row, Dr.
Stilwell. And I was--I think it's interesting to look at other
similar answers to this question--I'll be very quick about
this--maritime as a model. And how do we move very quickly from
this--like, this patchwork to create a holistic framework? Is
it along the lines of the OSTP inter-agency process to
identify, or--just very quickly, because I don't have much time
left.
Dr. Stilwell. I'll try and answer quickly. If that model
is adopted, there are agencies that are experienced with it.
The movement to commerce lets them follow models that already
exist, so there's technical expertise within the department in
how to bring in the industry information, developing it into
international technical standards, and moving forward to
international agreement. So the way you move quickly is assign
the duty to those who have expertise in that area.
Chairwoman Horn. Dr. Wood?
Ms. Wood. I just want to repeat the same idea, that one of
the key opportunities to see where expertise has been developed
in small communities within the agencies, and to make sure that
it is not lost in transition periods.
Ms. Gabrynowicz. And whoever is chosen to be the lead
agency, they have to have in-house capability commensurate with
the task, and right now there is no one agency that has it all.
They are going to have to--they can be the lead, but they're
going to have good working relationships with other agencies
and space expertise. NASA comes to mind. They're not a
regulatory agency, they can't do it, but they've got to be in
this loop.
Chairwoman Horn. Thank you.
Mr. Oltrogge. Yeah, also to sort of re-frame what Dr.
Stilwell said, there are existing frameworks out there. It
behooves us to take advantage of those, and get moving. But one
of the studies that I led for AIAA (American Institute of
Aeronautics and Astronautics) was a space traffic management
governance study, what's out there, and what I found is really
fascinating. There is a fabric, a continuum, of space
governance out there. People like to say what's the right
answer for a certain thing, but what I've found is that there
are many instruments out there, and we need to get comfortable
with employing all of those instruments, I think, to get to
were we need to go.
Dr. Weeden. Um-hum.
Mr. Oltrogge. Thank you.
Chairwoman Horn. Thank you.
Dr. Weeden. So I just want to echo and reinforce that
point made earlier. There are multiple potential answers. There
is no agency that stands out as the clear favorite. Several
possible, all have pros and cons, all could probably work. That
makes it a little bit harder, because there's--again, there's
no clear answer. And the same thing with these models. We have
all written papers comparing space to maritime, or space to air
traffic, or space to, you know, weather, or GPS sharing, and
there is a little bit of analogy there, but it's also a little
bit different. So, again, there is no one clear answer that
fits we can just copy. We're going to have to pull the best
parts from each one of those.
Chairwoman Horn. Thank you very much. I'm well over my
time. Recognize Ranking Member Lucas for 5 minutes.
Mr. Lucas. Thank you, Madam Chair, and listening to those
last responses, I'll turn to you, Dr. Stilwell. As a former air
traffic controller, let's talk about whether we adopt for the
space sector the air traffic control model to emulate, or the
maritime domain. Expand on that, if you would, as being
valuable to study, I guess is the way I should word that.
Dr. Stilwell. I'm happy to. So there are significant
differences between air traffic control and the concepts of
space traffic management, the most significant of which is that
air traffic control is predicted on a single entity having
authority over a physical volume of air space, and that does
not exist in the space domain. That brings rise to the maritime
comparisons, where there are multiple authorities responsible
for operators within the domain.
So there are issues in air traffic control that are very
useful, and very instructive, and that is particularly in the
way that international standards are reached through the ICAO
(International Civil Aviation Organization) process, that,
without reaching new treaties or new agreements, new technical
standards can be adopted by the world. And what we see in the
ICAO process, which I would like to note is--seeks consensus,
but is not a consensus-based process. It is an industry expert
driven process to reach standards that can be implemented by
all nations in the world.
And what we see is that, when ICAO is able to develop
guidance material, it is adopted because that material is
valuable. It saves each individual country from trying to
develop their own standards. So the value occurs long before we
reach an enforceable standard, and at the guidance material
level. So if we use that model, bringing in the industry
expertise to develop what starts as guidance material, and
evolves into a standard, we get a jump start on the process for
reaching those international agreements.
For us to develop behaviors in space that are applicable
only in the U.S., or only in the U.S. or Western Hemisphere
countries, doesn't get us where we need to go, in terms of
space situational awareness and space safety. So there are
instructive models, but it is not a plug and play. We cannot
say let's do what we do with air traffic control, because the
environment and the governance is dramatically different.
Mr. Lucas. Several witnesses, Dr. Stilwell, discussed the
challenges that DOD faced upgrading their SSA systems and
software. And, despite considerable taxpayer funding and many
years, they're still using the same system. Your testimony
highlights how the private sector is much more innovative, and
can adopt new challenges more quickly. How could a distributed
governance model for space situational awareness allow
operators of space assets to become customers of data, rather
than simply users for data? And please elaborate on the
importance of this difference as it pertains to innovation, and
the burden on the taxpayers, I would note.
Dr. Stilwell. It's quite important, because the--StratCom
is very competent at fulfilling their mission, which is to
protect U.S. assets in space, and they develop their systems to
do that. The ancillary benefit to the space community of
providing conjunction alerts is an additional service that's
provided, and it's not intended to be tailored to meet a
specific satellite operator's needs, nor should it be. As you
mentioned, the taxpayers have no obligation to fund
specifically tailored services.
By dividing the two elements, the space situational
awareness, where the infrastructure of data about the location
and trajectory of objects in space, and the conjunction
alerting services into two separate functions, we have the
ability to use the infrastructure as a joint use infrastructure
as--the same as we do with radars and navigational aids on the
terrestrial domain, and allow the industry to use that data to
develop more bespoke tools. You become a customer when you are
paying for a service. If you are--there's a high cost to a free
service, and the industry's experiencing that high cost in
their cost of evaluating hundreds of thousands of conjunction
alerts.
If we allow a healthy competitive industry to develop in
this layer between the operator and the infrastructure, then
there is an opportunity to innovate quickly, and, in a
competitive environment, there is an incentive to invest in the
analytics to provide more precise information to those
customers. There's not an incentive for government to invest in
that because it is not the priority under the current model.
The priority under the current model is to protect U.S. space
assets in space, and StratCom does that very well.
Mr. Lucas. Continuing with you, Doctor, in your opinion,
are the problems of orbital debris, space situational
awareness, and space traffic management, would you describe
them as data issues or behavioral issues? And as you think
about that, I guess I would ask are most operators good actors?
Dr. Stilwell. It's a combination of the two. We--better
data gives you better information so that you can make better
decisions. So the question of whether it is a data issue or a
behavior issue----
Mr. Lucas. Um-hum.
Dr. Stilwell [continuing]. Is not--they're not divorced
partners. Your behavior is based on the data that you have
available. However, in the question of good actors, you can
only be a good actor if you have rules to follow. We can't
expect someone to comply with a rule that doesn't exist. So
when it comes to particularly a conjunction between two
maneuverable satellites, who executes the maneuver is
important, because there's an economic cost to executing that
maneuver. It reduces your mission life of the satellite, and
companies should not be expected to be altruistic in being good
actors. They should expect--be expected to follow the rules.
However, without any rules, it comes down to a negotiation, and
we should not expect two commercial enterprises to ask each
other to sacrifice their viability in the absence of any
structure.
In both the maritime and aviation domains we have right of
way, and that answers that question for you. So the fact that
you are a good actor does not negate the need for good rules,
which we do not have.
Mr. Lucas. Thank you, Doctor, and my time has expired,
Madam Chair.
Chairwoman Horn. Thank you, Mr. Lucas. The Chair
recognizes Mr. Beyer for 5 minutes.
Mr. Beyer. Thank you, and thank you all of you for being
here today. The--this is my 6th year on the Committee, and we
have often had glancing blows about space debris. This is
really the first time we've really gone to the experts to
really understand what's moving on it, so thank you very much,
and Madam Chair, thank you.
Mr. Oltrogge, you talked about the Kessler Syndrome, and
the chain reaction effect, and specifically about the
ecological threshold that, once passed, we cannot return. Even
in a nuclear fissile thing, when there's a chain reaction, it
gets to the end of the chain reaction. Why is--what would
happen if you don't get back to the way things were? What's
the--space look like, or the world look like?
Mr. Oltrogge. Yeah. The Kessler Syndrome is a collisional
chain reaction that just keeps going. Fact is, it will
eventually reach some sort of stability point. The real issue
with that stability point is by the time it does, you have a
huge number of small particles out there, and fragments. And
the overall space debris population is already quite large.
Mr. Beyer. So many of the existing satellites will be
taken out?
Mr. Oltrogge. Yes. It puts satellites at risk. We are--
globally, and in commercial innovation market, working to track
smaller and smaller things. There is a construct that operators
today have when they fly their satellite. They look for
information on what's coming close to them. The population, as
was mentioned earlier, is about 22,000 publicly released
objects. That could grow by a factor of 10, as I mentioned.
Mr. Beyer. So let me pivot to Dr. Weeden. As you talked
about active debris removal, we see--we're talking about carbon
capture here all the time, in terms of carbon in the
environment. They got rid of the trash--they're trying to get
rid of the trash at Base Camp at Everest. People are trying to
collect the plastic from the ocean. Why do you think NASA and
DOD have been so reticent to develop ADR (active debris
removal) technology?
Dr. Weeden. Fully put, it's not their job. You know, so
2010, the Obama Administration issued a national space policy
that directed both NASA and the DOD to jointly develop the
technology, but it is not a core mission area for either
organization to manage the space environment or to remove space
debris. And so, when they put it up against all the other
priorities they have from all the things that are in their
mission statements, they've been directed by Congress to do, it
emerges an unfunded mandate, and there is not that
organizational interest in taking care of----
Mr. Beyer. So which organization should do it? Perfect
world.
Dr. Weeden. So that is--like the question we were
discussing before about SSA, there are a couple of options.
NASA could do it. My sense, though, is that they would be--it
would be overwhelmed by all of the other things NASA's focused
on, moon, Mars, science, all those things. I think in a perfect
world I would probably marry this what I'll call space
environmental management mission with the space traffic
management mission, and the SSA mission, because they all share
and overlap a little bit.
Now, that does not mean that a government agency should be
the one removing debris. I think there's a lot of room for the
commercial sector to do there, but you should have the
government agencies providing oversight of that, and helping
incentivize that.
Mr. Beyer. Great. Professor Gabrynowicz, it's--you're the
first person I've ever met that has a satellite named after
them, or an asteroid, rather. In politics we get bridges and
schools and stuff after we're dead, but----
Ms. Gabrynowicz. Mine is an asteroid.
Mr. Beyer. Asteroid, it's very cool. But you talked about
the now-installed draft code of conduct for outer space
activities being stalled, and we look and say we can't ratify
the International Criminal Court, or the law of the sea, or--
how are we going to--why is there so little interest not just
in the United States, but globally, for these binding,
seemingly necessary treaties?
Ms. Gabrynowicz. I think there's two answers. One answer
is that we are dealing with topics that do, by nature, involve
the entire globe, so that makes it difficult for individual
nations to understand truly what their responsibility is, and
what they can afford to do. When you talk about the climate,
when you talk about the oceans, no--that's bigger than any one
nation can handle, and we're trying to figure out how to
allocate responsibility.
The second answer is, I think, and this is more of the law
professor answer, is I think we're at a time where the nature
of legal agreements is changing. It's like the early 15-,
1600s, where the treaty appeared for the first time. Before
that there were no such things as treaties. Treaties came into
being because we needed them to come into being. It was the
kind of agreement we had to do because nations were beginning
to interact with one another. And, in fact, the nation-state as
we understand it today didn't exist until then.
There's something going on now globally where--with the
constant shift of political power and economic needs, and
shifting borders that is going to require different kinds of
agreements, and we've been doing that since the end of World
War II. We have declarations of principles, codes of conduct.
There's all kinds of agreements that are trying to satisfy the
needs that the formal treaty process has been able to satisfy
for a number of years, and we're still working on it.
Mr. Beyer. Well, thank you for painting the picture where
we need to go. And I'd yield back, Madam Chair.
Chairwoman Horn. Thank you, Mr. Beyer. Chair recognizes
Mr. Posey.
Mr. Posey. Thank you, Madam Chair, for holding this
hearing on the challenges affecting the current Space
Situational Awareness Program. The present Space Policy
Directive 3 is the policy to improve the SSA and space traffic
management through broad interagency coordination. Now, one of
the goals is to transfer the space debris repository from the
Department of Defense to the Department of Commerce so
hopefully DOD can focus on its mission of protecting the United
States and our allies, and the Commerce Department can focus on
space debris with the expected launch increases.
Part of this process involves setting standards. The
National Institute of Standards and Technology is currently
working on the best practices to encourage space safety and
innovation. That's a really good thing. And according to Mr.
Kevin O'Connell, Director of the Office of Space Commerce of
the Department of Commerce, these new standards are in part key
to making sure that the United States remains the flag of
choice for space entrepreneurs. I think we all want to do that.
Dr. Stilwell, with the number of launches expected to
increase this year, space traffic management is important to
our space program, and vital to our national security. How do
you think SPD-3 will allow for more launches to occur in a safe
manner?
Dr. Stilwell. In my experience, SPD-3 has been very well
received by the space community, and that there is a lot of
enthusiasm for those concepts to move forward in order to
facilitate growth and action. It's important that, as we talk
about debris mitigating behaviors and active debris removal,
that we not set new entrants up for a situation where they're
designing a launch that doesn't meet standards that will be
developed shortly after, or even years after. If we can develop
those standards early, we support that industry, we support
that growth, and we create an environment where people know
what their target is.
Specific questions about end of life access, so that we
don't have two dead satellites that are heading toward each
other, that--honestly, having better data about their collision
doesn't make the system safer. It just makes us know better
that two non-maneuverable objects might collide. What we need
to do is reduce the number of non-maneuverable objects that
remain in space. And as a design function for the industry,
they need to know what that expectation is. So there are a
number of elements within SPD-3 that set us down the path to
giving predictability to a growing industry, and that's a very
important part to support industrial growth.
Mr. Posey. If you just had to guess, what do you think
some of the suggestions would be?
Dr. Stilwell. The 25-year rule is a very long rule. That's
a long time to leave your objects in space. It doesn't take
advantage of the technological innovation that has occurred
since that rule was put into place. How you de-orbit your
satellite at end of life, there are a lot more options now than
when those concepts were developed. Those are important, and
also the removal of large objects. There may be a very clear
path that says you have an obligation, if you leave a large
object in orbit, for the future active debris removal when that
becomes available.
Mr. Posey. I would hope that we would see that. Do you
think it's realistic to require internationally that every
single satellite that's launched have a solid plan for how to
deactivate that satellite, and remove it from space?
Dr. Stilwell. I do think it's realistic, and the interest
of the international community is the same as ours. Often in
the space discussions people say, well, would China do this?
China, as an emerging space-faring nation, has the same, if not
a growing, interest in ensuring the sustainability of space.
There is an interest from every country that wants to be able
to exploit the opportunities that space provides to ensure that
that is available, that it is not a high-risk environment.
So the beauty of working in the space industry is it tends
to be non-partisan and non-controversial. We want a lot of the
same things. The international community wants that as well. We
don't have these conflicts where they--where people are saying
no, let's do nothing. Everybody wants somebody to do something,
and the U.S. is in the perfect position to take that leadership
role.
Mr. Posey. That's great. I hope we do. Thank you.
Chairwoman Horn. Thank you very much. Chair recognizes the
gentleman from Colorado, Mr. Perlmutter.
Mr. Perlmutter. Thank you. It's a busy afternoon, so I
missed a couple of the questions, but just sort of piggybacking
on what you and Mr. Posey were just talking about, Professor
Stilwell and Professor Gabrynowicz, these questions are to the
two of you, because I'm really trying to understand the legal
framework here, and whether the law of the sea is actually
expressed in any of our treaties, and how, if it isn't, how we
get there to put some kind of structure in place. You say
everybody wants to do something, but we also know that there's
national security issues. You know, we've got some satellites
up there we don't want anybody to know about, or, you know,
technology within it.
So how would you both suggest we get to a framework--and I
think you both talked about debris, contamination, and salvage
that might otherwise be expressed in the law of the sea? How do
we get from here to there?
Ms. Gabrynowicz. First of all, let's reach an agreement on
salvage. Right now there is no legal right to salvage in space,
and there's a very good reason for that, and that's because
when the treaties were being negotiated, neither the Soviet
Union nor the United States wanted to give the other party an
excuse to grab their space object and reverse engineer it. So
salvage----
Mr. Perlmutter. But don't we still have a little bit of
that problem today?
Ms. Gabrynowicz. You asked for a legal answer.
Mr. Perlmutter. OK, all right.
Ms. Gabrynowicz. OK. Remember, even during the height of
the cold war, we reached agreements with the Soviet Union
because we had to, because it was in both our interests. We
would not have space law today if the Soviet Union and the
United States didn't agree on the treaties. The confidence
building measures like the hotline agreement, we can do those
things. If we could do that during the height of the cold war,
there's no reason why we can't do those things now. All we have
to do is find things where there is common interest, and then
get serious about putting the political will behind it. It's
not all about, you know, hugging, and airy-fairy, and all that
kind of stuff. It's pragmatic. We need to----
Mr. Perlmutter. All right. So----
Ms. Gabrynowicz [continuing]. Save out satellites.
Mr. Perlmutter [continuing]. We--does somebody have to
call to convene a treaty conference? Is that where we are? Is
that what needs to be done? Or can we do it one on one with
China, one on one with----
Ms. Gabrynowicz. You can do it any way you think the
avenue is going to work for you. If I were queen of the world,
I would say which avenue is going to be the most productive? I
think the most--the beginning of the most productive is you
talk to nations who have as much to lose in space as you do,
and then you sit down and say, look, let's stop blaming each
other for the moment, but the debris caused by the X incident
and the Y incident are things we can't do again in the future
if we both want to continue our space program, so let's create
some rules of the road.
Mr. Perlmutter. So, Professor Stilwell, does NASA convene
this, does the International Association of Insurance Agencies
convene this? Who--how do we get this going? Because everybody
on this panel seems to be of one mind about we'd better get
busy here.
Dr. Stilwell. This is a State Department function. It's
international diplomacy, and Professor Gabrynowicz gave a good
description of mutually assured destruction, and that's a
powerful motivator. And we have that in space right now because
if the space environment becomes unsustainable, there are
tremendous costs for not only the space-faring nations of the
world, but, as Dr. Wood pointed out, every country is a space
country. So the U.N. Office of Outer Space Affairs has the
committee on the peaceful uses of outer space. They have
mechanisms available. What we need is the political will to
start moving this forward.
Mr. Perlmutter. And you would suggest that the law of the
sea is a common denominator, something that we're all
comfortable--we, the world, is comfortable with the general
parameters of maritime law?
Dr. Stilwell. And it has evolved over hundreds of years in
a very constructive way, and illustrates that, even if you
don't have a ratified treaty, countries comply with the
provisions. And that's an important element as well.
Ms. Gabrynowicz. And may I add, if you read ``The Shadow
War,'' James Clapper also says we need the law of the sea for
space, and a number of his colleagues as well. So it's there.
Mr. Perlmutter. OK. I thank you all for your testimony
today. I think you have made an impression on--certainly me,
and I thank you. And I yield back.
Chairwoman Horn. Thank you. The Chair recognizes Mr.
Olson.
Mr. Olson. I thank the Chair, and welcome to our five
witnesses. Well, low Earth orbit is getting real crowded. This
SSA and STM started on October 4 of 1957 with the launch of the
Sputnik 1 satellite. Now, challenge is there because she was
powered for maybe a week or two, came down after 21 days, no
collision chances up there in orbit, but that started then.
Right now, though, that world has changed, as you all know. We
have over 9,000 satellites up there orbiting right now. Almost
2/3 are dead, out of fuel, mission's complete. 1/3 are actually
viable right now.
We do have an idea what happens if we have a collision.
Intentional collisions with China anti-satellite missile firing
I guess it looks right around 2007. Our debris, in that graph
you put up there, Dr. Weeden, doubled almost overnight with
that missile shot, and that was intentional. You all scared me
pretty earlier talking about the crisis over Pittsburgh,
Pennsylvania. Those two satellites, coming at each other about
32,000 miles rate of closure, came about the width of this room
from a collision. 500 miles over Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania,
almost have a collision the size of this room. That'd have been
catastrophic.
Having grown up about two miles from the Johnson Space
Center, my main goal is to make sure that those human beings
who have been there now for 20 straight years on orbit every
single day do not have an impact from some satellite debris,
that we control their safety. And it's not just for America. We
are now the world's space travelers. China's doing a little
bit, but us, Russia, ESA (European Space Agency), we are
dominating space flight to the entire world, and so I want to
make sure we're proactive instead of reactive with this debris
field that's growing. That means SSA is proactive. That's what
it should be. STM is kind of reactive, and so I think nothing
helps us more with being proactive than artificial
intelligence. I'm the co-Chairman of the House AI Caucus, and
so my question for all of you is what role does AI play in the
world of SSA? Dr. Stilwell?
Dr. Stilwell. I'm not an expert in artificial
intelligence, and I think it's only responsible to defer to
those who are.
Mr. Olson. Dr. Wood?
Ms. Wood. Thanks so much for the introduction and for the
questions. I want to highlight one of the things we've been
discussing is the practices, and what it means to have healthy
practices that reduce the uncertainty. So this began actually
during the design phase of the satellite before it even goes to
space. There are actions operators can take, including how they
use tools like artificial intelligence, to understand how
they're going to be the best operator they can, how they're
going to know where their satellite is, share that, hopefully,
with their own government, and with other operators through
groups like the Space Data Association.
Then some teams are interested in using SS--artificial
intelligence to help figure out how to operate their satellite.
It's actually an emerging technology, and it's interesting, but
it also creates confusion, meaning if you operate your
satellite, and you use an algorithm partly informed by
artificial intelligence to plan when you want to maneuver from
one orbit to another, that could be interesting technically,
but it also creates more uncertainty for other operators around
you to know where you're going to be at a given time.
So, actually, I think it's an open academic research
question and operational question, but certainly we do, as the
space community, want to take advantage of the benefits of
these tools. So I think overall we want to say operators should
be incentivized both by government requirements as well as by
peer pressure among the commercial community to do what they
can in the design phase and in the operation phase to be as
transparent as possible. That means better communicating where
you are, then having the right physical objects on your
satellite so you can track yourself. We need to be able to
identify and track objects. But we can also use artificial
intelligence as we try to understand the complex behavior of
satellites in space, so multiple answers.
Mr. Olson. Thank you. Ms. Gabrynowicz?
Ms. Gabrynowicz. Remembering I'm a lawyer and not a
scientist, I agree with Dr. Stilwell that you need to ask AI
experts. But, from a legal perspective, two of the most
important things you're going to have to deal with if you're
going to be using AI is intellectual property rights and
liability.
Mr. Olson. Mr. Oltrogge? If I pronounced----
Mr. Oltrogge. Thank you. Yes, you did. Let's see. I'm a
person who feels that a holistic approach is very important
here. We have to try and address the threat of space debris
through all avenues. AI is a very important one, and I think it
needs to be a heavy area where we do research. The issue,
though, is that a lot of the data that would feed that AI, I
feel, today is not out there, and it's just not to the level
where it can be operationalized yet. So all across we need to
pursue.
Mr. Olson. Thank you. Dr. Weeden?
Dr. Weeden. Yeah, I just want to echo what Dan said, and
say the same thing. A lot of what we call AI is actually
machine learning algorithms, and a lot--and they're essentially
only as good as the data you feed them. And, to echo what Dan
just said, we don't have the underlying data in a point where
we have enough of it, we understand its precision, its
accuracy, its confidence. We don't really understand to the
point where I would feel confident to feed that into an
algorithm at this point in time. So I think we start with
fixing the data, get a better handle on that, and then, yes, I
think we're going to have to move to an area where we adopt
things like machine learning, other things, to help improve--
situation.
Mr. Olson. I'm out of time. On behalf of our Chairwoman,
can you all say hook them? Anybody?
Dr. Weeden. I'm from New York, I'm sorry.
Mr. Olson. I yield back.
Chairwoman Horn. I thought you would've learned your
lesson, given that you still owe me a bunch of tamales. So, you
know, eventually.
Mr. Olson. They're coming.
Chairwoman Horn. OK. I'm holding you to that.
Mr. Olson. La Cucina.
Chairwoman Horn. I'm ready. Well, thank you all so much,
to the witnesses. This has been an incredibly informative and
helpful hearing, I think, to lay out the expanse of the
challenges we're facing, and we're about the wrap up. There's
one small question I want to close out with, because there's
much more that we'll follow up with. But the 25-year rule that
was just discussed, I want to circle back on that because--and,
Dr. Wood, I'll direct this to you, and if anyone else has
anything, we can add to it, but the--there was recently--in
December of 2019 there was a NASA-led interagency task force
that talked about updated standard practices that still
included the 25-year rule, which seems to be very counter to
all of the things that we've been talking about here. So I'd
like to hear from you what the impact of these standards are
going to be, likely, on the space community, and how widely
they're being adopted or perceived.
Ms. Wood. Thanks so much for the opportunity. You know, I
think one thing we haven't done enough today is talk about how
there are different ways to operate, depending on which
altitude you're in in space, and so we should think about how
we might require or expect different behavior from operators
somewhere in the 400 to 600 kilometer location, which is very
popular for certain low Earth orbit missions, versus the medium
Earth regime, versus geostationary. So I think we really want
to target our advice, or our behavior expectations, depending
on where you are, and ask what's been the historic usage of an
area. And not just are we going to have the Kessler Syndrome,
but is that particular altitude of particular interest and
popularity, and therefore it requires special concern, and
special rules?
So, of course, with our space sustainability rating, what
we're trying to do is actually encourage operators to do better
than what's required by current law, so we would hope, even if
a government requires 25 years, that they would see it as
actually a commercial benefit to perform better, to actually
get their satellite out of orbit, especially if they're in an
orbit where they are known that they're sharing it with a lot
of other commercial operators. So that's part of what we do, we
calculate both--how popular is that orbit, how much is there--
already been a use of that orbit? And that's drawing from the
techniques developed by the European Space Agency partners, and
then we ask what will be the likely benefits of removing your
satellite from that particular orbit, not in general, because
that orbit's popular, or because there's already a lot of
satellites there. So when we ask what's the importance of
removing your satellite, we should also ask what's already been
happening historically in that orbit, and why is it so
important that your particular mission will make room for
future missions in that orbit.
But I do think there's an opportunity, and there's a lot
of consensus among the technical experts that it is feasible to
remove satellites faster than 25 years in many cases,
especially in orbits that area already popular, that already
have historic--laden with debris, and so therefore it behooves
us, both by voluntary choice, as well as by government action,
to really move toward shorter times in orbit beyond the mission
lifetime. Thank you.
Chairwoman Horn. Yes, Dr. Gabrynowicz?
Ms. Gabrynowicz. Again, speaking as a lawyer, I have no
opinion as to whether 25 or some other number of years makes a
better rule, but I will say we call it a rule, but it's not
legally binding. The only entity who is legally bound by the
25-year rule is NASA. Unless the 25-year rule goes through the
APA (Administrative Procedure Act) rulemaking process, it is
not binding on any other Federal agency. Other Federal agencies
have said, we will try to abide by this, but there is no legal
requirement that they do so, and there certainly is no
requirement outside of the United States for anybody else to be
bound by the 25-year rule. And if you change it to 5 years or
10 years, that's still going to be the situation.
Mr. Oltrogge. Yeah.
Chairwoman Horn. Go ahead.
Mr. Oltrogge. So I'm founder of the Space Safety
Coalition. We have 37 space organizations who have joined to
develop best practices, and also align with international best
practice, but develop our own aspirational ones over and above
what the international consensus and documents are. So orbit
lifetime there, aspirationally, we seek, in that document, to
be done in 5 years. Get your satellite out of orbit 5 years--
within 5 years of the end of your mission. So aspirational best
practices in the commercial arena, where operators do want to
do the right thing, are a very powerful thing, in that, in
advance of international consensus, the commercial operators
and companies can strive to do better. So that's, I think, a
very positive thing.
In terms of the 25-year rule itself, developed in 1995,
based on the then population, and the then analyses that were
done, that was something that at the time seemed to be a
reasonable compromise between the cost of immediately bringing
your satellite out of orbit versus leaving it up there forever.
So it's a compromise. The ODMSP (Orbital Debris Mitigation
Standard Practices) that was just released last year, 2019,
does something interesting, in that it still requires a 25-year
rule, but it aspirationally adds that we should take these
satellites out of orbit as soon as we can. Thank you.
Dr. Weeden. Quickly just to add on to that, I want to
touch on the point that was made about not having a blanket
rule for everything. I think that is the regime we should be
thinking about. Instead of 1, 25, 15, whatever, everything, we
need to think about a tailored approach to different orbital
regimes, because they are different.
The second is to talk about enforcement. At the moment the
European Space Agency is the only entity I know of that's
monitoring who's complying with this. It's roughly around 50 to
60 percent compliance with this existing 25-year rule, or
suggestion. That's good, should be a lot better. So enforcing--
better enforcement through--it's going to come through national
legislation. National policy is where it needs to be, as well
as thinking about less of a blanket rule, more of a tailored
approach.
Chairwoman Horn. Thank you very much. Would you like to
contribute to that? OK. I'm happy to--if you'd like. It's fine.
I want to say thank you again. This is incredibly important,
and informative, and further identifies the need for us to move
quickly, to take action, and highlighting the multiple layers
of challenges, and the need to be intentional and tailored in
the way that we address this using incentives, some
regulations, other voluntary--commercial--I think there's--
there are many different layers to this that can help us to
address these issues. You have all touched on many of those
areas, and we're very grateful, and we'll continue.
Before the hearing closes, I want to make sure that we
note that the record will remain open for 2 weeks, and for any
additional statements from the Members, or any additional
questions that the Committee might ask, I can almost assure you
that we will have additional questions for the record, so we--
be prepared for those. But, again, this testimony was
invaluable. I thank my colleagues on both sides of the aisle
for the importance of this issue, and the witnesses are
excused. The hearing is now adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 4:12 p.m., the Subcommittee was adjourned.]

Appendix

----------

Answers to Post-Hearing Questions

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
