- EXAMINING THE VOTING PROCESS

[House Hearing, 113 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

EXAMINING THE VOTING PROCESS--HOW STATES CAN BUILD ON RECOMMENDATIONS

FROM THE BAUER-GINSBERG COMMISSION
=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

COMMITTEE ON HOUSE

ADMINISTRATION

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED THIRTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

Held in Washington, DC, July 23, 2014

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on House Administration

Available on the Internet
www.fdsys.gov

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
89-838                    WASHINGTON : 2014
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800; DC
area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104  Mail: Stop IDCC, Washington, DC
20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON HOUSE ADMINISTRATION

CANDICE S. MILLER, Michigan,
Chairman

ROBERT A. BRADY, Pennsylvania, Ranking Minority Membersissippi
ZOE LOFGREN, California              PHIL GINGREY, M.D., Georgia
JUAN VARGAS, California              AARON SCHOCK, Illinois
TODD ROKITA, Indiana
RICHARD B. NUGENT, Florida

Professional Staff

Sean Moran, Staff Director
Kyle Anderson, Minority Staff
Director

EXAMINING THE VOTING PROCESS--HOW STATES CAN BUILD ON RECOMMENDATIONS
FROM THE BAUER-GINSBERG COMMISSION

----------

WEDNESDAY, JULY 23, 2014

House of Representatives,
Committee on House Administration,
Washington, DC.
The committee met, pursuant to call, at 10:33 a.m., in Room
1310, Longworth House Office Building, Hon. Candice S. Miller
(chairman of the committee) presiding.
Present: Representatives Miller, Harper, Rokita, Nugent,
and Brady.
Staff Present: Sean Moran, Staff Director; John Clocker,
Deputy Staff Director; Bob Sensenbrenner, Deputy General
Counsel; Yael Barash, Legislative Clerk; Erin Sayago,
Communications Director; Kyle Anderson, Minority Staff
Director; Matt Pinkus, Minority Senior Policy Advisor; Matt
DeFreitas, Minority Professional Staff; Khalil Abboud, Minority
Deputy Counsel; Thomas Hicks, Minority Senior Counsel; Mike
Harrison, Minority Chief Counsel; Greg Abbott, Minority
Professional Staff; and Eddie Flaherty, Minority Chief Clerk.
The Chairman. I am going to call to order the Committee on
House Administration's hearing on examination of our Nation's
voting process and the recommendations that were released by
the Bauer-Ginsberg Commission in January of this year. And the
hearing record will remain open for 5 legislative days so that
members can submit any materials that they wish to be included
therein.
The Chairman. And a quorum is present, so we will proceed.
I certainly want to thank my fellow committee members for
being here today to discuss this very important issue. And the
purpose of this hearing is to discuss how States and local
election officials can build upon the recommendations that were
outlined in the Presidential Commission on Election
Administration report, otherwise commonly known as the Bauer-
Ginsberg Commission report.
And I certainly want to thank the two co-chairs of the
Commission for coming today. And we appreciate your time and
your attendance to this. And we appreciate your service as well
to the 6-month study that you conducted to identify ways in
which our State and local election officials can improve the
voting process for every American.
I was a former secretary of state in Michigan, the Chief
Elections Official of my State, so I certainly understand the
challenges. I like to think I understand the challenges of
election officials and what they face each and every day. It
was my duty then, as it is for other secretaries of state, to
ensure each and every election runs smoothly, that the voting
process is absolutely accessible and understandable to citizens
of voting age, and most importantly, that the results were
accurate, as accurate as possible, when we go to elect our
public leaders.
It was certainly all of our hopes that the Commission's
recommendations would assist the States in useful and effective
and nonpartisan ways so that every election official is able to
meet their mission of a successful election. And since the
administration of elections is inherently a State function, I
was very hesitant then, as I am now, about Washington mandates,
which is why actually, in full transparency--I mentioned this
to our two witnesses--when the President created the Bauer-
Ginsberg Commission, I didn't believe that a new Federal
commission was needed.
However, as I looked at your report, I have to say that I
was very--I don't know if I should use the word pleasantly
surprised, but I was very encouraged that the report focused on
utilizing good local governance over elections, and it made
recommendations on different ideas that I think really can help
locals improve upon their own voting process.
So we certainly didn't want to have the Commission's
recommendations be shelfware. We thought it was a great idea.
And I talked to my Ranking Member about having this hearing in
a way that we can hopefully amplify some of the recommendations
that the Commission has made.
It is certainly my belief that the primary role for Federal
Government in election administration is not to dictate to
local officials or to place mandates on them, but again simply
to help in an advisory way so that State election officials can
do their important work to make certain that every American
citizen is able to cast their vote and make sure that their
votes are counted.
I will just give you one example from my time as Michigan
Secretary of State. We actually in our State have a very
decentralized type of election system, administration, to the
extent that we have over 1,800 various local units, various
election clerks that are responsible for administering
elections there. Every one of them, previously to what we
called a qualified voter file, actually had maintained their
own voter registration lists. It wasn't uncommon to go into
some small areas, and you would find the clerks had put their
voter registration lists in a cigar box in their closet or
something.
But at any rate, Michigan is quite a large State. And what
we did is we computerized it all. We melded it all together.
And we now call it the Michigan Qualified Voter File. We
actually eliminated over 700,000 duplicate voter registrations
from the file when we were able to do that. We had quite a bit
of pushback initially from using that kind of technology. It
doesn't seem so high tech today, but at the time it was.
And it has worked really great. It has been a great
product. In fact, it was cited by the Ford-Carter Presidential
Commission on Federal Election Reform as a national model back
in the day. And many other States have certainly used something
like that and have improved upon it as well.
I mention that just because we did that without any Federal
mandate. We did it without any Federal money. The State of
Michigan determined that this was something we wanted to invest
in to make sure that our State's election officers were able to
accomplish their goal. So we did it ourselves. And many of the
recommendations offered by the Bauer-Ginsberg Commission I
think were great suggestions and ideas that the States can
implement. And again, they can do so without the need for
Federal financial assistance.
This report offered a number of recommendations, best
practices, practical suggestions, such as online tools to
assist election officials with determining how many voting
machines should be deployed in which area, depending on the
need. Certainly every State and local voting precinct tries to
continually improve on their efforts to maintain up-to-date and
accurate voter lists, and resources and education materials on
how and where to vote, and of course ensuring that their ballot
resources are properly deployed. They hope to accomplish these
things while also hopefully reducing some of the administration
costs that are associated with making all of this information
available and streamlining the process.
We are all aware of the challenges election officers face
when it comes to administering elections, but particularly when
their budgets are facing constraints that force them to
prioritize. However, clearly, the States want to have the best
voting processes in place and one that fits best with their
residents.
The voting process is really not a one size fits all, so
even the best-intended Federal mandates I think can backfire
when the process used historically in various States does not
fit with that mandate. Every State should always strive to
utilize good ideas and procedures that work for them, but they
are wise to listen to good ideas from other States that can
help them improve.
Today we are here to listen to our two witnesses on their
experience with this Commission and what they learned from the
various State and local election officials from around the
country. And we are especially interested in hearing about what
they have heard from election officials since the Commission's
report was released, especially I think as we are thinking
about the upcoming midterm election where many of the voting
precincts will be in the spotlight again.
And I will also just take one moment of personal privilege
and say that I was very pleased that the President also put on
your Commission an individual that in my humble estimation is
the best election officer in the Nation, Chris Thomas, who is
the Michigan director of state elections. He is widely
recognized as certainly really a leader in this field. And I
know you had an excellent Commission to work with.
The right to vote is the foundation of the American
democratic system, and the Framers of our Constitution tasked
each and every one of our States with the immense
responsibility of administering and protecting that right. And
while we, the Federal Government, always seek better ways to be
partners with the State, again we need to keep in mind their
challenges and to avoid costly mandates that inhibit, actually
could inhibit their ability to protect the integrity of our
electoral system. And instead we need to find ways to alleviate
their burdens.
Preserving the integrity of our electoral process is
certainly of the utmost importance, and I know that again every
State and every election officer takes that role seriously.
Again, I want to thank you for coming, the two witnesses.
We certainly are all looking forward to your testimony. We have
read your opening statements.
And at this time I would like to recognize my ranking
member, Mr. Brady from Pennsylvania, for his opening statement.
Mr. Brady. Thank you, Madam Chairman. First of all, could
we put another log on the fire? It is awful hot in here, isn't
it? This is not one of the meetings we need to be too hot at.
It is a good meeting.
The Chairman. Particularly on the House Administration
Committee.
Mr. Brady. Yeah. We thought we should be nice and cool in
here.
But anyway, I would like to thank my friend Chairman Miller
for holding this hearing today. Having an open dialogue is
vital to solving the problems that plague our elections, and I
thank the chair for calling attention to this issue of critical
importance.
I also want to thank our witnesses, Mr. Bauer and Mr.
Ginsberg, whose determination and expertise are critically
important to fixing our elections.
Following the 2012 presidential election, President Obama
set out to improve America's voting experience. In 2012, many
voters, regardless of their political affiliation, were faced
with unreasonably long wait times to cast their ballot. Other
eligible Americans were disenfranchised altogether as a result
of outdated voter registration policies.
Clean, efficient, and accurate elections are the
cornerstone of our democratic system of government. It is
crucial that we assure that all eligible voters have full and
unimpeded access to the ballot box. This is why I believe the
work of the Commission was so important.
I fully respect the autonomy of the States in administering
their elections, but also believe that Congress, and more
specifically this committee, has a duty to ensure no eligible
voter is turned away for any reason. I will continue to
advocate for equal access to the ballot box for all eligible
voters.
Once again, thank you, Madam Chairman, and I look forward
to the testimony of our expert witnesses.
And thank you for your participation not only in this
hearing, but your participation again to making our election
process work.
The Chairman. I thank the gentleman.
[The statement of Mr. Brady follows:]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED]

The Chairman. I now recognize the gentleman from
Mississippi for his opening statement.
Mr. Harper. Thank you, Madam Chair.
And thank you, Mr. Bauer, Mr. Ginsberg, for your work on
this and for your service and for sharing the experiences and
giving us much to consider.
The election process is very dear to me, not just because I
am an elected official, because it really embodies self-
governance and how we do things in this country. So I began
working on elections and political campaigns as a college
student, like many individuals. Before I came to Congress, I
served as a county party chair for about 8 years, was one of
those souls down in West Palm Beach, Florida, during the
recount in 2000 as a Republican observer. So it is quite a
process to watch and participate in.
But I think it is important to participate in the election
process, and we wish everyone would. I know from firsthand
experience in running numerous elections at the county level
that it is not an easy task. Sometimes we don't anticipate as
heavy a turnout as it winds up being or misjudge where the
turnout will be and misallocate voting machines. Machines
break. Finding and training poll workers, who in my home State
work about 16-hour days for not a lot of money, can be quite a
challenge also.
When everything runs smoothly, few people notice. But when
a problem occurs, everybody screams and looks for the problems,
whether they may claim fraud or corruption. I believe your
Commission primarily grew out of concerns about long lines and
some difficulties with voting in the 2012 election in what was
really limited to a few jurisdictions. The assumption too many
are quick to make is that some kind of voter suppression must
have taken place.
To me, long lines at voting precincts mean that a lot of
people are voting, and that is always a very good thing. It is
interesting how the media portrays people standing in long
lines in other countries, whether it was in Iraq or Afghanistan
or other countries, that those folks who wait in long lines are
heroes, which they are. But long lines of Americans standing in
line for a couple of hours is portrayed as a broken system.
Now, this is not to say that we can't do better, and that
we should, and that is why I think the focus of your report, we
need to look at how we can make it easier for folks to vote. I
am all in favor of improving the process. I am not in favor of
weakening accountability. I have some concerns about early
voting, and I worry about the integrity of electronic voting
systems, both for voting and for recapping elections. There
were allegations of a serious attempt of hacking of the
electronic vote tabulation system during the recent Ukrainian
presidential election by another foreign power in order to
change the outcome. That is always disturbing.
New technology is great, but we must have sufficient
safeguards. And in my view, primitive as it may sound, there is
no greater safeguard than a paper ballot.
I appreciate the work you did on the Commission and the
report. And again, thank you for your appearances today. We
look forward to your testimony.
And I yield back.
The Chairman. Thank the gentleman.
Any other opening statements?
Let me introduce our witnesses, then. First, we have Robert
Bauer, who is a partner at Perkins Coie. In 30 years of
practice he has provided counseling and representation on
matters involving regulation of political activity before the
courts and administrative agencies, of national party
committees, candidates, political committees, individuals,
Federal office holders, corporations and trade associations,
and tax-exempt groups. He served as the White House counsel to
President Obama and returned to private practice in June 2011.
In 2013, the President named Bob to be co-chair of the
Presidential Commission on Elections Administration. He was
general counsel to Obama for America and the President's
campaign organization in 2008 and 2012. And he is general
counsel to the Democratic National Committee.
And our second witness, again the co-chair of the
Commission, is Benjamin Ginsberg, who is a partner at Jones Day
in Washington, D.C., where he represents a variety of clients
on election law issues, particularly those involving Federal
and State campaign finance laws, ethics and gift rules, pay-to-
play laws, election administration, government investigations,
communications law, and election recounts and contests.
He recently served, as we say, as a co-chair of the
Presidential Commission on Election Administration. Prior to
joining Jones Day in 2014, he served as national counsel to the
Bush-Cheney Presidential campaigns in the 2004 and 2000
election cycles and played a central role in the 2000 Florida
recount. In 2012 and 2008, he served as national counsel to the
Romney for President campaign, and he has also represented
campaigns and leadership PACs of numerous members of the Senate
and House, as well as to the national party committee.
So we have two--talk about two experts in a very bipartisan
way here before us today. I think this will certainly be
interesting testimony.
And I would now recognize Mr. Bauer for his opening
statement.

STATEMENTS OF MR. ROBERT F. BAUER, CO-CHAIR, PRESIDENTIAL
COMMISSION ON ELECTION ADMINISTRATION; AND MR. BENJAMIN L.
GINSBERG, CO-CHAIR, PRESIDENTIAL COMMISSION ON ELECTION
ADMINISTRATION

STATEMENT OF ROBERT F. BAUER

Mr. Bauer. Thank you, Madam Chairman, members of the
committee, Ranking Member Brady. I am very pleased to be here
with my co-chair, Ben Ginsberg. We have become a bipartisan
traveling party on this subject. And I am glad to go first. I
told your staff before we came, I am always pleased to be Ben
Ginsberg's warmup act.
I also would like to say one thing, Chair Miller, about
Chris Thomas, because, oddly, I had pencilled in his name to
the written testimony to say that he is, in fact, one of the
finest election administrators in the country, and a member of
our Commission who I think it is fair to say, and Ben will
agree with me, performed outstandingly, and is an important
part of the implementation of the recommendations of the report
that in the division of testimony that Ben and I have agreed
upon Ben will talk about.
But let me just say very briefly--and I have submitted a
statement for the record, so I won't duplicate it--but let me
say a little bit something briefly about the approach that we
took and also some of our experience with the positive
reception of the report and how that is shaping how we look at
what lies ahead, including the effort to implement this report.
Our outstanding research director, Nate Persily of Stanford
Law, was fond of saying throughout our experience with the
Commission that we were working not so much on a report as on a
project, on a long-term project. And we view the report, in
effect, as having kicked something off with its publication;
not ending the day it was published, but, in effect, opening up
with its publication opportunities to work on these
recommendations that are very, very important to us and how we
perceive the success of what we have done.
Now, of course, the origin of the Commission's work is
fairly traced to the problem of long lines that obviously
received a lot of attention when the Commission was
established. But the Commission of course was charged with
looking at a range of issues that election administrators face.
And of great importance to us, and I want to stress it here
today, is that it is important that we view election
administration as a subject of public administration.
Obviously, politics enters into this discussion all the time.
But at bottom and throughout our work we tried to focus on
election administration as a topic of public administration,
and to look at the service that we provided our voters as very
similar to the service that our best companies would provide
their customers. We have to treat the voters with the same
respect and hope to achieve on their behalf the same level of
performance and efficiency.
When we think about the problems that we encounter in the
voting process, we know that any one problem we identify could
have many sources. So if we think about lines, for example,
there may be any reason, number of reasons why lines prove to
be impermissibly or inappropriately long. That could include
the design and administration of polling places, errors in
voter registration lists, poor training programs for polling
workers. There are a variety of reasons. So the problem has to
be attacked at various different points.
Throughout our consideration of the issues, we looked very
hard at data. Of great importance to bipartisan election
administration is to stay close to the facts, to the data, to
the best understanding of how elections are administered and
what goes wrong with elections. And that is why we were well
served by the senior research director we had, both a political
scientist and a law professor, Professor Persily, who helped
guide the Commission to the best sources of information that we
have about what reallytakes place in the conduct of elections
and what really lies behind some of the problems that our voters
confront.
So with those few preliminary observations, let me just add
a couple more.
We heard at the outset of our work from a variety of
sources, from election administrators around the country, that
they were concerned that one size of reform did not fit all.
And we understand that there is a concern with one size does
not fit all, that it is possible that what works in one
jurisdiction may not work in another. But we are confident, and
I think this is true of all of the commissioners, that our
recommendations are suitable for the vast majority of
jurisdictions.
All election administrators, as the chair well knows, as a
former secretary of state, confront a similar set of
challenges, from the registration of voters and the
verification of eligibility, to polling place management and
equipment acquisition, to the successful transmission and tally
of the results. And we found that our administrators across the
country, whom we heard from in hearings, in formal hearings,
and also in the court of testimony that we elicited, all agree
that there were fundamental responsibilities that election
administrators engaged in that could be addressed with
solutions of common application.
Those administrators, we want to stress, I certainly want
to stress, I think Ben would agree, deserve all the support
that they can get. They are asked to perform at the highest
levels, but routinely provided with inadequate levels of
support, and in particular inadequate levels of resources. Our
elections occur periodically in this country, but the issues of
election administration receive generally only infrequent
attention. And the Commission, while not making any specific
recommendations about the level of resources required, did want
to and did stress that at the end of the day States and
localities do need resources to carry out the functions that
they are engaged in.
And this question of resources is deeply implicated in a
second point that I wanted to raise out of the report before
this committee, and that is the resources that will be
required, the thinking and the planning that will be required
to meet the challenge that we face in the next generation of
voting technology.
The Commission has described this as a looming technology
crisis. It didn't mean to exaggerate, and I don't think it did
exaggerate. Election administrators across the country,
everywhere, Democratic and Republican, expressed concern that
we are facing a major problem with transitioning from the
technology currently in use to the technology that we will need
in elections still to come. And we have to listen carefully to
them. They are the ones who are putting on elections. They are
the ones who are ordering the machines, testing the machines,
using the machines. And that is what they are telling us.
This importance of resources is matched by the very
important question of how election administrators allocate the
resources that they have. And here we tried to supplement the
report that we issued with the provision of online tools that
would assist administrators in the management of the polling
place to avoid and anticipate long lines.
The tools that the Commission recommended are still posted
online and available on the Cal Tech-MIT Technology Project Web
site. They are open source. They are available for improvement.
And as Ben will describe shortly, we are going to continue to
work with election administrators to make these tools widely
available, to work with them, to improve them, and to try in
other ways to be supportive of their efforts to address the
lines problem.
And finally, one quick point, because I see that my time
has expired. The Commission's focus was on State and local
election administration and the means of improving it through
administrative reform and best practices. We didn't make
Federal legislative recommendations. But we did hear testimony
across the board from jurisdictions that there are Federal
statutes that protect discrete populations of voters--military
voters, language minority voters, disabled voters--that simply
are not attracting the level of compliance and the success of
compliance that they should.
One notable exception is the MOVE Act, that affects
military voters, which seems to have been quite successful by
all accounts. But other statutes that we have confronted, the
ones that I have cited, have not been similarly as successful
as they might be in implementation. And in particular--and here
I am channeling Chris Thomas, because nobody expresses this
better, in a more informed way or, frankly, more tartly than
Chris Thomas--we have a major problem with departments of motor
vehicles across the country who are not attending successfully
to their registration responsibilities under the National Voter
Registration Act. And this is something that we hope will
receive attention across the country.
So the Federal Government has established an important
presence in these areas and compliance is critically important.
So with that, I would like to close by saying we are
pleased with the reception of the recommendations. We hear
continued offers to continue to work on those recommendations
from State and local election officials. And where we go from
here, this phase of implementation is something I would like to
turn over to my co-chair, Mr. Ginsberg, to discuss further.
And I would say before I do so, I am not surprised, but it
was an absolute pleasure to work with Ben Ginsberg on this. And
I would never say so privately, so I thought I would say so
publicly.
The Chairman. Thank you very much. We appreciate that, Mr.
Bauer.
[The statement of Mr. Bauer follows:]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED]

The Chairman. And the Chair recognizes Mr. Ginsberg.

STATEMENT OF BENJAMIN L. GINSBERG

Mr. Ginsberg. Thank you, Madam Chair, Ranking Member Brady.
Thank you for having us here today.
We very much appreciate the opportunity to talk about the
Commission and its recommendations and how we plan on
implementing its best practices and advice we have for State
and local jurisdictions.
It was a pleasure to work with Bob. We did enjoy the
opportunity to step out for a bit, bring our perspectives from
being in the partisan trenches for many years. The members of
our Commission, Chris Thomas and his seven colleagues, provided
a great deal of expertise to us. Nate Persily was remarkable in
the breadth of research. We held hearings around the country
and numerous meetings with interest groups and individuals
concerned about the process, and that helped inform the
recommendations and best practices that we presented in the
report.
Two general points. First, Bob and I are both very proud of
what is in the report, the way that we have tried to deal with
the situations that State and local officials who put on
elections, and attempt to ease the problems which serve as
obstacles to duly qualified citizens being able to cast their
votes. That was our mission and what we have tried to do in the
report. We would urge you to read the report, and this summary
of our testimony will touch on some of the highlights.
There are no Federal mandates in the report. We believe the
Commission came up with practical solutions for State and local
administrators to make the voting experience better for all
citizens. The report passed with bipartisan and unanimous
agreement.
Secondly, we were certainly acutely aware that the actual
implementation of this or any report is the really hard part,
especially in an area like election administration that is so
decentralized in the our country. Thanks to the Bipartisan
Policy Center here in Washington, there is an ongoing plan to
implement the Commission's recommendations and best practices,
which I look forward to describing in a moment.
The area into which this report delves, elections and
voting, is certainly one where there can be conflict between
Republicans and Democrats. But it is also a subject where
Republicans and Democrats can agree and do agree on the basic
principle, that every legally registered voter has the right to
be able to cast his or her ballot easily and without barriers.
For that reason, there is a positive agenda of reforms that can
be made in this area, and we believe that the report provides
that blueprint.
For the solutions, the Commission recognized at the outset
that our elections are administered by approximately 8,000
different jurisdictions, largely using volunteers who often
don't receive proper training. As a result, achieving
uniformity or Federal solutions that actually work in our
elections has proven challenging.
There are individual specifics included in the written
testimony and of course in the report itself. But in terms of a
positive agenda moving forward, I particularly urge you to look
at long lines, a problem that should not exist, for which we
provide practical solutions and recommendations. We found after
our study that, in fact, the solutions, as Bob mentioned, are
identifiable and solvable. And the report and the Web sites
provide tools to be able to do that, as well as the practical,
on-the-ground best practices that others who have faced this
situation have recommended.
Online registration and two programs that help the States
check the accuracy of their voter registration lists against
those of other States each received support across the
political spectrum. Accurate voter lists is something that the
right and the left agree is necessary, whether for the purpose
of providing greater efficiency, more accuracy, cost savings,
online registration, and the two programs are helpful
ingredients to a positive agenda.
Reducing the barriers to voting that Bob mentioned faced by
military overseas voters, disabled voters, language minorities,
is all an important part of enforcing laws that are on the
books and doing the right thing for our citizens. And again the
practical recommendations and best practices are included.
The simple proposition is that, as Bob said, we do have two
major things to deal with. One is the technology crisis. We did
not meet a single State or local administrator who either was
satisfied with the machines that their jurisdiction was using
at the moment or saw a solution in what was currently available
on the market or was pleased with the certification process
that makes it much more difficult to be able to move forward
with technological advances that have taken place in the rest
of society.
And the adequate physical facilities that communities rely
on is often schools. Yet there are problems with using schools
because of safety concerns. That is a conflict, the rights of
voters and the safety of children, that should not be allowed
to conflict. The report recommends having in-service training
days on election day so that schools can be used. But that is
something that State and local administrators, that we wish to
try and enable them to achieve.
In terms of the implementation, as I mentioned at the
outset, it is really important to get the recommendations and
best practices into State and local jurisdictions and being
able to use on that level. We are particularly thankful, for
that reason, to the Bipartisan Policy Center, which has agreed
to house a program whose goal is to get the recommendations and
best practices implemented by the States and localities.
Specifically, the center has augmented its staff by
bringing on two people very involved with voting issues, one an
alum of our Commission, the other a former State election
official. They will be working directly with States and
localities looking for opportunities to implement legislation,
looking for opportunities to go into some of the polling places
with historically long lines to be able to implement the
solutions to help that serve as a test case for others.
The BPC project will also work on improving the
certification process for new technology and look for
legislative opportunities on online registration, legislation
to ensure the place of schools as voting places, and other
improvements that are mentioned in the report.
With that, let me reiterate that there is a positive agenda
with which Republicans and Democrats can move forward so that
all legally qualified voters can cast their ballots without
barriers that all agree should not be there.
Thanks again for having us here today and letting us report
to you on our recommendations, best practices, and how we will
implement them.
The Chairman. Thank you very much, gentlemen.
[The statement of Mr. Ginsberg follows:]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED]

The Chairman. Let me just start with a question. And I
think it was really sort of the impetus for the President
putting the Commission in place, really, was the long lines
that we all watched. And I have to tell you, and I don't mean
to always talk about my experience as secretary of state, but
we all come from our own prism of whatever our personal
experiences were. And we are looking at sort of the usual
suspects of where these long lines were, because it wasn't all
over the country, it wasn't in some of the precincts that had
heavy, heavy, heavy voter participation.
And in a State like mine that doesn't have either early
vote or same-day registration or any of those kinds of things,
it doesn't even have no-reason AV voting, I am not going to say
we had no lines anywhere, but there was no reports of anybody--
I mean, what we saw on the TV that was happening in one State
was really happening in one State, from what I would tell.
There were a couple of other areas.
I mean, I talked to some of our other election officials
afterward and said, you can just see what happened there. They
didn't have enough voting equipment. I mean, it is pretty
fundamental things, I think, is my personal opinion. They
didn't have enough voting equipment, they hadn't had good
education, training for the precinct. The election workers that
they had, as you say, many of them, most of them are volunteers
or else they just hire them as they need. That is not their
full-time job.
They perhaps didn't take into account the number of
registered voters in that particular precinct and had them put
in the proper numeric order and all of these kinds of things.
Again, I think it is sort of a fundamental thing.
So actually, in the case of Florida, not to point on
Florida, but I thought the governor of Florida did exactly the
right thing, actually, by tasking their secretary of state with
taking a look at what had happened there and making some
recommendations, which they did. And I looked at that report,
and it was very much along the lines of what I am talking about
here, the kinds of problems that they found.
But is there anything in particular that you think, as you
have looked at that--I mean, again, talking about Federal
mandates, you can't mandate good management, obviously--but
what kinds of things we could help amplify the Commission's
recommendation so that election workers who do experience these
kinds of long lines, what can we actually do? Obviously, nobody
wants to look at these very long lines.
There was one individual in particular that I know the
President pointed to as an elderly person who had to wait for a
long time, and she was trying to early vote. And I was just
thinking, why didn't they vote absentee or perhaps they could
have some line workers come out and, for goodness sakes, offer
her a chair or something? I mean, some of these basics kinds of
things. Again, it is not really a Federal mandate.
So I am not quite sure what we can do to assist in that
area, other than pointing out these very basic things. And what
is your, to either of our witnesses in regards to the long
line, is there anything that was unbelievably unique that
caused these long lines, other than what most election officers
would recognize immediately?
Mr. Ginsberg. It seemed to vary very much by the
jurisdictions where there were problems, with some
commonalities. But, again, when you have 8,000 different
jurisdictions administering elections, uniformity is not one of
those things that is going to come naturally.
In the places where there did seem to be long lines, and we
held a field hearing in Miami and heard from the administrators
of most of the counties that had the line problem, part of it
is administrative decision making, part of it is the facilities
in which polling places actually take place. And part of it is
just kind of what you mentioned, which is, recognizing which
particular precincts are going to have a greater influx of
voters because of new registrations.
Even in the counties around the country where there were
the worst lines, it was not at every polling place, it was only
at some of the polling places, and actually a relatively few
number of the polling places where there were long lines. It is
a problem that should be dealt with.
The resource tools that are at supportthevoter.gov and on
the Cal Tech-MIT Web site that Bob mentioned provide a way that
not only election administrators, but actually citizens who
want to deal with the number of machines available, the
historic voter flows, both in terms of raw numbers and when
they occur during the day, can all provide that.
The report also goes into commonsense solutions, like
providing sample ballots to people beforehand so they can read
the ballot before they go into the polling place and help with
their decision. Line walkers who go around and spot problems
while they are waiting in line before there are people who are
actually going through the process and slowing everybody else
down.
Providing big central rooms where people can wait to vote.
You go in, you take a number, and then you sit in a comfortable
place so you don't have to stand on line outside, if the
facilities like schools can accomplish that, are all part of
the practical solutions that can occur.
The Chairman. Mr. Bauer.
Mr. Bauer. I agree with what Ben has said.
You asked also as part of the question, who is helping
them? And what are the relative roles, Federal Government, the
States themselves in the initiative that you described to the
Florida governor.
And what I think this Presidential Commission attempted to
do was to draw together the best learning and in some cases to
encourage new learning about administrative problems that lead
to long lines is one of the problems that we looked at and to
give in a very uniform, very focused way, to give election
administrators a way to think about the problem and the
possible solutions.
So, for example, we unanimously found that election
administrators should have 30 minutes in mind as the wait time
for voters, 30 minutes should be effectively the maximum, not
that that is a goal that could always be achieved, because
there will be circumstances in which, for reasons beyond the
administrator's control, the line wait will be longer than 30
minute. But in those cases, there ought to be contingency plans
that the administrators can put into effect if they know that
there is going to be a 30-plus-minute wait.
And Ben is correct that the problem is a problem that is
found in pockets around the country. But we found that the
total number of voters affected in one way or the other by
lines longer than 30 minutes or lines longer than an hour is 10
million voters, and that is a significant number of voters and
arguably could expand.
And so what we attempted to do was, as a Presidential
Commission, to take the best learning, encourage some new
learning, and then through the implementation to push out, in
complete cooperation with State and local election officials,
as much of the best understanding of administrative practice as
we possibly could, drawing on what the Election Assistance
Commission has done over the years in counseling on issues
like, for example, polling management and poll worker training,
drawing in organizations like the one that Chris Thomas chairs,
the National Association of Election Directors.
And that is an important function, this function of
providing a clearing house and an organizing center for the
best possible learning about what to do to solve these
problems. And we find in the implementation phase, and I think
that Ben has described it, a very positive reception to an
ongoing effort like this that brings together the best that
both the Federal and the State and local initiatives can offer.
The Chairman. Thank you. And I absolutely agree that the
National Association of Secretaries of State that both myself
and Mr. Rokita were former members of, I think he was the
president one year, and also the National Association of
Election Officers, et cetera, all of this ongoing education and
things that they are discussing and helping the locals with,
there is no second almost for that kind of a thing.
I did want to also ask a question about the resources
needed. You both mentioned about the resources needed. I know I
sound like a broken record, back when I was a secretary of
state. But back when I was a secretary of state, before I came
to Congress, right at that time HAVA had been passed by the
Congress, so I wasn't here when it was passed. But all of a
sudden we had this huge windfall of dollars that was coming,
recognizing that the Federal Government was about to send $4
billion out to the elections officials around the Nation
principally to upgrade their voting equipment.
This had never been done before. I think it was, if we
would have known the word TARP at the time, we would have said
HAVA was like TARP for election officials. It was amazing that
all of this money was coming.
And I think the Congress, trying not to mandate, really
didn't have much strings attached to it as far as the kind of
election equipment that should be purchased or what have you. I
mean, I remember, again in Michigan, my successor actually
implemented it all. But we put in place--you know, we had over
5,000 precincts in our State, and said you could only purchase
either Optical Scan or Optech at that time. And we were going
to have uniformity of the kind of equipment that we were going
to have out there.
You saw a lot of these States that were buying everything
under the sun. I mean, there was no uniformity. And, of course,
some of this election equipment is very interesting. And at
that time with all the technology and everything, had all the
bells and the whistles, you thought you wanted to have all
these great computers. But, as you know, computers do break.
And so no surprise that there were problems with election
equipment that was purchased by Federal dollars.
But now, all of these years later, equipment, you know, it
has had its normal life expectancy. And I cannot imagine, with
the Federal restrictions that we have on our budget now, that
there will be another type of billions of dollars of spending.
I mean, if it is for the State and the locals to run elections,
how can the Federal Government be looked at as the ones that
just gives them all the money for this.
So it is I think incumbent on the locals as well to do some
planning with investing in elections to make sure that they do
have the money to purchase what is very expensive equipment and
all of these kind of things.
What was your thinking as the Commission talked to--did you
have the feeling that there is an expectation out there in the
country that the Federal Government will forevermore provide
funds for election equipment or how was this looked upon?
Mr. Bauer. Ben will be glad to have me answer that one
first.
What we did discover was election administrators certainly
mourn the passing of HAVA funding, that there was money
available for this and now it is very hard to come by. So there
is no question that they are in a different position right now,
which they find very, very difficult.
And we did not attempt to say where the resources would be
located. One of our charges was, as I mentioned in my opening
statement, we were not to make Federal legislative
recommendations. We didn't delve into the question of where the
resources might be found.
But without any question whatsoever, they have to be found
somewhere, because, as you know as a former secretary of state,
I mean, the equipment is expensive, there has to be money for
repair and maintenance. But the acquisition costs alone are
going to be very, very significant. And the entire process of
identifying the best next generation of equipment entails
costs.
And so these administrators are in the first instance, and
we heard a good bit of this, troubled that they are having
difficulty communicating with their State and local elected
officials on this topic. They find that they are last in line
in every budgetary conversation, that these are priorities that
are by and large shuffled to the bottom of the deck because,
understandably, faced with very difficult choices, elected
officials have other priorities to attend to, education and
road repair and the like. And elections being periodic tend to
be treated as something that could be dealt with later or,
frankly, made to do without, made to do with less.
And this, in the case of technology development here, and
acquisition, is unsustainable over the long run. So I can't say
that there are expectations that the Federal Government will do
it or that the State government will do it or a combination of
both. But the question is, where is it going to come from,
because without it we are facing a real disaster.
Mr. Ginsberg. I would say that there is a wish but not an
expectation amongst the State and local officials that the
money come from the Federal Government. But I don't think they
expect that. And historically, with the exception of the HAVA
influx, it has been a State and local responsibility.
I would say that the bright spot out there is that
technology, if it ever gets to catch up through the
certification process, can help reduce the cost of systems. I
mean, you now have these big, huge stand-alone systems that can
only be used for elections. The move to electronic poll books
to help out is one. There are software voting programs out
there, not a paper ballot, for purposes of historic integrity,
but it seems to be where you are going. That can be a much less
expensive alternative for States.
The problem is we have kind of tied ourselves into a knot
on this whole process, that the lasttime there were a new set
of certification standards was 2007, which was before there was
such a thing as a tablet computer anywhere. And so the
technology available has not caught up to voting systems yet.
That is one way that things can help out. We have got to do
something about the certification process so that new and
improved technology can be integrated into the system before
all machines start running out.
The Chairman. Thank you very much.
The chair how recognizes the ranking member, Mr. Brady.
Mr. Brady. Thank you, Madam Chairman.
The only thing I think is worse than long lines is no
lines. It is like a double-edged sword. We worry about increase
in voter participation. Make it easier. And then we have long
lines that cause people a problem when it is time for them to
vote.
I have been doing elections too many years in the city of
Philadelphia, which is a blood sport, by the way, and I have
been fighting with secretary of states forever. You know, I
understand that we can't have uniformity throughout the United
States because States have their rights. But trying to get our
State uniformity with the amount of people that are on the
ballot and then they end up throwing ballot questions with
``whereas'' clauses and people want to sit and read them, if we
can get uniformity within the State I think it would be easier.
There is no real need to have a ballot question or some other
maybe offices that are way-down offices, that are important,
especially important for the people that are running in them,
but if we could have some uniformity throughout the State so
that we don't have a long ballot on one primary and then in the
general we have a short ballot.
And just this past primary we had a major, major governor's
election with a contentious primary. We had 17 percent of the
people come out and vote, which is disgraceful, it is
embarrassing for a major election for a governor. And it seems
to me that if we can make it easier for people to vote, that
would eliminate lines and make it easier for them to cast their
vote, and that it maybe would help them to want to come out and
vote because it is easier for them to do that.
I understand and looked at all the Internet ideas. And I
agree with Mr. Harper, maybe early voting isn't always the
answer because there is always a fraud factor. Eyeball
participation, identification, fingerprint, phone voting are
all issues. It is a tough job that you have. And I can't think
of two more qualified people that can hopefully come back to
us.
And I did read your report. I will also ask unanimous
consent to insert the entirety of the Commission's report into
the record.
The Chairman. Without objection.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED]
\
Mr. Brady. Thank you.
And I did read your report, and it is an in-depth and a
good report. But I guess, how do you implement it? How do we
try to get people to buy in? There are people that like long
lines and people that don't. But what they don't understand is
that we are still infringing on people's rights, ensuring they
have the ability, making it easier for them to vote. And by
making it easier for them to vote, we can increase the voter
participation, for whatever, or whoever they are voting for.
So I guess I just support what you do. I don't have a
crystal ball, nor do any of us have a crystal ball to know what
we could possibly do. There are things out there, there are
things that we can implement, hopefully, to make it happen. I
don't ever have a problem with long lines. We seem to be okay
with long lines. It is inconvenient. But when we have long
lines, we have participation, so that doesn't really cause me a
problem as much as no lines. That has been my problem. So I
commend and appreciate what you do.
I would also like for unanimous consent to insert, in the
entirety, to insert a letter from the Federation of American
Women's Clubs Overseas into the record.
The Chairman. Without objection.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED]

Mr. Brady. I appreciate it, Madam Chairman.
And I guess I don't have any questions because I am really
looking for answers. I think you have done the best that you
could do.
And I would like to also real quickly piggyback on what our
chairman said. Is there anything that we could do? Is there
something we could do as our committee and in our positions
here, whatever resources you may need, whether it be
intelligence, whether it be funding, whatever we could do to
try to make these long lines shorter and make these no lines
more participative.
I appreciate it. Thank you.
The Chairman. Chair now recognizes the gentleman from
Mississippi.
Mr. Harper. Thank you, Madam Chair.
And thank each of you for your comments. I think we are all
in agreement that everybody who wants to vote, who is legally
entitled to vote should be able to vote. And those long lines
create a sense of excitement on election day, and it is
something that is very special.
And having dealt with elections certainly on a county
level, every election, no matter how well you plan, how well
you train, there is going to be some confusion. And it may be
as simple as the problem of having a split precinct where
sometimes, despite your best training, they don't know which
ballot to take. So we see those issues that go on from time to
time, too.
And early voting, what we see is, yes, you can say it may
ease the long lines. But I have had many people in States where
they have early voting that say things happen during the last
week or two of an election that may change a mind or new
information. And so you lose that to go up to the election day,
which sometimes is a concern for me.
And certainly I spoke in my opening statement about how
important it is to have integrity and accountability of
elections. Election day is a special day. It is something that
I think as Americans we like that excitement. And I certainly
understand the purpose of early voting. Certainly increasing
voter participation is an argument in favor. But it does
concern me that that early voting can take away from election
day itself.
So if one accepts that election campaigns serve a valid
role, both to influence and educate voters over a relatively
short period of time, then early voting can shorten or even
subsume rather than enhance that role. Could each of you
comment on that? I will start with you, Mr. Ginsberg.
Mr. Ginsberg. Sure. Early voting is interesting to look at
from a nationwide perspective, because there are regions of the
country that engage in early voting a lot more than other
regions. New England, for example, does not believe in it, much
for the reasons that you state about the sense of community.
And there are different types of early voting. And absentee
ballot is early voting. That actually is where there are more
instances of fraud. In-person early voting is still eyeball-to-
eyeball contact, so not as objectionable from the fraud and
security angle.
I think overall there is now no-excuse absentee voting in
27 States around the country, pretty evenly split between
Republicans and Democrats in positions of authority as election
officials in the States, and early in-person absentee balloting
in 32 States, again pretty evenly split between Republicans and
Democrats.
To us, that reflected something that the voters wanted and
asked for in those different States. And the State and local
officials, without a Federal mandate of any sort, implemented
it in their States.
I share your personal concerns about election day being a
special day, but I have also seen from this that both
Republican and Democratic State and local officials alike have
decided that early voting is something that their citizens are
demanding and they have implemented it.
Mr. Harper. Mr. Bauer.
Mr. Bauer. I agree with Ben that what we are dealing with
here is voter expectation. Voters want voting to beginto mesh
with the way they live their lives generally. They live their lives a
certain way, and our voting system in many respects lags behind their
expectation in the efficiency with which it is delivered and the ease
of access that it offers. And so I think that election officials around
the country, Democratic or Republican, are under tremendous pressure to
offer multiple forms of voting before election day.
So I think that the way we looked at it is essentially that
voting is special, that is a special act, but it cannot be, in
light of voter expectation, crammed into a single day, Tuesday,
any longer. That is not what voters expect, and that is not the
message they are sending to their elected officials.
Mr. Harper. I want to thank each of you for the many, many
hours you have spent on this. And we have I think some common
goals that we can work towards. And so thank you for all of
your hard work.
And with that, I yield back.
The Chairman. I thank the gentleman.
And before I recognize the gentleman from Florida for his
questions, you were talking about early vote. I know the entire
Nation is always looking at New Hampshire, whose motto is
``Live Free or Die,'' to Dixville Notch. Every Presidential,
they go to Dixville Notch, where there are eight registered
voters. They don't have early vote. But it is an interesting
thing. We all wait to see what Dixville Notch is going to do
there with their voting.
At this time the chair now recognize the gentleman in
Florida.
Mr. Nugent. Thank you, Madam Chair.
And I certainly hope that Florida is not in the limelight
again in regards to voting issues. We kind of have been that
way over the last few election cycles. But I think that the
governor recognized the fact that some policies that were put
in place weren't working, and that he tasked the secretary of
state to come up with a report, which he did in February of
2013, much to the same conclusions that you all have come up
with.
And Florida does early voting, absentee voting, early
absentee voting, I mean, in-face absentee voting, I guess it
is. And the number of voters turning out, though, still seems
to lag behind where it should be, even though we have put in
place--like on early voting. Part of the problem was that they
had to have it at either--it had to be a supervisor of
elections office or substation-type office, annex office. And
they have expanded that now to a number of community buildings
that early voting can take place.
I mean, how do you get people to come out to vote? And I
think that is the question that Mr. Brady was asking. I would
rather have people in lines voting than nobody voting or
underutilizing the precincts that are put up.
We talk about convenience of voting. I think we have made
it really convenient. It would be interesting to see what
happens in this election with the changes that were made in
2013. But I am not optimistic that is going to increase the
number of voters coming out to vote.
So, I mean, do you have any thoughts on that? As you went
through this process did anything come forward? I mean, I have
heard about convenience, but I don't know how else to make it
more convenient.
Mr. Bauer. I suppose it is fair to say that all of the
Commissioners have asked, would have heard and would believe
that there are a variety of factors that bear on turnout, and
that the one thing we could do is to address one factor we hope
wouldn't bear on turnout, and that is that there would be
maladministration of the electoral process, and that
frustration with access would be one of those factors. We
wouldn't say for a moment that if you remove all of those
barriers, that we would predict that somehow turnout would rise
up to the levels that you would like to see and that we would
like to see. There are other factors that certainly are going
to bear on turnout, and so removing those administrative
obstacles would not be sufficient themselves. But here is one
thing you wouldn't want to hear from voters, that they had
wanted to vote, and somehow they couldn't. They couldn't
because their name was not on the rolls, or they couldn't
because they were in line for 3\1/2\ hours, and their child
care was no longer available, so they had to peel off from the
line and couldn't vote any longer. Those things you wouldn't
want to hear.
So just in that one sense, that is what we were focused on,
but certainly it is true there are a variety of reasons why we
have different turnout levels in different types of elections.
It varies by State, and it is a complex question to which we
can only make the limited contribution we hope to make with the
recommendations in this report.
Mr. Nugent. One of the things that I worry about as you
move more into technology in regards to voting is the ability
to compromise that. We see this across the board, whether it is
Target or whatever. There are ways to access information, and
what you worry about is that is massive fraud that could be
perpetrated. So I want to make sure that as we move forward on
the technology end of it, that we actually have the fraud
protection in place, because we use these things all the time
for a lot of things that we think we are safe on, whether it is
transactions with banks, whatever else. You know, we tend to
trust that, you know, we are safely doing it, and what we are
hearing is that that is not necessarily the case. And so I
worry that as we move forward in the technology end of it as it
relates to elections, that we really have the ability to
protect those, A, results and those voter rolls from fraud.
Mr. Ginsberg. The Commission certainly came to agree with
you on that. I would say that among the more robust debates we
heard was the technology security debate, and for purposes of
the report, we came out in favor of online registration and the
use of electronic poll books in thepolling places just because
it is much more efficient and just as accurate as mounds and mounds of
paper to check people in in a much quicker way. But we certainly did
not express an opinion on voting online, because the balance of the
debate was that we are just not ready for that yet.
Mr. Nugent. Cybersecurity would obviously be an issue. You
know, we are being attacked by hackers from all over the world.
Can you imagine some of the state actors that would love to
influence an election, particularly a national election would
be very tempting to them, I would think.
And, Madam Chair, I yield back. Thank you.
The Chairman. Thank the gentleman.
The chair now recognizes the former secretary of state from
Indiana Mr. Rokita.
Mr. Rokita. Thank you, Madam Chair. I appreciate that
recognition, and thank you to both you gentlemen for your
leadership. It is greatly appreciated.
I have been saying for years that the problems associated
with Florida's election really had nothing to do with
secretaries of state or local election officials, but really it
was sheriffs of the State that were the problem.
Mr. Nugent. If the gentleman would yield on that.
Mr. Rokita. Very briefly.
I associate with the gentleman. I mean, as Secretary of
State, I often had this question. You are almost to the point,
and I am being facetious, of course, here and embellishing, but
you can roll out of bed and vote, and yet voter turnout doesn't
go up, and that is because we have a cultural issue. People
don't value perhaps the experience, and we have to ask
ourselves why, and it seemed like that might have been beyond
the technical nature of your Commission.
In fact, and I know you shied away from photo ID, and I
don't want to get into that debate here, but I often use that
as an example of how it would--in Indiana it actually increased
voter turnout when we went to that, because people saw that the
administrators valued the process enough to say, hey, you know,
we are going to ask the same kind of questions we ask when you
go to a video store, which we used to do at the time, or when
we get on a plane and do those same things. And when I think
constituents and voters and the public see that we place those
kind of--that high level of interest and value in the process,
you will see more turnout.
But speaking of value, in the technology section I didn't
see, and maybe it was somewhere else--I did not see that you
mentioned voting centers as a solution to this. Was that talked
about, and, Ben, you are nodding your head?
Mr. Ginsberg. We did talk about it. We talked about them
favorably. They seemed to be an innovation that is working in a
number of States. Particularly States that have adopted early
voting have gone to voting centers.
Mr. Rokita. There is no wrong place to vote, so if there is
a big line on one side of town for one reason or another, you
can immediately start through the social media and everything
else, and through apps, redirect people. You have got to use
technology the right way to make sure it is secure, make sure
your coworkers can fairly critique and properly challenge a
voter. But the idea that we can use technology now so there is
really no wrong place to go, I think, is very valuable.
Secondly, Mr. Bauer, thank you for your work again. You use
the example where the max shouldn't be more than 30 minutes to
wait in line, and then you said unless there are some things
outside of our control. What are examples of what is outside
our control?
Mr. Bauer. An example, and we heard this from election
administrators, is that the polls open, and there are already
700 people waiting to vote. They have been there for an hour or
so waiting for the polls to open. They wanted to vote early. Or
in the early afternoon, there is a get-out-the-vote surge on
one side or the other, and seven buses pull out, and voters
start coming out to vote. So that would be a challenge for
administrators, that over that period of time, there is likely
to be a build-up of voters.
Mr. Rokita. Unless you had vote centers, which is in our
control.
Mr. Bauer. There are a variety of ways of addressing that,
including vote centers, but in a case where they realize that
they are looking at longer lines, there are steps that they can
take. They need contingency plans so that the problem doesn't
mushroom. And our only point by setting up the 30 minutes was
to establish a framework for them to think about how our voters
experience the voting.
Mr. Nugent points out we have problems with turnout. We
don't want voters to walk away thinking that either the system
isn't functioning properly, or it is not functioning properly
because no one is paying attention to their own interests and
their own requirements for voting. And so as long as the voters
perceive, and there is evidence to suggest this, that the
administrators are responding to the problem--they may not be
able to deliver a 7-minute wait time, but they are clearly
responding to the problem--that is reassuring to the voter. It
will enhance voter confidence.
Mr. Rokita. Like at a grocery store when you open up a new
line or something like that.
Mr. Bauer. Pardon me?
Mr. Rokita. Like at a grocery store when you open up a new
line.
Mr. Bauer. Absolutely correct.
Mr. Rokita. That goes to your point about how we live our
lives today and what we can do to adapt.
Mr. Bauer. Precisely.
Mr. Rokita. I completely agree with that.
My question turned more on, you know, what is really
outside our control, and what is really inside our control, I
guess, is what I was trying to get from you. Do you have any
other examples? What is an act of God that we should, you know,
reasonably expect could cause----
Mr. Bauer. Power--well, I am not sure I would refer to a
power outage as an act of God.
Mr. Rokita. Act of the EPA.
Mr. Bauer. A separate hearing no doubt. I would imagine a
weather event with flooding, a power outage. One of the things
that we addressed in our report, for example, is that there
are, in fact, real weaknesses in contingency planning for
natural disasters. You know, that has been taken up, by a way,
by a task force of the National Association of Secretaries of
State that has been looking at that. But we need election
administrators to have a playbook that they can turn to when
administrative problems beset the polling place.
Mr. Rokita. Understood. Thank you.
Madam Chair, I know my time is expired, but I notice that
the red light has been on for others, so just let me finish
with one more question now.
In Florida, wasn't it true that--and I apologize if you
testified to this already. In Florida in 2012 in the general
election, weren't there 11 or so constitutional amendments on
the ballot?
Mr. Ginsberg. There were.
Mr. Rokita. Yes, right?
And everyone reading those, like the ranking member says--
--
Mr. Ginsberg. I am not sure everyone was, but certainly
some people were.
It does make sense for States, and we heard this from
numerous State and local officials, to recognize that the
heaviest turnout is going to occur in Presidential years, and,
therefore, if you are going to put constitutional amendments on
a ballot, the general election in a Presidential year is
probably not the right time to do it.
Mr. Rokita. Or get ready to spend a lot more on an election
so that you can properly size the process for the----
Mr. Ginsberg. Well, the other recommendation that we have--
--
Mr. Rokita [continuing]. Or stop being a referendum State.
These were constitutional amendments, but other States might
have the same kind of problem if they are a referenda State,
right?
Mr. Ginsberg. Providing sample ballots so that people can
read all those before they go into the polling place and not
take up the line is another way to deal with the situation
where you do have a lot of constitutional amendments on the
ballot, so you don't have to read it for the first time while
you are waiting.
Mr. Rokita. I yield 30 seconds to the gentleman from
Florida, and my time is expired. Thank you.
Mr. Nugent. I can talk firsthand in regards to the
constitutional amendments that were on the ballot. They did all
the things that you talked about. Supervisor of Elections
office sent out ballots early, sample ballots, all the
constitutional amendments that was in the press.
But it is so overwhelming, and I think the State of Florida
has recognized that, and they changed the law in regards to
limiting the amount of information on a constitutional
amendment to 75 words, I believe, but also limiting the number
of initiatives that can be on a ballot, because that was just
overwhelming in regards to voters, because even if you have all
that preinformation, you still get there and you pull it out,
and you go, hold on a second, I want to read this one more time
before I cast my vote. And a lot of folks were doing that,
because, you know, I saw it when I went to vote. It was
holding--it was gumming up the works, let's say. And I think
States need to be cognizant of that. And I think Florida has
finally figured that one out. Like I said, I hope Florida is
not the poster child of election issues in the future, but as
it is still a rapidly growing State, we do have our growing
pains.
So I want to yield back and thank the gentleman from
Indiana.
The Chairman. Thank you.
I am going to recognize myself for a second round of
questions here. And, you know, just one thing that Mr. Rokita
was mentioning or saying about an act of God or various things
that happen that is outside-the-box challenges of election
officials. I was just thinking about when Sandy happened and
what happened in New Jersey. They actually had a very
successful election. That was unbelievable, the challenges.
And one personal experience. We all remember where we were
on 9/11. Many cities were having their election that day,
including the city of Detroit, and, of course, New York
actually was having their election. They cancelled their
election that day.
But in Detroit I was down at the voting precincts with
Chris Thomas. We are talking about Chris Thomas, and we went in
the first voting precinct. They had the TVs on. You watched
that plane go into the first tower, and like everybody else we
thought, well, what is that? Was that an accident, what
happened, et cetera. And then by the time we got to the second
voting precinct, the next plane came into the second tower.
And Chris Thomas and I went out and sat in his car, because
he was driving around that morning, and we sat there and looked
at each other and said, good Lord. Should we cancel the
election? Who knew, right? We called the mayor of Detroit. They
were closing the Ambassador Bridge. They were closing the
Windsor Tunnel. You are wondering about people being out that
day or whatever, but I just remember him and I looking at each
other thinking if there is anything that sets us apart from
these--I won't use the word that we thought about it that day--
it is our democracy and our ability to vote. And we are going
to carry on with the elections. But we weren't really sure if
that was the right call or not at that time, but it turned out
all right.
But some of the things, the challenges that election
officials do deal with each and every day, it is an amazing
thing.
I just have a question. I am going to pick up on what
everybody has talked about, the long lines and everything. I
remember when I first saw this Commission being a construct of
the Commission, if the President is smart, he will put somebody
from Disney on there, because nobody does lines better than
Disney anywhere in the world. And you did have somebody on
there, and I think the Commission went down andvisited Disney,
and you even have a term, the ``queueing theory,'' I believe it is
called, getting in the queue, in the lines, and customer service, et
cetera, et cetera.
Is there anything that you really found from Disney that
you thought could have application to the line situation, the
long-line situation?
Mr. Ginsberg. I think our visit informed us that the whole
field of industrial engineering which deals with queueology and
lines really has a lot to offer election officials. And, in
fact, Chris was among those who told us about this, that there
are industrial engineers in city and State government who don't
do things around helping the polling places in their
jurisdictions with problems, but certainly could. So I think
that we were greatly informed by that.
There are also just kind of tricks of the trade that we
saw, things like informing people of how big the lines are so
that you can sort of gauge what the best time to vote is. We
did have a revelatory moment in Dumbo's Flying Circus actually
where it got a lot of 5- and 6-year-olds, who you don't want to
put standing in line for 30 minutes. So rather than that, you
can go up when you first get there, get a time that you will be
able to use the ride, and then there is a big playground where
you can just sort of set 5- and 6-year-olds loose. Now, that is
a--to take that to a voting center, that would be the central
place where there are chairs. So you would go in, see how long
the line is, be told an approximate time to vote, and then be
able to vote in comfort, something like a jury room while you
are waiting to get called for jury duty. That is the kind of
practical solution that----
The Chairman. Like the FastPass or whatever they called it
in Disney.
Mr. Ginsberg. Or FastPass.
The Chairman. Mr. Bauer.
Mr. Bauer. Yes. We were really struck by what we saw of
Disney's constant reevaluation of how well they are doing. That
was very inspiring to the election administrators that they
were continually thinking through what they had done before to
make the experience a good one for their customers and how they
might still improve upon it. It is just a continuous effort on
their part to think through by close contact with their
customers. They survey them regularly and intensively how they
can make this experience work best for them, reduce the lines,
and make sure the problems when they are detected are
addressed. And so, yes, it was an example again of how powerful
sound administrative practice can be.
We also, we did spend a day there. We were a little late
leaving because it was difficult to peel Ben Ginsberg away from
the souvenir stand.
Mr. Ginsberg. Let me say that I thought Bob did amongst his
best thinking wearing mouse ears.
The Chairman. All right, gentleman. We are going to get
back to a serious question here.
You know, this committee has had some hearings about
military vote. And you mentioned about the military vote, and I
think we all agree that certainly the brave men and women that
are our ambassadors for liberty and freedom and democracy need
to make sure that they have the ability to vote conveniently,
and that their votes arrive in time to be counted accurately,
et cetera.
We have talked to the Department of Defense through FBAP
and other types of things, you know, really trying to
understand what they have done to try to expedite and improve
all of that kind of a process. What is your Commission
recommendation on something, again, that we could really help
amplify the message to the State and local election officials
in regard to military vote?
Mr. Bauer. One of the more positive messages we heard, and
I touched on this in my opening statement, is that the
Congress' persistent attention to military voting issues over
the years, and we had testimony about it over a very long
period of time, the different statutory enactments that
Congress has worked with in trying to improve the military
voting experience has paid off. And there was widespread
agreement that the MOVE Act, which significantly improved the
delivery of ballots to military voters in time for them to be
able to participate in the election, has worked very well.
Having said all of that, the challenges there are really
significant, and we can see opportunities for the Federal
Government to continue to look at the effective circulation,
for example, of registration information to military voters to
make sure that voters actually have what they need in the way
of information about how to participate. There are offices, for
example, on bases that are meant when the onboard military
personnel--meant to describe for them the registration
opportunities and give them the means to register, and there
was some suggestion in the testimony, significant suggestion in
the testimony, that these are not being staffed as effectively
and not performing as effectively as they might.
So there is certainly room for Congress to continue to
attend to what it has done here, kind of a legal framework it
is set up for here, because as always, the success of these
lies in the details, and I think the details are going to
require Congress' continued attention.
Mr. Ginsberg. On the State and local level, if you are
serving in the military overseas or just living overseas, your
point of contact with voting is going to be your State or
county Web site, really, from the secretary of state or the
county election official. There was great variation in terms of
the quality and usefulness and user-friendly nature of those
sites. So there are some best practices that we have suggested
and examples that we have pointed out of sites that seem really
good because members of the military and people living overseas
will be able to use them more efficiently if they are up to
speed.
The Chairman. Just one final question or perhaps comment,
because Mr. Rokita and I actually introduced a bill called the
Voter Registration Efficiency Act. Back in Michigan we really
were sort of the genesis of motor voter, because we were one of
three States in the Nation where the secretary of state who did
the elections also did the motor vehicle administration, so we
had all the databases. And you are much more likely to change
your registration, or become registered to vote initially, or
change your voter registration address if you are coming in to
do a driver's license change than you are perhaps to go to your
local voter registration place and change it.
So in Michigan we always had, I think, always in the 90
percentile of everybody who was registered to vote--or eligible
to register to vote were registered to vote, but we never did
any better than the national average in participation either.
So, again, for all kinds of reasons, the same kind of reasons
every State has, I suppose.
But one of the things is we, of course, want to make sure
that nobody votes more than once, even in different States. And
the thing that really brought this to our attention, there was
a lady that was running for Congress actually from Maryland a
couple of years ago who voted twice in two different elections
in two different States, and subsequently her nomination did
not go so well when that came to light.
But at any rate, there are a number of people, probably not
through negligence--just because we call them snowbirds in
Michigan, right? Maybe they are in Florida, or maybe they are
in Arizona or wherever they are--that don't change their voter
registration, but register to vote in a new State. We were
looking at some examples where there, you know, could be
hundreds of thousands just in one State of individuals who are
registered in more than one place.
So, anyway, our legislation just said if you go to a State
to register, the DMV, or the secretary of state or whatever it
is in that particular State would ask you, are you registered
to vote in any other State? Just ask that simple question,
which we thought could really weed out. But we had a little bit
of pushback from AMVA, from the Association of Motor Vehicle
Administrators, because they said, listen, this registering to
vote is not--that is not our job here. And they were concerned
about all of that.
But I do think that--I am not sure if your Commission--I
guess that is my question: Did the Commission look at anything
like that, talking about utilizing databases to be able to weed
out duplicate voter registrations, or do you think that we are
on the right track with thinking about that kind of
legislation, or would that be helpful, or did you look at it?
Mr. Ginsberg. We did talk about it. Certainly urging States
to tie into voter registration databases with the motor vehicle
databases will make changes of address problems that occur on
voter rolls--would reduce it tremendously. And that is
something we do talk about and recommend, really led by Chris
Thomas, who did talk about the Michigan experience.
We also urge States to join two programs that exist which
do compare their databases. There is the Interstate Voter
Crosscheck Program that was started in Kansas, and the ERIC
Project that was originally funded by Pew. And I think it is
now 29 States belong to the Interstate Crosscheck Program, and
I believe it is 11 belong to the ERIC program. Those are both
complementary interchanges of databases designed to stop
precisely that. So it both serves to stop duplication of voter
registrations in multiple States, and provides a much more
accurate list of eligible people who are not registered to vote
so that they can be contacted to register.
Mr. Bauer. I completely agree with Ben on that. I think the
list exchanges that we endorsed we endorsed as fulfilling a
variety of purposes from preventing the problem that you
identified to also identifying voters eligible to vote who
could be encouraged to vote and hadn't been.
The Chairman. Thank you very much.
Ranking member have any other questions?
Mr. Brady. One real quick statement. We are talking about
elections. I want to thank my friend from Florida for educating
me. I didn't know what a chad was. I thought it was Chad
Everett, was the only chad I know. There are dimpled chads,
pregnant chads, hanging chads. Thank you, and thank your State
for that.
The Chairman. Any other questions from the gentleman from
Florida?
Mr. Nugent. I will pass.
The Chairman. Gentleman from Indiana.
Mr. Nugent. One last thing.
Thank you very much for visiting Disney. Hopefully you
spent a lot of money, because the State of Florida really does
appreciate that. Thank you very much.
The Chairman. It all emanates in Florida, you know?
I certainly think I speak on behalf of the entire
committee. This has been a really interesting hearing, and,
again, we appreciate both of you taking the time to come into
the hearing today and testify and answer the questions, and
certainly for your service, as we all have said, on the
Commission. It is very good work, and we are looking forward to
trying to help amplify the message and the recommendations, et
cetera.
I know you mentioned, I think you called it the Bipartisan
Policy Center that is working with the local election
officials, so if there is something that we can do to assist
with them, we certainly want to be able to do that and look
forward to your suggestions and input on that.
At this time, without objections, I would mention that all
Members have 5 legislative days to submit to the chair
additional written questions for the witnesses. We would ask
the witnesses to respond if they can do so so that the answers
may be made part of the record.
And with that, the hearing is adjourned. Thank you.
[Whereupon, at 12 p.m., the committee was adjourned.]


