- MENACE ON THE RED SEA: SECURING SHIPPING AGAINST THREATS IN THE RED SEA

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

MENACE ON THE RED SEA: SECURING SHIPPING
AGAINST THREATS IN THE RED SEA

=======================================================================

(118-44)

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON
COAST GUARD AND MARITIME TRANSPORTATION

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON
TRANSPORTATION AND
INFRASTRUCTURE
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

JANUARY 30, 2024

__________

Printed for the use of the
Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available online at: https://www.govinfo.gov/committee/house-transportation
?path=/browsecommittee/chamber/house/committee/transportation

____

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

55-435 PDF                WASHINGTON : 2024

COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORTATION AND INFRASTRUCTURE

Sam Graves, Missouri, Chairman
Rick Larsen, Washington, Ranking Member
Eric A. ``Rick'' Crawford, Arkansas  Eleanor Holmes Norton,
Daniel Webster, Florida                District of Columbia
Thomas Massie, Kentucky              Grace F. Napolitano, California
Scott Perry, Pennsylvania            Steve Cohen, Tennessee
Brian Babin, Texas                     John Garamendi, California
Garret Graves, Louisiana             Henry C. ``Hank'' Johnson, Jr., Georgia
David Rouzer, North Carolina         Andre Carson, Indiana
Mike Bost, Illinois                  Dina Titus, Nevada
Doug LaMalfa, California             Jared Huffman, California
Bruce Westerman, Arkansas            Julia Brownley, California
Brian J. Mast, Florida               Frederica S. Wilson, Florida
Jenniffer Gonzalez-Colon,            Donald M. Payne, Jr., New Jersey
Puerto Rico                        Mark DeSaulnier, California
Pete Stauber, Minnesota              Salud O. Carbajal, California
Tim Burchett, Tennessee              Greg Stanton, Arizona,
Dusty Johnson, South Dakota            Vice Ranking Member
Jefferson Van Drew, New Jersey,      Colin Z. Allred, Texas
Vice Chairman                      Sharice Davids, Kansas
Troy E. Nehls, Texas                 Jesus G. ``Chuy'' Garcia, Illinois
Tracey Mann, Kansas                  Chris Pappas, New Hampshire
Burgess Owens, Utah                  Seth Moulton, Massachusetts
Rudy Yakym III, Indiana              Jake Auchincloss, Massachusetts
Lori Chavez-DeRemer, Oregon          Marilyn Strickland, Washington
Thomas H. Kean, Jr., New Jersey      Troy A. Carter, Louisiana
Anthony D'Esposito, New York         Patrick Ryan, New York
Eric Burlison, Missouri              Mary Sattler Peltola, Alaska
John James, Michigan                 Robert Menendez, New Jersey
Derrick Van Orden, Wisconsin         Val T. Hoyle, Oregon
Brandon Williams, New York           Emilia Strong Sykes, Ohio
Marcus J. Molinaro, New York         Hillary J. Scholten, Michigan
Mike Collins, Georgia                Valerie P. Foushee, North Carolina
Mike Ezell, Mississippi
John S. Duarte, California
Aaron Bean, Florida
Celeste Maloy, Utah
Vacancy

------

Subcommittee on Coast Guard and Maritime Transportation

Daniel Webster, Florida, Chairman
Salud O. Carbajal, California, Ranking Member
Brian Babin, Texas                   John Garamendi, California
Brian J. Mast, Florida               Chris Pappas, New Hampshire
Jenniffer Gonzalez-Colon,            Jake Auchincloss, Massachusetts
Puerto Rico                        Mary Sattler Peltola, Alaska
Jefferson Van Drew, New Jersey       Hillary J. Scholten, Michigan,
Mike Ezell, Mississippi, Vice          Vice Ranking Member
Chairman                         Rick Larsen, Washington (Ex
Aaron Bean, Florida                      Officio)
Sam Graves, Missouri (Ex Officio)

CONTENTS

Page

Summary of Subject Matter........................................     v

STATEMENTS OF MEMBERS OF THE COMMITTEE

Hon. Daniel Webster, a Representative in Congress from the State
of Florida, and Chairman, Subcommittee on Coast Guard and
Maritime Transportation, opening statement.....................     1
Prepared statement...........................................     2
Hon. Rick Larsen, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Washington, and Ranking Member, Committee on Transportation and
Infrastructure, opening statement..............................     3
Prepared statement...........................................     4
Hon. Salud O. Carbajal, a Representative in Congress from the
State of California, and Ranking Member, Subcommittee on Coast
Guard and Maritime Transportation, opening statement...........     6
Prepared statement...........................................     7

WITNESSES

Charles ``Bud'' Darr, Executive Vice President of Maritime Policy
and Government Affairs, Mediterranean Shipping Company (MSC),
oral statement.................................................     8
Prepared statement...........................................    10
Ian M. Ralby, J.D., Ph.D., Founder and Chief Executive Officer,
I.R. Consilium, LLC, oral statement............................    15
Prepared statement...........................................    16
Jonathan Gold, Vice President of Supply Chain and Customs Policy,
National Retail Federation, oral statement.....................    20
Prepared statement...........................................    22
David W. Heindel, President, Seafarers International Union, oral
statement......................................................    25
Prepared statement...........................................    26

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

January 26, 2024

SUMMARY OF SUBJECT MATTER

TO:      LMembers, Subcommittee on Coast Guard and Maritime
Transportation
FROM:  LStaff, Subcommittee on Coast Guard and Maritime
Transportation
RE:      LSubcommittee Hearing on ``Menace on the Red Sea:
Securing Shipping Against Threats in the Red Sea''
_______________________________________________________________________

I. PURPOSE

The Subcommittee on Coast Guard and Maritime Transportation
of the Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure will meet
on January 30, 2024, at 10:00 a.m. ET in 2167 of the Rayburn
House Office Building to receive testimony at a hearing
entitled, ``Menace on the Red Sea: Securing Shipping Against
Threats in the Red Sea.'' Members will receive testimony on the
emerging challenges to United States and global shipping
efforts associated with increased geopolitical threats in and
around the vital Red Sea shipping corridor. At the hearing,
Members will receive testimony from the MSC Group, I.R.
Consilium, the National Retail Federation, and Seafarers
International Union.

II. BACKGROUND

The Red Sea is a vital shipping corridor for global
maritime shipping, facilitating the movement of an estimated 12
percent of global trade per year.\1\ The primary transit route
is through the Suez Canal, which is a manmade waterway
connecting the Mediterranean to the Red Sea and the shortest
maritime route to Asia from Europe. As one of the world's most
heavily used shipping lanes, approximately 20 percent of all
container shipping, nearly 10 percent of seaborne oil, and
eight percent of Liquefied Natural Gas (LNG) pass through the
Suez Canal.\2\ While attacks by state and non-state actors have
been a reality for ships transiting the Red Sea for several
decades, the region has seen a dramatic increase in attacks
since October 2023. Houthi forces based in Yemen, and supported
by Iran, have systematically targeted numerous civilian and
military vessels. As the crisis continues to escalate, numerous
shipping companies have ceased transits through the Red Sea and
are instead opting to take longer routes around the Cape of
Good Hope.\3\ Increases in risk, insurance premiums, transit
time, and fuel costs have caused a rise in container prices,
and threaten to severely disrupt global supply chains.\4\ In
response, the United States has announced Operation Prosperity
Guardian, an international coalition aimed at defending ships
transiting the Red Sea.\5\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Alex Mills, The Long Shadow of the Red Sea Shipping Disruption,
Atlantic Council, (Jan. 8, 2024) available at https://
www.atlanticcouncil.org/blogs/econographics/the-long-shadow-of-the-red-
sea-shipping-disruption/
\2\ Id.
\3\ Meghann Myers, Houthis have attacked ships in the Red Sea 25
Times Since November, Military Times, (Jan. 4, 2024), available at
https://www.militarytimes.com/news/your-military/2024/01/04/houthis-
have-attacked-ships-in-the-red-sea-25-times-since-november/.
\4\ See Lisa Baertlein, Ocean Cargo Rates Climb After New Red Sea
Ship Attacks, Reuters, (Jan. 4, 2024), available at https://
www.reuters.com/markets/commodities/ocean-cargo-rates-climb-after-new-
red-sea-ship-attacks-2024-01-03/.
\5\ Press Release, Dep't of Defense, Statement from Secretary of
Defense Lloyd J. Austin III on Ensuring Freedom of Navigation in the
Red Sea, (Dec. 18, 2023), available at https://www.defense.gov/News/
Releases/Release/Article/3621110/statement-from-secretary-of-defense-
lloyd-j-austin-iii-on-ensuring-freedom-of-n/ [hereinafter Secretary of
Defense Statement].
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

III. HOUTHIS AND ATTACKS IN THE RED SEA

Ansar Allah, more commonly referred to as the Houthi
Movement or simply ``the Houthi'', is a Shia Islamist political
and military organization based in Yemen and believed to be
supported by Iran.\6\ The Houthi movement has been operating in
the region since the mid-1990's, and most recently was engaged
in a military operation against the Republic of Yemen
Government from 2015 until a peace was brokered in April
2022.\7\ The Houthi movement has a long history of using the
Red Sea to advance its interests, from using the waterway to
smuggle weapons from Iran to conducting attacks against global
shipping to pressure governments.\8\ In response, the United
States established an international coalition, referred to as
the Combined Maritime Force (CMF) and Task Force 153, in 2022,
to monitor activity and assert presence in the Red Sea.\9\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\ Jeremy M. Sharp, Cong. Rsch. Serv., R43960, Yemen: Civil War
and Regional Intervention, (Nov. 23, 2021), available at https://
crsreports.congress.gov/product/pdf/R/R43960.
\7\ Carla E. Humud, Cong. Rsch. Serv., IN11917, Political
Transition in Yemen, (Apr. 25, 2022) available at https://
crsreports.congress.gov/product/pdf/IN/IN11917.
\8\ Cameron Glenn and Mattison Rowan, Who are Yemen's Houthis,
Wilson Center, (July 7, 2022), available at https://
www.wilsoncenter.org/article/who-are-yemens-houthis.
\9\ CTF 153: Red Sea Maritime Security, Combined Maritime Forces
(CMF), (2024), available at https://combinedmaritimeforces.com/ctf-153-
red-sea-maritime-security/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Capitalizing on regional instability, in October 2023, the
Houthi movement increased its attacks against international
shipping in the Red Sea. Houthi leadership justified its
attacks as a desire to punish Israel for its actions in
Gaza.\10\ Throughout October, United States Navy (USN)
destroyers intercepted numerous missiles fired by Houthi forces
over the Red Sea.\11\ Houthi air defense also shot down an
American MQ-9 Reaper operating in or near Yemeni' territorial
waters.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\10\ Yemen's Houthis `Will Not Stop' Red Sea Attacks Until Israel
Ends Gaza War, Aljazeera, (Dec. 19, 2023), available at https://
www.aljazeera.com/news/2023/12/19/yemens-houthis-will-not-stop-red-sea-
attacks-until-israel-stops-gaza-war.
\11\ Paul McLeary, Houthis Launch More Attacks in Red Sea as US
Warships Head to Region, Politico, (Dec. 16, 2023), available at
https://www.politico.com/news/2023/12/16/houthi-attacks-red-sea-u-s-
warships-00132146.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
On November 19, 2023, Houthi Forces forcefully boarded and
seized control of the Galaxy Leader, a British-owned and
Japanese flagged vessel with 25 individuals on board that was
operating in international waters at the time.\12\ The vessel
and its crew are still being held by the Houthi. Since then,
there have been an additional 24 attacks against vessels
transiting the region, either through hijacking, attempted
hijacking, or missile and drone attacks.\13\ Furthermore,
United States naval vessels and personnel have been targeted
directly by Houthi missiles and drones. On December 31, 2023,
Houthi fighters fired on USN helicopters with small arms while
responding to a distress call from a Maersk cargo vessel
already under attack.\14\ The Houthi have pledged to continue
attacks in the Red Sea until Israel ceases its campaign in
Gaza.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\12\ Isabel Debre and Jon Gambrell, Yemen's Houthi Rebels Hijack an
Israeli-Linked Ship in the Red Sea and Take 25 Crew Members Hostage,
AP, (Nov. 20, 2023), available at https://apnews.com/article/israel-
houthi-rebels-hijacked-ship-red-sea-dc9b6448690bcf5c70a0baf
7c7c34b09.
\13\ Joseph Clark, U.S., Partners Committed to Defensive Operations
in Red Sea, DoD News, (Jan. 4, 2024), available at https://
www.defense.gov/News/News-Stories/Article/Article/3631623/us-partners-
committed-to-defensive-operations-in-red-sea/.
\14\ @CENTCOM, X, (Dec. 31, 2023, 3:53 AM), available at https://
twitter.com/CENTCOM/status/1741381969936834951.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

IV. IMPACT ON GLOBAL SHIPPING

There has been a profound impact on shipping through the
Red Sea due to the Houthi attacks. In response to increased
risk, several of the largest shipping companies have halted or
limited transits through the Red Sea and Suez Canal.\15\ As of
January 6, 2024, 389 container vessels, accounting for over a
fifth of global container capacity, have altered their routes
to avoid the Suez Canal and Red Sea.\16\ As an alternative,
ships have shifted to sailing around the Cape of Good Hope.
This, however, adds significant time to transits between Europe
and Asia, and can cost upwards of $1,000,000 in additional
fuel.\17\ Furthermore, ships need to make increased port calls
along the African coast to refuel and resupply, increasing
their vulnerability to piracy attacks by other non-state
actors.\18\ Shipping companies still transiting the Red Sea and
Suez Canal are subject to increased operational costs. As of
January 2024, insurance premiums for container ships transiting
the Red Sea have increased 10-fold, amounting to tens of
thousands of dollars increase in insurance premiums.\19\ Major
insurers are also seeking to exclude United States, United
Kingdom, and Israeli ships from coverage on Red Sea
voyages.\20\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\15\ Peter Eavis and Keith Bradsher, Red Sea Attacks Leave Shipping
Companies with Difficult Choices, N.Y. Times, (Jan. 6, 2024), available
at https://www.nytimes.com/2024/01/06/business/red-sea-shipping-
houthi.html.
\16\ Id.
\17\ Noah Berman, How Houthi Attacks in the Red Sea Threaten Global
Shipping, Council on Foreign Relations, (Jan. 5, 2024) available at
https://www.cfr.org/in-brief/how-houthi-attacks-red-sea-threaten-
global-shipping.
\18\ Jonathan Saul, London Marine Insurers Widen High Risk Zone in
Red Sea as Attacks Surge, Reuters, (Dec. 18, 2023), available at
https://www.reuters.com/markets/commodities/london-marine-insurers-
widen-high-risk-zone-red-sea-attacks-surge-2023-12-18/.
\19\ Id.
\20\ Alex Longley and Aine Quinn, Ship Insurers Seeking Exclusions
for US and UK Vessels from Red Sea Coverage, Bloomberg, (Jan. 16,
2024), available at https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2024-01-16/
insurers-seek-to-exclude-us-uk-ships-from-red-sea-cover.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
As of January 10, 2024, container freight rates have spiked
to a 15-month high, costing roughly $6000-$7000 per forty-foot
equivalent (FEU) on transits between Europe and Asia.\21\ In
September of 2023, similar transportation cost below $1800 per
FEU.\22\ Increased shipping times due to the use of alternative
routes have also constrained space availability on ships,
forcing shippers to pay premium rates to secure spots.\23\ The
rise in insurance premiums, travel times, and fuel costs have
holistically increased the cost of global shipping, negatively
impacting shippers, manufacturers, and consumers.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\21\ Mohammed Al-ansare, Container Freight Rates to Europe Spike to
15-Month High as Red Sea Attacks Continue, S&P Global Commodity
Insights, (Jan. 10, 2024), available at https://www.spglobal.com/
commodityinsights/en/market-insights/latest-news/shipping/011024-
container-freight-rates-to-europe-spike-to-15-month-high-as-red-sea-
attacks-continue.
\22\ Id.
\23\ Id.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Notably, the impact of the crisis on global shipping has
been amplified by a simultaneous drought that has caused water
levels in the Panama Canal, which facilitates five percent of
the world's seaborne trade, to hit historic lows.\24\ As
several of the lakes and rivers feeding the canal dry up, the
locks are close to being too shallow for the passage of
container ships.\25\ The lower water level has forced
authorities to restrict access and limit the number of ships
using the canal, and in some cases, ships are required to carry
less cargo to minimize draft.\26\ Only 18 ships will be
permitted to transit the canal per day in February, down from a
usual operation capacity of about 36 ships per day.\27\
Consequently, carriers will have to decide between paying
increased premiums for priority access through the canal,
waiting, or rerouting.\28\ Regardless of which option is
selected, the limited ability of container ships to transit the
Panama Canal amplifies the economic impact of the current
crisis in the Red Sea.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\24\ Mie Hoehris Dahl, The Panama Canal is Running Dry, Foreign
Policy, (Jan. 15, 2024), available at https://foreignpolicy.com/2024/
01/15/panama-suez-canal-global-shipping-crisis-climate-change-drought/
[hereinafter Panama Canal Running Dry].
\25\ The Dwindling of the Panama Canal Boosts Rival Trade Routes,
The Economist, (Jan. 9, 2024), available at https://www.economist.com/
the-americas/2024/01/09/the-dwindling-of-the-panama-canal-boosts-rival-
trade-routes.
\26\ Panama Canal Running Dry, supra note 24.
\27\ Id.
\28\ Id.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

V. UNITED STATES RESPONSE

Since the beginning of the crisis, the USN has maintained a
continuous and active presence in the region to enforce freedom
of navigation and maintain security as part of its CMF
responsibilities. However, as Houthi attacks increased
additional resources were needed. Subsequently on December 18,
2023, the United States announced the establishment of
Operation Prosperity Guardian, a multinational security
initiative under the purview of the CMF and the leadership of
Task Force 153.\29\ Currently, Operation Prosperity Guardian
includes contributions from the United Kingdom, Bahrain,
Canada, France, Italy, Netherlands, Norway, Seychelles, and
Spain.\30\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\29\ Secretary of Defense Statement, supra note 5.
\30\ Id.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
On January 10, 2024, the United Nations Security Council
passed Resolution 2722, which demanded Yemen's Houthis
immediately end attacks on ships in the Red Sea, cautioned
against escalating tensions, demanded the release of the Galaxy
Leader, and implicitly endorsed Operation Prosperity
Guardian.\31\ The provision was sponsored by the United States
and Japan.\32\ No members voted against the provision, while 11
members voted for it and four members (including veto wielding
China and Russia) abstained.\33\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\31\ Jonathan Landay and Arshad Mohammed, UN Security Council
Demands Houthis Stop Red Sea Attacks, Reuters, (Jan. 10, 2024),
available at https://www.reuters.com/world/middle-east/un-security-
council-demands-houthis-stop-red-sea-attacks-2024-01-10/.
\32\ Id.
\33\ Id.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
On January 12, 2024, the USN, in conjunction with British
forces, engaged in a limited air campaign against Houthi weapon
sites and support infrastructure in Yemen. The attacks involved
60 targets in 16 locations and were aimed at degrading the
Houthi' capability to target seaborne shipping.\34\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\34\ See e.g. Joseph Clark, U.S. Partners' Forces Strike Houthi
Military Targets in Yemen, Dep't of Defense News, (Jan. 12, 2024),
available at https://defense.gov/News/News-Stories/Article/Article/
3644027/us-partners-forces-strike-houthi-military-targets-in-yemen/;
Phil Stewart, Idress Ali, & Mohammed Ghobari, US and Britain strike
Yemen in reprisal for Houthi attacks on Shipping, Reuters, (Jan. 12,
2024), available at https://www.reuters.com/world/us-britain-carry-out-
strikes-against-houthis-yemen-officials-2024-01-11/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Shippers have also expressed an increased concern that
carriers will leverage the ongoing crisis as a means to
maintain inflated profits.\35\ As the crisis continues, the
Federal Maritime Commission will be pivotal in insuring that
fair market practices and regulations are being adhered to, in
order to prevent high prices.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\35\ The State of Transportation: Hearing before the H. Comm. on
Transp. and Infrastructure, 118th Cong., (Jan. 17, 2024) (Chairman
Rouzer Question to panel, 38:30).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

VI. WITNESSES

LBud Darr, Executive Vice President of Maritime
Policy and Government Affairs, Mediterranean Shipping Company
(MSC)

LDr. Ian Ralby, Chief Executive Officer, I.R.
Consilium

LJonathan Gold, Vice President of Supply Chain and
Customs Policy, National Retail Federation

David Heindel, President, Seafarers International
Union

MENACE ON THE RED SEA: SECURING SHIPPING
AGAINST THREATS IN THE RED SEA

----------

TUESDAY, JANUARY 30, 2024

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Coast Guard and Maritime
Transportation,
Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 10:06 a.m. in
room 2167 Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Daniel Webster
(Chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Mr. Webster of Florida. The Subcommittee on Coast Guard and
Maritime Transportation will come to order.
I ask that the chair be authorized to declare a recess
during today's hearing.
Without objection, show that ordered.
I also ask unanimous consent that Members who do not sit on
the subcommittee be permitted to sit here and ask questions.
Without objection, show that ordered.
As a reminder, if Members wish to insert documents in the
record, please email them to
[email protected]
.
Now I recognize myself for the purpose of an opening
statement for 5 minutes.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. DANIEL WEBSTER OF FLORIDA, CHAIRMAN,
SUBCOMMITTEE ON COAST GUARD AND MARITIME TRANSPORTATION

Mr. Webster of Florida. We meet here today to examine
threats and emerging challenges to maritime commerce in and
around the Red Sea shipping corridor.
I would like to welcome our witnesses today, I appreciate
them: Bud Darr, executive vice president of maritime policy and
government affairs at MSC Group; Ian Ralby, CEO of I.R.
Consilium; Jonathan Gold, vice president of supply chain and
customs policy at the National Retail Federation; and David
Heindel, president of the Seafarers International Union.
Thank you all for being here, we really appreciate it and
look forward to your testimony and what you have got to say.
The Red Sea is critical as a shipping corridor for global
maritime commerce, connecting Europe and Asia through the Suez
Canal, representing nearly 20 percent of container traffic and
a significant portion of oil and liquefied natural gas
shipments.
Since October, Houthis, an Iranian-backed separatist group
based in Yemen, have sought to disrupt global commerce by
significantly increasing attacks against military and civilian
vessels transiting the Red Sea. To date, dozens of vessels have
been targeted either through hijacking, attempted hijacking, or
missile or drone strikes, putting ships and their crews at
risk.
Sadly, we learned last week that two Navy SEALs were lost
at sea during a mission to disrupt Iranian arms shipments to
the Houthis. Our prayers go out to the families of the fallen
SEALs and all servicemembers still in the region.
In response to these threats, we have seen carriers reroute
ships around Africa and insurance costs skyrocketing, leading
to increased container rates and longer transit times for goods
to arrive at their destinations.
On December 18, the United States announced the
establishment of Operation Prosperity Guardian, a multinational
security initiative to support maritime commerce transiting
through the Red Sea. On January 12, the United States Navy, in
conjunction with coalition partners, began air strikes in an
effort to degrade the Houthis' ability to strike maritime
targets.
At the same time these disruptions are occurring in the Red
Sea, the Panama Canal is also facing bottlenecks as low water
levels are forcing canal authorities to reduce transits by
half, compounding uncertainty for ocean carriers and shippers.
We saw firsthand during the pandemic what a significant
supply chain crisis can do to global economy, and we must not
let that happen again.
And so, I thank our witnesses for joining us today and look
forward to hearing what they have done to address these
challenges.
[Mr. Webster of Florida's prepared statement follows:]

Prepared Statement of Hon. Daniel Webster of Florida, Chairman,
Subcommittee on Coast Guard and Maritime Transportation
We meet today to examine threats and emerging challenges to
maritime commerce in and around the Red Sea shipping corridor. I'd like
to welcome our witnesses joining us today--Bud Darr, Executive Vice
President, Maritime Policy and Government Affairs at MSC Group; Ian
Ralby, CEO of I.R. Consilium; Jonathan Gold, Vice President of Supply
Chain and Customs Policy, National Retail Federation; and David
Heindel, President of the Seafarers International Union.
The Red Sea is a critical shipping corridor for global maritime
commerce--connecting Europe and Asia through the Suez Canal,
representing nearly twenty percent of container traffic and a
significant portion of oil and liquefied natural gas shipments.
Since October, the Houthis, an Iranian-backed separatist group
based in Yemen, have sought to disrupt global commerce by significantly
increasing attacks against military and civilian vessels transiting the
Red Sea. To date, dozens of vessels have been targeted, either through
hijacking, attempted hijacking, or missile and drone strikes--putting
ships and their crews at risk.
Sadly, we learned last week that two Navy SEALS were lost at sea
during a mission to disrupt Iranian arms shipments to the Houthis. Our
prayers go to the families of those fallen SEALS and to all the service
members still in the region.
In response to these threats, we have seen carriers reroute ships
around Africa and insurance costs skyrocket, leading to increased
container rates and longer transit times for goods to arrive at their
destinations.
On December 18th, the United States announced the establishment of
Operation Prosperity Guardian, a multinational security initiative to
support maritime commerce transiting through the Red Sea, and on
January 12th, the United States Navy, in conjunction with coalition
partners, began air strikes in an effort to degrade the Houthi's
ability to strike maritime targets.
At the same time these disruptions are occurring in the Red Sea,
the Panama Canal is also facing bottlenecks as low water levels are
forcing canal authorities to reduce transits by half--compounding
uncertainty for ocean carriers and shippers.
We saw firsthand during the pandemic what a significant supply
chain crisis can do to the global economy, and we must not let it
happen again. And so, I thank our witnesses for joining us today and
look forward to hearing what can be done to address these challenges.

Mr. Webster of Florida. So, now I recognize the ranking
member to give an opening statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. RICK LARSEN OF WASHINGTON, RANKING
MEMBER, COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORTATION AND INFRASTRUCTURE

Mr. Larsen of Washington. Thank you, Chair Webster and
Ranking Member Carbajal, for holding this hearing on the
ongoing Houthi attacks on commercial shipping. I look forward
to learning about the status of the domestic and international
supply chains, as well as the U.S. and the international
response.
Ninety percent of goods moved worldwide spend time on a
ship. As a country that depends on maritime trade, the U.S. has
to do what it needs to do to ensure resilient supply chains.
For its part, the U.S. Navy continues to do an exceptional job
to ensure free and open maritime trade around the world.
I was on this committee when, in 2009, pirates captured the
U.S.-flagged Maersk Alabama off the coast of Somalia, and the
Navy ensured the safe return of the vessel and every mariner on
board.
Unfortunately, a new threat exists: a continuous and
unpredictable Houthi attack on commercial vessels transiting
the Suez Canal and the Red Sea.
I do want to take a moment to formally recognize the work
of the Navy, which is playing a leading role in Operation
Prosperity Guardian and, with partner nations, is regularly
thwarting Houthi attacks. As a result, ships continue to
transit the region daily.
I am saddened, though, by the death of two Navy SEALs who
perished during an operation to seize Iranian weapons bound for
Yemen's Houthi rebels.
Special Warfare Operator First Class Christopher J.
Chambers and Special Warfare Operator Second Class Nathan Gage
Ingram died protecting American sovereignty, and their
sacrifice kept deadly weapons out of the hands of terrorists.
However, the threat posed by Houthi rebels persists. To
avoid this challenge, some operators have diverted their
vessels around the Horn of Africa, adding 10 to 12 days to the
trip, increasing carbon emissions and $1 million in operating
costs to their voyages.
Those who do transit the Red Sea face significant increases
in their insurance premiums or risk being dropped altogether.
In either case, the end result is higher prices for U.S.
consumers.
And over the past 4 years, the global supply chain has been
tested in ways previously unimaginable. From the Houthi attacks
in the Red Sea to historic drought conditions at the Panama
Canal to COVID-19-related backlogs, one thing is clear: smooth
sailing on the high seas should not be taken for granted.
Congress responded to the COVID-19 supply chain crisis in
several ways. As an example, Congress passed the Bipartisan
Infrastructure Law, which, among other things, invests $2.25
billion in the Port Infrastructure Development Program. That
investment will help ensure that ports are prepared for
inevitable fluctuations in cargo that jeopardize the seamless
movement of goods.
Congress passed the Ocean Shipping Reform Act, a bipartisan
bill which ensures fair and transparent policies and practices
associated with international shipping.
And in 2009, in the wake of the piracy attack on the Maersk
Alabama, this subcommittee took immediate action by holding
hearings and coordinating a comprehensive Federal response to
ensure the protection of U.S. ships and U.S. mariners. That
response involved the Department of Transportation, Department
of Defense, Department of State, Department of Commerce, and
the U.S. Coast Guard. The result was the immediate protection
of U.S.-flagged ships, as well as a coordinated international
effort to apprehend and prosecute pirates and associated
criminal organizations.
This time, even more is needed. The Houthi threat requires
an international response that goes beyond a justified response
in attacking Houthi aggression.
Today, we are going to hear from Dr. Ralby about the need
to empower Yemen to combat the threat internally. Just as the
U.S. should continue to stand by Ukraine, we have to support
our friends around the world. Their security and sovereignty is
our security and sovereignty.
And while we can't control the rain in Panama immediately,
Congress can ensure that infrastructure here at home works.
That means continued investments in roads, rail, airports,
ports, vessels, and the women and men that make our
transportation system work.
It's not too soon to start considering what that next
investment in infrastructure will look like, as well as the
investment in the U.S. maritime industry. So, I look forward to
working with my colleagues to ensure the investments that
started in the BIL are continued.
I would just note, as well, that we have the responsibility
in this committee, as the Subcommittee on Coast Guard and
Maritime Transportation, to look at the supply chain issues
with regards to shipping around the world and shipping in the
U.S. And that's the focus of this hearing, and I do want to
thank the chair and the ranking member for calling it.
And with that, I look forward to hearing our witnesses and
yield back.
[Mr. Larsen of Washington's prepared statement follows:]

Prepared Statement of Hon. Rick Larsen of Washington, Ranking Member,
Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure
Thank you, Chairman Webster and Ranking Member Carbajal, for
holding this hearing on the ongoing Houthi attacks on commercial
shipping.
I look forward to learning about the status of domestic and
international supply chains as well as the U.S. and international
response.
Ninety percent of goods moved worldwide spend time on a ship. As a
country that depends on maritime trade, the United States must do
everything to ensure resilient supply chains.
For its part, the United States Navy continues to do an exceptional
job to ensure free and open maritime trade around the world.
I was on this Committee when, in 2009, pirates captured the U.S.-
flagged Maersk ALABAMA off the coast of Somalia, the Navy ensured the
safe return of the vessel and every mariner on board.
Unfortunately, a new threat exists--continuous and unpredictable
Houthi attacks on commercial vessels transiting the Suez Canal and the
Red Sea.
I would like to take a moment to formally recognize the work of the
U.S. Navy, which is playing a leading role in Operation Prosperity
Guardian and--with partner nations--is regularly thwarting Houthi
attacks. As a result, ships continue to transit the region daily.
I am saddened though by the death of two Navy SEALs who perished
during an operation last week to seize Iranian weapons bound for
Yemen's Houthi rebels.
Special Warfare Operator 1st Class Christopher J. Chambers and
Special Warfare Operator 2nd Class Nathan Gage Ingram died protecting
America's sovereignty, and their sacrifice kept deadly weapons out of
the hands of terrorists.
However, the threat posed by Houthi rebels persists. To avoid this
challenge, some operators have diverted their vessels around the Horn
of Africa, adding 10 to 12 days, increased carbon emissions and $1
million in operating costs to their voyages.
Those who do transit the Red Sea face significant increases in
their insurance premiums or risk being dropped altogether. In either
case, the result is higher prices for U.S. consumers.
Over the past 4 years, the global supply chain has been tested in
ways previously unimaginable.
From these Houthi attacks in the Red Sea to historic drought
conditions at the Panama Canal to COVID-19-related backlogs, one thing
is clear--smooth sailing on the high seas should not be taken for
granted.
Congress responded to the COVID-19 supply chain crisis in several
ways.
First, Congress passed the Bipartisan Infrastructure Law. Among
other things, the BIL invests $2.25 billion in the Port Infrastructure
Development Program.
That investment will help ensure that ports are prepared for
inevitable fluctuations in cargo that jeopardize the seamless movement
of goods.
Second, Congress passed the Ocean Shipping Reform Act, which
ensures fair and transparent policies and practices associated with
international shipping.
In 2009, in the wake of the piracy attack on the Maersk ALABAMA,
this Subcommittee took immediate action by holding hearings and
coordinating a comprehensive federal response to ensure the protection
of U.S. ships and U.S. mariners.
That response involved the Department of Transportation, Department
of Defense, Department of State, Department of Commerce and the Coast
Guard.
The result was the immediate protection of U.S. flagged ships as
well as a coordinated international effort to apprehend and prosecute
pirates and associated criminal organizations.
This time, even more is needed. The Houthi threat requires an
international response that goes beyond a justified response in
attacking Houthi aggression.
Today, we will hear from Dr. Ralby about the need to empower Yemen
to combat the threat internally.
Just as the U.S. should continue to stand by Ukraine, we must
support our friends around the world--their security and sovereignty is
our security and sovereignty.
While we cannot control the rain in Panama, Congress can ensure
that our infrastructure here at home works.
That means continued investment in roads, rail, airports, ports,
vessels and the women and men that make transportation work.
It's not too soon to start considering what that next investment in
infrastructure and the U.S. maritime industry will look like.
I look forward to working with my colleagues to ensure that the
investments started in the Bipartisan Infrastructure Law are continued.
I would note as well that we have the responsibility on this Committee,
and this Subcommittee on Coast Guard and Maritime Transportation, to
look at supply chain issues with regards to shipping around the world
and shipping in the U.S.--and that's the focus of this hearing.
Thank you, Chairman Webster, and I look forward to hearing from our
witnesses.

Mr. Webster of Florida. Thank you, Ranking Member Larsen.
Now I recognize the ranking member of the subcommittee.
Mr. Carbajal, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. SALUD O. CARBAJAL OF CALIFORNIA,
RANKING MEMBER, SUBCOMMITTEE ON COAST GUARD AND MARITIME
TRANSPORTATION

Mr. Carbajal. Thank you, Chairman Webster. Today's hearing
is timely so we can better understand the ongoing situation in
the Red Sea and the effect it has on the global economy.
About 12 percent or $1 trillion of global trade passes
through the Red Sea every year. Ship operators have scrambled
to account for the increased risk by taking extreme measures
such as diverting vessels, paying increased insurance costs,
hiring private security, and relying on the United States Navy-
led Operation Prosperity Guardian for protection in the region.
The U.S. and global economy will be affected by this crisis
in the Red Sea. The only question is how much.
I look forward to learning more about the commercial and
economic impacts, but I would like to use the rest of my time
to focus on the human factor.
Life on a ship is not glamorous. Mariners are typically at
sea for several months at a time. They have limited access to
internet and their families, and they are on-call 24 hours a
day, 7 days a week.
For foreign mariners on foreign ships, it's worse. They are
often required to work a year or more at a time, are paid
unfair wages, and are often subjected to subpar health
conditions and legal systems. Unfortunately, that's the result
of the flag of convenience system where shipowners can register
their vessels in low-tax--let me repeat that, low-tax--low-
regulation countries, and find mariners from anywhere in the
world as long as they will tolerate the wages.
For all mariners, though, the Houthi threat in the Red Sea
is real. The U.S. Navy is doing incredible work protecting
lives and commerce, but living, sleeping, and working under
constant threat of deadly attack is unacceptable and
unsustainable.
Unfortunately, this is business as usual for American
mariners. Through every emergency, conflict, and war, the
United States merchant marine has shown up. They bravely sailed
during World War II when ships were being sunk daily by
torpedoes. Many lives were lost. They delivered military
supplies to our troops during the Gulf War when foreign
mariners and foreign companies refused. They routinely sail
hospital ships to disaster-stricken regions.
Currently, American mariners are showing their bravery and
dedication by sailing through the Red Sea to deliver military
cargo and humanitarian aid to the region.
Congress must find new and innovative ways to bolster the
U.S. merchant marine.
I will close by expressing my appreciation for the U.S.
Navy. Without them, vessel traffic in the Red Sea would have
come to a halt in November.
I would also like to remember the two Navy SEALs who died
during an operation in the Arabian Sea to intercept the
delivery of Iranian weapons to Houthi terrorists. They are
heroes, and their sacrifice protected countless military and
civilian lives.
Thank you, Chair, and I look forward to hearing from our
witnesses.
[Mr. Carbajal's prepared statement follows:]

Prepared Statement of Hon. Salud O. Carbajal of California, Ranking
Member, Subcommittee on Coast Guard and Maritime Transportation
Thank you, Chair Webster. Today's hearing is timely so we can
better understand the ongoing situation in the Red Sea and the effect
it has on the global economy.
About 12 percent or $1 trillion of global trade passes through the
Red Sea every year. Ship operators have scrambled to account for the
increased risk by taking extreme measures such as diverting vessels,
paying increased insurance costs, hiring private security, and relying
on the U.S. Navy led Operation Prosperity Guardian for protection in
the region.
The U.S. and global economy will be affected by the crises in the
Red Sea--the only question is how much.
I look forward learning more about the commercial and economic
impacts, but I would like to use the rest of my time to focus on the
human factor.
Life on a ship is not glamorous. Mariners are typically at sea for
several months at a time, they have limited access to internet and
their families, and they are on-call 24 hours a day, 7 days a week.
For foreign mariners on foreign ships, it's worse. They're often
required to work a year or more at a time, are paid unfair wages, and
are often subjected to subpar health conditions and legal systems.
Unfortunately, that's the result of the ``flag of convenience'' system
where ship owners can register their vessels in low-tax/low-regulation
countries and find mariners from anywhere in the world--so long as
they'll tolerate the wages.
For all mariners though, the Houthi threat in the Red Sea is real.
The U.S. Navy is doing incredible work protecting lives and commerce
but living, sleeping, and working under constant threat of deadly
attack is unacceptable and unsustainable.
Unfortunately, this is business as usual for American mariners.
Through every emergency, conflict, and war, the U.S. merchant marine
has shown up. They bravely sailed during World War II when ships were
being sunk daily by torpedoes. They delivered military supplies to our
troops during the Gulf war when foreign mariners and foreign companies
refused. They routinely sail hospital ships to disaster-stricken
regions.
Currently, American mariners are showing their bravery and
dedication by sailing through the Red Sea to deliver military cargo and
humanitarian aid to the region.
Congress must find new and innovative ways to bolster the U.S.
merchant marine.
I'll close by expressing my appreciation for the U.S. Navy. Without
them, vessel traffic in the Red Sea would have come to a halt in
November.
I'd also like to remember the two Navy Seals who died during an
operation in the Arabian Sea to intercept the delivery of Iranian
weapons to Houthi terrorists. They are heroes and their sacrifice
protected countless military and civilian lives.
Thank you, Chair, and I look forward to hearing from our witnesses.

Mr. Webster of Florida. I would like to again welcome our
witnesses.
I appreciate you being here. Thank you for being here
today.
I would like to take a moment to explain our lighting
system to the witnesses. There are three lights in front of
you. Green means go, yellow means time to slow down, and red
means conclude your remarks.
I also ask unanimous consent that the witnesses' full
statements be included in the record.
Without objection, show that ordered.
And I ask unanimous consent that the record of today's
hearing remain open until such time as the witnesses have
provided answers to any questions that may be submitted to them
in writing.
Without objection, show that ordered.
I ask unanimous consent that the record remain open for 15
days for any additional comments and information submitted by
Members or witnesses to be included in the record of today's
hearing.
Without objection, show that ordered.
As your written testimony has been made part of the record,
the committee asks that you limit your oral remarks to 5
minutes.
With that, Mr. Darr, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

TESTIMONY OF CHARLES ``BUD'' DARR, EXECUTIVE VICE PRESIDENT OF
MARITIME POLICY AND GOVERNMENT AFFAIRS, MEDITERRANEAN SHIPPING
COMPANY (MSC); IAN M. RALBY, J.D., Ph.D., FOUNDER AND CHIEF
EXECUTIVE OFFICER, I.R. CONSILIUM, LLC; JONATHAN GOLD, VICE
PRESIDENT OF SUPPLY CHAIN AND CUSTOMS POLICY, NATIONAL RETAIL
FEDERATION; AND DAVID W. HEINDEL, PRESIDENT, SEAFARERS
INTERNATIONAL UNION

TESTIMONY OF CHARLES ``BUD'' DARR, EXECUTIVE VICE PRESIDENT OF
MARITIME POLICY AND GOVERNMENT AFFAIRS, MEDITERRANEAN SHIPPING
COMPANY (MSC)

Mr. Darr. Thank you, Chairman Webster. Thank you, Ranking
Members Larsen and Carbajal, and Members, for the opportunity
to be here today and help describe what our experience has been
to date and perhaps shed a little light on what the future may
look like with this situation.
I have provided a written statement, I provided my CV. I
will not bore you with too much detail on that, other than to
say I am a graduate of the United States Merchant Marine
Academy, proudly. I served in the U.S. Navy and the U.S. Coast
Guard until retirement, and I am an American citizen, and I
feel very strongly about the interests that the United States
has in these issues, whether it involves U.S.-flagged ships,
U.S. mariners, or other seafarers just trying to do their jobs
every day.
I would like to offer up some comments on four points that
I would like to ask your attention to.
One is that this is an unprecedented series of attacks by
nonstate actors upon commercial shipping. There have certainly
been attacks in the past, either by states that were well
organized, and there have been attacks by nonstate actors such
as Somali piracy some time ago, which seems, unfortunately, to
be reemerging now at this moment. But as nonstate actors go,
the level of sophistication of the targeting, the weaponry, and
the boldness is absolutely unprecedented. And they have, in
fact, taken control of a vital sealane, which is essential not
only for U.S. economic interests, but for trade to flow more
broadly throughout the world.
I will point out what we do in our industry is we are a
conduit for trade. We don't operate ships just to operate them,
although we love them very much, and we love the people that
operate them. We go where the trade requires us to go, and we
will adapt accordingly.
I would also like to offer my express thanks not only to
the U.S. Navy, who not only has fought so bravely, sometimes
paying the ultimate cost during this particular conflict, but
also for keeping the watch over the holidays. I remember many
conference calls with CENTCOM where we were at home with our
families, and they were not, and we are grateful for the
contributions that are being made, even if today we are not
seeing a genuine improvement on the water to the point where we
feel that it is safe.
So, my second point is, we are making this work. It is an
extraordinary, unprecedented situation. It is extremely
complicated, particularly to adapt global networks quickly, but
we are making it work. Commerce is flowing.
The third point is, these are interconnected systems when
you look at any one carrier or you look at a sector, such as
the containerized sector, which is the part of our business I
am here to speak to you about today. You can't look at one
particular port or one particular service loop, which would be
a series of ports served by a series of vessels. But you have
to look at how it fits in with the broader system, particularly
where it interfaces with ports and interfaces with the
shoreside component of what it takes to keep supply chains
moving.
And one major difference between the situation we face
during the pandemic, which was also quite difficult, and what
we face today is that those shoreside components are not
showing the incredible stress that they were under during the
pandemic, where it became painfully obvious to us that we could
still operate ships quite well, we hadn't forgotten how to do
that, but the shoreside component of what we would do once we
got to port in the U.S. was not capable of handling that sort
of a surge. And that is where I think these investments in the
future are critically important, so that we have a more capable
and more resilient series of supply chain components for the
future in the interest of the United States.
I will also say there are substantial costs that come with
these alterations. Some of the comments in the opening
statement, I think, made recognition of that. And we are still
trying to assess the full scope of those costs. At this moment,
quite honestly, you have to make the best educated guess that
you can, because it's not the same from company to company,
it's not the same from service to service, it's not the same
from loop to loop, and it's even not exactly the same from ship
to ship. But keep in mind, if we need additional ships of a
certain type or other equipment to fulfill the surge need, that
has to come probably from other service areas, so, it causes
disruption throughout the whole interconnected network.
I believe that situation will normalize. I believe we are
in this for a while, at least it feels like that way. And as
that happens, I think the market will take over again and
pricing will reflect equity from carrier to carrier or customer
to customer over time, as the market normally can do.
And the last point I will make, sir, is about seafarers. At
the end of the day, the controlling consideration here and the
controlling point of what the discussion should be, in my
humble opinion, has to be about the human aspect of this. I
work for a family-owned company. We have almost 200,000
employees, and I can tell you, our chairman views them all as
family members. It is unique for us, but it shouldn't be. These
seafarers are keeping commerce moving, they are serving global
society's needs, and they are just trying to do their job every
day. And for them to be shot at, as they were three different
times on our fleet, one of which was an hour-long firefight--an
hour-long firefight--that they were directly in the middle of,
is just unacceptable. We have got to find a way to make the
shooting stop.
And for all the other considerations we have here, I would
urge let's keep in mind there are real human lives hanging in
the balance of the decisions that we make, and they cannot just
be commercial decisions because we can insure a ship, we can
insure a cargo or our customers can, but you can never properly
insure the impact of a loss of human life. Thank you.
[Mr. Darr's prepared statement follows:]

Prepared Statement of Charles ``Bud'' Darr, Executive Vice President of
Maritime Policy and Government Affairs, Mediterranean Shipping Company
(MSC)
1. Introduction: Mediterranean Shipping Company and the Liner Shipping
Industry.
Chairman Webster, Ranking Member Carbajal, and Members of the
Subcommittee, thank you for the invitation to testify today. My name is
Bud Darr. I am Executive Vice President of Mediterranean Shipping
Company Group (MSC).
MSC is a global leader in transportation and logistics. As one of
the world's leading container shipping lines, and having by far the
largest fleet, MSC has 675 offices across 155 countries worldwide, with
the MSC Group employing almost 200,000 people. With access to an
integrated network of road, rail, air, and sea transport resources
which stretches across the globe, the company prides itself on
delivering global services with local knowledge. MSC's shipping line
sails on more than 300 trade routes, calling at 520 ports, and is
targeting net-zero decarbonization by 2050.
MSC is also a member of the World Shipping Council (WSC). The World
Shipping Council (WSC) is a non-profit trade association that
represents the liner shipping industry, which is comprised of operators
of containerships and roll-on/roll-off (ro-ro) vessels (including
vehicle carriers). Together, WSC's members operate approximately 90
percent of the world's liner vessel services including more than 5,000
ocean-going vessels of which approximately 1,500 vessels make more than
27,000 calls at ports in the United States each year.\1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ A full description of the Council and a list of its members are
available at www.worldshipping.org.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The liner shipping industry provides American importers and
exporters with delivery service for almost any goods or commodities to
and from roughly 190 countries. Approximately 35 million TEU of
containerized cargo are currently imported into or exported from the
United States each year. The container shipping industry is one of the
most important facilitators of the nation's growth and ongoing economic
activity.\2\ Ocean shipping is also--by far--the most fuel-efficient
form of transportation at scale on the planet.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ Twenty-foot equivalent (TEU) is a general unit of cargo
capacity based on size of a 20-foot-long intermodal container, which is
a standard size box that can be easily transported by vessels, rail and
trucks. In practice most containers are 40 feet in length.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
2. The Red Sea and Gulf of Aden Security Situation Remains Dire.
Since mid-November, Yemeni-based Houthi rebels have launched
attacks on numerous commercial vessels in the Red Sea. These attacks
employ powerful long-range sophisticated weapons--typically only
possessed by nation States--including ballistic and anti-ship cruise
missiles and one-way attack drones. The world has never seen attacks
like these by non-State actors on commercial shipping.
The Houthis started their attacks on November 19, with a brazen
attack and seizure by helicopter, dropping heavily armed militants onto
the deck of the car carrier M/V GALAXY LEADER, where they proceeded to
hijack the vessel and take it to Yemeni internal waters, where its 25-
member crew remains kidnapped today, and we should not in any way
forget about them. On December 26, 2023, our vessel, the M/V MSC UNITED
VIII, was transiting from King Abdullah Port, Saudi Arabia to Karachi,
Pakistan, when the master was contacted on the radio by Houthi forces
claiming to be the Yemeni Navy and ordering the vessel to head towards
Yemeni waters. After the master refused, the Houthis became
increasingly threatening, resulting in the master reaching out to
coalition naval forces for assistance. The Houthis fired missiles at
the vessel, in a series of attacks that lasted over an hour, with
missiles exploding in close proximity to the vessel, which was
terrifying for our crew. By sheer luck, there were no physical injuries
to the crew or damage to the vessel. This was one of three ships in our
network that were targeted by the Houthis, with one of these attacks
resulting in direct damage but fortunately without causing casualties
or a major onboard fire.
On December 31, 2023, Houthis in armed small boats attacked and
attempted to board the M/V MAERSK HANGZHOU--getting as close as 20
meters as a contract security team aboard the HANGZHOU deterred their
advancement. The militants were only stopped when U.S. Navy helicopters
responding to the HANGZHOU's distress calls were fired on by the Houthi
small boats using crew served and small arms weapons, causing the U.S.
Navy helicopters to respond in self-defense and destroy three of the
four attack boats, and killing the militants. This attack represented
the first counterattack by coalition forces against the Houthis
resulting in loss of life. It is important to note that this particular
attack occurred in morning following an aerial attack on the same
vessel during the prior evening.

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Note: Attacks involving commercial vessels are attacks where at least
one commercial ship is struck or targeted usually with drones or
missiles. Data as of Jan. 20. Source: United States Central Command

In\\ the initial wave of attacks, the Houthis appeared to be
targeting vessels that had an identifiable Israeli ownership interest.
For instance, the M/V GALAXY LEADER was flying the Bermuda flag and
chartered by the Japanese shipping corporation NYK--but was listed in
public databases as being associated with an Israeli firm. Many vessels
with Israeli ownership interests reacted by avoiding the Southern Red
Sea, likely causing the Houthis to expand their targeting to all
vessels calling on Israeli ports. At present, the Houthi's targeting
has become so attenuated from Israeli interests that it is
indiscriminate, placing all commercial vessels transiting the Southern
Red Sea and Gulf of Aden in the vicinity of Yemen at risk of being
attacked.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ How Houthi Attacks Have Upended Global Shipping, New York
Times, Jan. 21, 2024, available at How Houthi Attacks in the Red Sea
Upended Global Shipping--The New York Times (nytimes.com) [https://
www.nytimes.com/interactive/2024/01/20/world/middleeast/houthi-red-sea-
shipping.html]
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
On December 18, 2023, the United States and its coalition partners
announced the stand-up of Operation Prosperity Guardian (OPG), a
defensive operation with the mission of providing naval presence to
achieve deterrence. We applaud and appreciate the men and women from
U.S. and coalition forces serving in OPG for standing the watch, and
especially for the significant efforts they have made to protect
seafarers and preserve the freedom of navigation. Unfortunately, the
Houthi's continuing barrage of attacks show they are not yet deterred.
On January 10, 2024, the United Nations Security Council adopted
Resolution 2722 condemning the Houthi attacks and demanding the Houthis
immediately cease all attacks.\4\ On January 12, after a series of
high-level U.S. and coalition nation warnings to cease attacks on
commercial shipping in the Red Sea went unheeded, the U.S. and U.K.
launched defensive attacks on Houthi land-based positions, to suppress
their capabilities to attack commercial vessels in the Red Sea. The
Houthis responded by expanding their targeting to include U.S. and U.K.
vessels, and on January 22, they claimed to have attempted to attack
the U.S.-flagged M/V OCEAN JAZZ. On January 23, the U.S. and U.K.
responded with another series of attacks, resulting in the Houthis
firing ballistic missiles at two U.S.-flagged Maersk Limited Line, Ltd.
vessels on January 24, 2024 that were under direct U.S. Navy escort in
the Gulf of Aden near Bab El-Mandeb.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ United Nations security Council Resolution 2722, Jan. 10, 2024,
available at N2400928.pdf (un.org) [https://documents-dds-ny.un.org/
doc/UNDOC/GEN/N24/009/28/PDF/N2400928.pdf?
OpenElement]
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
MSC has assessed that the security situation in the Red Sea and
Gulf of Aden is not safe enough to protect our most vital asset--our
seafarers--nor our customers' cargo or our vessels which are of course
of great value, but genuinely insurable value as materiel assets. We
are diverting services that would typically transit the Red Sea and the
Suez Canal around the Cape of Good Hope (CGH), until we are confident
the security situation is safe enough to have our seafarers return to
the Red Sea. We are also aware that many other major ocean carriers and
other shipping interests have made similar decisions, as depicted in
the graph below prepared by the World Shipping Council, which depicts
container vessels above 7,500 TEU diverting voyages from the Red Sea
and Suez Canal to go around the CGH.

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

3. Red Sea Impacts on the Supply Chain.
The Suez Canal is a vital trade route for liner shipping and
supports 10 to 15 percent of world trade and 30 percent of global
shipping volumes. Thus, the decision to avoid the Red Sea and Suez
Canal is a significant one.

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Diverting around the CGH extends the voyage length from 8,500
nautical miles to 11,800 nautical miles--approximately 40 percent
farther--and typically adds an additional 5 to 16 days of transit time,
depending on the route, the ship's particulars, and the destination.\\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ Sea Intelligence, Dec. 17, 2023, Issue 645.

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

MSC, like most liner companies, typically seeks to provide a
consistent service at ports of call within our network. Diverting
around the CGH requires significant adjustments to our global network
to, among other things, add additional vessel capacity, make schedule
changes, connect with transshipment points, and reposition equipment.
These adjustments result in increased costs, and they have knock-on
effects beyond the services that would typically transit through the
Red Sea.
The Red Sea security situation has required MSC to re-wire its
entire global network. Transits will take more time and involve
additional costs, but we will keep global trade running and shipping
costs continue to be a very small percentage of the overall cost of
goods. As the chart below depicts, additional freight costs resulting
from the Houthi attacks are rising from very low rates that were below
or consistent with pre-pandemic rates.

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

4. Panama Canal Low Water exacerbating Red Sea Impacts.
Like the Red Sea, the Panama Canal is a critical route for liner
shipping. Severe drought in Panama has resulted in a 36 percent
reduction in Panama Canal transits. The Panama Canal authority recently
announced it is cutting daily ship crossings to 22 per day, down from
38 per day last year, as well as reducing the maximum draft of vessels
from 14.9 to 13.4 meters, which requires liner shipping using the canal
to carry smaller numbers of containers. Prior to the Red Sea attacks,
many shipping companies diverting from the Panama Canal to avoid delays
or reduced cargo loads were relying on the Suez Canal and Red Sea as an
alternative route for their vessels. The Red Sea security situation has
severely limited this option, which puts further pressure on liner
shipping companies, and requires diversions to longer routes to keep
maritime commerce flowing.
5. Ocean Carriers are flexible, resilient and continue to move
customers' cargo.
MSC prides itself on providing reliable and cost-efficient global
liner service to its customers to carry their cargo across the world's
oceans and deliver it to where they direct it. It is important to point
out to the Subcommittee, however, that the present situation is unique
and distinct from the situation we faced during the pandemic where the
congestion was caused by U.S. land-based logistics being overwhelmed by
unprecedented import demand. The land-based congestion in U.S. ports
and supporting logistics infrastructure caused, at its height in
November of 2021, more than 100 loaded container vessels to back up off
of Southern California ports (there were similar backups off of other
U.S. ports) because while there was plenty of container vessel
capacity, the land-based logistics capacity could not efficiently
process all the import cargo that was arriving.
We are hopeful that the Congress's subsequent investments in U.S.
port and landside infrastructure will at some point provide additional
capacity and resiliency to handle similar future supply and demand
surges caused by geopolitical and other unanticipated major events. MSC
has made substantial and unprecedented investments in new vessel
capacity--many of which are dual fuel vessels to support our efforts to
advance to net-zero greenhouse gas emissions--and MSC now features the
largest fleet in the world with some 800 container ships, with a
capacity exceeding 4 million TEU. We assess that if we can continue to
access U.S. ports uninterrupted, we have sufficient assets and capacity
for the foreseeable future to ensure U.S. importers and exporters
access to global markets.
6. Conclusion.
MSC is committed to serving the international trade of the United
States, and our adaptability and resiliency to continue to move
maritime commerce for importers and exporters across the world's oceans
despite the current geopolitical challenges are evidence of our
commitment.

Mr. Webster of Florida. Dr. Ralby, you are recognized for 5
minutes.

TESTIMONY OF IAN M. RALBY, J.D., Ph.D., FOUNDER AND CHIEF
EXECUTIVE OFFICER, I.R. CONSILIUM, LLC

Mr. Ralby. Chairman Webster, Ranking Member Larsen, Ranking
Member Carbajal, Members, I am Ian Ralby, and I appreciate this
opportunity to share with you some of the maritime security
aspects of this menace in the Red Sea, and it is indeed a
menace. Based on my analysis and that of my team at I.R.
Consilium, I want to make three points.
First, even if the Israel-Gaza situation ended today with a
complete resolution that was mutually agreeable to all parties
involved, the Houthis would continue to attack shipping.
Second, 100 percent of the ballistic missile capabilities
of the Houthis could be taken out, and the Houthis would still
attack shipping.
And number three, if the U.S. continues to be the face of
the counter-Houthi narrative and the counter-Houthi operations,
others will continue to be inspired to join the Houthis, and
potentially could join them in attacking shipping, as well.
Since the 19th of November, the Houthis have seized on a
convenient narrative that played into something that they
wanted. They have opportunistically taken advantage of the
Palestinian situation, and made it a cause that aligned with
their own interests, albeit hypocritically so. If we look at
that hypocrisy, the Houthis have, over the last 10 years,
killed more Muslim Arabs than Israel has in 75 years of its
existence. The Houthis do not care about the Palestinian cause
except insofar as it furthers them.
Furthermore, they are protesting that situation by
targeting innocent civilians, and that hypocrisy needs to be
pointed out. By not having divorced the narrative between what
is happening in Israel and Gaza and what is happening on the
Red Sea, we have allowed the Houthis to gain momentum, gain new
members, and to inspire others as being a party that is doing
something it really isn't. They are looking out for their own
interests, and they are loving the situation for the momentum
it has given them.
Unfortunately, they are also loving the fact that we have
bombed them now. For 10 years, they have been spouting the
narrative that they were at war with the U.S. and the U.K., and
that was one of the ways that they motivated people and
particularly brainwashed some of the youth in Yemen to join
their cause. Now the whole world's media is telling them that
they are actually at war with the U.S. and the U.K., and so, we
have given them, inadvertently, credibility. And that
credibility has given them relevance, it has given them
visibility, and they love the taste of the significance that
they now seem to have. So, they are going to continue looking
for ways to attack.
And so, even if we take out 100 percent of their
capabilities on the ballistic front and on the drone front,
they will find other ways to be continually attacking shipping.
As we have learned from other piracy incidents in other parts
of the world, from Somalia to the Singapore Strait to the Gulf
of Guinea and beyond, it doesn't take very much to be able to
disrupt maritime commerce, and they have certainly the will to
do so, and have in the past tested the use of remote-controlled
bomb boats, and even found unmanned underwater systems that
have been capable of potentially attacking shipping, as well.
So, now the world is watching and the Houthis are enjoying
it. But we have to be very careful because, if we do not change
how we are approaching the Houthis, we are going to continue to
inadvertently embolden them.
They have an incredibly low regard for human life. They
have shown that over and over. They have weaponized food for
their own people. They have killed, as I said, more people over
the course of the conflict than died in the entire conflict in
Afghanistan over 20 years. They are not to be treated as a
rational party in the way we see rational thinking, and so, we
must suspend our own approach for what we think would be the
right way forward to look at how to deal with the enemy that we
actually face, not the one that we want.
We have to pull their attention away from shipping, and in
order to do that, we have to also embolden the Government of
Yemen. The Government of Yemen holds the keys to this
situation. Without them taking up and fighting to regain their
own sovereignty, we are setting ourselves up for a long-term
problem. At the moment, the Houthis are a threat to the people
of Yemen, they are a threat to the region, they are a threat to
global shipping, they are a threat to the entire global
commerce. And as a result, they are a threat to the United
States public. Thank you very much.
[Mr. Ralby's prepared statement follows:]

Prepared Statement of Ian M. Ralby, J.D., Ph.D., Founder and Chief
Executive Officer, I.R. Consilium, LLC
Since the 19th of November 2023, the Houthi Movement within Yemen
has launched a sustained assault on global maritime commerce. While the
initial rationale for these attacks was to show support for Gaza, the
Houthis have quickly moved to re-enliven their own ambitions. If the
war between Israel and Hamas ended today, it is highly unlikely that
the Houthis would cease their attacks on vessels transiting the Red
Sea. After years of fighting in Yemen and claiming to be at war with
the United States and the United Kingdom, the Houthis are thrilled to
have finally achieved widespread visibility, and global relevance. The
recent strikes by the US and the UK have not only failed to deter the
Houthis, but have actually legitimized their domestic narrative,
leading to a major upsurge in both popularity and recruitment. That
popularity is also growing outside of Yemen, raising serious concerns
for Houthi-inspired attacks. At the same time, Iran, which had promised
to stop arming the Houthis in the Chinese-brokered agreement with the
Saudis last March, has also renewed its overt support to them, and
launched several attacks of its own on ships in the Indian Ocean and
Arabian Sea. The Houthis are stronger today than they were three months
ago and shipping in the Red Sea is a life-threatening prospect to the
seafarers who carry the 90% of world trade that moves through the
maritime domain. Unless the United States changes its approach, global
shipping will remain impeded, the region will descend further into
intractable conflict and the US economy will suffer.
The Houthis Before November 2023
Before the world watched them board and commandeer the GALAXY
LEADER on 19 November 2023, the Houthis were relatively unknown and
invisible on the international stage. Sadly, Yemen has long been the
forgotten corner of the Middle East. Even after ten years of fighting
against the Government of Yemen and a Saudi-led Coalition, the Houthis
had gained little attention, even in foreign policy and international
security communities. That does not mean, however, that they were an
insignificant group. Over the course of the civil war, the UN estimates
that more than 150,000 people have been killed in fighting and an
additional 227,000 have died from famine and the related humanitarian
crisis. In context, that means that more Yemenis have died in their
civil war than the total number of deaths--on all sides--in the twenty
years of War in Afghanistan. Though many are coming to know the Houthis
for the first time, they actually have a long track-record that
provides insights into how they are likely to operate and respond to
different forms of intervention.
How the Houthis Enjoy Operating
The Houthis love to make the West and what they perceive to be
Western institutions--like the United Nations--look bad. They have a
long history of getting close to an agreement, or even agreeing to
something, just long enough for the UN or others to expend funds or
make bold statements, only to renege at the last minute. For years, the
UN repeated the same cycle over and over again with regard to the FSO
SAFER--a dilapidated tanker attached to the Marib-Ras Isa pipeline and
used, before the war, as the main export terminal for Marib Light
Crude. The vessel was laden with 1.14 million barrels of oil, and, had
it spilled, would have not only caused an environmental disaster more
than four times the size of the 1989 Exxon Valdez spill, but damage the
desalination plants that provide drinking water for tens of millions of
people along the Red Sea Coast. The Houthis consistently agreed to
allow the UN to get onboard and assess the vessel, then delayed the
mission once the assessment team was in place across the sea in
Djibouti, and then backed out of the agreement altogether. While the UN
kept thinking that the Houthis would be motivated to protect their own
coast and the people who live by it, it became clear that the Houthis
found far greater motivation in toying with the UN and trying to make
it look foolish. Given that the Houthis consider the US to be an even
bigger enemy than the UN, they will go to lengths to try to make the US
look bad in the eyes of their target constituents.
Houthi Narrative versus Reality
Despite claiming to be at war with foreign powers, it is worth
highlighting that the Houthis have killed several times more Muslim
Arabs in the last decade than Israel has in the entire 75 years of its
existence. That said, the majority of the deaths in Yemen have not been
from bullets or missiles but from a humanitarian crisis that put
roughly six million people on the brink of famine. During the
negotiations over the FSO SAFER, Mohammed Al Houthi, a member of the
``Supreme Council'' tweeted that the international community cared more
about the ``shrimps'' than the Yemeni people. Meanwhile, the Houthis
were limiting the movement of food to their own people in order to
advance the narrative that they were being starved by Western Powers.
At the same time, even when the money was available, they were failing
to pay the salaries of Yemenis, further exacerbating the crisis in
order to further their narrative. Their propaganda capacity is well-
calibrated to appeal to their target audiences and they will
unnecessarily cause Yemenis to suffer and die just to advance their
talking points.
The Gaza Narrative
At present, the main Houthi narrative is that these attacks on
maritime commerce are a form of protest against Israel's campaign in
Gaza. Unfortunately, Western media have continued to link the situation
in Gaza to the situation in the Red Sea, giving further credence to
that contention. Many in the region and even beyond who sympathize with
the plight of the Palestinians now see the Houthis as one of the only
elements that have taken meaningful action to back up their thoughts
and prayers. The Houthis are opportunistically using the suffering of
the Palestinian people to be able to reenergize their fighters, recruit
new ones and boost both their funding and their popularity. And it is
working. With the advent of US and UK strikes, Houthi recruitment is
rapidly accelerating, and other groups in the region, including the Al
Shabab in Somalia, are seeing a similar upsurge in energy and
motivation to fight. With the advent of the US and UK strikes, the Gaza
narrative is no longer necessary; a complete resolution of the
situation for the Palestinians would still leave the Houthis with
plenty of reasons to attack shipping in their own minds and in the eyes
of their fighters and supporters. Divorcing the narrative from Gaza,
however, would have helped to potentially motivate other states who are
suffering from the Houthi attacks--like Egypt--to play a bigger, more
visible role. While it would still potentially diminish some of the
Houthi momentum if the Gaza crisis ended, that momentum may now have
taken on a life of its own.
Iranian Inspiration
For most of the last decade, the Houthis were primarily focused on
taking over sovereign control of Yemen. In the past, their leaders have
shown a profound lack of understanding of the maritime domain. For
example, at one point they proposed that in order to fix the FSO SAFER,
they would simply repaint the exterior hull of the vessel while it was
still at sea. Iran, by contrast, has shown remarkable ability to use
maritime attacks to send targeted messages to specific interlocutors.
In 2019, 2021 and 2023 in particular, Iran engaged in a series of
attacks on vessels and facilities that had a noticeable impact in
changing different states' or individuals' posture toward Iran.
Throughout those attacks, Iran did not cause a major maritime
environmental spill (despite hitting tankers), and, with one
exception--the MERCER STREET in July 2021--did not take human life. The
Houthis, by contrast, have shown reckless disregard for the marine
environment and human life in almost equal measure. In the past, Iran
has admitted that they have directed the Houthis to attack particular
vessels, and have helped build the Houthi capacity to conduct maritime
strikes. The recent haphazard attacks on vessels with no clear ties or
very tenuous ties to their professed target shows that they are not
concerned about getting it wrong. And given how they have viewed and
treated the lives of Yemenis over the years, it is safe to say that
they do not regard the sanctity of human life in a manner consistent
with international norms. The Houthis are imitating Iranian aggression,
without understanding or replicating Iranian precision. This puts
seafarers at immense risk.
Iranian Support
Iran has long provided material support to the Houthis, arming them
with a range of both small arms and light weapons and more
sophisticated drones and ballistic weapons. Without Iran, the current
aerial assault on shipping would not have been possible. Benefitting
from the chaos that the Houthis have created over the last two months,
Iran has resumed its overt support for the Houthis and this creates
increased concern for ships in the region. Iran has provided
intelligence and targeting to the Houthis, particularly in the recent
attacks on US-linked vessels. Two vessels--the MV SAVIZ and the MV
BEHSHAD--are ostensibly Iranian owned commercial vessels that operate
in the southern Red Sea. They have, however, long been used to support
the Houthis and both collect and provide intelligence. Iran's more
sophisticated maritime capacity is a major factor in increasing the
threat that the Houthis pose. At the same time, recent Iranian attacks
on ships as far away as 200 miles off the coast of India and
longstanding Iranian aggression against ships in the Strait of Hormuz
should serve as a reminder that as much as the world can sanction Iran,
Iran can still cripple the flow of international maritime commerce. In
combination with the more erratic Houthis, and potentially others--like
pirates based out of Somalia--this could create long-term hardship for
the world's economy and those responsible for the physical movement of
international trade.
Maritime Significance
The nature of global commerce makes this situation a major threat
to the world's economic stability as well as critical supply chains and
desperately needed humanitarian assistance. According to data from
Lloyds List, the Bab al Mandeb--the southern entrance to the Red Sea--
has seen a 47% year on year decrease between the third week of January
2023 and the third week of January 2024. That level of decline remained
consistent in the fourth week of January. The Suez Canal--a major
factor in Egypt's economy--saw a 36% decline in the third week and a
45% decline in the fourth week. Meanwhile, the Cape of Good Hope--the
southernmost point of Africa--has seen an 80% increase in year on year
traffic this January. This is already affecting insurance rates, which
have increased as much as 40 times what they were, and, as a result,
the cost of shipping. According to the accounting firm Ernst and Young,
the six days during which the EVER GIVEN was famously stuck in the Suez
canal in March 2021 cost the shipping industry $416 million per hour.
The costs of the Houthi attacks, however, will be far greater and will,
as a result, be passed on to consumers throughout the world. The cost
of everything is likely to increase, given the integrated nature of
supply chains. While much attention has been paid to energy supplies,
oil and gas are fungible commodities that can be rerouted more easily.
By contrast, specific goods in specific containers have to get to
specific destinations. Disrupting the 30% of global container traffic
that traverses the Red Sea will therefore have a greater impact on the
economy than the 10% of oil that traverses the same passage.
Knock-on Concerns
Diverting ships around Africa comes with other concerns, as well,
particularly for larger containerized vessels. African ports are too
shallow to host those larger vessels, meaning that there is no safe
harbor for such vessels in the event of a storm, an emergency, or even
a need for resupply. And the weather is a concern--both in terms of the
strong storm systems that have already been battering the Western
Indian Ocean, and in terms of the traditional challenges associated
with navigating around the Cape of Good Hope, the southern tip of
Africa. Furthermore, the major increase in traffic around Africa means
that the African ports are now overrun and do not have the capacity to
resupply and service the vessels that are able to call. Finally African
maritime security concerns, while recently calmer, could reemerge as
major spoilers, with the combination of inspiration from the Houthis
and opportunity from the heavy increase in vessel traffic. Piracy off
Somalia and Nigeria, and terrorist attacks in various places remain
serious threats to the safety of shipping and the free flow of maritime
commerce.
Houthi Escalation
In addition to the threats that ships face in diverting around
Africa, there are added concerns that could emanate from Yemen. Thus
far, the attacks have manifested in three primary forms: capturing a
vessel, aerial attacks on vessels, and at least one surface attack on a
vessel. After capturing the GALAXY LEADER, the Houthis likely have
satisfied their appetite for demonstrating that capacity. Taking a
vessel comes with all sorts of challenges, and since they have not been
after ransom money, it is unlikely that they will attempt to take more
vessels in that manner. That said, taking ships for ransom could become
an interest in the future. The aerial assault, however, is likely to
continue as long as the weaponry exists to launch it. With longstanding
arms smuggling routes to provide the Houthis with weaponry, it is
unlikely the US and UK will be able to eradicate that capacity any time
soon. Even taking out 100% of that aerial assault capacity, however,
the Houthis can still attack ships. During the last decade, they have
piloted the use of remote controlled ``bomb boats'' to attack ships in
a manner similar to the USS COLE bombing in 2000, without having to
commit suicide in the process. Furthermore, piracy has showed that with
sufficient will, minimally armed individuals can cause significant
hardship to maritime commerce. Surface attacks and even unmanned
underwater system-based attacks could become a problem in the near
future.
Further Concerns
Having managed to get the oil off the FSO SAFER onto a more
seaworthy vessel, the YEMEN, the UN has now paused the completion of
the effort to protect Yemen and the Red Sea from the threat posed by
that situation. The Houthis, therefore, could target that vessel,
causing a catastrophic spill out of spite, further hampering access
through the Red Sea. They could also attack and cause a similar spill
on another tanker, producing the same effect. It would be consistent
with the Houthis mindset to do so, blame the West, and seek to profit
off the clean-up process. This could cause multi-generational harm to
the other Red Sea states, not least of all Egypt. Additionally, the
Houthis have publicly warned that they have the capacity to cut the
submarine cables that traverse the Red Sea and account for one third of
the world's internet. They have cut cables in the past and doing so now
would cause significant global economic hardship. With their amplified
will over the last few months, the Houthis can continue to find ways to
be disruptive for months and years to come.
Yemeni Stability
Yemen has benefitted from a ceasefire since 1 April 2022, and the
Houthis were close to accepting a peace deal with the war weary Saudis
before this situation erupted. The reenergized Houthi movement,
however, may not only reject peace, but renew efforts to take Marib--
seen by the Houthis as their economic future in light of its oil
production capacity--and other parts of Yemen's territory. With the
momentum behind them, the Houthis could easily restart the fight to
take over Yemen's sovereignty. It is thus absolutely critical to
support and empower the Government of Yemen--not just militarily--to be
able to stand on its sovereignty and defend itself. The West
effectively stopped the Government of Yemen from retaking the Port of
Hodeidah on the Red Sea and other coastal areas in 2018 in favor of a
deal--known as the Stockholm Agreement--that sought to deescalate
tensions. The Houthis have never abided by that deal and Yemen has
suffered from leaving the Houthis in control of the coast. Now global
shipping is suffering from that as well. Yemen's sovereignty needs to
be a serious consideration in how to shift the dynamics of this
currently spiraling situation.
Conclusion
The Houthis are merchants of chaos, and can play a disruptive role
in the Red Sea for months and years to come. As long as they are
motivated to fight, they will continue to do so. The more they are
perceived to be standing up to the US, UK and other Western governments
and institutions, the more support they will garner. With that support,
they will be able to continue to replenish arsenals and recruit new
members, as well as inspire others to fight. The US needs to change its
approach, empower the Government of Yemen, help inspire others who are
suffering the consequence of these attacks to step up, and work to
divert the Houthi attention away from the maritime domain. The Houthis
claim to be standing up for the innocent Palestinians who have been
harmed by the war between Israel and Hamas. Their form of protest is to
attack and threaten the lives of innocent seafarers, and harm the
innocent people around the globe who rely on maritime shipping for
survival. They cannot be allowed to maintain their false narrative and
every effort must be made to restore the freedom of navigation and the
safety of global maritime commerce.

Mr. Webster of Florida. Mr. Gold, you are recognized for 5
minutes.

TESTIMONY OF JONATHAN GOLD, VICE PRESIDENT OF SUPPLY CHAIN AND
CUSTOMS POLICY, NATIONAL RETAIL FEDERATION

Mr. Gold. Thank you, Chairman Webster, Ranking Member
Larsen, and Ranking Member Carbajal, for the invitation to
testify today on behalf of the National Retail Federation on
the impacts of Red Sea shipping disruptions.
Retail is the Nation's largest private-sector employer,
contributing $3.9 trillion to the annual GDP and supporting one
in four U.S. jobs. That's 52 million working Americans. Having
a safe, efficient, predictable, and timely supply chain is
critical to the success of any retailer to ensure that products
are available to the consumer, whether they shop online or in-
store.
We all saw firsthand the disruption caused when supply
chains were completely overwhelmed during the pandemic. Through
significant efforts, supply chains were returning to normal and
congestion issues were resolved. We are now faced with another
significant supply chain disruption because of the attacks in
the Red Sea--this on top of the restrictions impacting the
Panama Canal, as was mentioned by the Members.
While the volume of U.S. trade through the Suez Canal is
small, the disruption impacts are being felt far and wide. The
biggest challenges for retailers are the additional volatility,
cost, uncertainty, and overall risks to the supply chain.
Retailers are being forced to readjust their supply chains to
ensure product delivery.
Our members are seeing increased time--an additional 10 to
14 days or longer--to the supply chains to compensate for
longer vessel sailing times around the Cape of Good Hope. Our
members are also seeing an increase in shipping costs. This
meant a significant increase in freight rates on the spot
market. While not as high as during the pandemic, there are
concerns about what this means for future contract rates.
Carriers are also seeking a number of different surcharges
and fees, including war risk surcharges, emergency contingency
surcharges, and others. We understand that longer vessel times
impact fuel, labor costs, and insurance costs. Our members want
to make sure these fees and surcharges cover real costs and are
not intended for profit.
One member has told me that they have had carriers ask for
an increase of $1,500 to $3,000 per container, which represents
a 38-percent to 73-percent cost increase for directly affected
cargo.
We are also hearing that the rates and surcharges are not
just being applied to directly impacted cargo, but to other
routes such as the EU-to-U.S. route because of equipment
availability.
Some members are also noting that their overseas vendors
are starting to see some challenges with their ability to
source raw materials in a timely manner, as well as increased
costs for those components.
Retailers are working closely with their supply chain
partners to address the disruptions and to implement mitigation
strategies. It is important to note that retailers are making
decisions now regarding back-to-school and holiday shipments.
Some of these strategies include transiting the Cape of Good
Hope, as talked about. For cargo and vessels waiting to transit
the Red Sea, the carriers have made the decision to shift
around the Cape of Good Hope. NRF members have to rely on the
decision of the carrier, but then address the delayed
transportation issues once the cargo arrives in the U.S.
Our members are also indicating that they are shifting
supply chains back to utilizing west coast ports, and then
using intermodal rail to get the cargo back to the east coast.
Unfortunately, the Panama Canal is not a viable option right
now. Some retailers are shifting to air cargo for more timely
and sensitive shipments. In addition, retailers are working
with their overseas vendors to encourage early shipments to
avoid disruptions.
While many are focusing on the current situation, more
challenges will be created the longer these disruptions
continue. The Federal Government needs to start paying
attention to these issues now to help avoid significant
congestion in the coming months.
We are now entering the new cycle for new ocean contract
negotiations. Retailers are concerned about what the impact the
long-term disruptions will have on this next contract. We do
not want to see rates similar to the pandemic, which could
impact inflation.
Shippers are also looking to shift back to the west coast
ports. We know a significant amount of cargo had shifted away
because of the pandemic and the most recent labor negotiations.
We need to make sure that our ports, terminals, railroads,
harbor drayage providers, and warehouses are ready for the
increased cargo volumes that will shift back.
Railcar imbalances and increased demand could result in
more congestion and increases in dwell. We are already hearing
that the dwell time is starting to tick up on the rail side. We
need to make sure we have an available fleet of chassis and
readily available terminal appointments to be able to move
containers out of the terminals as quickly as possible. Some
believe this congestion could begin within the next 4 to 6
weeks, so, we need to convene stakeholders now to plan.
There are also concerns that vessels and equipment will be
out of position, including empty containers, because of the
longer sailing times. Vessel space is becoming increasingly
constrained, which may impact replenishment for spring and
summer merchandise. Some carriers are canceling certain
services, which will create additional capacity constraints in
the market.
While the focus of today's hearing is on the Red Sea
disruptions, it is important to note that other supply chain
challenges will further complicate the global supply chain. The
ripple effects will impact other issues. I already noted the
Panama Canal restrictions. As retailers are looking to address
these issues, they are also planning for potential labor
disruptions at east coast and gulf coast ports because of the
current labor negotiations between the ILA and USMX. The
contract expires at the end of September, during the peak
shipping season, when retailers are bringing in their holiday
merchandise. Retailers are making their shipping decisions now
to avoid any potential issues.
In conclusion, the challenges from the ongoing attacks in
the Red Sea are significant and will get worse the longer they
occur. We appreciate the attention and actions of the
administration with Operation Prosperity Guardian and building
an international coalition. More work, though, needs to go into
efforts to ensure safe passage for vessels and mariners through
the Red Sea. Their safety is of the utmost importance. While we
are addressing the immediate issues, we need to make sure that
we are preparing for the potential congestion issues that will
impact U.S. ports in the coming months.
Thank you again for the opportunity to testify today.
[Mr. Gold's prepared statement follows:]

Prepared Statement of Jonathan Gold, Vice President of Supply Chain and
Customs Policy, National Retail Federation
Thank you, Chairman Webster, Ranking Member Carbajal, and Members
of the Subcommittee for inviting me to testify on behalf of the
National Retail Federation (NRF) and the retail industry on the impacts
of the supply chain disruptions impacting the Red Sea and Suez Canal.
NRF passionately advocates for the people, brands, policies and
ideas that help retail succeed. From its headquarters in Washington,
D.C., NRF empowers the industry that powers the economy. Retail is the
nation's largest private-sector employer, contributing $3.9 trillion to
annual GDP and supporting one in four U.S. jobs--52 million working
Americans. For over a century, NRF has been a voice for every retailer
and every retail job, educating, inspiring and communicating the
powerful impact retail has on local communities and global economies.
Having a safe, efficient, predictable and timely supply chain is
critical to the success of any retailer. The ability to ensure that
products are available for the consumer, whether they shop in-store or
online, is key to the retail supply chain. We all saw firsthand the
disruption caused when supply chains were completely overwhelmed from
beginning to end during the pandemic. Through significant efforts on
behalf of the private sector and governments, supply chains were
returning to normal as trade flows returned to pre-pandemic growth
levels and congestion issues were resolved. Unfortunately, we are now
faced with another significant supply chain disruption with the attacks
impacting commercial shipping through the Red Sea and Suez Canal. This
is on top of disruptions already impacting the flow of commerce through
the Panama Canal due to restrictions from low water volumes.
While the overall volume of U.S. trade that transits the Suez Canal
is only about 12%, the impacts of the disruptions are being felt far
and wide. The biggest challenge for retailers posed by the ongoing
disruptions is the additional volatility, cost, uncertainty and overall
risk to the supply chain. Once again, retailers and other shippers are
being forced to readjust their supply chains to ensure product
delivery.
Current Supply Chain Challenges
To date, our members have experienced the following supply chain
challenges because of the issues in the Red Sea:

Increased shipping timelines. As a result of the attacks,
ocean carriers have decided to shift their sailings away from the Red
Sea to go around the Cape of Good Hope. Because of this change, NRF
members have indicated that they have had to add an additional 10-14
days to their supply chains to compensate for the longer vessel times.

Increased shipping costs. Tied to the longer transit
times, retailers are seeing an increase in transportation costs. We
have seen a significant increase in freight costs on the spot market.
While rates are not as high as we saw during the pandemic, there are
concerns about what this means for future rate discussions. In addition
to the increase in freight rates, ocean carriers are also seeking to
pass along a number of different surcharges and fees to their
customers. While we certainly understand that the longer vessel times
impact fuel, labor costs and insurance costs, NRF members want to make
sure the new fees and surcharges actually cover real costs and are not
intended for profit. We also know that maritime insurance rates are
skyrocketing as well.

These new surcharges include Peak Season Surcharges, Transit
Diversion Surcharges, War Risk Surcharges, Contingency Adjustment
Surcharges, Emergency Contingency Surcharges and others. The Federal
Maritime Commission recently issued an advisory regarding the
surcharges and rate increases and will be holding a hearing on Feb. 7
to further explore this issue.

I've had one member tell me they have had carriers ask for an
increase of $1,500-$3,000 per container, which represents a 38%-73%
cost increase for directly affected cargo. We are hearing that the
rates and surcharges are not just being applied to directly impacted
cargo, but to other routes such as Europe to the U.S. because of
equipment availability.

Material and Component Availability. We have heard from
some members that their overseas vendors are starting to see some
challenges with their ability to source raw materials in a timely
manner. They are also indicating increased costs for these components
as well. There have been recent reports of European manufacturers
shutting down because of their inability to get materials.
Risk Mitigation Efforts
NRF members are working closely with their supply chain partners to
address the disruptions and are implementing mitigation strategies to
ensure products arrive in time. It is important to note that retailers
are making decisions now regarding back-to-school and holiday
shipments.
Some of these mitigation strategies include:

Transit via the Cape of Good Hope. For cargo on vessels
that have been waiting to transit the Red Sea/Suez Canal, the carriers
have made the decision to make the shift to take the longer route
around the Cape of Good Hope. NRF members have to rely on the decision
of the carrier, but then address the delayed transportation issues when
the cargo arrives in the U.S.

Shift cargo to West Coast ports. Many NRF members have
indicated that they have shifted their supply chains back to utilizing
West Coast ports to avoid the disruptions and additional time because
of the Red Sea issues. They have decided to bring cargo into the West
Coast ports and then use intermodal rail to get the cargo back to the
East Coast, where it was intended. Unfortunately, because of the
current restrictions impacting the Panama Canal, that route is not a
viable option.

Use air cargo. Some retailers are shifting to using air
cargo for more sensitive and timely shipments.

Encourage earlier shipments. Retailers have been working
with their overseas vendors to encourage them to ship earlier as they
expect disruptions to increase.
Future Challenges
While many are focusing on the current impacts of the disruptions,
the longer the attacks and disruptions continue, the more challenges
that will be created. We believe the federal government needs to start
paying attention to these issues now to help avoid significant
congestion in the coming months.

Freight rates. While many retailers and other shippers
are still under their yearly ocean contract and are able to work with
the carriers on rate increases and surcharges, we are now entering the
cycle for new contract negotiations. Many NRF members are concerned
about the impact of long-term disruption on the next ocean freight
contract. We witnessed significant cost increases during the pandemic.
We certainly hope we do not see those kinds of rates again, which could
impact inflation, currently trending downward.

Port congestion. As noted earlier, many shippers are
looking to shift back to the West Coast ports. Unfortunately, this
shift may cause congestion at those ports if they are not properly
planning for the surge in cargo. We know a significant amount of cargo
shifted away from the West Coast during the most recent labor
negotiations. That cargo may shift back, so we need to make sure our
ports, terminals, railroads, drayage providers and warehouses are ready
for the increased volumes. We are already hearing that rail dwell times
are starting to tick up. Rail car imbalances and increased demand could
result in more congestion and increases in dwell. We need to make sure
there is chassis availability as well. One of the biggest drivers of
congestion during the pandemic was the lack of available chassis. We
are also hearing of terminal appointment challenges.

Efforts need to be made now to convene the right stakeholders to
plan accordingly to address these issues to ensure we don't see a
significant congestion challenge in the coming weeks. Some believe this
congestion could begin within the next 4-6 weeks, after Lunar New Year
when trade volumes start to pick up again.

Vessel and Equipment Issues. Because of the longer
transit times for routing around the Cape of Good Hope, there are
concerns that vessels and equipment will be out of position. There is
growing concern about the impact on empty container availability
overseas. We have heard from some members that vessel space is becoming
increasingly constrained, which may impact replenishment for spring and
summer merchandise. We have also seen reports of some carriers
canceling certain services, which will create additional capacity
constraints in the market.

While the focus of today's hearing is on the impacts of the attacks
and disruptions in the Red Sea, it is important to note that other
supply chain challenges will further complicate the global supply
chain. The ripple effects from these disruptions will impact other
ongoing issues as well. I noted earlier the current restrictions on
using the Panama Canal. Unfortunately, these restrictions are going to
continue and further impact the choices that shippers and carriers have
for an alternate route.
In addition, as retailers are addressing the Red Sea issues, they
are also planning for potential labor disruptions at East Coast and
Gulf Coast ports because of the ongoing labor negotiations between the
International Longshoremen's Association and the United States Maritime
Alliance. The contract is set to expire at the end of September, during
the peak shipping season when retailers are bringing in their holiday
merchandise. Again, retailers are making their shipping decisions now
and many are again looking to shift to the West Coast to avoid any
potential issues. NRF recently called for the ILA and USMX to return to
the bargaining table in the hopes of reaching a new deal before the
current one expires.
Conclusion
As we discussed, the challenges stemming from the ongoing attacks
in the Red Sea are significant and will get worse the longer this goes.
We appreciate the attention and actions that the administration has
taken with Operation Prosperity Guardian and building an international
coalition. We know that more work needs to go into the effort to ensure
safe passage for vessels and mariners through the Red Sea. Their safety
is of the utmost importance.
We know the future impacts that will result from ongoing
disruptions. While we are addressing the immediate issues impacting
transit through the Red Sea and Suez Canal, we need to make sure we are
preparing for the congestion issues that will impact U.S. ports in the
coming months.
Thank you again for the opportunity to testify on this important
issue.

Mr. Webster of Florida. Mr. Heindel, you are recognized for
5 minutes.

TESTIMONY OF DAVID W. HEINDEL, PRESIDENT, SEAFARERS
INTERNATIONAL UNION

Mr. Heindel. Thank you, Chairman Webster, Ranking Member
Carbajal, and the members of the committee for letting me
testify today. I am representing the interest of the seafarers
unions, not only domestically but internationally, as well,
with regards to this menace that we are all experiencing. We
represent the crews here in the States of the U.S.-flagged
vessels that have been attacked in the Red Sea.
These attacks in the Bab-el-Mandeb Strait have disrupted
international commerce and represent the greatest threat to the
merchant marine since World War II. The men and women of the
merchant marine are no strangers to armed conflict. Throughout
our history, we have battled privateers, commerce raiders,
mines, submarines, pirates, and terrorists. These attacks have
highlighted what every mariner knows: our jobs are essential,
they are dangerous, and may require us to sail into harm's way.
The Red Sea attacks represent the most technologically
advanced threat we have ever faced. Drones, anti-ship cruise
missiles, and anti-ship ballistic missiles have all targeted
American and foreign ships and their crews.
I want to thank the President, the Secretary of Defense,
TRANSCOM, CENTCOM, NAVCENT, and the other military components,
as well as the Maritime Administration, for their efforts on
our behalf. And it is thanks to them that we have managed to
avoid casualties so far.
These attacks have had a major impact on the global supply
chain. The Red Sea accounts for as much as 25 percent of the
world's container shipping trade. We have seen a 70-percent
reduction in ship transits and a 50-percent reduction in cargo
through the region. Several carriers, both international and
U.S.-flagged, have chosen to divert their vessels away from the
Red Sea, and instead make the trip around the Cape of Good Hope
to avoid this menace. This adds nearly 2 weeks to a typical
voyage each way. If these attacks continue, the impact will
have an effect on our economy and potentially add to a rise in
prices of consumer goods. It is critical for our economic
interests that this shipping route remain open.
As of today, we have not had any difficulty in crewing
ships headed through the warlike area, and no ship has sailed
late because of crew issues. It is our goal that every American
ship that has been called upon sails on time with a full
complement.
It is important to note that our ships are not combat
vessels, and they are not capable of defending themselves
against these kinds of attacks. We are wholly reliant on naval
support. We have been coordinating with TRANSCOM, MARAD, and
the MSC at a variety of levels to ensure the safe passage
through these areas.
Our biggest need right now is secure communications.
Whether this is in the form of specialized equipment, naval
liaisons embedded on board our ships, or additional American
civilian mariners with proper clearances and certificates on
board, having direct communications between our ships and
combat ships in the area is key. We have been informed by the
Military Sealift Command that they will be sending additional
personnel to the 5th Fleet NAVCENT Maritime Operations Center,
and we hope this enhances the flow of information between our
ships and their defenders in the region.
I am convinced that our mariners would prefer to only enter
the region when it is absolutely necessary and any nonessential
voyages be rerouted.
Having a reliable, dependable, and loyal maritime
transportation system is critical to American national
security. Programs like the Maritime Security Program, Tanker
Security Program, Cargo Preference, and the Jones Act create
and maintain jobs in peacetime so that the ships, their crews
are available when called upon by the Government. Every
American ship attacked so far has either been enrolled in the
MSP or is a Government-owned vessel crewed by civilian
mariners.
Finally, maritime labor is very concerned about how much
information is publicly available about these attacks. Thanks
to social media, we have seen information like ships'
locations, registration data, vessel schedules, speed, routes,
and destinations posted on the internet and made available in
almost real time. The level of detail being provided is far
beyond that needed to convey the message that American ships
need protection. This is actionable intelligence for the
Houthis, should they choose to use it. We have learned the hard
way in past conflicts that loose lips do sink ships, and we
need to make sure that this vital seaway is kept open to keep
commerce moving.
We merchant mariners are proud of our 250-year history of
service, and we have delivered the goods in peace and war, and
we will continue to do so. I would like to thank you for
holding this hearing, and I am happy to answer any questions
that you may have. Thank you.
[Mr. Heindel's prepared statement follows:]

Prepared Statement of David W. Heindel, President, Seafarers
International Union
Thank you Chairman Webster, Ranking Member Carbajal and the members
of the subcommittee for holding this hearing. My name is David Heindel,
and I am the President of the Seafarers International Union (SIU) and
the Maritime Trades Department (AFL-CIO). I went to sea in 1973 after
graduating from the SIU's entry-level mariners' program and sailed
aboard deep-sea vessels as a member of the engine department for nearly
a decade before coming ashore to serve the union in a variety of
capacities. On behalf of the SIU and the rest of maritime labor, we are
pleased to offer this testimony to Congress. Collectively, we represent
the crews of the U.S.-flag vessels that have been attacked, to date, in
the Red Sea.
The recent attacks on international and U.S.-flag shipping in the
Ban el-Mandeb Strait of the Red Sea have disrupted international
commerce and represent the greatest combat threat to the United States
Merchant Marine since the Vietnam War.
The men and women of the United States Merchant Marine are no
strangers to armed conflict. The Merchant Marine dates its birth to
1775, when Jeremiah O'Brien took control of the Unity sloop, and
captured HMS Margaretta in the Battle of Machias. Since then, in every
major American conflict, the Merchant Marine has played its role as
America's fourth arm of defense. During World War II, nearly 10,000
merchant mariners gave their lives to deliver the goods that kept our
allies and our armed forces in the fight for freedom in Europe. Most
recently, American commercial ships carried most of the sustainment
cargo needed during Operations Iraqi Freedom and Enduring Freedom. The
attacks against shipping in the Red Sea have highlighted what has long
been a fact of life for the American mariner--these are essential,
dangerous jobs, that may require sailing into harm's way.
American merchant mariners have learned many hard lessons over the
years when it comes to dealing with armed conflict. We have had to
learn to respond to attacks from armed privateers and commerce raiders.
We've navigated through mined harbors and rivers. We've braved
torpedoes fired from invisible submarines. We've dealt with attempted
hijackings, boarding by pirates and terrorist attacks in port. The
attacks in the Red Sea represent some of the most technologically
sophisticated threats we have ever faced. Attack drones armed with
explosive devices, anti-ship cruise missiles and anti-ship ballistic
missiles have all been employed against ships transiting the Red Sea.
We wish to thank the President and Secretary of Defense, the United
States Transportation Command (TRANSCOM), the United States Central
Command (CENTCOM), the United States Naval Forces Central Command
(NAVCENT) and the other relevant components of the United States
military for their efforts to date, that have successfully protected
U.S.-flag merchant shipping in the region. Despite the dozens of
attacks launched by the Houthi rebels, every U.S.-flag ship that has
transited the Red Sea has done so safely and without loss of life. We
are also grateful to Maritime Administrator Ann Phillips and the rest
of the Maritime Administration (MARAD) staff for their strenuous
support of our mariners during these illegal attacks.
The impact of these attacks on the global international supply
chain has been significant. Several international carriers have chosen
to divert their vessels from the Red Sea and Suez Canal approaches and
instead send those vessels around the Cape of Good Hope in Africa,
adding nearly two weeks transit times to vessel voyages as well as
sometimes sending shipping into areas of known pirate activity.
Increased transit times, coupled with the increased cost of insurance
has had a major impact on operations. The Red Sea accounts for 25% of
the world's container shipping miles. We have seen a 70% reduction in
ship transits and a 50% reduction in cargo moving through the region.
Not since the Second World War has there been such prolonged,
indiscriminate targeting of merchant shipping and as the crisis
continues, impacts are likely to widen. Given the importance of the Red
Sea on the Suez Canal route between Asia and Southern Europe--and more
importantly, the United States--it is paramount that access to these
critical shipping lanes remain open.
As noted, thanks to the significant support from the combatant
commands in the region, no U.S.-flag ship has been hit by a successful
attack from Yemen, and we have not yet lost a civilian mariner. We,
along with the rest of America, mourn the loss at sea of two U.S. Navy
personnel engaged in special operations to interdict weapons deliveries
to the Houthi rebels in Yemen. To date, we have not seen any
appreciable impact on mariner willingness to accept jobs on vessels
heading into the combat zone, and to date we have not had a ship fail
to sail on time because of a lack of crew due to these attacks. It is
our goal to ensure that every U.S.-flag ship that is called upon sails
on-time and with a full complement, as has been our long-standing
tradition.
Our ships are not combat vessels, and they are not capable, alone,
of repelling attacks from drones and anti-ship missiles. We are totally
reliant on the United States Navy and our allies to protect all U.S-
flag ships transiting the war-like zone. By long-standing practice, we
have coordinated with TRANSCOM, MARAD and the Military Sealift Command
(MSC) to provide on-going information, best practices, and critical
information necessary to ensure safe passage in these areas. Thanks to
this coordination, the shipping companies and labor organizations
responsible for the vessels and their crew have access to critical
situational updates from the relevant sources in the region.
In a recent letter to General Jacqueline Van Ovost, commander of
TRANSCOM, maritime labor noted the critical importance of ``continued
cooperation and information sharing, to ensure that our vessels and
their crews have all the tools needed to ensure safe transits of the
area. Especially critical are secure communication links between
vessels transiting the Red Sea and the naval vessels deployed in the
area to deter and defend against Houthi attacks,'' and specifically
asked for continued communication, `` . . . whether this is in the form
of specialized equipment, U.S. naval officers from the [Naval
Cooperation and Guidance for Shipping] NCAGS Shipping Control Teams,
U.S. civilian mariners with the proper security clearance and COMSEC
certification, or other naval liaisons being embedded on the
vessels[.]'' In response, TRANSCOM informed us that MSC would be
sending additional personnel to augment the Naval Cooperation and
Guidance for Shipping (NCAGS), 5th Fleet/NAVCENT Maritime Operations
Center, to enhance the flow of information between our ships and the
combatant commands in the region.
Traditionally, mariners who have been sent into active combat zones
have been entitled to hazard pay. We are working with our ship
operators to ensure that this past practice is implemented across the
U.S.-flag fleet. So far, we have had a number of good conversations
with our ship operators and we are confident that our members will
receive a small premium for the additional risks they are taking while
these attacks continue. However, I am convinced that every mariner
sailing in that region would say the small premium they are receiving
is nowhere near worth the risk of facing indiscriminate missile drone
and rocket attacks reigning down in their workplace and would prefer to
reroute around Africa than transit the conflicted region, in the
absence of a need to deliver an essential cargo to the area in
question. It is important to note, again, that we have had no issues
crewing vessels heading into the Red Sea because of these attacks so
far, but should the existing global conflict continue, non-essential
transits of a war zone may have a detrimental effect on the maritime
industry's ability to recruit and retain mariners in the future.
This fact highlights one of the messages we have been communicating
to Congress for decades--the continued need for a United States
Merchant Marine, crewed by American citizens, that can carry a
significant portion of the waterborne commerce of the United States, as
well as serve as a naval auxiliary and defense asset in times of
national emergency or armed conflict. The United States Merchant Marine
ensures that our nation has a reliable, dependable and loyal maritime
transportation system, and that is why we continue to advocate for
programs like the Maritime Security Program (MSP), Tanker Security
Program (TSP), cargo preference and the Jones Act, all of which ensure
peacetime jobs and infrastructure so that the ships, mariners,
intermodal networks and experience we need to safeguard our economic
security are there when we need them. To our knowledge, the U.S.-flag
ships that have been attacked in the region have all been either MSP
enrolled vessels or MSC civilian-mariner crewed vessels. This
reinforces what we have been telling Congress and the Administration
for years, namely, that continued support for the United States
Merchant Marine is critical to American national, economic and homeland
security.
Finally, maritime labor is concerned about the level of information
that has been made available publicly regarding these incidents. Modern
technology has made a wealth of information available to the public in
a way that is far more accessible than it ever has been before. This
includes vital information like ship locations, registration data, and
even things like transit speed and destinations. Since the start of
these attacks last November, there have been alarming breeches of
operational security, including disclosure of vessel schedules, routes
and other information regarding transits through the Red Sea. This
information has been released in almost real time. The public
dissemination of this kind of information, which can easily be rendered
into actionable intelligence by the rebels in Yemen, is dangerous, and
we would ask those in the press, whether professional or amateur, those
on social media and elsewhere to remember one of the axioms of the
Merchant Marine: ``Loose lips sink ships.''
The United States Merchant Marine is proud of our record over the
last quarter of a millennium. We have operated side-by-side with the
United States military in virtually every conflict in the history of
the United States. We provide the materiel and supplies to the
warfighter and they, in turn, have protected our vessels and crews as
we sail into harm's way. While the current situation involves the
Houthi rebels in Yemen, we may well face in the future more
sophisticated adversaries. The experience we are gaining now has
demonstrated to the U.S. citizen mariners who are in harm's way that
U.S. naval and other military personnel stand with them and will
continue to do so. Working together again has strengthened the bond
between the Merchant Marine and the military, and we hope our success
will deter our adversaries from taking unwise action against American
shipping. The efforts taken so far to protect our vessels in the region
have demonstrated the United States is committed to protecting its
shipping and keeping the sea lanes open, and we hope this will
incentivize other carriers to put their vessels under the U.S.-flag and
use American citizen mariners, as has happened in past conflicts.
Our members aboard ship and our organizations ashore are committed
to working with Congress, the Administration, and the Armed Forces to
continue doing what has been our traditional mission--to deliver the
goods, in peace and in war, as we have since 1775.
Thank you for holding this hearing on the vital topic, and I am
happy to answer any questions you may have.

Mr. Webster of Florida. Thank you for your testimony, and
we will now turn to questions from the panel. I will recognize
myself for 5 minutes for questions.
Mr. Darr, during the pandemic, we saw a clear impact on the
supply chain and disruptions of the global economy. Can you
share if there have been any lessons learned from that that we
might use now?
And if so, how would they be implemented to prevent future
situations this time around?
Mr. Darr. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would be happy to
answer that question.
I have to say that the fundamental problems that we saw,
particularly in the United States, really can be traced back to
much more of the shoreside component. And I think addressing
both the infrastructure and operational practices there can
help insulate us for future crises, whether it be one of this
scale or one of a different scale like the pandemic was. So, I
would emphasize a focus on fixing that part, because that was
essentially what failed us all as consumers, and also companies
trying to serve the economy.
When it comes to application to this particular situation,
I would say it taught us to expect the unexpected and not think
you really can predict what's coming next, be as nimble as
possible, and it has forced us to maintain some additional
capacity at substantial cost to be able to respond. And if we
did not have that additional capacity at hand right now, as we
do under the current market conditions, I would argue we
probably would be in a much, much more difficult situation than
we are. The reality is, because we have kept that additional
capacity available, we have been able to deploy it. And
although it takes longer and although it has some additional
costs associated with it, we are making it work, and the goods
are moving.
Mr. Webster of Florida. Dr. Ralby, simply put, what
objectives do you think the Houthis' movement is hoping to
achieve by perpetrating these attacks?
Mr. Ralby. Thank you, Chairman. Their main objective is to
advance their own movement. Their movement includes goals to
not only take over the remainder of Yemen, but to advance on
both Mecca and, ultimately, Jerusalem. They see this as a
global movement.
Theologically, the Houthis began with a certain
interpretation of how the world should be ordered. They have no
real interest in governing, they just have an interest in
advancing that ideology. And interestingly, that ideology is
actually at odds with Iran. The Iranian and Houthi ideology do
not line up. So, at some point, they will find themselves at
odds with each other. But for now, their interests are aligned
because the Houthis are willing to be as erratic and chaotic as
they are in pursuing both advancement on Yemen and, ultimately,
advancement on more of the region.
So, they're merchants of chaos. They really enjoy being
chaotic. And so, for right now, that is serving their purpose.
Mr. Webster of Florida. Can you share with the subcommittee
some of the risks currently incurred by American owned or
flagged maritime assets transiting the Red Sea, as well as any
other potential ones of concern emerging from the Houthis'
increased aggression?
Mr. Ralby. Certainly. I think since we began striking
targets within Yemen, there has been a major increase in the
direct attempt to target U.S.-affiliated ships because U.S.-
flagged ships are obvious, but there are also different layers
of ownership and connection to the United States that have led
to the Houthis targeting them more.
Interestingly, it appears that some of that targeting is
being aided and provided by Iran, who are much more capable in
discerning the overall character of vessels. They have proven
themselves over the years to be very competent in identifying a
specific entity attached to a vessel and targeting that entity
as their interlocutor in using their attacks. The Houthis don't
care that much, but they are enjoying the fact that they can
target U.S. ships right now.
The problem is that they are erratic, as I said, but also
they don't care if they get it wrong. So, as much as they may
be targeting one nationality of ship, they are likely
indifferent as to whether they actually hit it, as long as it
gets some attention. And they are also indifferent as to
whether they hit something else or someone else.
And so, this is a grave threat to all shipping, but
certainly at the moment, the increase in attention on the U.S.
and U.K. vessels has been problematic.
Mr. Webster of Florida. Thank you very much. It looks like
my time is out.
So, Mr. Carbajal, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Carbajal. Thank you, Mr. Chair. I will yield to Ranking
Member Larsen.
Mr. Larsen of Washington. Thank you, Mr. Carbajal.
Mr. Heindel, your statement warns that loose lips sink
ships. Can you underscore a little bit more how concerned
maritime labor is about the availability of vessel movement
information, which I can get on my phone right now, right? So,
can you talk a little bit about that?
Mr. Heindel. Well, there has been quite a bit. Obviously,
it is very hot news today. The media is all covering it, and
specifically, the maritime media is covering it very heavily.
And if you happen to look at some of the issues--and it's
practically daily--that are--or I should say coverage that they
are putting out there, it is showing vessels where they are,
and they are tracking these vessels, it is almost like, as I
said, in real time.
Now, perhaps it may be a few hours old, it may be a day
old. But the fact is that, if the media is covering it to such
a degree and putting this information out there, it's not
healthy. It's not healthy for our mariners, and it's not
healthy for the vessels that we are sailing on. It's important
that I think it be said that you don't have to have all of the
details in the photos that they are putting out there in their
journals or blogs, if you will.
Mr. Larsen of Washington. Well, I think the men and women
in the maritime labor are an important part of this supply
chain. I didn't check my tags on my clothes this morning, but I
imagine a few of these were not made in the U.S., and were
brought in containers on a few ships that traveled around the
world. I am not sure from where to where, but I am sure if we
all checked our clothing, we would find that we are connected
to this problem a little bit more closely ourselves than we all
realize. But you are all on the front line, and I appreciate
what you are doing out there to help us out.
Mr. Darr, while the Navy is doing a good job--a great job,
actually--in maintaining a minimum level of safety currently in
the Red Sea, are there other things the U.S. can be doing to
prepare for supply chain disruptions in the future?
Keep in mind, as I said in my opening, we are the Coast
Guard and Maritime Transportation Subcommittee, so, our focus
is largely on the supply chain side of things, the economic
side of things. Can you address what we can do to prepare for
supply chain disruptions in the future?
Mr. Darr. Thank you, sir, and when it comes to your
original comment about how closely connected we all are, I
think that is very true, and I would urge everyone to think
about that. Because again, we are a conduit for world trade,
and we work best and we serve our customers' needs the best
and, ultimately, the consumers best when supply chains are
functioning in an integrated way.
So, I would suggest infrastructure investments in the
physical infrastructure; changing some of the operational
constraints on maintaining inventory so there is more of a
surge capacity, including impacts that it may have on
warehousing and shipping capability and things like that; find
the right balance between regulating what needs to be
regulated, say, on the environmental side and the safety side
against the practical needs of keeping goods moving. It's not
an easy thing to do, but that pragmatism is required in order
to keep things functioning.
From the Navy's standpoint, of course, keeping the sealanes
open. I think it was my third day in Navy boot camp, when I was
a very impressionable 18-year-old, when I was taught that that
was one of our fundamental missions. And I think, worldwide,
whether it is the Red Sea, Strait of Malacca, doesn't matter, I
think that is an essential part of it, to keep commerce
flowing.
But what's happening today with the kinetic responses to
the activity there, that's treating a symptom. And I think
that, ultimately, to keep sealanes peaceful and open requires a
strong element of diplomacy that maybe we shouldn't expect to
shoulder on behalf of the United States Navy or other navies,
but rather the diplomats and Government leaders that support
that.
Mr. Larsen of Washington. In your testimony, I just want to
clarify one thing, as well, that you said during COVID, we had
the backups at the ports, but things could get there, and this
is sort of the opposite. Things are having trouble getting to
the ports because of the attacks, but our ports largely are
resilient, more resilient than they had been during COVID. Did
I get that right?
Mr. Darr. There is extra capacity available. Our operations
people advise me on the terminals we call, they are operating
at about 60 percent capacity right now, and a terminal is
optimized at around 80 percent or so. During the pandemic, we
saw numbers like 115, 120 percent.
So, that surge capacity to absorb this is available at the
moment. But we shouldn't take that for granted, and there will
be some times because of the modification of the services,
where we will get large volumes arriving at once, and those
need to be dealt with. But I think those will be transient
situations where it was a rather long haul during COVID.
Mr. Larsen of Washington. Great, thanks.
I yield back, thanks.
Mr. Webster of Florida. Mr. Babin, you are recognized for 5
minutes.
Dr. Babin. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, I appreciate it, and I
appreciate you witnesses coming forward in this very, very
serious development.
Well, we have heard the numbers: 20 percent of all
container shipping, 10 percent of seaborne oil, and 8 percent
of LNG pass through the Suez Canal; a dramatic increase in
attacks since October of 2023. And quite frankly, I don't know
if this is sustainable. Many companies have ceased transits
through the Red Sea, increases in risk, insurance premiums,
transit times, fuel costs, et cetera.
We have announced, of course, Operation Prosperity
Guardian, an international coalition. I certainly like that.
But throughout October, U.S. Navy destroyers intercepted
numerous missiles fired by Houthi forces over the Red Sea, and
Houthi air defense also shot down a MQ-9 Reaper. Probably, that
Reaper came out of my district outside of Houston.
And the Houthi forces on November the 19th seized control
of a British-owned ship, Japanese-flagged, the Galaxy Leader.
And after 3 months, they are still holding that ship and still
holding the crew. As a former merchant seaman myself, that
greatly disturbs me. We have to protect our merchant mariners'
lives, as well as our allied merchant mariners.
Over and over, we have seen a number of attacks by Houthi
fighters firing on U.S. Navy helicopters with small arms, et
cetera. Now we have lost three U.S. military personnel, dead.
We had two SEALs lost at sea, over two dozen American military
personnel wounded. I think it's high time that the United
States retaliate in a way that will make these folks remember
and be aware of what they are playing with, and that is playing
with fire.
So, I would ask, Mr. Ralby, if you would, in your written
testimony, you shared some of the downsides of diverting ships
around Africa, specifically highlighting a lack of safe harbors
and the increased potential for piracy. Somalia is out there.
What can carriers do to mitigate some of those risks if our
administration doesn't strike back? What is the current
alternative?
Mr. Ralby. Thank you, sir. I think, first of all, I would
agree that there needs to be retaliation. But retaliation does
not necessarily mean giving them exactly what they want, which
is a direct confrontation, militarily, with the United States.
So, I think we need to retaliate by finding ways that will
actually persuade them, and they cannot be persuaded in the
ways that we would be persuaded. So, we need to look to
solutions that will draw their attention away from shipping,
and that is a critical, critical piece of this.
In order to make shipping more safe, particularly through
Somalia, we need to be looking at how to resuscitate some of
the lessons we learned 10, 12 years ago--or even longer now--
when we were dealing with Somali piracy on a day-to-day basis.
We saw two attacks yesterday, so, this is a real threat. The
skills for piracy were not lost over the last decade, they were
transferred. A lot of the attacks were actually by Somali
pirates against vessels that were engaged in illicit
trafficking. And so, the skills are still there, the reporting
just hasn't been there and the attacks on vessels engaged in
legitimate international maritime commerce haven't been there.
But we need to be ready for that possibility. To that, I
think we need to take a new look at Best Management Practices
5, the guidance that is given to shippers to harden their
vessels and ensure safest operations for averting piracy
attacks. We need to ensure that we have a greater familiarity
with where there are potential safe harbor options. And as the
United States, we could do a lot to try to support African
ports in being ready to provide fuel supplies, food supplies,
fresh water supplies, other husbandry services to the increased
traffic.
We have seen an 80-percent, year-on-year increase going
around the Cape of Good Hope. That is a major increase.
Dr. Babin. Right.
Mr. Ralby. And so, that is a critical point.
Dr. Babin. Yes, sir. I would also remind you that when
Somali piracy was at its peak, they seized several Russian
vessels. The Russians did not mess around with them. They did
not play. And I think that it goes without saying that hitting
back and hitting back very hard teaches people a lesson.
I am sure diplomacy is great, but you cannot project
weakness. And that is what we have seen with all of the attacks
going on, and the further threats, and trying to tie it in some
form or fashion to the Israeli war. And I dare say that, even
if the Israeli war were over, we would probably continue to see
Houthi attacks in that Red Sea area.
It looks like I am out of time. So, Mr. Chairman, I will
yield back. Thank you.
Mr. Webster of Florida. The gentleman yields back. Mr.
Carbajal, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Carbajal. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Heindel, there is no question the Navy is doing an
incredible job thwarting the Houthi attacks. How does the
treatment of U.S.-flagged vessels differ from other ships
utilizing flags of convenience?
And should the Navy be prioritizing the protection of
American-owned, American-flagged, and American-crewed vessels,
many of which are carrying defense and humanitarian cargoes?
Mr. Heindel. Thank you for that question, Congressman. In
simple terms, I believe they should be, but we do have an
obligation as well to support all commerce going through that
area. I believe that is the goal. But if there are going to be
ships that are queuing up to be escorted through the area, I
believe that U.S.-flagged should be priority.
Now, first of all, it is the U.S. taxpayer dollar on the
line here, and I think it is vitally important that we look to
protect our seafarers, and help the rest of the world when we
can.
Mr. Carbajal. Thank you. What is the most important thing
that can be done to further protect U.S. vessels and American
mariners?
Mr. Heindel. Right now, the important thing is
communications. As I indicated earlier, we need better
communications between the commercial vessels that are active
in the Red Sea and being escorted or waiting to be escorted.
And if we have the communications that the Navy has or the
Military Sealift Command has, we would be in much better
position than we are today. Right now, we are using, basically,
the radio or mobile phones, if we are fortunate enough to have
the connectivity. But having the communications with the combat
vessels is vital.
Certainly, the way things are currently in the Red Sea, I
believe I have seen a news piece that said there is about 75
minutes between the time the missile is launched to the time it
hits its target. So, we need very quick communications with the
combat vessels.
Mr. Carbajal. Thank you.
Mr. Gold, I am glad we were able to work together
throughout the pandemic to enact meaningful legislation in the
form of the Ocean Shipping Reform Act. One thing we learned in
that process, though, is what happens when we are reliant on a
supply chain dominated by foreign interests.
What are your members doing to increase the share of cargo
that goes on U.S.-flagged ships?
Mr. Gold. Thank you, Congressman, and we definitely
appreciate all of your support throughout the pandemic to get
the Ocean Shipping Reform Act put through. I think our members
are continuously looking at diversifying their supply chains,
whether it is away from China or elsewhere, but it takes time
to move their supply chains. And unfortunately, with the
ongoing challenges that we see, even when you go and look to
diversify, you are being impacted by something else.
So, I think, again, retailers are looking to make their
shifts, but we have got to have open, stable shipping routes to
be able to make sure we can get product to where it needs to
go. Unfortunately, we are not able to bring everything back
here to make. Folks are looking at friendshoring, onshoring,
ally-shoring, but it takes time to develop those. So, they are
trying to make sure they are doing what they can to make sure
products are getting here when they need to be here for the
consumer.
Mr. Carbajal. Thank you.
Mr. Darr, today we are talking about the appropriate U.S.
response to Houthi attacks in the Red Sea. Given that MSC
doesn't flag a single ship in the United States, doesn't pay
United States taxes, and doesn't employ American mariners, how
should the U.S. Navy prioritize the protection of MSC ships?
Mr. Darr. Well, first of all, I will say we do have a large
base of operations in the U.S. We are number one in the U.S.
market, we do employ a lot of American citizens, including
myself sitting here today, and we do pay taxes where they are
due in the United States.
But that's not what I came here to talk about today. What I
would like to address is your question straight on, and it
comes down to we are there to serve the commerce needs of the
world's trading partners, and what they need, we will provide.
And what they need right now is a very competitive service with
other options that are out there. We provide that through a
variety of flags. We are based in Switzerland, and our
corporate headquarters is there in Switzerland, physically, as
it has been continuously since 1978, which, by the way, has
corporate tax rates that are very close to OECD Pillar Two.
And taxation is not the real issue here. And what we would
like to see is the trading partners keep the sealanes open,
whether that is the United States or whether a larger burden is
shouldered by other trading partners around the world, which I
think it should be, including some of the largest that are
absent from these operations and these risks right now. They
should all do so because the merchant navies of the world are
not capable of keeping the sealanes open themselves, but they
will adapt to whatever the needs are of the customers and the
countries that are behind them.
Mr. Carbajal. OK, thank you.
Mr. Chair, I am out of time.
Mr. Webster of Florida. The gentleman yields back. Mr.
Mast, you are next.
Mr. Mast. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Carbajal, will you engage with me for 1 minute so I can
understand something?
Mr. Carbajal. Sure.
Mr. Mast. Just listening to your line of questioning, are
you advocating that a non-U.S.-flagged vessel received no
protection?
Mr. Carbajal. No. What I am saying is that I appreciate all
commerce. It's important when you consider the global trade,
the dependence we have. But I think that taxpayers, the United
States taxpayers, would want us to prioritize, first and
foremost, American-taxpaying companies.
Mr. Mast. Very good. Just thank you for clarifying that. I
agree with that. I would love to see agreement on that issue as
it pertains to our southern border and prioritizing Americans
first. I think that's something that we should take that same
ideology and apply it there--not to conflate the issues, but I
think they are similar, and so, I was glad to hear you bring it
up in that way as it relates to flagged vessels.
I want to go to a couple of things that were brought up
here and, Mr. Ralby, I will start with you. You used the term
``persuade'' as it relates to responses that the U.S. could put
forward. And just the first question would go to the Biden
administration's policies towards Yemen, taking them off the
Foreign Terrorist Organizations list. They have received about
$3 to $3\1/2\ billion in aid since being taken off it. Has that
persuaded them not to attack?
Mr. Ralby. Let me clarify. The Houthis are 100 percent not
the Government of Yemen. So----
Mr. Mast [interrupting]. Has it persuaded, though, the
Houthi--they are Yemeni, correct?
Mr. Ralby. They do not see themselves as Yemeni, no. They
are physically occupying territory in Yemen, but the Houthi
movement sees itself as temporarily occupying Yemen in advance
of a greater attempt to take over. They currently control 30
percent of the territory of Yemen and 70 percent of the
population. Seventy-five percent of that population is under
the age of 29. So, they are revolutionizing a very young
population, but they do not see themselves as Yemeni.
Mr. Mast. And they may not be the Government, but it is
always an important question to ask whenever you are looking at
our foreign policy, is does our aid, does our foreign policy
support what we want out of each individual country?
Because kind of going to going back to what Mr. Carbajal
said, it has to represent the American taxpayer, right? And
does that $3 to $3\1/2\ billion support what we want out of
Yemen towards the policy towards the United States of America?
I would say not. Maybe you want to have the argument that way,
but----
Mr. Ralby [interrupting]. I would agree that our foreign
policy towards Yemen is failing at the moment in that we have
for several administrations consistently failed to bolster the
Yemen Government. We have focused our attention on the Houthis
since the outset of the coup in 2015, but we have not provided
the wherewithal.
In 2018, the U.S. was part of a major effort to prevent the
Government of Yemen from retaking the Port of Hudaydah on the
Red Sea coast. That is now a critical strategic failure on our
part, because if the Government of Yemen controlled that sea
access, we would perhaps not be having the same conversation we
are having today.
And so, I agree that we need to rethink our foreign policy
towards Yemen, particularly because Yemen has long been the
sort of forgotten corner of the Middle East. It is a very sad
reality. And so, we have not paid enough attention to
understanding, as well, the Houthi mentality, which is why, to
the point of Mr. Babin and others, we need to strike back. But
our way of striking back has to be geared towards providing
benefit to the U.S. public.
If we just want to strike back for the sake of striking
back, we may find ourselves actually making things worse. And
that is, unfortunately, what seems to be happening right now.
The Navy is very good at doing its job and fulfilling its
mission, but that mission right now that it has been set on is,
unfortunately, backfiring with regard to protecting shipping,
protecting seafarers, and making commerce free flowing.
Mr. Mast. I don't agree with liberal mentality like that. I
mean, we are Americans. If somebody hits us, there's going to
be a reckoning, and we are going to hit back. And that's just
the American way, and it should always be the American way,
flat out.
I want to go to some different questions at this point. I
want to talk about range, armaments, reconnaissance,
maneuverability, quantity, capabilities. This is advanced in
terms of these drone systems throughout not just conflict
between United States of America and vessels, but we saw this
going on with Saudi Arabia and Houthis and the conflicts that
have taken place there.
Are we dealing for the vessels with strictly radio or line
of sight, or do you have another capability with which you are
able to track the inbound drone strikes?
Mr. Darr. Generally speaking, what the military operators
have said is to use some established lines of communication via
CENTCOM, or through UKMTO secondarily, and that the first
should come through VHF, which, obviously, has some downside,
because everyone listens to VHF 16, including the bad guys, but
also that they offer satellite communication options where, if
you call them, they will pick it up. But that's not a secure
line of communication.
Then, of course, we have some ability to have awareness of
what is going on to the extent that AIS is being used. That
sends a signal from other vessels in the area, too. But
obviously, the bad guys in the region are not going to have AIS
transponders on if they have them at all.
Mr. Mast. I have many more questions I would love to ask
you guys on armaments and reconnaissance and maneuverability,
but my time has ended.
I appreciate the increase in time, Mr. Chairman, and I have
nothing to yield back.
Mr. Webster of Florida. The gentleman yields back. Mr.
Garamendi is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Garamendi. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and gentlemen,
thank you very much for your testimony. The more this testimony
has gone on, the more the questions have been asked, the more
complex the situation is revealed. I am going to go to Mr.
Ralby.
You have opined that we are not on the proper path towards
a solution. Could you define how we might find a solution and
what it might be?
Mr. Ralby. Yes. I certainly agree that when the U.S. gets
hit, we hit back. But what we have to be looking at is what we
want to accomplish with that. And the way that we hit back has
to be similar to what we have looked at even with Ukraine.
Russia posed a real threat to the United States. It always
has for the last century. And our approach to supporting
Ukraine has been in empowering the Ukrainians to fight for
their own sovereignty as they have been attacked. Similarly, we
need to look at the Yemen people and give them the
encouragement and the backing to actually fight for their own
sovereignty.
And that fight is multifold. Yes, it may be kinetic, but at
the moment, they also need to be recognized. The fact that
there is still confusion in critical circles around the world
as to whether the Houthis are the Government of Yemen or not is
part of the problem. We do not understand Yemen, and so, a
starting point needs to be there.
That then needs to also come with our help in divorcing the
narrative between what is happening in Israel and Gaza and what
is now happening in the Red Sea. Otherwise, we are not
protecting shipping, and we are not protecting U.S. interests
because they will continue to attack, and we have to provide
that divorce of the narrative in order to help embolden some of
the neighbors to be willing to speak up.
Egypt has been ominously quiet on this subject, though they
are losing a huge amount. Their canal revenues are dropping
precipitously. Their economy is going to take a major, major
hit. And unfortunately, they are not going to eke out even a
comment unless we divorce that narrative.
We then also need to get better in the information
operations space. We have allowed the Houthis to control the
narrative, and they are very good at it. Their propaganda
machine is really quite impressive for the target audience that
they are going to. We are very good at speaking to our people
about fighting back, about retaliation. Unfortunately, that
doesn't sit with the people that we need to be targeting right
now in order to change the situation.
So, if we want to change that context, we are going to have
to change our approach to messaging, to visibility. And as I
said, we may be not the right face for this. We may need to
find others to carry the water for us, or at least help us.
Mr. Garamendi. I think it would be very useful if you were
to repeat all of that at least a few more times, so that we
might come to a better understanding of what we are faced with.
Certainly, we already heard just a moment ago that some of us
do not understand the Yemen Government and the Houthi, quite
different, or the history of Saudi Arabia and the Houthis.
So, the question really to all of you is, how do we gain
the support of the international community in dealing with this
problem?
And I will also note that this particular onset of attacks
coincides with the Israel-Hamas war, and may not end if that
were to end, but nonetheless, did begin at that point.
So, the question to all of you in the next minute or so is,
how can we enhance international support for the protection of
shipping in the area?
I do note that Denmark yesterday sent an air defense vessel
into the Red Sea. Perhaps that's a start.
So, let's start, Mr. Heindel, and then right on down the
line. How do we get further or better international support for
the protection of shipping in the area?
Mr. Heindel. Well, my first thought is, that's above my pay
grade, but I think we all have to try to continue to educate
our allies in the importance of what's going on. In my view,
there is a bigger dynamic going on that is not on the surface
today. That's my personal opinion.
But the fact is that we have to do everything we can to
convince our allies that it is important that they participate,
because a strong front, I think, will provide for a certain
message to go not only to the Houthis, but to the guys across
the water from----
Mr. Garamendi [interrupting]. We note quickly that the
Somali pirates were lessened when the international community
was strongest.
Mr. Gold and Mr. Darr, quickly--well, I think I am out of
time.
Mr. Gold. I would just say real quick--again, not my area
of expertise on how to do that, but I think continuing to talk
to our allies about the situation because, again, we are
impacting global commerce here, and everybody is being impacted
by this. So, we need to make sure our allies are fully aware of
the situation, not just the impact on the U.S., but the impact
on their own markets, as well, because we are certainly seeing
a significant impact in the European market right now, where
they are starting to see some inflationary pressures there.
Mr. Garamendi. I am pushing my time well beyond, but it
seems to me that, if we are going to be successful here, we
need to have a large alliance in place, all that are interested
in the shipping in the area.
And the comment about Egypt's lost revenue is instructive.
Thank you very much.
Mr. Webster of Florida. The gentleman yields back. Mr.
Bean, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Bean of Florida. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Good morning to you; good morning, T&I; good morning,
witnesses, welcome.
Outside of war, have you all ever seen--it is a toss-up,
anybody can jump in--outside of war, has it ever been this bad
in the Red Sea, attacks on merchant vessels?
Voice [discussion off the record]. Yes.
Mr. Darr. To my knowledge of the history, no. And it is, in
part, a sign of the times. The last time there was more
conflict that threatened the Red Sea in its entirety, the
weaponry used against commercial shipping directly was not as
sophisticated.
Mr. Bean of Florida. For you to say it's an hour, your
ships, merchant ships, were under attack for a firefight,
directly an hour, that to me is very scary. What happens if
this continues? What happens, Mr. Darr? If this continues,
paint the picture for us.
Mr. Darr. Well, I will try and go beyond speculation and
just give you my observations of what's happening now and
extrapolate it out.
We will adapt. We will make it work. We will meet the
world's commerce needs. That's what we do. But it may not look
like it does today. And what we are learning through the
initial 6 weeks of adaptation of our networks is maybe we are
going to call different places than we called before. Maybe we
are going to shift volumes for transshipment to different hubs
than we did before. Maybe we are going to avoid transshipment
hubs we used very closely. Maybe we are going to avoid the Suez
Canal altogether, and all that may come from that, as far as
stability in the region goes. All of those things are possible.
I can't paint exactly the picture----
Mr. Bean of Florida [interposing]. Got you.
Mr. Darr [continuing]. But I can assure, you we will meet
the need, but it will be more expensive. There will be costs
associated with that.
Mr. Bean of Florida. Ten-four. Dr. Ralby, is it just
American and ally ships? Are they attacking Iranian ships? Are
they attacking Chinese ships?
Mr. Ralby. They, as I said, are quite erratic. So, they are
attacking everybody at the moment. They are trying to target
U.S. and U.K. and Israeli-affiliated ships, but as I said
before, they don't really care. They nearly hit a Russian
cargo. They have done a couple of things that show that they
are just not all that precise.
They are imitating what has been, to your earlier question,
a fairly consistent Iranian approach of what we have often
termed ``hybrid aggression'' when a state actor does it. But
this is just a nonstate actor engaging in terrorist activity.
And so, they are using these attacks to send messages, and they
don't really care who they hit or what vessel might be
affected----
Mr. Bean of Florida [interrupting]. Have we seen other
countries like China--have they responded, or other countries
saying enough of this, we are not going to put up with it?
Mr. Ralby. Everybody is hurting, let's put it that way. No
shipping, no shopping. You do not have free flow of maritime
commerce, everyone on Earth hurts, whether you are on the coast
or thousands of miles inland.
The problem is that a lot of the states are keeping quiet,
while we have been willing to go out in the front and try
things out. And so, China has been ominously quiet on this
front, and my guess is that they are looking for ways to do
what I was saying before. They have equities in this that are
really important to understand.
In 2023, China brokered a rapprochement between Saudi
Arabia and Iran. Part of that deal was for the Iranians to stop
arming the Houthis. In the last few weeks, they have overtly
resumed arming the Houthis, as we have seen----
Mr. Bean of Florida [interrupting]. So, Iran is the main
factor behind the Houthis. Are there are other countries? Is
China involved in Houthi armament, or any other country other
than Iran?
Mr. Ralby. The armament flow goes through a number of
countries, and the illicit traffic of arms has been well
ingrained, so that they have different directional flows that
allow them to gain weapons. China has been involved. Iran has
been involved. I am sure Russia has been involved. There are a
lot of countries that have been involved in the illicit flow of
arms for years, and some of that has gone through Somalia,
through Djibouti, and into Yemen.
There are two vessels, though, that are really important
for the U.S. to pay attention to, Iranian-owned commercial
vessels in the southern Red Sea: the MV Behshad and the MV
Saviz, both of which take turns operating as both a floating
armory and as an intel source for Iranian support to the
Houthis. Those vessels should be very much on our focus of how
we would want to retaliate, and thus far----
Mr. Bean of Florida [interrupting]. They're not, they are
given a hall pass.
Twenty years ago, whenever it was, I know we had--Somali
pirates was an issue. That has kind of gone away. Is it true
because we finally said enough about this, and we started using
force? Is that what ended Somali pirates, that type of
interaction?
Mr. Ralby. There is----
Mr. Bean of Florida [interrupting]. Mr. Heindel, you say
yes. You are nodding yes. Jump in, Mr. Heindel. Is that force--
is that our option here?
Mr. Heindel. Well, if you are trying to equate the two, I
think there's a--the politics are different, at least from my
viewpoint. Somali pirates were just a band of thugs that----
Mr. Bean of Florida [interrupting]. But force, you say
force--and my time is about to run out--force is what they deal
with, and that's the language they speak.
And it bears--Dr. Ralby, this has nothing to do with
Israel, is that correct? That was your testimony. Nothing to do
with Israel. They are just using that as the guise. Is that
correct?
Mr. Ralby. It was a convenient narrative. And for them, the
profit margin is not the motivation as it was for Somali
pirates. So, the risk-reward calculus for them is very, very
different. That is why they are a much more difficult threat.
Mr. Bean of Florida. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, and
I yield back. Thank you.
Mr. Webster of Florida. The gentleman yields back. Ms.
Scholten, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Ms. Scholten. Thank you, Chair Webster. Thank you so much
to all of our witnesses today. I apologize for the gravelly
voice. I am not sick, I lost my voice cheering for our beloved
Detroit Lions.
We really want to thank you for your testimony. This is an
incredibly precarious time in our world and in the Red Sea.
While the humanitarian impacts are deeply felt across the
globe, constituents back home are also concerned about the deep
economic impact that this will have, as they are already
struggling with hyperinflation and putting food on the table.
I have a series of economic questions about the impacts of
this war, and also what we can do about it here in Congress.
So, my first question is for Mr. Gold.
Our economy is still recovering from supply chain shortages
that we experienced after the pandemic, with some industries
still struggling to access essential components. From our
national GDP, to increased operating costs for maritime
shipping, do you have an estimated cost to our economy if the
route through the Red Sea is no longer a viable option?
Mr. Gold. Thank you for the question. Unfortunately, we do
not have an estimate at this point in time. I think there are
so many variables as to what the actual impact would be. I
think, as Mr. Darr noted, the supply chain will adjust and will
adapt, and I think you have to figure out what those additional
costs will be.
We are seeing some of those costs that are being passed
along now, especially to small and medium-sized enterprises who
don't have the ability to negotiate and push those costs off.
But again, as we are in a new negotiating cycle for new
contracts, that is going to be an impact; the impact on
congestion at our ports, if that does materialize, is going to
have an impact, as well.
So, I think, again, preparing for what's to come is where
we need to be giving a lot of focus now. I agree with Mr. Darr
that the focus on infrastructure, both on kind of the land side
but also through the gate, is critically important, but also
looking at kind of the IT systems, as well.
I think one of the areas where we kind of failed throughout
the pandemic was that communication aspect which is so critical
among supply chain partners, the ability to know what is coming
in, and when, and how it's going to transit through the supply
chain is incredibly important. And unfortunately, we haven't
seen that progress yet on that aspect of this to be able to
plan accordingly.
Ms. Scholten. Thank you.
Mr. Darr, you mentioned your hopefulness that Congress'
investments in port and landside infrastructure included in the
Bipartisan Infrastructure Law will increase capacity and
resiliency. Can you talk a little bit more about how some of
those investments can help us cope?
Mr. Darr. Yes, ma'am. Those investments, in large part at
the port level--let me give you an example.
In the U.S., we are largely constrained by the geography of
the ports and the terminals that we have. And so, to build a
new terminal, while not impossible, is very, very difficult.
And they tend to encroach upon other users of that land space.
So, the more we can do to densify the operations in the
terminals and make them more efficient, while also--I should
point out in our company's model--maintaining the workforce,
because it can be done, and it can be done effectively because
the volumes go up, that's a good start. And being as thoughtful
as possible about those sorts of investments in particular I
think helps us the most because also some of those investments
can be done faster than to, say, identify a new site and then
all that goes with that. And it is a lot that goes with that,
in building that out.
Second, I would say the road infrastructure needs huge
work. And the rail operators also need whatever incentivization
is there to maintain additional surge capacity to meet the rail
network needs because whatever we can put on rail is avoided
going on the roads and overstressing that again.
Ms. Scholten. It's all a part of the shipping and transport
larger ecosystem.
What other suggestions do you have for us in Congress?
Obviously, containing the conflict, ending the conflict is a
major path to maintaining this route through the Red Sea. But
in the interim, this is a daily problem. What can we do here in
Congress to help make sure that we are supporting the industry?
Mr. Darr. So, again, I will start with maybe what you
didn't want me to focus on, but I think it is important. The
shooting has to stop. It has to be safe enough for us to send
our sons or daughters or people that have trusted their lives
to us into that region.
When it comes to what we can do day to day, we have what we
have, and we have a substantially altered series of networks
trying to deliver the cargo. And I would say being as prepared
as possible, from retail shelving all the way down to the quay
side, will help us avoid another situation like we had during
the pandemic.
Ms. Scholten. Yes.
Mr. Darr. But I want to be very clear. The scale of this
disruption comes at a better time when there is additional
capacity, both at sea and ashore.
And second, the scale of the cost excursions, the
underlying expenses to us to operate that have to find their
way into the market is, to this point, nowhere near what it was
during the pandemic. It happened very quickly.
Ms. Scholten. Right.
Mr. Darr. But if you look at what the analysts are putting
out there, we may have seen the top in some of the markets.
It's not for me to speculate on, but you can review that
yourself.
And then lastly, on the export trades, they are under a lot
less stress and price pressure.
Ms. Scholten. Thank you so much, Mr. Chairman. Thank you
for the additional time. I yield.
Mr. Webster of Florida. The gentlelady yields back. Mr. Van
Drew.
Dr. Van Drew. Thank you, Chairman. I have a little
different angle here. I believe President Biden has failed our
country. He grossly mishandled our Afghanistan withdrawal. It
was a sign of weakness. He didn't prevent Russia's attack on
Ukraine when we could have just prevented it. It was a sign of
weakness. And he has been unable to prevent Iran-backed proxies
from attacking our ally, Israel, and all of our troops in the
Mideast. Again, it is a sign of weakness.
None of these horrendously handled events would have ever
happened under our previous President Trump. He knew that in
order to protect America abroad, the Commander in Chief must be
strong. What we need in this country are those great words,
``peace through strength,'' because where there is weakness,
there is always war.
Just this weekend, 3 of our servicemembers were killed and
almost 40 others injured in an Iranian-backed drone attack in
Jordan. You are all aware of it. This, again, is a tragedy that
President Biden could have prevented, but has failed to do so
because he has created an era of weakness around the world. And
it's gravely impacting Americans, and it's impacting our
American interests.
The Houthi terrorist organization based in Yemen has been
launching missile barrages on Israel and has conducted over 30
different attacks on civilian and military vessels, and these
are the vessels that transit the Red Sea. Houthi forces are
also responsible for seizing control of the Galaxy Leader, an
allied vessel with 25 human beings on board, all of whom are
being held captive by the Houthi terrorists.
Dr. Ralby, to your knowledge, what is being done to rescue
the hostages from the Houthis?
Mr. Ralby. I am not familiar with any negotiations, and I
don't think it would be appropriate to share that in an open
forum if I were. Thank you.
Dr. Van Drew. OK, so, you have no knowledge of it, and I
don't think anybody else does, either.
What can be done to prevent all of these attacks from
happening again and again? Your thoughts, Dr. Ralby?
Mr. Ralby. To prevent the attacks, we have to draw the
Houthi attention away from shipping. That has to be the first
step. It doesn't mean that they will stop attacking, it doesn't
mean they will stop fighting, but they need to not be attacking
global maritime commerce and the seafarers who carry our goods.
We need to embolden not only the Government of Yemen, but,
as we said before, the neighborhood, in order to help make that
happen. So, American strength and diplomacy and American
strength in its military both require that we help our closest
friends recognize their own interests, as well.
At the moment, we have some hope in the immediate horizon
with the EU naval force mission that is being sent to the
region on the 19th of February. The EU is not a military
alliance. The EU is not a sovereign nation state in and of
itself. And during the piracy days, we learned an important
lesson from the EU naval force mission. Some of the most
hostile nations towards each other--so, Russia, China, Iran,
India, the United States, others who do not necessarily love to
speak to each other or love to work together--found common
purpose using the EU as that nameless, faceless economic
community in combating an economic threat. And so, we may be
able to work more closely with some of our partners with some
of the region if we first divorce the narrative.
Second, find these kinds of avenues for pulling Houthi
attention away.
Third, embolden and support the Government of Yemen and the
Yemeni people to retake their sovereignty and ultimately try to
keep the focus on the consequences, not necessarily the
actions----
Dr. Van Drew [interrupting]. Thank you for your answer.
Mr. Ralby. Thank you.
Dr. Van Drew. Thank you. Houthi attacks have also gravely
affected, as we all know--that's why you are here--our supply
chain. The Red Sea helps facilitate a massive amount of global
trade per year. And you all know that, as well. And these
attacks have forced many of these ships to reroute around the
Cape of Good Hope, which you also know, and it's making cargo
more expensive, which you also know, and time-intensive. This
is directly caused by the very same group that our current
President declassified as a specially designated global
terrorist group over 2 years ago. Again, it's a clear example,
in my opinion, of weakness.
In that time, this undoubtedly terroristic organization has
been able to regroup and put themselves in a position where
they can attack, and they are, and they are attacking America
and our allies with the help from Iran. Mr. Ralby, do you
believe it was wise to declassify the Houthis 2 years ago?
Mr. Ralby. At the time, I did think it was the wise
decision. The reason was, at that point, there were two major
equities at stake. Number one, the humanitarian situation in
Yemen was absolutely dire. Six million people were on the brink
of famine. And the ability to negotiate the movement of aid
with a foreign terrorist organization controlling the territory
was one of the challenges that was being faced----
Dr. Van Drew [interrupting]. Thank you, and I thank you for
the answer. I am running out of time. I would respectfully
disagree with you. We are where we are now. And certainly, look
how that worked out for us.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Webster of Florida. The gentleman yields back. Mr.
Auchincloss, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Auchincloss. Thank you, Chairman. I appreciate the
witnesses' time and testimony.
Dr. Ralby, despite their protestations, do you think the
Houthi leadership cares about the people of Gaza?
Mr. Ralby. No, I do not.
Mr. Auchincloss. And is it true that, in fact, under their
brutal, incompetent, nefarious governance, that 10 times as
many people have died in Yemen as have died in Gaza?
Mr. Ralby. I am terrible at math, but it sounds about
right.
Mr. Auchincloss. Yes. And so, I would note for those in the
United States and elsewhere who are cheering on these Houthi
pirates who have designed to make them into social media stars
who are chanting, who are rallying to their flag, that they are
supporting terrorists who have killed American servicemembers,
who have been sadistic to their own people, and who seek to
undermine the very rules of international commerce that have
allowed peace and prosperity to spread the world over.
Do you think the Houthi leadership gains or is weakened
with direct confrontation with the United States?
Mr. Ralby. One important thing to note is that the Houthi
leadership is a bit of an amorphous body. It is always
intentionally decentralized. And so, one of the challenges is
that, yes, we could maybe look at who the supreme council is,
and determine them. But there are also other factions in
different parts of the area that will respond differently. All
of them, though, all of them, are responding in the same way at
the moment to the U.S. strikes. It has emboldened all of them
uniformly.
Mr. Auchincloss. Yes. So, to be blunt about it, this is
good politics for them at home, yes.
And so, while I hear the outrage and the sense of urgency
from my Republican colleagues, and viscerally I share it any
time American merchant marine, any time American servicemembers
are under harm's way, we also have to recognize that we don't
want to walk in to the game that our enemy wants to play.
So, let's now unravel what might actually scare Houthi
leadership. They are reliant on Iran as their patron state, is
that correct?
Mr. Ralby. They are.
Mr. Auchincloss. And Iran itself is reliant on China, as
the purchaser of its oil exports. Is that right?
Mr. Ralby. They are.
Mr. Auchincloss. So, is it safe to say that China could
exercise significant influence here, if it wanted to, to reduce
support and funding for the Houthi?
Mr. Ralby. Very much so.
Mr. Auchincloss. And yet, as a member of the Select
Committee on the Strategic Competition Between the United
States and the Chinese Communist Party, I want to highlight
that China is not only missing in action as a purported
upholder of international commerce and rules, but is in fact
actively undermining the potential for a peaceful resolution to
this issue.
The deal that they brokered between--I use the word
``brokered'' maybe in quotation marks, because really it was a
performance--but that they claimed to help broker between Saudi
Arabia and Iran required that those states bring the Houthis
under control. Obviously, that hasn't happened, and yet China
has done nothing to curtail or punish Iran for that.
China has also done nothing to ensure the safety of the Red
Sea. Is that right?
Mr. Ralby. That is correct.
Mr. Auchincloss. What do you think should the response of
the United States be to the Chinese Communist Party's complete
unwillingness to be a responsible global citizen in this
episode?
Mr. Ralby. Well, first of all, I think it needs to be made
clear that that is a major factor.
China has also a signed treaty by Xi Jinping himself with
Ukraine not to--to stand in if anybody attacked them. They
didn't do that. They are very good at not fulfilling their
obligations when things get hot.
And in this particular situation, they are probably a bit
frustrated by the equities that they did host, I would say,
that deal between Iran and Saudi Arabia, which complicated in
some ways their position because they now have a vested
interest in maintaining that detente, that rapprochement
between Iran and Saudi Arabia, and the Saudis have very
complicated equities with regard to the Houthis. So, they are
probably quite frustrated right now.
Mr. Auchincloss. And their economy is the most trade-
dependent of any in the world.
Mr. Ralby. Absolutely. So, they are hurting, but they are
actually probably enjoying watching us take the first set of
hits for this. So, they are a looming question mark, and we
need to call them out quickly.
Mr. Auchincloss. Yet another example of the malign and
malicious attempts at global leadership from the Chinese
Communist Party.
I yield back.
Mr. Webster of Florida. The gentleman yields back.
Mr. Ezell, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Ezell. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The Houthi attacks that are targeting maritime vessels in
the Red Sea represent a direct threat to maritime
transportation and, ultimately, to the world's supply chains.
The Trump administration recognized the threat posed by this
group, and took decisive action by designating the Houthi
rebels as a global terrorist entity, which would allow the
placement of crippling sanctions on these fighters.
However, one of the Biden administration's first acts has
communicated a message of weakness as President Biden removed
the Houthis from this designation. We are witnessing a clear
trend. Past actions by President Biden continue to strengthen
terrorist organizations and encourage global attacks.
Dr. Ralby, it's clear we must put an end to this Houthi
aggression. You mentioned in your testimony that the Houthis
are often untrustworthy negotiators. Can you expand on how
negotiations have gone in the past, and do you think anything
has changed?
Mr. Ralby. The Houthis not only are untrustworthy, they
enjoy making whoever they are negotiating with look bad in the
eyes of their people. They have a long history of agreeing to
things and then reneging. I will give one concrete example.
The FSO Safer was a critically important issue to address
off the coast of Yemen. It had 1.14 million barrels, and would
have not only caused a spill 4 times the size of Exxon Valdez,
but would have actually taken out the desalination plants on
which more than several tens of millions of people rely for
their drinking water along the Red Sea.
And the Houthis, in negotiating to do something about the
vessel, continually agreed to an assessment mission, allowed
for the U.N. to expend funds on placing that assessment team in
Djibouti, and then reneged on it. And they enjoyed doing the
same thing over and over again. And unfortunately, a lot of the
negotiators who have tried to work with the Houthis have found
themselves falling again afoul of the definition of insanity:
trying to do the same thing over and over again, expecting a
different result.
The Houthis are consistent in one thing: in being
untrustworthy, in being very quick to renege on any promises
they make. So, they cannot be trusted, they cannot be
negotiated with in the same way that we would otherwise.
Recently, they agreed to not attack vessels that were
carrying oil coming into the gulf, the Port of Aden.
Unfortunately, they went ahead and struck them very quickly.
So, they have a long history of reneging on every promise they
make.
Mr. Ezell. Thank you, Doctor.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Webster of Florida. The gentleman yields back.
Mr. Rouzer, you are next. Welcome to the committee.
Mr. Rouzer. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I see my friend and
colleague, Dusty Johnson, here. Dusty and I serve as cochairs
of the Supply Chain Caucus here on the House side, and I know I
have heard from industries all across the board, obviously,
just how critically important the Red Sea and Suez Canal are to
an efficient supply chain.
Dr. Ralby, in your testimony you state that, while oil and
gas shipments are being impacted, the greater threat is the
shipment of specific goods with specific delivery times.
You also mentioned that disrupting the 30 percent of global
container traffic on the Red Sea will have a greater impact on
the economy than the 10 percent of oil traffic. Could you speak
a little bit more to these goods shipped through the Red Sea,
and what impacts delayed shipments have on the global economy
and commerce?
And then, as a followup to that, Mr. Gold, I would be
curious of your thoughts on the impact to consumer prices.
Mr. Ralby. I will be very quick. Energy supplies are
fungible. Oil is oil. Yes, there are different categories of
oil, but once the products have been refined, they can be
replicated and supplanted by different shipments from all over
the world.
Goods, however, are targeted towards specific purchasers.
And so, you can't just make up for somebody's race car that is
due to be at a specific race at a specific time by substituting
another one. So, there are a different set of equities for the
container carriers versus the oil and gas industry and the
wider energy industry.
In fact, one of the other disparities is that oil and gas
movements through the Red Sea are actually a much smaller
percentage of the overall traffic than the container goods, and
so, that is why I would argue that the container industry,
which is why it's important to have Mr. Darr here, is more
affected by this.
Mr. Rouzer. Yes. As a followup, too, how much--let's just
assume, hypothetically, that all trade is cut off there. How
much of the U.S. economy is represented with that? What is that
figure?
Mr. Ralby. I do not have that figure. That is not my area
of expertise. But what I can say is that it is not just the
U.S. economy, it is global because of the nature of our
globalized supply chains.
And the important piece that I would also note that doesn't
get looked at as much is that it is not just goods for sale, it
is also humanitarian aid. And so, there are other consequences
to this that transcend just the marketplace and go as well to
desperately needed aid, medical supplies, other things that
need to get to places on time in order to make sure human life
is protected.
Mr. Rouzer. Absolutely. Any other thoughts there from the
panel?
Mr. Gold, do you want to talk about the inflationary
impact?
Mr. Gold. Sure. I mean, obviously we saw what happened
during the pandemic when supply chains were essentially shut
down, and the impact we saw on prices and costs and everything
else. I think right now it's too early to tell what that impact
is going to be because of what's happening in the Red Sea.
I think, as we have talked about here, carriers and
shippers will find a way to make product arrive. It might
arrive later than you expected. You are going to have an impact
on not just retailers, but manufacturers who are waiting on
inputs to production, on ag products. You have already seen the
impact in Europe with ag products that are having to go around
the Cape of Good Hope that are having spoilage and having
impact there. So, I think, for my members, they are trying to
contain costs as much as possible.
So, again, for the larger retailers, they are more nimble
at being able to do that. For small and medium-sized companies,
that is going to impact them more because they don't have that
ability to negotiate on whether it's rates, surcharges, what
have you.
And again, it's not just on the rates that you are seeing
in the surcharges, but it's the other impact on the congestion
issues that we are going to witness if the surge does come and
starts to clog up our ports once again. You are going to see
the additional charges from every mode of transportation
throughout the supply chain, as we have witnessed during the
pandemic. Hopefully, we won't see the prices rise as much. That
shouldn't be an issue. But again, it's way too early to tell
what that economic impact is going to be.
But we need to start paying attention now and working
through those issues so we don't have congestion as we
witnessed during the pandemic.
Mr. Rouzer. So, what improvements do we need to make at our
ports? What kind of alternative thinking, additional resources,
what kind of opportunity does that present to us?
Mr. Gold. I think the biggest issue right now is, as we
talked about earlier, we are making investments on the landside
infrastructure, but we have got to work through some of the
operational issues that really caused the congestion issues
during the pandemic. We have got to make sure all of the
stakeholders--the carriers, terminals, drayage trucks,
railroads, warehouses, the shippers--are all talking to each
other to understand what is happening at any point in time so
that we don't have the congestion issues. Making sure we have
equipment readily available, the chassis, the railcars are
there when they need to be there, and not cause further
congestion.
Mr. Rouzer. Mr. Darr, it looked like you had something to
say.
Mr. Darr. I did, thank you, sir.
First of all, I would like to say I agree with that
interconnectivity that Mr. Gold just laid out. I think that is
spot on.
And I want to congratulate the Department of Transportation
for initiating the flow process, which is a pretty good attempt
to try and open up some more visibility with the hope that we
can project forward patterns much better based on the past. And
it is an example of a genuine public-private partnership that I
think deserves some recognition.
Also, I want to point out that when it comes to
containerized goods, they are not all affected equally here.
And the higher value that the goods are relative to their
volume that goes into a container, the much less affected they
are by excursions in price. And as I mentioned earlier, we are
not seeing anywhere near the sort of price excursions in the
open market that we did during the pandemic.
And also keep in mind the baseline of which we might say
prices are higher or less actually is a baseline which was at a
very low point in the market, below pandemic levels. And in a
lot of cases like, for example, in exports of U.S. ag cargoes,
a lot of those we are carrying below our costs at the time. So,
it is not painting the full picture just to look at an absolute
pricing point. Thank you.
Mr. Rouzer. Thank you very much.
Sorry, Mr. Chairman, I appreciate your indulgence, though.
Sorry to go over.
Mr. Webster of Florida. The gentleman yields back. Mr.
Johnson, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Johnson of South Dakota. I want to pick up where Mr.
Rouzer ended. He does a great job helping to lead the Supply
Chain Caucus.
And I think we--number one, we all get it. We understand
that going through the Red Sea is an incredibly dangerous
proposition these days. I think we all understand that some
carriers would rightfully make a decision to reroute. I think
we understand that those reroutes could cause price
adjustments. Now, Mr. Gold and Mr. Darr, you have both made it
clear the full effect of those really haven't been felt yet. We
don't know what next month or the month after that holds.
Of course, I have talked to some shippers. We are a little
concerned that these reroutes could create an opportunity for
not just reasonable fee and rate adjustments, but perhaps
unreasonable fee and rate adjustments, really with a process
that doesn't have a tremendous amount of transparency.
And so, Mr. Darr, what do you say to shippers who raise
those concerns?
Mr. Darr. Well, like I say, first of all, get to know us
better and have the kind of dialogues that we have had
facilitated by some associations of ag exporters in particular.
And we understand each other better, we can serve their needs
better, set up groups to help accommodate that even when times
are good, rather than the really challenging times like now.
And I think, if you have prepared and you have built the
relationships in those times, it's much easier to deal with a
crisis, and you are speaking the same language.
I also would encourage those that can to seek the stability
of longer term service agreements, rather than just to be
reliant upon the spot market, because those that are, are much
more subject to market fluctuations. And in the U.S., for
example, 90 percent, roughly, of our cargoes in and out are
carried under service agreements. And there is a significant
advantage as far as stability goes with that.
Lastly, I will make the point about the need to mutually
focus on things that could be of benefit. And for example,
investments in the ports for densification purposes, which
involves taking advantage of some technology that exists today,
does not have to be at the expense of any port jobs. And as I
said, our model, we try not to do that at all, but yet we can
improve and do much better and reach higher efficiency levels,
similar to what we see in many overseas ports if we make those
investments here and do so with the right goals in mind.
Mr. Johnson of South Dakota. So, with those associations
that do have an active dialogue with you, you are not hearing
those kind of concerns about maybe unreasonable rate increases
to come?
Mr. Darr. No, sir, I am not. Because if they are
unreasonable, we are in a very competitive marketplace. And
even though right now the carriers are having to adapt very
quickly and to add capacity and add equipment and things into
it, ultimately the competition in the market is going to be a
boundary on this.
And I think as a case in point, Sea-Intelligence, for
example, just published their latest analysis over the last
couple of business days, and they have shown that on the export
side in the U.S. transpacific market, which is where most of
the ag goes, those rates are actually about flat.
So, again, we are seeing the import side, or the headhaul,
carry most of the burden of the extra costs of having to adjust
the networks. And in normal times, it's not uncommon to see 85
to 90 percent of the revenue actually generated on the import
side, and the exporters benefit from that. That seems to be,
according to the published data, one of the dynamics that's
happening now. And if it gets too far out of bounds, the market
will correct it. There will be somebody else that will carry
the cargo that meets the shipper's needs.
Mr. Johnson of South Dakota. Certainly a competitive market
would respond in that way. I mean--and I don't know how you
would ultimately define a market that's not competitive enough.
We have seen concentration in the industry in the last couple
of decades. You'd know the numbers better than I would, but I
think 70 percent of the cargo held by the largest five or six
partnerships. But it is good to hear that the rates have been
flat.
Mr. Gold, what else would you say in response to Mr. Darr's
comments?
Mr. Gold. I think certainly those that are under the yearly
contract have better ability to negotiate on rate increases and
surcharges. There certainly are provisions.
But again, small and medium-sized companies that aren't
under those yearly contracts that have to rely on the spot
market don't have the same ability and same flexibility, and
they certainly are the ones that are being impacted by those
increases.
And again, looking to the next contract cycle, concerns
about what comes next and how those prices are going to go
forwards. Right now, we would love to see more visibility into
how some of those numbers are coming about. I think, from what
I hear from my members, they are working with the carriers and
negotiating, and figuring out how much of those surcharges they
are going to take on, but they would love to get the exact
understanding of where those numbers are actually coming from
to understand what's being put forward to them.
Mr. Johnson of South Dakota. So, as we look about problem-
solving and even doing a better job, Mr. Darr, I thought your
suggestion about, hey, more engagement would be good.
It sounds like additional transparency would be your
addendum to that, Mr. Gold, right?
Mr. Gold. I think so, yes. And we are looking forward to
the hearing the Federal Maritime Commission will be holding on
February 7 on this specific issue.
Mr. Johnson of South Dakota. Yes. Thank you very much,
gentlemen.
And with that, I would yield back.
Mr. Webster of Florida. The gentleman yields back. Seeing
there is no further testimony, I would like to thank the
witnesses for being here. They were very good testimonies. I
thank the Members for being insightful. I thank the audience
for being respectful.
The hearing is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 11:51 a.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]

[All]
