- ELIMINATING BOTTLENECKS: EXAMINING OPPORTUNITIES TO RECRUIT, RETAIN, AND ENGAGE AVIATION TALENT

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

ELIMINATING BOTTLENECKS: EXAMINING OPPORTUNITIES TO RECRUIT, RETAIN,
AND ENGAGE AVIATION TALENT

=======================================================================

(118-65)

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON
AVIATION

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON
TRANSPORTATION AND INFRASTRUCTURE
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

JULY 10, 2024

__________

Printed for the use of the
Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available online at: https://www.govinfo.gov/committee/house-
transportation?path=/browsecommittee/chamber/house/committee/
transportation
_______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

57-418 PDF                   WASHINGTON : 2024

COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORTATION AND INFRASTRUCTURE

Sam Graves, Missouri, Chairman
Rick Larsen, Washington, Ranking Member

Eric A. ``Rick'' Crawford, Arkansas         Eleanor Holmes Norton,
Daniel Webster, Florida                       District of Columbia
Thomas Massie, Kentucky                     Grace F. Napolitano, California
Scott Perry, Pennsylvania                   Steve Cohen, Tennessee
Brian Babin, Texas                          John Garamendi, California
Garret Graves, Louisiana                    Henry C. ``Hank'' Johnson, Jr., Georgia
David Rouzer, North Carolina                Andre Carson, Indiana
Mike Bost, Illinois                         Dina Titus, Nevada
Doug LaMalfa, California                    Jared Huffman, California
Bruce Westerman, Arkansas                   Julia Brownley, California
Brian J. Mast, Florida                      Frederica S. Wilson, Florida
Jenniffer Gonzalez-Colon,                   Mark DeSaulnier, California
Puerto Rico                               Salud O. Carbajal, California
Pete Stauber, Minnesota                     Greg Stanton, Arizona,
Tim Burchett, Tennessee                       Vice Ranking Member
Dusty Johnson, South Dakota                 Colin Z. Allred, Texas
Jefferson Van Drew, New Jersey,             Sharice Davids, Kansas
Vice Chairman                             Jesus G. ``Chuy'' Garcia, Illinois
Troy E. Nehls, Texas                        Chris Pappas, New Hampshire
Tracey Mann, Kansas                         Seth Moulton, Massachusetts
Burgess Owens, Utah                         Jake Auchincloss, Massachusetts
Rudy Yakym III, Indiana                     Marilyn Strickland, Washington
Lori Chavez-DeRemer, Oregon                 Troy A. Carter, Louisiana
Thomas H. Kean, Jr., New Jersey             Patrick Ryan, New York
Anthony D'Esposito, New York                Mary Sattler Peltola, Alaska
Eric Burlison, Missouri                     Robert Menendez, New Jersey
Derrick Van Orden, Wisconsin                Val T. Hoyle, Oregon
Brandon Williams, New York                  Emilia Strong Sykes, Ohio
Marcus J. Molinaro, New York                Hillary J. Scholten, Michigan
Mike Collins, Georgia                       Valerie P. Foushee, North Carolina
Mike Ezell, Mississippi                     Christopher R. Deluzio, Pennsylvania
John S. Duarte, California
Aaron Bean, Florida
Celeste Maloy, Utah
Kevin Kiley, California
Vince Fong, California

Subcommittee on Aviation

Garret Graves, Louisiana, Chairman
Steve Cohen, Tennessee, Ranking Member

Eric A. ``Rick'' Crawford, Arkansas          Henry C. ``Hank'' Johnson, Jr., Georgia
Thomas Massie, Kentucky                      Andre Carson, Indiana
Scott Perry, Pennsylvania                    Julia Brownley, California
Bruce Westerman, Arkansas                    Mark DeSaulnier, California
Brian J. Mast, Florida                       Greg Stanton, Arizona
Pete Stauber, Minnesota                      Colin Z. Allred, Texas
Tim Burchett, Tennessee                      Sharice Davids, Kansas
Dusty Johnson, South Dakota                  Jesus G. ``Chuy'' Garcia, Illinois
Jefferson Van Drew, New Jersey               Jake Auchincloss, Massachusetts
Tracey Mann, Kansas                          Mary Sattler Peltola, Alaska,
Burgess Owens, Utah                            Vice Ranking Member
Rudy Yakym III, Indiana, Vice Chairman       Hillary J. Scholten, Michigan
Lori Chavez-DeRemer, Oregon                  Dina Titus, Nevada
Thomas H. Kean, Jr., New Jersey              Salud O. Carbajal, California
Anthony D'Esposito, New York                 Robert Menendez, New Jersey
Marcus J. Molinaro, New York                 Eleanor Holmes Norton,
Mike Collins, Georgia                           District of Columbia
Aaron Bean, Florida                          Frederica S. Wilson, Florida
Kevin Kiley, California                      Christopher R. Deluzio, Pennsylvania
Vince Fong, California                       Rick Larsen, Washington (Ex Officio)
Sam Graves, Missouri (Ex Officio)

CONTENTS

Page

Summary of Subject Matter........................................   vii

STATEMENTS OF MEMBERS OF THE COMMITTEE

Hon. Garret Graves, a Representative in Congress from the State
of Louisiana, and Chairman, Subcommittee on Aviation, opening
statement......................................................     1
Prepared statement...........................................     3
Hon. Steve Cohen, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Tennessee, and Ranking Member, Subcommittee on Aviation,
opening statement..............................................     4
Prepared statement...........................................     5

WITNESSES

Matthew ``Monty'' Montgomery, Department Chair, Department of
Professional Aviation, Louisiana Tech University, oral
statement......................................................     7
Prepared statement...........................................     8
Michael Robbins, President and Chief Executive Officer,
Association for Uncrewed Vehicle Systems International (AUVSI),
oral statement.................................................    16
Prepared statement...........................................    18
Joanne M. ``Jo'' Damato, CAM, Senior Vice President of Education,
Training, and Workforce Development, National Business Aviation
Association (NBAA), oral statement.............................    30
Prepared statement...........................................    32
David J. Spero, National President, Professional Aviation Safety
Specialists, AFL-CIO (PASS), oral statement....................    41
Prepared statement...........................................    43

SUBMISSIONS FOR THE RECORD

Statement of Faye Malarkey Black, President and Chief Executive
Officer, Regional Airline Association, Submitted for the Record
by Hon. Garret Graves..........................................    89
Statement of the FAA Managers Association, Submitted for the
Record by Hon. Rick Larsen.....................................   100

APPENDIX

Questions to David J. Spero, National President, Professional
Aviation Safety Specialists, AFL-CIO (PASS), from:
Hon. Rick Larsen.............................................   105
Hon. Jefferson Van Drew......................................   107

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

July 3, 2024

SUMMARY OF SUBJECT MATTER

TO:      LMembers, Subcommittee on Aviation
FROM:  LStaff, Subcommittee on Aviation
RE:      LSubcommittee Hearing on ``Eliminating
Bottlenecks: Examining Opportunities to Recruit, Retain, and
Engage Aviation Talent''
_______________________________________________________________________

I. PURPOSE

The Subcommittee on Aviation of the Committee on
Transportation and Infrastructure will meet on Wednesday, July
10, 2024, at 10:00 a.m. ET in 2167 Rayburn House Office
Building to receive testimony at a hearing entitled,
``Eliminating Bottlenecks: Examining Opportunities to Recruit,
Retain, and Engage Aviation Talent.'' The hearing will examine
provisions enacted into law by the FAA Reauthorization Act of
2024 (P.L. 118-63) that seek to mitigate and eliminate a myriad
of bottlenecks plaguing the United States civil aviation
workforce pipelines to ensure the American aviation industry
can recruit, retain, and engage with aviation talent to remain
a global leader in aviation safety and innovation. The
Subcommittee will receive testimony from the Association for
Uncrewed Vehicle Systems International (AUVSI); Louisiana Tech
University; National Business Aviation Association (NBAA); and
the Professional Aviation Safety Specialists (PASS).

II. BACKGROUND

Civil aviation contributes significantly to domestic and
international economies. According to a large commercial air
transportation association, commercial aviation contributes
five percent of the United States gross domestic product
(GDP)--the equivalent of approximately $1.37 trillion in total
economic activity in 2023--and supports more than 10 million
American jobs.\1\ According to the Federal Aviation
Administration (FAA), United States air carrier domestic
passenger growth is forecasted to average 2.5 percent per year
over the next 20 years.\2\ With commercial aviation activity
beginning to exceed pre-pandemic levels and steady growth
expected in the years to come, the aviation industry must
recruit and retain high-skilled talent to meet both present-day
and future demand.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Economic Impact of Commercial Aviation, Airlines for America,
(June 28, 2024), available at https://www.airlines.org/impact/.
\2\ FAA, FAA Aerospace Forecast Fiscal Years 2024-2044 at 2,
available at https://www.faa.gov/dataresearch/aviation/
aerospaceforecasts/faa-aerospace-forecast-fy-2024-2044.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
On May 16, 2024, the President signed H.R. 3935, the FAA
Reauthorization Act of 2024 into law.\3\ H.R. 3935 reauthorizes
the FAA's statutory authorities through Fiscal Year 2028 and
addresses workforce challenges that continue to impact United
States civil aviation, among other things. The bill does so by
establishing opportunities to reduce barriers to entry in the
civil aviation workforce, including through the modernization
of FAA services and websites utilized by aviation professionals
and by investing in efforts to improve career pathways for
youths and students interested in pursuing careers in aviation.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ Press Release, The White House, Bill Signed: H.R. 3935, (May
16, 2024), available at https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/
statements-releases/2024/05/16/press-release-bill-signed-h-r-3935/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In developing H.R. 3935, the Subcommittee on Aviation held
a hearing on April 19, 2023, entitled, ``FAA Reauthorization:
Examining the Current and Future Challenges Facing the
Aerospace Workforce,'' and a hearing on November 30, 2023,
entitled, ``Turbulence Ahead: The Consequences of Delaying a
Long-Term FAA Bill'' to inform policy solutions incorporated
into H.R. 3935 that address or eliminate bottlenecks affecting
the civil aviation workforce.\4\ The Subcommittee on Aviation
will exercise its oversight role and responsibilities over the
five-year reauthorization period to ensure the FAA implements
and administers the new law in accordance with Congressional
intent.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ FAA Reauthorization: Examining the Current and Future
Challenges Facing the Aerospace Workforce: Hearing Before the Subcomm.
on Aviation of the H. Comm. on Transp. and Infrastructure, 118th Cong.
(2023).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

III. KEY PROVISIONS IN THE FAA REAUTHORIZATION ACT OF 2024 ADDRESSING
WORKFORCE BOTTLENECKS

This hearing will focus on policy solutions incorporated in
H.R. 3935 to eliminate or alleviate bottlenecks most commonly
affecting pilots, aircraft mechanics, air traffic controllers,
aviation safety inspectors, and other key aviation roles. These
aviation professions are closely regulated, require significant
training and experience to achieve FAA certification, and are
essential to the safe operation of the National Airspace System
(NAS). Provisions included in H.R. 3935 related to improving
FAA services and appropriately streamlining regulatory
processes may be highlighted during the hearing as the aviation
industry's growth is highly dependent on adequate staffing,
robust investment in FAA resources, and timely decision-making.
Specifically, these provisions range from directing the FAA to
promulgate rulemakings in a timely manner, leveraging various
Federal training initiatives, and issuing airmen and operator
certificates, among other responsibilities and authorities
carried out by the agency.

AIRLINE PILOT WORKFORCE

The career path to becoming a United States airline pilot
requires an individual to not only satisfy FAA training and
instruction requirements, but also obtain qualifying flight
experience. Pilot training and education can be completed at a
collegiate aviation school, a non-collegiate vocational pilot
school, or a non-collegiate, instructor-based pilot school.\5\
In addition, the United States military trains and certificates
pilots, many of whom pursue careers as airline pilots upon
exiting the military.\6\ The pipeline for individuals
interested in becoming a commercial pilot and for those with
established careers is not immune to bottlenecks that can both
disincentivize aspiring airmen from pursuing their goal to
become a professional pilot, as well as hamstring employed
pilots from reentering the cockpit in a timely manner.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ U.S. Gov't Accountability Off., GAO-18-403, Collegiate Aviation
Schools: Stakeholder's Views on Challenges for Initial Pilot Training
Programs, (2018), available at https://www.gao.gov/assets/gao-18-
403.pdf.
\6\ See supra note 9.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

NOTABLE PILOT PROVISIONS OF THE FAA REAUTHORIZATION ACT OF 2024

Sec. 411. Aeromedical innovation and modernization working
group

Pilots must obtain and maintain an FAA medical certificate
to operate aircraft, and for commercial pilots, it is a
requirement for employment.\7\ This section establishes a
working group to review the FAA's medical processes, policies,
and procedures and to make recommendations to the Administrator
to ensure the timely and efficient certification of airmen.
Among its tasks, this working group will assess the FAA's
special issuance process, determine the appropriateness of the
list of medical conditions under which an Air Medical Examiner
(AME) can issue a medical certificate, and to review mental
health protocols and approved medications, including any
actions taken resulting from recommendations by the Mental
Health and Aviation Medical Clearances Aviation Rulemaking
Committee. It is expected that the FAA will respond to the
working groups findings by taking necessary action to
streamline the medical certification process and breakdown
barriers for applicants.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\7\ FAA, Mental Health & Aviation Medical Clearances ARC
Recommendation Report (April 1, 2024), available at https://
www.faa.gov/sites/faa.gov/files/Mental_Health_ARC_Final_
Report_RELEASED.pdf.

Sec. 418. Pilot program to provide veterans with pilot
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
training services

The cost of pilot training is often cited as a significant
barrier to entry for individuals interested in pursuing the
commercial pilot profession.\8\ Furthermore, veterans'
educational assistance programs funds cannot be used to finance
a private pilot certificate and thus can disincentivize
veterans who are interested in pursuing a professional pilot
career as the average cost of a private pilot's license is
$10,500.\9\ Section 418 works to eliminate these barriers to
entry for veterans interested in aviation by establishing a
pilot program to provide grants to certain flight schools to
provide flight training and educational activities to veterans
who have no previous flight experience. Section 418 also
provides targeted financial assistance for flight training
costs.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\8\ FAA, Youth Access to American Jobs in Aviation Task Force,
Final Report, (Sept. 22, 2022) [hereinafter YIATF Report], available at
https://www.faa.gov/regulations_policies/rulemaking/committees/
documents/media/YIATF_Taskforce_Report%209-22-22%20FINAL.pdf.
\9\ U.S. Dep't of Transp. Volpe Ctr., DOT-VNTSC-OSTR-21-01, Forces
to Flyers Pilot Training Demonstration Evaluation and Research on Pilot
Career Pathways (2020).

Sec. 440. Improving Federal Aviation Workforce Development
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Programs

The FAA Reauthorization Act of 2018 (P.L. 115-254)
established the Aviation Workforce Development (AWD) Grants
program to fund outreach and educational efforts focused on
growing the United States aircraft pilot and aviation
maintenance workforce. This program enjoys broad support from
many aviation stakeholders, as it encourages collaboration
between government, industry, and local entities to address
skills gaps and encourage more Americans to pursue good-paying
careers in aviation.\10\ Section 440 of the FAA Reauthorization
Act of 2024 not only builds on the successes of the AWD Grants
program for the pilot and maintenance talent pools, but it also
establishes a new eligibility for aviation manufacturing to
ensure the manufacturing sector has a robust talent pool to
recruit from in the coming decades. The FAA Reauthorization Act
of 2024 authorizes funding levels for the aviation maintenance,
aircraft pilot, and aviation manufacturing development programs
at $20 million respectively for each of fiscal years 2025
through 2028. This section also invests $12 million annually in
the new Willa Brown Aviation Education Program to expand
outreach and aviation education opportunities in low-income and
underrepresented communities.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\10\ Pub. L. No. 115-254 Sec.  625, 132 Stat. 3405.

Sec. 833. National coordination and oversight of designated
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
pilot examiners

This section requires the FAA to establish an office to
provide oversight and facilitate national coordination of
designated pilot examiners (DPEs). This section further
requires the established office to consider whether to
implement the final recommendations report issued by the DPE
Reforms Working Group. Improving oversight of DPEs will improve
DPE knowledge, DPE availability, and help to reduce the wait
times that many general aviation pilots face when it comes to
scheduling check rides with a DPE. This change in policy was
recommended to the FAA by the DPE Working Group in 2021.\11\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\11\ Aviation Rulemaking Advisory Committee, Designated Pilot
Examiner Reforms Working Group, a Report From the Designated Pilot
Examiner Reforms Working Group to the Aviation Rulemaking Advisory
Committee (June 17, 2021), available at https://www.faa.gov/
regulations_policies/rulemaking/committees/documents/media/ARAC%20DPEWG
%20Final%20Recommendation%20Report%20June%202021.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

AVIATION MAINTENANCE WORKFORCE

Aviation maintenance workers are generally employed by
commercial airlines, repair stations, and aircraft
manufacturers. In general, it can take between one and three
years of education or training to become a FAA-certificated
mechanic and earn an airframe rating, a powerplant rating, or
an airframe and powerplant (A&P) rating.\12\ Similarly to
commercial pilots, education and training costs remain barriers
to entry for individuals interested in pursuing aviation
maintenance careers and the AWD program for maintenance
technicians helps individuals finance their education through
scholarships.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\12\ U.S. Gov't Accountability Off., GAO-20-206, Aviation
Maintenance: Add'l Coordination and Data Could Advance FAA Efforts To
Promote a Robust, Diverse Workforce, (2020), available at https://
www.gao.gov/assets/gao-20-206.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

NOTABLE AIRCRAFT MECHANIC PROVISIONS OF THE FAA REAUTHORIZATION ACT OF
2024

Sec. 403. Bessie Coleman Women in Aviation Advisory
Committee

According to recent projections, there is strong demand for
aircraft mechanics and service technicians with an estimated
11,500 job openings available annually from 2021 until
2031.\13\ To help meet this aviation maintenance need, and
other workforce needs across the industry, Section 403
establishes the Bessie Coleman Women in Aviation Advisory
Committee to advise the Department of Transportation (DOT) and
FAA on the recruitment, retention, education and training, and
career advancement of women in the aviation industry. The
Committee will consist of various aviation stakeholders,
including aviation maintenance, repair and overhaul entities,
and must submit reports to Congress on its progress, findings,
and recommendations.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\13\ U.S. Gov't Accountability Off., GAO-23-106769, Aviation
Workforce: Supply of Airline Pilots and Aircraft Mechanics, (2023),
available at https://www.gao.gov/products/gao-23-106769.

---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Sec. 425. Joint Aviation Employment Training Working Group

Members of the Armed Forces who are interested in becoming
civilian aviation professionals including aviation mechanics,
often express frustration with the portability of their
skills--specifically with challenges associated with obtaining
civilian FAA certifications to perform aviation jobs similar to
those they performed in the Armed Forces.\14\ To eliminate
bottlenecks in the recruitment pipeline for these individuals,
Section 425 tasks an interagency working group consisting of
FAA and Department of Defense (DOD) personnel to identify
challenges that inhibit seamless transitions to the civil
aviation workforce. This working group must also determine
whether opportunities exist to increase interagency information
sharing on certification pathways, including knowledge testing
requirements.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\14\ Lindsay Bjerregaard, MRO industry competes for transitioning
military veteran talent, Aviation Week, (April 7, 2023), available at
https://aviationweek.com/mro/workforce-training/mro-industry-competes-
transitioning-military-veteran-talent.

---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Sec. 426. Military aviation maintenance technicians rule

Veterans who are interested in transitioning their
maintenance skills learned while serving in the Armed Forces to
the civil aviation workforce often face challenges in
qualifying for a civilian mechanic certificate issued by the
FAA, especially when attempting to take the civilian written
mechanic exam.\15\ Section 426 improves this transition to the
civil aviation industry by requiring the FAA to revise certain
aviation regulations to create a military mechanic written
competency test and to develop, as necessary, a relevant Airman
Certification Standard (ACS) to qualify eligible military
maintenance technicians for a civilian mechanic certificate.
This section also requires the FAA to determine whether to
expand testing locations on military installations to increase
access to testing and to coordinate with other relevant Federal
agencies to develop an outreach plan to increase awareness of
career transition services.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\15\ Id.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

AVIATION SAFETY INSPECTOR & SPECIALIST WORKFORCE

Every day, America's civil aviation system is responsible
for safely transporting an estimated 2.6 million passengers
without fear of harm or injury.\16\ As the demand for air
travel recovers from the pandemic and continues to increase, so
does the need to maintain our gold standard in aviation safety.
The FAA's Flight Standards Service (FSS) and Aircraft
Certification Service (AIR) aviation safety inspectors are
responsible for the certification, education, oversight, and
enforcement of the NAS.\17\ Given increased compliance
requirements on manufacturers and operators, ongoing supply
chain quality issues, enhanced scrutiny of safety culture
across the aviation ecosystem, and the emergence of more
advanced aerospace technologies in United States airspace, it
is critical that this safety workforce be fully staffed to meet
present day and future industry demand.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\16\ Supra note 1.
\17\ Strengthening the Aviation Workforce: Hearing Before the S.
Comm. on Commerce, Space and Transportation, 118 Cong. (March 16, 2023)
(statement of David Spero, National President, Professional Aviation
Safety Specialists).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

NOTABLE SAFETY INSPECTOR/SPECIALIST PROVISIONS OF THE FAA
REAUTHORIZATION ACT OF 2024

Sec. 429. FAA Workforce Review Audit

This section requires the DOT Office of Inspector General
(IG) to audit any FAA workforce plan completed during the past
five fiscal years related to the occupations the agency relies
on to accomplish its aviation safety mission. The DOT IG must
assess staffing levels and workforce retention trends, review
gaps in safety-critical and senior positions, and review
opportunities for FAA employees to gain or enhance expertise,
knowledge, skills, and abilities, among other considerations.
Furthermore, the DOT IG is required to submit a report to the
FAA and Congress on the audit results and recommendations.

Sec. 430. Staffing model for aviation safety inspectors

This section requires the FAA to conduct a comprehensive
review and, as necessary, revise the agency's staffing model
for aviation safety inspectors. In implementing this section,
the FAA must assess projected staffing needs at the office and
service level, the forecasted workload of aviation safety
inspectors, including responsibilities associated with
overseeing aviation manufacturers and new airspace entrants,
among other requirements.

Sec. 431. Safety-critical staffing

This section directs the FAA, upon completion of the
required actions under Section 430, to take all appropriate
actions to meet the safety-critical staffing needs determined
by such revised staffing model, including potentially
increasing the number of safety critical positions in the FAA's
FSS and AIR offices per fiscal year under certain conditions.

AIR TRAFFIC CONTROLLER WORKFORCE

For several years, the FAA and the aviation industry have
reported a need for a right-sized and qualified FAA workforce
commensurate with the agency's responsibilities. The pandemic,
however, only exacerbated the challenges felt by the agency's
Air Traffic Organization (ATO), which has faced challenges in
hiring and training controllers at a rate to meet increased
travel demand.\18\ Air traffic controllers are highly skilled
aviation professionals who undergo rigorous training at the FAA
Academy in Oklahoma before being placed in a FAA facility. The
process, however, of hiring and adequately training a
controller is lengthy and typically takes between five to seven
years of one's hiring date to reach full certification.\19\ In
the latest Aerospace forecast for the 2024-2044 period, the FAA
notes that ``with robust air travel demand growth in 2024 and
steady growth thereafter, we expect increased activity growth
that has the potential to increase controller workload.'' \20\
Thus, it is imperative that the agency take action to reduce
bottlenecks in the recruitment and training processes and
increase throughput and retention at training facilities for
the controller workforce.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\18\ Turbulence Ahead: Consequences of Delaying a Long-Term FAA
Bill: Hearing Before the Subcomm. on Aviation of the H. Comm. on
Transp. and Infrastructure, 118th Cong., (Nov. 30, 2023) (statement of
Rich Santa, President, National Air Traffic Controllers Association).
\19\ Statement of Rich Santa, supra note 11.
\20\ Supra note 2, at 4.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

NOTABLE CONTROLLER PROVISIONS OF THE FAA REAUTHORIZATION ACT OF 2024

Sec. 437. Air Traffic Control Workforce Staffing

To directly address the controller workforce bottleneck in
the aviation system, Section 437 directs the FAA to set as the
minimum hiring target for new air traffic controllers for each
of fiscal years 2024 through 2028 the maximum number of
individuals trained at the FAA Air Traffic Control Academy. It
also directs the Transportation Research Board to identify the
most appropriate staffing model for future air traffic
controller workforce needs and requires the FAA to revise its
staffing standards no later than May 16, 2025. In the interim,
the FAA must adopt and utilize the staffing models and
methodologies developed by the Collaborative Resource Workgroup
(CRWG) (which consists of representatives from FAA's ATO and
the National Air Traffic Controller Association) that were
recommended in a report submitted to the FAA and referenced in
the 2023 Controller Workforce Plan (CWP).

Sec. 439. Federal Aviation Administration Academy and
facility expansion plan

This section requires the FAA to develop a plan to expand
the FAA's capacity for educating and training developmental air
traffic controllers, including resource and staffing needs,
modernization efforts, and costs. The FAA is required to submit
the plan to Congress no later than one year after enactment and
brief Congress on the implementation of such plan six months
after submission.

NEW AIRSPACE ENTRANTS WORKFORCE

At a time of unprecedented aerospace innovation, from
unmanned aircraft systems (UAS or drones) to advanced air
mobility (AAM) aircraft, Congress and the FAA must provide a
clear and predictable framework for these new entrants to scale
safely in our skies and for these industries to grow in the
United States. By ensuring the timely publication of these
long-awaited rules, employers will be able to ensure their
workforces are ready to scale the production of new
technologies to meet operational demand. Furthermore, some new
entrants stakeholders cite the pressing need for a more highly-
skilled technical workforce, both in the industry and at the
FAA, to foster the advancement of United States aerospace
innovation.\21\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\21\ U.S. Gov't Accountability Off., GAO-22-105020, Transforming
Aviation: Stakeholders Identified Issues To Address for `Advanced Air
Mobility', (2022), available at https://www.gao.gov/products/gao-22-
105020.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

NOTABLE NEW AIRSPACE ENTRANT WORKFORCE PROVISIONS OF THE FAA
REAUTHORIZATION ACT OF 2024

Sec. 428. Direct hire authority utilization

This section directs the FAA to use its existing direct
hire authorities to recruit individuals for positions related
to aircraft certification and aviation safety. In exercising
this authority, the FAA must consider any staffing gaps in
positions that support the safe integration of new airspace
entrants. Furthermore, this section requires the FAA to brief
Congress on the use of direct hire authorities, including how
the authorities are used with respect to the FAA UAS Collegiate
Training Initiative (UAS CTI), and the number of employees
hired at the agency as a result.

Sec. 913. Drone education and workforce training grant
program

This section requires the Secretary to establish a grant
program to make grants available to educational institutions
for workforce training geared towards small UAS. Section 913
authorizes $5 million annually for this grant program through
fiscal year 2028. Through the grant program, students at
eligible institutions (including those participating in the
FAA's UAS CTI) will be able to receive hands-on training that
will provide them with the skills necessary to pursue
successful careers in an UAS-related field.

Sec. 930. Beyond visual line of sight operations for
unmanned aircraft systems

To provide regulatory certainty to this innovative sector,
advocates have long sought an FAA rule to establish regulations
to allow UAS to safely operate beyond visual line of sight
(BVLOS). The FAA chartered an Aviation Rulemaking Committee
(ARC) to recommend requirements for BVLOS UAS operations in
2021, and the ARC submitted its final report in March 2022.
Section 930 requires the FAA to publish an NPRM within four
months and a final rule within six months of enactment to
establish a performance-based regulatory pathway for BVLOS UAS
operations.

Sec. 955. Rules for operation of powered-lift aircraft

This section requires the FAA to publish a special Federal
aviation regulation (SFAR) for the operations of, and pilot
requirements for, powered lift AAM aircraft within seven months
of enactment. If the FAA fails to publish a final rule within
16 months, specific existing operating and training rules will
apply to these aircraft until the agency publishes the final
rule. Section 955 also establishes a powered-lift aviation
rulemaking advisory committee to provide recommendations on the
development of permanent regulations for the certification and
operation of powered-lift AAM aircraft.

IV. WITNESSES

LMatthew ``Monty'' Montgomery, Department Chair,
Department of Professional Aviation, Louisiana Tech University

LMichael Robbins, President & CEO, Association for
Uncrewed Vehicle Systems International (AUVSI)

LJoanne ``Jo'' Damato, Senior Vice President,
Education, Training & Workforce Development, National Business
Aviation Association (NBAA)

LDavid ``Dave'' Spero, National President,
Professional Aviation Safety Specialists, AFL-CIO (PASS)

ELIMINATING BOTTLENECKS: EXAMINING OPPORTUNITIES TO RECRUIT, RETAIN,
AND ENGAGE AVIATION TALENT

----------

WEDNESDAY, JULY 10, 2024

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Aviation,
Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 10:10 a.m., in
room 2167 Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Garret Graves
(Chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Mr. Graves of Louisiana. The Subcommittee on Aviation will
come to order.
I ask unanimous consent that the chairman be authorized to
declare a recess at any time during today's hearing.
Without objection, so ordered.
Mr. Stanton. Mr. Chairman, I also ask unanimous consent
that Members not on the subcommittee be permitted to sit with
the subcommittee at today's hearing and ask questions.
Mr. Graves of Louisiana. Without objection, so ordered.
Mr. Stanton. As a reminder, if Members wish to insert a
document into the record, please also email it to

[email protected]
.
Chairman.
Mr. Graves of Louisiana. Thank you, Mr. Stanton.
I now recognize myself for purposes of an opening statement
for 5 minutes.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. GARRET GRAVES OF LOUISIANA, CHAIRMAN,
SUBCOMMITTEE ON AVIATION

Mr. Graves of Louisiana. I want to start by thanking all
the witnesses for being here today. This hearing is about--it
is about bottlenecks in aviation. And, of course, when you
think about bottlenecks in aviation, I think that most folks
probably think immediately about passengers, about commercial
airlines and transportation experiences, and certainly that is
a big part of it. But we need to be thinking about the future,
which also includes new technology, includes commercial space
launch.
And I want to just give three quick statistics just to
paint a picture, not of what the aviation sector looks like
today and the challenges and stressors and bottlenecks, but
thinking about what it looks like in the future.
For commercial space launch, half of all licensed space
launches ever have occurred in the last 5 years. I will say
that again. Half of all licensed space launches ever have
occurred in the last 5 years. In 2015, there were 14 authorized
commercial space transportation operations, and in 2023, there
were 113. By 2028, it is projected that there are going to be
338. So, just in commercial space launch.
When you go to commercial passengers, America had its
busiest travel day ever on Sunday with more than 3 million
passengers screened. That record that was set on Sunday broke
the record that existed before that was set in just the month
of June of this year. Eight or nine of the ten busiest travel
days ever have occurred since May 23 of this year. And last
year, airlines carried 819 million passengers on domestic
flights. This year is expected to be even higher as the
industry climbs to the ever elusive goal of 1 billion
passengers.
In the drone space, in 2016, there were 20,000 remote
pilots. Now there are over 400,000. There are currently more
than 780,000 drones registered with the FAA, and that number is
projected to grow in excess of 1 million just in the next few
years.
So, let me say it again. You look at the stresses today.
You look at the industry today. In the future, this is just
going to grow greater and greater. The good news is that folks
here on this dais and a lot of the great staff behind us and in
this room worked tirelessly over the last 2 years, and really,
really proud, working with my friend, Mr. Cohen, and others, in
delivering the FAA reauthorization bill that was signed into
law just a few months ago.
And that bill does address a lot of the bottlenecks that we
have identified, either by giving the FAA the authority to do
so or helping to give the certainty to industry to help to
address some of these chokepoints or growing demands.
But one of the biggest challenges we have right now is with
ATC, air traffic control, and the controllers. The FAA is
approximately 3,000 controllers short right now. We took a lot
of steps in the FAA bill to help to improve the hiring and to
really max out hiring and move the needle in the near term,
which, again, is the real pinch point in the pipeline. You are
seeing great disparity with retirements in air traffic
controllers and the hiring, meaning that they are not keeping
pace with the hiring pipeline with those that are retiring.
And thinking about that bottleneck that hits a bit closer
to home, our office has heard from Louisiana Tech in 2020 about
the need for more designated pilot examiners to meet the
training needs of the students.
So, it is not just about air traffic controllers. It is
about ensuring that we can meet the demand for pilots. And if
the designated pilot examiners are short, then it is going to
have an impact on the ability of us to meet the targets on
pilot demand as well.
So, look, I am not going to go through every single problem
that we have and every single bottleneck that we have, but I do
want to say that we cannot rest on the laurels of having this
FAA bill that was signed into law. We have got to focus on
implementation. We need to focus on this explosive growth of
this really exciting industry in aviation. Whether it is about
passenger travel, it is about the general aviation, it is about
the innovation in these new platforms, or it is about
commercial space launch.
I think the FAA bill was a fantastic foundation, and I am
looking forward to hearing from some of our witnesses today and
hearing about your thoughts about how we move forward in
implementation and, importantly, what the future looks like and
what we need to be doing to facilitate this innovation and
improving the passenger experience.
[Mr. Graves of Louisiana's prepared statement follows:]

Prepared Statement of Hon. Garret Graves of Louisiana, Chairman,
Subcommittee on Aviation
I want to start by thanking all the witnesses for being here today.
This hearing is about bottlenecks in aviation. When you think about
bottlenecks in aviation, most folks probably think immediately about
passengers, commercial airlines, and transportation experiences.
Certainly, that's a big part of it. But we need to be thinking about
not just the problems of today, but the problems of the future.
For commercial space launches, half of all licensed space launches
ever have occurred in the last five years. In 2015, there were 14
authorized commercial space transportation operations. In 2023, there
were 113. By 2028, it's projected that there are going to be 338--just
in commercial space launch. For commercial travel--America had its
busiest travel day ever on Sunday, July 7, 2024, with more than 3
million passengers screened, breaking the record that had been
established just one month before. In the drone space, in 2016 there
were 20,000 remote pilots. Now, there are over 400,000. There are
currently more than 780,000 drones registered with the FAA, and that
number is projected to grow in excess of 1,000,000 just in the next few
years.
We need to be concerned not just about the stresses in the
aerospace industry today, but the reality that these stressors are
going to grow greater and greater in the future. The good news is that
folks here on this dais--and a lot of the great staff behind us in this
room--worked tirelessly over the last two years to deliver the FAA
Reauthorization Act of 2024, which was signed into law just a few
months ago.
The bill addresses a lot of the bottlenecks that we have
identified, either by giving the FAA a path forward to fix these issues
or by giving certainty to the industry to help to address some of these
choke points and growing demands.
One of the biggest challenges we have right now is with our air
traffic controllers. The FAA is approximately 3,000 controllers short
right now. We took a lot of steps in the FAA bill to help improve
hiring and move the needle in the near-term, which is the real pinch
point in the pipeline. You're seeing a great disparity between the
retirement rate of air traffic controllers and other aviation
professionals and the pace of hiring to fill those available positions.
And thinking about that bottleneck that hits a bit closer to home, our
office heard from Louisiana Tech in 2020 about the need for more
Designated Pilot Examiners to meet the training needs of the students.
If the Designated Pilot Examiners are short, then it's going to have an
impact on the ability of us to meet the targets on pilot demand as
well.
I'm not going to go through every single problem and every single
bottleneck that we have, but I do want to say that we cannot rest on
our laurels after seeing the FAA bill signed into law. We've got to
focus on implementation. We need to focus on this explosive growth of
this really exciting industry in aviation, whether it's about passenger
travel, general aviation, innovation in these new platforms, or
commercial space launches.
Our FAA bill was a fantastic foundation and I'm looking forward to
hearing from our witnesses today about how we move forward in
implementation and, importantly, what the future looks like and what we
need to be doing to facilitate this innovation in improving the
American aerospace industry.

Mr. Graves of Louisiana. With that, I now recognize Ranking
Member Cohen, 5 minutes for an opening statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. STEVE COHEN OF TENNESSEE, RANKING
MEMBER, SUBCOMMITTEE ON AVIATION

Mr. Cohen. Thank you, Mr. Chairman Graves.
It is obvious that when Chairman Graves goes home at night,
it is not les bons temps rouler. It is not beignets. It is not
jambalaya. It is absorbing and reading all of this stuff, and
he is got it in his mind and his gut and explained it well.
He has been a great subcommittee chair. I was so looking
forward to him being my ranking member next year. It is a great
loss of him not going to be here to do that.
He has covered the whole terrain. And I want to thank the
witnesses for being here.
We did pass a bipartisan infrastructure bill and FAA
reauthorization bill. It was truly bipartisan. We call the
infrastructure bill bipartisan. It was not that bipartisan.
There were a couple of folks here--but the FAA reauthorization
was, and this committee did a great job in getting it passed.
But we do need to implement it, because there are shortages
of employees, the bottlenecks that we have seen and have been
described. Airline pilots, we need more and more. Air traffic
controllers, they are behind. They got slowed up during the
pandemic, and we need to train more of those. Aviation
maintenance technicians, inspectors, designated pilot
examiners, LA Tech. All those areas need work.
Shortages of these vital members of the workforce have
resulted in subpar experiences across the ecosystem of
aviation, and our FAA reauthorization bill will allow us to
come back and improve those areas.
We also have gaps in minority hiring all through the
aviation industry. In my community, which is majority African
American--and Federal Express is based there--there are great
opportunities for African Americans to get employment, and they
need to have training opportunities, which this bill will help
with, and we need to urge and see to it that the workforce
looks more like America and gives people opportunities to move
up the ladder.
Air traffic controllers, it was really the pandemic that
hit them, but there have been problems with wages and
retirements and all of that.
Historical staffing challenges facing Air Traffic
Organization technicians, such as increased workload without
additional resources and training, have exacerbated this
bottleneck.
This is why our FAA reauthorization bill includes
provisions to maximize controller hiring, improve staffing
models, and expand the FAA's resources to meet the evolving
needs of our air traffic system.
My district in Memphis needs more designated pilot
examiners, or DPEs. That is a need. DPEs provide required
practical tests--checkrides--for aspiring pilots, but their
uneven distributions throughout the country with limited
incentives to serve as a DPE can pose scheduling challenges for
pilot candidates.
The FAA reauthorization will help streamline the process of
obtaining a checkride by creating an FAA office to facilitate
national coordination of DPEs and improving the agency's search
tool to provide more information about the credentials,
qualifications, and availability of designated pilot examiners.
Mental health is another issue that directly impacts the
aviation workforce, and the safety of our aviation system.
Being up there in that tower for long hours and the tension and
the stress that you get, it is not easy. Pilots and air traffic
controllers often do not get the help they need for mental
health issues due to the consequences of speaking up or seeking
treatment. That needs to be corrected. They need to get the
medical help that they might need, because that is a stressful,
stressful, stressful job.
Our aviation sector must better support mental health of
our aviation workforce to ensure public safety. That is what
they are looking out for.
The FAA reauthorization bill will require the establishment
of an aeromedical innovation and modernization working group,
which will review and make recommendations to the agency's
medical processes, new policies on mental health, education,
and outreach.
It creates a task group to monitor and evaluate the FAA's
efforts to assist and provide more resources for the aviation
workforce.
A lot more work that needs to be done, and I commend
Chairman Graves for holding this hearing on this subject. I
thank the witnesses for being here, and I am looking forward to
your testimony.
With that, I yield back the balance of my time.
[Mr. Cohen's prepared statement follows:]

Prepared Statement of Hon. Steve Cohen of Tennessee, Ranking Member,
Subcommittee on Aviation
Thank you, Chairman Graves, and thank you to all of our witnesses
for testifying today.
Now that we have successfully passed an overwhelmingly bipartisan
FAA reauthorization bill, we must turn our attention to implementing
it.
There are widespread and well documented aviation workforce
challenges, spanning positions from airline pilots and air traffic
controllers to aviation maintenance technicians, aviation safety
inspectors and designated pilot examiners.
Shortages of these vital members of the workforce have resulted in
a subpar experience across the aviation ecosystem, which is why our FAA
reauthorization bill provides support for all of these groups.
It reauthorizes and increases funding for workforce development
programs for aircraft pilots and aviation maintenance technicians and
creates a new eligibility for aviation manufacturing workers.
Establishing and funding these critical programs will help build a
pipeline for the next generation of these members of the aviation
workforce.
As for controllers, the number of certified professional
controllers had been trending downward in the decade prior to the
pandemic.
During the pandemic, the temporary suspension of training at the
FAA Academy, which prepares air traffic controllers for their jobs,
significantly increased the time required to certify controllers.
The FAA is now slowly recovering from that pause, though there is
still much work to be done, as most facilities across the country have
a shortage of air traffic controllers.
Historical staffing challenges facing air traffic organization
technicians, such as increased workload without additional resources
and training, exacerbate these ongoing workforce bottlenecks.
That is why our FAA reauthorization bill includes provisions to
maximize controller hiring, improve staffing models and expand the
FAA's resources to meet the evolving needs of the air traffic system.
I have also recently learned of a need in certain areas, including
in my district of Memphis, Tennessee, of designated pilot examiners or
DPEs.
DPEs provide required practical tests, or checkrides, for aspiring
pilots, but their uneven distribution throughout the country and the
limited incentives to serve as a DPE can pose scheduling challenges for
pilot candidates.
The FAA reauthorization bill will help streamline the process of
obtaining a checkride by creating an FAA office to facilitate national
coordination of DPEs and by improving the agency's DPE search tool to
provide more information about the credentials, qualifications and
availability of designated pilot examiners.
Mental health is another issue that directly impacts the aviation
workforce and the safety of our aviation system.
Pilots and air traffic controllers often do not get the help they
need for mental health issues due to the consequences of speaking up or
seeking treatment.
Consequences can include a revocation of or delays in receiving
medical clearances, which can result in a period of not working for
multiple months.
Our aviation sector must better support the mental health of our
aviation workforce to ensure public safety in the air and on the
ground.
The FAA reauthorization bill requires the establishment of an
aeromedical innovation and modernization working group, which will
review and make recommendations to the agency's medical processes,
including policies on mental health protocols, education and outreach.
The law also creates a task group to monitor and evaluate the FAA's
efforts to assist and provide more resources for the aviation
workforce.
We must ensure robust development of and support for all aviation
workers, as they play a critical role in keeping our aviation system
operating safely and efficiently.
Thank you again to our witnesses for being here today, and I look
forward to our discussion.

Mr. Graves of Louisiana. Thank you, Mr. Cohen, for the
majority of your statement.
It looks like we are not visited by some folks. So, I now
would like to welcome our witnesses, and thank you for being
here today.
We are going to do a few quick, unanimous consent----
Mr. Cohen [interrupting]. Briefly, I would like to take a
moment to explain our lighting system to our witnesses. If the
light is green, forward, go, just like in a car, on the gas,
you are going. But when it turns to yellow, you've got to slow
down because the policemen are looking at you and might give
you a ticket. You've got to slow down. If it gets to be red,
you might get a citation, so, stop.
I ask unanimous consent the witnesses' full statements be
included in the record.
Mr. Graves of Louisiana. Without objection.
Mr. Cohen. I ask unanimous consent the record of today's
hearing remain open until such time as our witnesses provide
answers to any questions that may be submitted to them in
writing.
Mr. Graves of Louisiana. Without objection, so ordered.
Mr. Cohen. And I also ask unanimous consent that the record
remain open for 15 days for any additional comments or
information submitted by the Members or witnesses to be
included in the record of today's hearing.
Mr. Graves of Louisiana. Without objection, so ordered.
Thank you.
As your written testimony has been made part of the
committee's record, the subcommittee asks that you limit your
oral remarks to 5 minutes.
And with that, Louisiana's own Monty Montgomery from
Louisiana Tech where I went to school, in my diverse college
education experience, but, Mr. Montgomery, thank you for being
here. You are recognized for 5 minutes.

TESTIMONY OF MATTHEW ``MONTY'' MONTGOMERY, DEPARTMENT CHAIR,
DEPARTMENT OF PROFESSIONAL AVIATION, LOUISIANA TECH UNIVERSITY;
MICHAEL ROBBINS, PRESIDENT AND CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER,
ASSOCIATION FOR UNCREWED VEHICLE SYSTEMS INTERNATIONAL (AUVSI);
JOANNE M. ``JO'' DAMATO, CAM, SENIOR VICE PRESIDENT OF
EDUCATION, TRAINING, AND WORKFORCE DEVELOPMENT, NATIONAL
BUSINESS AVIATION ASSOCIATION (NBAA); AND DAVID J. SPERO,
NATIONAL PRESIDENT, PROFESSIONAL AVIATION SAFETY SPECIALISTS,
AFL-CIO (PASS)

TESTIMONY OF MATTHEW ``MONTY'' MONTGOMERY, DEPARTMENT CHAIR,
DEPARTMENT OF PROFESSIONAL AVIATION, LOUISIANA TECH UNIVERSITY

Mr. Montgomery. Thank you, sir.
Chairman Graves, Ranking Member Cohen, and members of the
committee, thank you for inviting me to participate in today's
hearing, and thank you for your attention to aviation.
My name is Matt Montgomery. I just go by Monty. Please call
me Monty. I am a former military maintainer, 20 years of Active
Duty service with nuclear weapons and 11 years as a Government
civil servant working for Global Strike Command.
Since I was a child way back in the 1970s, I always loved
aviation and am proud to be called an airman.
I would like to bring to your attention the aviation
academic training bottlenecks that we are currently facing at
Louisiana Tech University.
As you may know, our university has a rich history in
professional aviation, and we take pride in the quality of our
programs. However, we are currently experiencing several
challenges that are impacting the aviation academic training.
These challenges include the availability of flight training to
meet student demand, scheduling effectiveness, availability of
qualified professors and instructors, funding, aircraft
purchasing backlog, and factors such as designated pilot
examiner availability and lack of forecasted hiring trends.
In response to these challenges, Louisiana Tech University
is taking proactive measures to address the issues. We are
focusing on supporting our current students in flight aviation
management, and additionally, we are looking for growth
opportunities for flying mechanics, air traffic controllers,
and unmanned aerial systems airmen.
Despite our efforts, there are areas where we need
additional support. So, this literally requires assistance in
terms of funding, aircraft purchasing, professor pay gap, and
better forecasting of industry, military, and corporate hiring
trends. These areas are critical to our ability to overcome the
current bottlenecks, to ensure we provide the required number
of airmen when needed, and ensure the quality and effectiveness
of our aviation training programs to support growth and
adaptability.
Louisiana Tech is accredited by AABI. It is our opinion
aviation schools should be accredited by an independent
accrediting body such as AABI to ensure quality of training.
Historically, we have seen dramatic differences on when we pick
up students with private pilot certificates from other flight
schools, many times requiring extensive retraining to get to
acceptable flight standards.
Moving on to partnerships. We have several partnerships
with large airlines including United Aviate and Southwest
Destination 225, and regional airlines including Republic
Airlines, SkyWest Airlines, and Mesa Airlines. Our campus also
supports Air Force ROTC, providing private pilot training to
future officers. While these partnerships provide effective
pipelines for our airmen into aviation, we will be looking for
help from industry partners in our hard-to-fill vacancies,
equipment, and helping students get flight funding.
The superior work you have done to pass the FAA
Reauthorization Act of 2024 will present opportunities for us
to apply for grants and obtain funding needed to bridge these
gaps. However, students still need assistance, as our primary
dropout indicator for students in aviation is funding. The cost
of flight is just too great of a burden for most Americans,
which is the primary root cause of Louisiana Tech's private
pilot dropout rate that is historically at 68.2 percent.
In closing, aviation training pipelines need assistance to
properly meet U.S. demands. We need to forecast better. We need
additional funding assistance to procure our aircraft and
equipment. We need additional assistance filling in pay gaps,
and students need assistance in funding their dreams of flight.
Correcting these problems will remove bottlenecks in the
production of airmen and better set up the U.S. training
pipeline to fill projected needs.
For reference and review, I have also submitted to the
hearing record my report, titled, ``Aviation Academic Training
Bottlenecks: A Perspective from a Part 141 Flight Training
School.''
Lastly, I would like to thank every one of you who worked
on the FAA reauthorization bill. On behalf of all the airmen
you have helped and will be helping, your tireless efforts are
greatly appreciated. We needed your help and you valiantly
heard our call, so, thank you.
I am available for questions.
[Mr. Montgomery's prepared statement follows:]

Prepared Statement of Matthew ``Monty'' Montgomery, Department Chair,
Department of Professional Aviation, Louisiana Tech University
Chairman Graves, Ranking Member Cohen, and Members of this
Committee--thank you for inviting me to participate in today's hearing,
and thank you for your attention to aviation. My name is Matthew
Montgomery, but please call me Monty. I am the Department of
Professional Aviation Head for Louisiana Tech University. I am also a
former military maintainer with over 20 years of active-duty experience
as a nuclear weapons technician and over 11 years as a government civil
servant working for the Air Force Global Strike Command (AFGSC). Since
I was a child, way back in the 1970s, I always loved aviation and am
proud to be called an airman.
I would like to bring to your attention the aviation academic
training bottlenecks that we are currently facing at Louisiana Tech
University. As you may know, our university has a rich history in
professional aviation, and we take pride in the quality of our
programs.
However, we are currently experiencing several challenges that are
impacting our aviation academic training. These challenges include
availability of flight training to meet student demand, scheduling
effectiveness, availability of qualified professors and instructors,
funding, aircraft purchasing backlog, and factors such as designated
pilot examiners availability and lack of forecasted hiring trends.
In response to these challenges, Louisiana Tech University is
taking proactive measures to address the issues at hand. We are
focusing on supporting our current students in flight and aviation
management and additionally, we are looking for growth opportunities in
providing training to mechanics, air traffic controllers, and in
Unmanned Aerial Systems (UASs).
Despite our efforts, there are areas where we need additional
support. Specifically, we require assistance in terms of funding,
aircraft purchasing, professor pay gap, and better forecasting of
industry, military, and corporate hiring trends. These areas are
critical to our ability to overcome the current bottlenecks, to ensure
we provide required number of airmen when needed and ensure the quality
and effectiveness of our aviation training programs to support growth
and adaptability.
Louisiana Tech University is accredited by the Aviation
Accreditation Board, International (AABI). It is our opinion that all
aviation schools should be accredited by an independent accrediting
body such as AABI to ensure quality of training and standards.
Historically, we have seen dramatic training differences on when we
pickup students with their Private Pilot Certificate from other flights
schools. Most of the time requiring extensive retraining to get to
acceptable flight standards.
Moving onto our Partnerships, we have several partnerships with
large airlines including United Aviate and Southwest Destination 225,
and regional airlines including Republic Airlines, SkyWest Airlines,
and Mesa Airlines. Our campus also supports AFROTC providing Private
Pilot training to future officers. While these partnerships provide
effective pipelines for our airmen into aviation, we will be looking
for additional help from industry partners in our hard to fill
vacancies, equipment, and help getting students scholarships and flight
funding.
The superior work you have done to pass the FAA Reauthorization Act
of 2024 will present opportunities for us to apply for grants and
obtain funding needed to bridge these gaps. However, students still
need assistance as our primary dropout indicator for students in
aviation is funding. The cost of flight is just too great of a burden
for most Americans which is the primary root cause for Louisiana Tech's
Private Pilot dropout rate that is historically at 68.2%.
In closing, Aviation training pipelines need assistance to properly
meet U.S. demands. We need to forecast better; we need additional
funding assistance to procure aircraft and equipment, we need
additional assistance filling in the pay gaps, and students need
assistance in funding their dreams of flight. Correcting these problems
will remove bottlenecks in the production of airmen and better set up
the U.S. training pipeline to fill projected needs. For your reference
and review, I have also submitted to the hearing record my report
titled ``Aviation Academic Training Bottlenecks: A Perspective from a
Part 141 Flight Training School''.
Lastly, I would like to thank each and every one of you who worked
on the FAA Reauthorization Bill and passing this important legislation.
On behalf of all the airmen you have helped and will be helping, your
tireless efforts are greatly appreciated. We needed help and you
valiantly heard our call, so thank you!
I am happy to answer any questions you may have.
__________

Attachment

Aviation Academic Training Bottlenecks: A Perspective From a Part 141
Flight Training School
by Matthew ``Monty'' Montgomery, Department Chair, Department of
Professional Aviation, Louisiana Tech University
1. Background.
1.1. University Overview:
1.1.1. Louisiana Tech University is a selective-admissions,
comprehensive public university. Louisiana Tech is committed to quality
in teaching, research, creative activity and scholarship, public
service, and workforce/economic development. Louisiana Tech maintains
as its highest priority the education and development of its students
in a challenging environment within a safe supportive, diverse
community of learners. Louisiana Tech University is categorized as a
Four-Year selective admission research university awarding bachelor's,
master's, and doctoral degrees.
1.2. Aviation History at Louisiana Tech University:
1.2.1. Louisiana Tech University is a pioneer in academic
professional aviation and was the first Louisiana flight school to
offer a Bachelor of Science degree in Professional Aviation in 1967.
The program was expanded to include a Bachelor of Science degree in
Aviation Management in the Fall of 1999. In 2024, Louisiana Tech
University's latest expansion now offers a Master of Business
Administration with an Aviation Management Concentration to support
working airmen.
1.3. Department of Professional Aviation overview:
1.3.1. The Department of Professional Aviation is one of only two
programs within Louisiana Tech University that is selective
enrollments. This is due to the Department's self-regulating
enrollments owing to the availability of aircraft, aviation professors,
and Certificate Flight Instructors (CFI). The Department currently does
this by having an American College Test (ACT) or Scholastic Aptitude
Test (SAT) and Grade Point Average (GPA) requirement that is above
entry requirements into Louisiana Tech University. These requirements
are 23 ACT (1130 SAT) and 3.0 GPA. Once the Department has all the
perspective students listed, they will be stacked via ACT/SAT and GPA
requirements and taken from the top-down approach. The number taken
each year is determined by Flight Operations as an estimate on how many
more students it can accept based on open pilot slots (from dropouts
and graduations) and CFI attrition rates. This process is under review
in Summer 2024, as ACT and GPA doesn't appear to forecast effective
pilots.
1.4. Aviation Accreditation Board International (AABI).
Louisiana Tech University is an AABI accredited university. This
accreditation allows better continuity and training across member
institutions ensuring standardization and harmonization of aviation
training. Accreditation facilitates transfer of accreditation and
credits across member universities and institutions. This provides
airmen with the flexibility of increased options when transferring
schools. Additionally, any institution accredited by AABI, ensures
flight schools maintain standards and quality of training to include
contracted flight. It is our opinion that all Part 141 aviation
training schools should be accredited by an independent accrediting
body such as AABI to ensure quality of training, ensure compliance with
regulations, and give institutions a second opinion on their program.
Lastly, accreditation ensures aviation classes offered towards a
degree, are at an acceptable standard and quality.
2. Aviation Academic Bottleneck Problems:
2.1. Enrollments / Recent Demand for Aviation:
2.1.1. In 2023, Louisiana Tech University had 270 applicants for
the B.S. Professional Aviation (fixed-wing flight) degree. In 2024,
that number increased to over 370 applicants. Our intake of new
students is directly related to the number of aircraft we have on hand,
aviation professors, and available CFIs. In 2023, we had 35 flight
slots available and in 2024 we increased those available flight slots
to 65 due to scheduling effectiveness changes. With our current fleet,
professors, CFI population, and scheduling effectiveness we are at a
maximum production capacity.
2.2. Scheduling Effectiveness.
2.2.1. Active scheduling is paramount to ensure aircraft are
utilized at an effective rate. Lack of scheduling effectiveness will
see resources sitting on the ramp and will extend periods of training
to unacceptable levels. If a program has an effective schedule,
schedulers will actively monitor aircraft usage, weather conditions,
cancellations, and maintenance. If a Private Pilot cannot fly due to
weather, the scheduler will work to fill the time slot with pilots who
can. Without an active scheduling process, bottlenecks will be produced
in training and resources will be wasted.
2.2.2. Additional factors in scheduling effectiveness that create
bottlenecks in the production process, are weather and time of day.
Private Pilot students cannot fly in many weather conditions and cannot
fly at night. Active planning to maximize aircraft utilization is often
``thrown out the window'' due to weather conditions. This is the nature
of flight training and is unavoidable, however, it remains a common
problem when training airmen and can throw the best scheduling into
disarray.
2.3. Aviation Professors:
2.3.1. Most universities have a difficult time hiring experienced
pilots and mechanics to teach. This is due to:

The pay gap between education and industry and certified
mechanics.

A significant portion of pilots and certified mechanics
do not pursue a graduate degree.
2.3.2. Specifically, the pay gaps are:
2.3.2.1. For pilots, IAW the Bureau of Labor Statistics the average
Pilot pay is $171,210 (BLS.GOV, 2023). Per the latest Aviation Program
Salary survey completed by Aviation Accreditation Board International
(AABI) in 2022, the average pay for an Aviation Professor is $74,285 to
$100,690 depending on location and rank.
2.3.2.2. For Aviation Mechanics, IAW the Bureau of Labor Statistics
the average pay for Airframe and Powerplant (A&P) Certified Technicians
(Scheduled Air Transportation) is around $96,470 (BLS.GOV, 2023). AABI
2022 Survey indicated Aviation Mechanic Professors' average pay is
around $60,000 to $80,000 depending on rank and location.
2.3.3. This discrepancy creates a barrier to hiring qualified and
experienced personnel in education, as we cannot pay what the industry
is providing. In many cases, we must hire what we can afford, which can
negatively impact the quality of the aviation program. Additionally,
once we have grown our own professors (students work their
undergraduate degree, decide to stay and teach, and then earn their
graduate degree), we lose them to higher paying industry jobs or to
other universities fighting over the same limited resources pool.
2.3.4. With that said, a notable deviation is for those
universities/flight schools with a military installation nearby. This
proximity gives schools an additional hiring pool of retiring pilots,
mechanics, and other airmen who want to stay local. This hidden gem
allows Louisiana Tech to potentially get around the high market prices
and obtain highly qualified airmen, due to our location near an
airbase. This is further a benefit as most airmen leaving military
service have completed an undergraduate degree and most Senior Non-
Commissioned Officers (SNCO) and all retiring officers have their
graduate degree.
2.3.4.1. Louisiana Tech University is lucky enough to have
Barksdale Air Force Base near it. This gives us a large pool of
potential experienced airmen to hire for aviation positions. However,
we still need to get potential experienced airmen to travel 1 to 1.5
hours to Ruston to teach and then we are still competing against civil
service, contractor, and industry offerings.
2.4. Certificated Flight Instructors (CFI).
2.4.1. Louisiana Tech's CFIs are a proven resource and are in high
demand for training. We have seen many of our CFIs being actively
recruited by Part 61 and Part 141 schools across the nation. This is
further validated with GAO report 18-403. Specifically, ``Flight
instructor retention: Nearly all (16 of 18) selected school
representatives cited difficulty recruiting and retaining flight
instructors as a great or moderate challenge for schools' ability to
train pilots. According to most school representatives (15) and other
selected stakeholders, instructors who aspire to be airline pilots are
rapidly accruing the flight hours necessary to qualify and are
obtaining employment as soon as they are eligible. In addition,
regional airlines have recently increased hiring, generating high
turnover among flight instructors, who are traditionally their main
source of new pilots.'' (GAO, 2018)
2.5. Chief Flight Instructor.
2.5.1. Chief flight instructor position, as indicated in the 14 CFR
Part 141, Section 35 indicates the Chief Instructor must have the
following qualifications (CFR, 1997):
``(1) Hold a commercial pilot certificate or an airline transport
pilot certificate, and, except for a chief instructor for a course of
training solely for a lighter-than-air rating, a current flight
instructor certificate. The certificates must contain the appropriate
aircraft category and class ratings for the category and class of
aircraft used in the course and an instrument rating, if an instrument
rating is required for enrollment in the course of training;
(2) Meet the pilot-in-command recent flight experience requirements
of Sec.  61.57 of this chapter;
(3) Pass a knowledge test on--
(i)  Teaching methods;
(ii)  TApplicable provisions of the ``Aeronautical Information
Manual'';
(iii)  TApplicable provisions of parts 61, 91, and 141 of this
chapter; and
(iv)  TThe objectives and approved course completion standards of
the course for which the person seeks to obtain designation.
(4) Pass a proficiency test on instructional skills and ability to
train students on the flight procedures and maneuvers appropriate to
the course;
(5) Except for a course of training for gliders, balloons, or
airships, the chief instructor must meet the applicable requirements in
paragraphs (b), (c), and (d) of this section; and
(6) A chief instructor for a course of training for gliders,
balloons or airships is only required to have 40 percent of the hours
required in paragraphs (b) and (d) of this section.
(b)  For a course of training leading to the issuance of a
recreational or private pilot certificate or rating, a chief instructor
must have:
(1)  At least 1,000 hours as pilot in command; and
(2)  Primary flight training experience, acquired as either a
certificated flight instructor or an instructor in a military pilot
flight training program, or a combination thereof, consisting of at
least--
(i)  2 years and a total of 500 flight hours; or
(ii)  1,000 flight hours.
(c)  For a course of training leading to the issuance of an
instrument rating or a rating with instrument privileges, a chief
instructor must have:
(1)  At least 100 hours of flight time under actual or
simulated instrument conditions;
(2)  At least 1,000 hours as pilot in command; and
(3)  Instrument flight instructor experience, acquired as
either a certificated flight instructor-instrument or an instructor in
a military pilot flight training program, or a combination thereof,
consisting of at least--
(i)  2 years and a total of 250 flight hours; or
(ii)  400 flight hours.
(d)  For a course of training other than one leading to the
issuance of a recreational or private pilot certificate or rating, or
an instrument rating or a rating with instrument privileges, a chief
instructor must have:
(1)  At least 2,000 hours as pilot in command; and
(2)  Flight training experience, acquired as either a
certificated flight instructor or an instructor in a military pilot
flight training program, or a combination thereof, consisting of at
least--
(i)  3 years and a total of 1,000 flight hours; or
(ii)  1,500 flight hours.
(e)  To be eligible for designation as chief instructor for a
ground school course, a person must have 1 year of experience as a
ground school instructor at a certificated pilot school.''
2.5.2. This specific position represents the biggest of our
bottlenecks for personnel hiring and one exceedingly harder to fill.
Discussions with several Louisiana State schools and a Texas University
indicated these schools want to bring on a flight curriculum in their
region however cannot due to the inability to hire a Chief Flight
Instructor due to the pay differences with industry. The above
certificates, ratings, and flight time are the biggest hiring barriers
to starting programs within the U.S. due to the pay gap between what
pilots with these types of qualifications and flight hours make within
the industry and what Universities/Colleges can pay. With the quality
of the flight program mainly in the Chief Flight instructor's hands,
most schools are forced to increase pay for this position, which turns
into increasing flight costs for students or hiring within and
accepting the lack of industry experience.
2.6. Funding:
2.6.1. Our university's flight program funding is covered by
student flight fees. These fees cover leases of aircraft, maintenance,
insurance, flight instructor pay, and flight operations overhead (rent,
electrical, internet, etc.). Since no other sources of funding are
utilized, our flight fees are expensive and create a large barrier to
entry for a majority of U.S. households. Currently, on average
Louisiana Tech's flight costs are $72,000, to earn a Private Pilot
Certificate, Instrument Rating, Commercial Rating, and Certificated
Flight Instructor endorsement. This is on top of a 4-year college
tuition.
2.6.2. With these figures in mind, funding assistance isn't only
needed for aviation schools. The average U.S. wide drop out rate for
Private Pilots is 70% to 80% (AOPA.ORG, 2010). Louisiana Tech's Private
Pilot dropout rate is historically at 68.2%. From our research, the
primary root cause of the high dropout rate is that most Americans
cannot afford the price of learning to fly. Many of our students try to
work full time, go to school full time, and then spend their week's pay
on a couple hours of flight training. Most students quickly lose hope
in flight as they cannot make enough money to afford flights and to
live. While student loans are available, many students do not qualify
due to parents' income requirements or use most of their student loans
to pay for classes, books, and fees. If we can get aviation students
more help to pay for flight, it will decrease the dropout rate and
increase production.
2.6.3. Lastly, this data is supported by the GAO Report 18-403.
Specifically, ``High cost of training: Nearly all (16) selected
schools' representatives identified the cost of a professional pilot
degree program as a great or moderate challenge to recruiting and
retaining pilot students. High education costs are not unique to these
programs. Nonetheless, in addition to tuition, flight training fees
alone often exceed $50,000, well above the cap for federal financial
aid available to eligible students.'' (GAO, 2018)
2.7. Aircraft Availability and Cost:
2.7.1. Louisiana Tech has 10 Cessna 172S, Skyhawks, 1 Cessna C172R,
and 2 Piper PA-28, Arrows. To increase our offerings and add more
students, we would need additional aircraft. Currently obtaining
additional aircraft is at $500,000 to $627,000 depending on which
aircraft and which instruments are attached. If we want a dual-engine
aircraft, the Diamond 42 is around $1.2 Million. The Cessna
manufacturer (Textron Aviation) is backed up for Cessna 172's by a
little over 3 years and others are 1-2 years out. If Louisiana Tech
wants to remove selective enrollments by adding more aircraft, we will
require 8-10 Fixed-wing aircraft to grow the program. This will cost us
at least $5 Million to procure the added fleet required. The $5 Million
could be added to our monthly overhead costs, like current aircraft,
however, the flight costs are still a large barrier to flight training
for most Americans. Additionally, if the pilot hiring takes a turn for
the worse, we will not be able to afford the leases on the aircraft,
which increases our risk to unacceptable levels.
2.8. Airframe and Power Plant Program.
2.8.1. For aviation mechanics, we need specialized tools, trainers,
maintenance handling equipment, and facilities. All come at a great
cost. As stated above, we cannot compete against industry pay in
academia. We need mechanics as the supply and demand curve is flipped
on us, forcing our maintenance bills higher and higher each year. As
indicated in previous paragraphs, this cost is passed onto students,
pushing aviation more and more outside of the average American's
ability to pay.
2.8.2. In summary, selective enrollments are a large bottleneck in
our processes, however, it is in place due to the limited availability
of aircraft, professors, and CFIs. Other bottlenecks of funding,
aircraft availability, and limited supply of experienced graduate
degree airmen willing to take less pay to teach all greatly affect the
academic production of airmen.
2.9. Other Factors:
2.9.1. Designated Pilot Examiner (DPE). DPEs are hard to find in
Louisiana. When we do find them their costs are high and their time is
limited in supporting our Part 141 operations. Due to existing
regulations, our university is no longer able to obtain self-examining
authority due to our pass rates falling below 90%. However, we are
actively engaged with the DPEs we know of and ensuring we get maximum
time for when they are in Ruston, LA.
2.9.2. Hiring Trends. Hiring trends for Louisiana Tech airmen have
been positive for flight students. We currently have a 100% placement
rate for students completing their B.S. Professional Aviation degree.
Our students obtain positions performing Flight Instructing, Corporate
Aviation, Regional Aviation, Military, and various other piloting
positions. Louisiana Tech has partnerships with Southwest Airlines
Destination 225, United Airlines Aviate, Cape Air, Republic Airlines,
and SkyWest Airlines. While students have seen increased lead time into
the major airlines, they are employed and building Pilot-In-Charge time
with little problems. Most of our CFI-rated pilots are hired in-house
and train new students until they reach around the 900 PIC hour mark.
At that point, the instructors will move on to the regional partners.
Lastly, we have seen a number of CFIs moving to other flight schools
due to better pay or locality to home locations. This is a large
indicator that our airmen are in high demand and jobs are presented to
them across the region.
2.9.3. However, recent information provided by several of our
industry partners gives large indicators that hiring is slowing and
some airlines are cutting back routes and letting go of pilots.
Specifically, Mesa Airlines indicated ``The transition to a single
fleet operational environment, combined with drastically reduced pilot
attrition, has resulted in a temporary surplus of pilots at Mesa.''
(Lotter, 2024) This information combined with other indicators, like
aircraft delivery backlog/problems, airlines cutting back routes due to
manufacturer delays, and pay raises keeping senior pilots longer
increases the chances that our pilots may not be able to walk in
airline positions like they have in the past 5 to 10 years. Our
prognosis is that airline positions will be tougher to obtain due to
this, however, the job market is changing in nature. As the Large-
Unmanned Aerial Systems (L-UAS) market expands, the theory is
certificated, and rated pilots will transition to these platforms
changing as the market demands. Based on this theory, Louisiana Tech is
opening discussions on supporting Unmanned Aerial Systems and
partnering with Houma-Terrebonne airport to provide pilots, training,
and support for their future L-UAS operations.
2.10. Aviation Medical Examiners (AME).
While there are no AMEs within Ruston Louisiana there are several
30-to-60-minute drives from our location. We currently do not see any
major issues with AMEs and the FAAs website is easy to use and helps
potential students find AMEs close to home. Historically, we have seen
some students not understand the medications/problems they encountered
when they were young and get surprised when ADHD drugs, Color
Blindness, and heart conditions restrict them from flight. Due to this,
we ensure all potential students applying for Professional Aviation are
briefed on the AME processes and where to find the information.
3. What is Louisiana Tech doing to help?
3.1. Pilots:
3.1.1. We are seeking partners with local Part 141 non-university
flight schools to increase our availability of flight training. We are
currently building a partnership with Petroleum Helicopter
International (PHI), Metro Aviation, and Part 141 non-University flight
schools to start training rotary-wing pilots in Lafayette and
Shreveport, Louisiana. These partnerships should increase the supply of
rotary-wing pilots in the Gulf region that are in high demand with
perceived low supplies. If these efforts are successful, we will expand
this program into fixed-wing operations in these locations. Several
Community Colleges are willing to support our students in these
locations and will aid in our expansion efforts to fulfill regional
pilot requirements.
3.1.2. Additionally, to provide other ways students can become
airmen, we have developed a backup process for the flight program. This
process allows students who were not chosen for the flight program to
pursue an academic major in Aviation Management. These Aviation
Management students will be prioritized as flight program candidates
based on a review of their academic performance (College GPA) and will
backfill flight slots as we have students change majors or graduate
from the flight program throughout the year. This process is designed
to give students hope to get into flight, even if their High School
years were less than stellar or their testing wasn't competitive. While
they wait for an open flight slot, they can still complete the basic
General Education Requirements and non-flight Professional Aviation
classes.
3.1.3. Lastly, we are actively waiting for the FAA Aviation
Workforce Develop Grant to open for 2024. Our hope is to be awarded
grants to support buying new aircraft and equipment and supplement
growth opportunities. The opportunities the 118th Congress has
established in the FAA Reauthorization Act of 2024, will help us out
significantly if we can ensure we apply for and support grant
applications within the University.
3.2. Mechanics:
3.2.1. Louisiana Tech Aviation Industry partnerships within the
state. Currently, we are working with PHI and potentially Metro
Aviation to have their mechanics train our students to obtain their
Airframe and Powerplant certifications in tandem with Louisiana Tech's
B.S. Aviation Management degree. This new partnership should help those
companies by training our students to their standards and providing a
ready-trained force at their fingertips. Additionally, the new
credentialing helps Louisiana Tech by our industry partners providing
the training, equipment, and engines/aircraft to allow our academic
program to offer our degree with an aircraft maintenance focus, making
our Aviation Management degree more valuable to students.
3.3. Air Traffic Controllers:
3.3.1. We have submitted our application to the FAA for the Air
Traffic-Collegiate Training Initiative at the standard level. This
opportunity will make our B.S. Aviation Management degree more valuable
and allow our students to get into the pipeline to the FAA training
center, with 5-weeks off their training. If we can get funding for ATC
simulators and get an ATC Professor, we intend to expand this program
into the enhanced version. However, as previously stated, the pilots
and mechanics industry pay gap will be another barrier to hiring highly
qualified ATC professors.
3.4. MBA with Aviation Concentration.
Louisiana Tech University has partnered their College of Business
with the Aviation Department to generate a graduate-level aviation
degree at Louisiana Tech. If demand for this program is great, we plan
to use this as a springboard to establish a Master of Science in
Aviation Management degree.
3.5. Unmanned Aerial Systems (UAS).
3.5.1. 14 CFR Part 107. Louisiana Tech's Department of Professional
Aviation is building proposals to start a Minor and Certification in
Small-UAVs. While this project has just started our goal would be to
provide the grounds schools, aviation weather, and aviation law classes
to support any degree within the University adding a Minor in Small-
UAVs. Initial interest in the program is high and we hope to expand
this program to include any state agency that wants to get their first
responders Part 107 certified. Once the program is established, we will
work on accrediting a B.S. in Aviation Management with a Concentration
in Small-UAVs, a Minor in Small-UAVs, and a Concentration in Small-
UAVs.
3.5.2. Large-UAS (L-UAS). Louisiana Tech University is currently
developing a CEA (Cooperative Endeavor Agreement) with the Houma-
Terrebonne Airport Commission (HTAC) and the UAS Gulf of Mexico Center
of Excellence (UGC) to provide L-UAS support. This support will provide
certified pilots to assist with the certification of L-UAS, build a new
flight pipeline for L-UAS certified pilots at Louisiana Tech, and share
training equipment with HTAC & UGC in developing the next generation of
L-UAS airmen. Once this program is established, we expect to offer a
B.S. Professional Aviation (Large-UAS) degree.
3.5.2.1. L-UAS will affect our production of fully qualified
pilots. This is due to current standards for L-UASs (over 55 lbs.),
requiring a waiver certificate from the FAA until Beyond Visual Line of
Sight (BVLOS) becomes the certified norm by FAA. From past experiences,
the FAA required the pilot (under the Part 333 Program) to be a
certified on Private Pilot. This added program will require more
aircraft and CFIs, increasing the resource and financial strains on our
aviation program. Moreover, educating and training our students on this
emerging technology.
4. Where Louisiana Tech University Needs Help.
4.1. Funding.
Louisiana Tech's aircraft leases, maintenance, and flight
operations overhead is covered solely by student flight fees. Any
increases in cost due to maintenance increases, professor/instructor
pay increases to retain, and overhead increases (rent, utilities, etc.)
is directly passed onto our students. U.S. residents are already
struggling with the high cost of flight training and most cannot afford
it. Any assistance to bridge this financial gap will help us reduce
flight costs and open up aviation to more citizens.
4.2. Aircraft Purchasing.
Any financial support in the procurement and payment plans designed
for state universities/colleges is needed and would be appreciated.
4.3. Professor Pay Assistance.
Assistance to level the pay gap is needed to retain highly
qualified pilots to train the next generation of pilots. Whether this
support comes from assistance from the aviation industry paying back
the training pipeline through providing pilots from their pools or from
finding new innovative ways to fill the pay gap, we need external
resources that avoid further pushing additional financial burdens onto
students.
4.4. Future aviation research and data sharing.
We need better forecasting methods in aviation training to be able
to project positions at least 4-years out. Effective forecasting would
allow universities to efficiently project student enrollment we need to
attain while simultaneously lowering schools' risks and ensuring
schools are meeting industry demands. This forecasting should include
Unmanned Aerial Vehicles Pilots (both Small and Large), Fixed-Wing
Pilots, Rotary-Wing Pilots, Airframe and Powerplant Mechanics, ATC
controllers, and aviation management. Without data-driven forecasting,
we risk a misappropriating significant resource on aircraft, airport
improvements, equipment, and personnel based on immediate needs, when
in 4-years we may not have the same demand, wasting an extensive amount
of resources. This potential waste of resources exposes schools to a
significant financial risk of not being able to pay for the leases,
overhead, and annual maintenance if/when demand turns downward. For
this, we recommend the establishment of a training forecast body to
anticipate demands and communicate that information to our flight
schools to better provide training needs.
5. Summary
5.1. In closing, Aviation training pipelines need assistance to
properly meet U.S. demands. We need to forecast better; we need
additional funding assistance to procure aircraft and equipment, we
need additional assistance filling in the pay gaps, and students need
assistance in funding their dreams of flight. Correcting these problems
will remove bottlenecks in the production of airmen and better set up
the U.S. training pipeline to fill projected needs.
5.2. Lastly, I wanted to thank each and every one of you who worked
on this Act on behalf of all the airmen you have helped and will be
helping. We needed help and you valiantly heard our call. So, on behalf
of every pilot, mechanic, air traffic controller, and general aviation
airmen, Thank you.
References
AOPA.ORG. (2010, October). The Flight Training Experience. Retrieved
from https://download.aopa.org/epilot/2011/AOPA_Research-
The_Flight_Training_
Experience.pdf

BLS.GOV. (2023, May). 49-3011 Aircraft Mechanics and Service
Technicians. Retrieved from U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics:
https://www.bls.gov/oes/current/oes493011.htm

BLS.GOV. (2023). Airline and Commercial Pilots. Retrieved from Bureau
of Labor Statistics: https://www.bls.gov/ooh/transportation-and-
material-moving/airline-and-commercial-pilots.htm

CFR. (1997). 14 CFR Part 141 Pilot Schools.

GAO. (2018). Collegiate Aviation Schools; Stakeholders' on Challenge to
Initial Pilot Training Report #18-403. US GAO.

Lotter, A. (2024). Pilot Information Letter. Phoenix, Arizona.

S. 1939. (2024). FAA Reauthorization Act of 2024. Washington, DC.

Mr. Graves of Louisiana. Thank you, Mr. Montgomery.
I want to let Members know that I told Mr. Montgomery last
night that we were going to take him on a brief Capitol tour
last night, and I think we kept you out till maybe 11:30 at
night last night. No alcohol was involved, but we did have him
out way past his bedtime in the Capitol because it is such a
cool building. We were all over the place in all the nooks and
crannies. So, I appreciate you being here today, and I
apologize for keeping you up late last night.
Mr. Cohen. Thank you. I appreciate your testimony. As I was
telling the chairman, Louisiana Tech reminds me of some great
football games with Memphis State back in the 1950s and 1960s.
They had real good games.
Mr. Robbins, you are next, and you are recognized for 5
minutes.

TESTIMONY OF MICHAEL ROBBINS, PRESIDENT AND CHIEF EXECUTIVE
OFFICER, ASSOCIATION FOR UNCREWED VEHICLE SYSTEMS INTERNATIONAL
(AUVSI)

Mr. Robbins. Thank you, Chairman Graves and Ranking Member
Cohen, and distinguished members of the committee. My name is
Michael Robbins, and I am the president and CEO of AUVSI, which
is the world's largest trade association representing uncrewed
systems, robotics, and autonomy. And I am honored to be with
you today representing our members from the UAS, or drone,
industry, as well as the advanced air mobility, or AAM,
industry.
I am also delighted that my son Jack could be here today.
Jack is 13, interested in aviation, and represents a potential
member of the future world-leading aviation workforce here in
America.
As you know, the United States leads the world as the gold
standard for aviation safety. However, to safeguard our
position as the world leader, and to recruit, retain, and
engage the aviation workforce of the future, we must continue
to advance the policy and regulatory framework to integrate
advanced aviation technologies.
The United States Congress, led by the tremendous
bipartisan leadership of this subcommittee, and the full
Transportation and Infrastructure Committee, put the Nation on
the right path with the recent passage of the FAA
Reauthorization Act which is now law. And AUVSI is tremendously
grateful to the members of this committee and your hard-working
staffs for the years of investment into this foundational
legislation. You have set the standard for how Congress should
work effectively to advance good public policy. Thank you.
We are now at a pivotal time in aviation history with
drones and advanced air mobility aircraft unlocking significant
benefits in both safety and technology leadership. With those
benefits will come significant economic activity and workforce
opportunities.
As you know, drones offer a cost-effective solution for
critical operations, including public safety and utility
inspection, critical maintenance, precision agriculture, and
more. And AAM is revolutionizing propulsion systems, battery
technology, and flight controls, unlocking new segments not
served by traditional aviation and enhancing workforce
productivity and safety. Companies are opening high-rate
production facilities across America and creating thousands of
high-quality manufacturing jobs to build the aircraft required
to meet the current and future demands.
And drones and AAM are opening aviation careers to a
broader and more diverse workforce, including workers with
physical disabilities, those without advanced technical
degrees, and rural workers who do not live near economic
centers of legacy aviation.
The true potential for workforce growth, however, will only
be realized when the regulatory frameworks are in place for
aircraft certification and operations. The forthcoming beyond
visual line-of-sight rulemaking for drones and the powered-lift
SFAR for electric vertical takeoff and landing aircraft are
required for the U.S. to remain the world leader in aviation
safety and to build the workforce of the future. Without these
regulatory frameworks in place, innovation will be stifled,
operations will remain limited, and the drone and AAM
industries will be unable to scale in the near term in the
United States.
So, industry stands ready to work with the FAA to get these
rules done right and on a timeline that unlocks the full
potential of advancing aviation safety, workforce growth, and
U.S. economic opportunity.
Further, at this key moment, the need to modernize and
expand our industry and Government workforce has never been
more urgent. A few quick points.
First, the FAA's future hinges on real dollar increases,
not just a reshuffling of existing staff. New funds are needed
for the FAA to hire new subject matter experts capable of
tackling the unique challenges of drones and AAM integration.
Second, full funding of the workforce development and grant
programs included in the FAA Reauthorization Act is critical.
And third, integrating a curriculum from elementary school
through community colleges and 4-year universities that support
the drone and AAM industries is essential. Drones and AAM-
specific training must include innovative, cost-effective, and
safe certification methods.
And AUVSI is proud to partner with numerous Collegiate
Training Initiative schools as part of our advanced drone
training program, Trusted Operator, to provide a higher level
of drone knowledge, flight proficiency, and safety and risk
management practices that are valued by employers and customers
of commercial drone operations.
In conclusion, on behalf of AUVSI and our members, I want
to thank Chairman Garret Graves for his leadership of the
subcommittee, and as the cochair of the House Unmanned Systems
Caucus, along with Representative Titus.
I echo Representative Cohen's sentiments. Your leadership
has been tremendous in advancing aviation safety and putting
advanced aviation at the forefront of the minds of both
Congress and the regulators.
Your leadership is going to be sorely missed in the 119th
Congress, sir, but we know that you are going to continue to
serve our Nation in meaningful ways for many decades in the
future.
Thank you.
[Mr. Robbins' prepared statement follows:]

Prepared Statement of Michael Robbins, President and Chief Executive
Officer, Association for Uncrewed Vehicle Systems International (AUVSI)
Introduction
Thank you, Subcommittee Chairman Graves, Subcommittee Ranking
Member Cohen, Full Committee Chairman Graves, Full Committee Ranking
Member Larsen, and distinguished members of the Committee and
Subcommittee. My name is Michael Robbins, and I am the President & CEO
of the Association for Uncrewed Vehicle Systems International (AUVSI),
the world's largest industry association representing the uncrewed
systems, robotics, and autonomy industry. Our members create systems
that operate in the air, on the ground, and in the water across the
civil, commercial, and defense domains. Today, I am honored to appear
before the Aviation Subcommittee representing our members in the
Uncrewed Aircraft Systems (UAS or drones) and Advanced Air Mobility
(AAM) industries.
The topic of today's hearing--recruiting, retaining, and engaging
aviation talent--is of tremendous importance to the long-term
resiliency of the aviation industry, and specifically the advanced
aviation industry and the future of U.S. aviation leadership. To
safeguard our position as the global aviation leader, and to build the
aviation workforce of the future, we must continue to advance the
policy and regulatory frameworks that integrate advanced aviation
technologies into the National Airspace System (NAS), which will ensure
the U.S. remains the gold standard for aviation safety.
The United States Congress, led by the tremendous bipartisan
leadership of this Subcommittee, and the full Transportation and
Infrastructure Committee, put the nation on the right path with the
recent passage of the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA)
Reauthorization Act of 2024 (P.L. 118-63). The law contains dozens of
critical provisions in support of aviation safety and will ensure the
regulatory pathway for drones and AAM is based on fundamental risk-
based safety principles. This will guarantee continued U.S. leadership
in the decades ahead and help to build the aviation workforce of the
future. AUVSI and our members are tremendously grateful to the Members
of this Committee, and your staffs, for your years of investment into
this foundational legislation. On behalf of AUVSI and our members,
thank you.
We are at a pivotal moment in aviation history, with drones and AAM
aircraft unlocking significant benefits in both safety and technology
leadership. With those benefits will come tremendous economic activity
and workforce opportunities. Drones offer a cost-effective solution for
critical operations including public safety, package delivery,
precision agriculture, utilities maintenance, infrastructure
inspections, and much more. AAM is revolutionizing propulsion systems,
battery technology, and flight controls, unlocking new areas not served
by traditional aviation and enhancing workforce productivity and
safety. Companies are opening high-rate production facilities and
creating thousands of high-quality manufacturing jobs at an increasing
rate.
The true potential for workforce growth, however, will only be
realized when the regulatory frameworks are in place for aircraft
certification and operations. Two important and time sensitive
rulemakings are underway at the FAA which will help to determine the
future path of the drone and AAM industries, respectively. The
forthcoming Part 108, or Beyond Visual Line of Sight (BVLOS) rulemaking
for drones, and the Powered-Lift Special Federal Aviation Regulation
(SFAR) for electric vertical takeoff and landing (eVTOL) aircraft, are
required for the U.S. to remain the world leader in aviation and
aviation safety and to build the workforce of the future. Without these
regulatory frameworks in place, innovation will be stifled, operations
will remain limited, and the drone and AAM industries will not be able
to scale in the near term in the United States and will likely look for
opportunities to expand outside the U.S.--something we have already
seen happen. Industry stands ready to work with the FAA to get these
rules done right, and to get them done on a timeline that unlocks the
full potential of advancing aviation safety, workforce growth, and U.S.
economic opportunity.
At this pivotal moment, the need to modernize and expand our
industry and government workforce has never been more urgent. AUVSI
highlights four areas where Congressional action will have an impact:
First, the FAA's future hinges on real dollar increases, not just a
reshuffling of existing staff. New funds are needed for the Agency to
hire subject matter experts capable of tackling the unique challenges
of AAM and UAS integration. Congress has mandated that the Agency
integrate new entrants into the NAS, and we stand ready to support them
in doing so. Industry can attest that, while the current civil
workforce is highly dedicated and skilled, it is rooted in legacy
aviation technologies. The FAA must invest in a workforce comprised of
experts in new aviation technologies, including advanced automation and
autonomy, who embrace safety modernization and risk-based regulations,
and who do not default to applying traditional aviation ideologies to
the UAS and AAM segments of the industry, which are anything but
traditional. Further, FAA should implement continuous education and
training programs for FAA employees to ensure they remain current with
the latest advancements in aviation technologies and safety protocols,
including advanced avionics, autonomy, and electric propulsion.
Second, there is significant unrealized opportunity to address the
pilot and skilled worker shortages by leveraging automation, artificial
intelligence (AI), and autonomy. AUVSI member companies are focused on
making the most out of what technological evolutions can provide to the
development of human skills. To this effect, an adequate and skilled
use of automation, AI, and autonomy are undeniably tools to develop
advance flight safety and operational efficiency and to support the
training of the highly sought after workforce in the aviation industry.
Autonomy is becoming a tool to provide support to crew members in
situations where human factors reportedly impacted flight safety. This
idea of complementing human skills can naturally be transferred to
enhance the training of human crews and be transferred to other
essential domains of the aviation industry such as manufacturing and
maintenance. Furthermore, drones and AAM aircraft can perform specific,
repetitive tasks, such as delivering medical supplies to hospitals and
providing shuttle services to offshore oil rigs, that free up the
availability of pilots for more complex aviation operations and keep
human beings safer.
Third, full funding of the workforce development programs included
in the FAA Reauthorization Act of 2024 is critical. The law establishes
a new aviation manufacturing workforce development program and other
grant programs to support education and recruitment, which Congress
must now fund. The UAS industry specifically requests Congress' support
for the Drone Infrastructure Inspection Grant (DIIG) Act and the Drone
Education and Workforce Training Grant Program. Similarly, the AAM
industry specifically requests that Congress fully fund the Electric
Aircraft Infrastructure Pilot Program and the AAM Infrastructure Pilot/
Grant Program at the authorized levels in the legislation.
Fourth, investing in Science, Technology, Engineering, Aerospace,
and Math (STEAM) education is crucial for our country's future. We need
more affordable higher education options in the U.S., as the current
system is unsustainable for most American students. Integrating a
curriculum from elementary school through community college and four-
year universities that supports the UAS and AAM industries is
essential. Drone and AAM-specific training must include innovative,
cost-effective, and safe certification methods. AUVSI is proud to
partner with numerous Collegiate Training Initiative (CTI) schools as
part of our drone training program, Trusted Operator, which provides
advanced training beyond the minimally prescriptive operating
regulations, such as the FAA's Part 107. Working together, AUVSI and
CTIs provide higher level of drone knowledge, flight proficiency, and
safety and risk management practices that are valued by employers and
customers of commercial UAS operators. The certification is
administered by public and private universities, and for-profit
training providers that are accredited by AUVSI to ensure a consistent
level of training for students while allowing institutions to adapt the
program to fit their educational needs.
Finally, I want to highlight that industry recognizes its own
responsibility for workforce development. Industry leaders are engaging
the future of the workforce through initiatives like Youth Fly Days,
``Learning by Doing'' programs, scholarships, apprenticeship and
mentorship programs, partnerships with key organizations like the Girl
Scouts of the USA and various high schools around the nation, hosting
youth internship programs, veteran focused programs and hiring
initiatives, and much more. Drones and AAM are also opening aviation
careers to a broader and more diverse workforce, including workers with
physical disabilities, those without advanced technical degrees, and
rural workers who do not live near economic centers of legacy aviation.
To ensure the continued growth and safety of the aviation industry
in the U.S., we must invest in a diverse, skilled, and adaptable
workforce. This includes expanding funding, developing innovative
training programs, and supporting accessibility across the board. AUVSI
appreciates the Committee's and Subcommittee's leadership in these
efforts, and we look forward to working together to build a strong
future for aviation.
FAA Reauthorization Provisions
The FAA Reauthorization Act of 2024 includes multiple provisions
that will positively impact the aviation workforce writ large,
including ensuring the regulatory framework required for the UAS and
AAM industries is in place to allow the industries to scale and grow.
The Reauthorization also contains key provisions focused on workforce
recruitment and retention both at the FAA and within the broader
industry. We are encouraged that the Subcommittee keenly focused on
directly investing in workforce development and training, while also
enacting commonsense policy to remove certain barriers that
consistently stand in the way of attracting more talent into the
aviation ecosystem.
Beyond Visual Line of Sight (BVLOS) Rulemaking
Industry delivered to the FAA the FAA-chartered UAS BVLOS Aviation
Rulemaking Committee (ARC) report in March of 2022--twenty-eight (28)
months ago--however, we do not yet have a draft rule from the FAA.\1\
Accordingly, AUVSI appreciates the oversight of Congress on the BVLOS/
Part 108 rulemaking, specifically Section 930 of the FAA
Reauthorization Act of 2024, which directs the FAA to issue a notice of
proposed rulemaking (NPRM) within four (4) months of enactment to
establish a performance-based regulatory pathway for UAS to operate
BVLOS. That means we should have a draft rule no later than September
16, 2024.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ https://www.faa.gov/regulations_policies/rulemaking/committees/
documents/index.cfm/document/information/documentID/5424
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Section 930 also directs the FAA to issue a final rule sixteen (16)
months thereafter. That mandate is certainly welcome, but with that
timeline a rule is still approximately eighteen (18) months away from
today, and twenty (20) months after enactment. Accordingly, while the
rulemaking is underway, the FAA must continue issuing waivers and
exemptions to enable BVLOS operations on a risk-based and performance-
based basis. This is essential to unlocking the positive economic
impact of drone operations, including the corresponding growth in
drone-related jobs and the advancement of aviation safety.
AUVSI urges Congress to hold the FAA accountable to the key
timelines on releasing the BVLOS rule enacted as part of the FAA
Reauthorization Act of 2024. We urge the FAA to release the NPRM, or
draft BVLOS rule, now, so that all interested stakeholders can study
and comment on the draft rule and continue moving the regulatory
rulemaking process forward. For a draft rule, perfect should not the
enemy of the good, nor the enemy of forward progress. Further, we need
not take the full twenty (20) months mandated by Congress to get the
rule finalized. AUVSI and our members stand ready to work with the FAA
and others in industry to ensure a timely rule that enhances safety and
unlocks the full economic and workforce potential of drones.
AUVSI further emphasizes the requirement of an approval process for
associated elements, which is mandated by Section 932 of the FAA
Reauthorization of 2024. As defined in the legislation, a third-party
service supplier means an ``entity other than the FAA that provides a
distributed service that affects the safety or efficiency of the
national airspace system.'' This includes safety-critical
communications, such as command and control (C2) links, UAS Traffic
Management (UTM), ground-based surveillance, and other critically
important infrastructure and service providers.
As the BVLOS ARC Final Report describes in depth, BVLOS operations
will enhance safety, provide sustainable transportation options, reduce
carbon emissions, enhance access to life-saving medicines and critical
supplies, save taxpayer resources, contribute to economic and workforce
growth, and so much more. Let's get the process moving. Let's keep
America as the gold standard for aviation safety and technology.
Powered-Lift Special Federal Aviation Regulation (SFAR)
Similarly, we urge the FAA to issue the Powered-Lift SFAR as soon
as possible, which takes into consideration industry feedback on the
initial approach the FAA took in the NPRM. It is imperative that
Congress maintain oversight of the SFAR's timeliness and content.
Section 955 of the FAA Reauthorization Act of 2024 requires the FAA to
publish a special final rule for the operations of, and pilot
requirements for, powered lift aircraft within seven (7) months and
applies specific requirements and considerations to such rulemaking.
This section supports type-specific training and qualification for
pilots--something that is essential for safety in the early years--and
requires alignment with International Civil Aviation Organization
(IACO) type-rating frameworks.
As with drones, the United States has the ability, capacity, and
know-how to be the world leader in Advanced Air Mobility operations
utilizing eVTOL aircraft. Ensuring a risk-based, safety-based, SFAR is
essential for the U.S. to maintain global leadership. Unfortunately,
the draft language proposed in the NPRM fails to do so. Despite having
set expectations that this SFAR would align with ICAO, by moving away
from that type rating approach, FAA is both reversing a perceived
commitment to the industry and international community and adding
unnecessary barriers for U.S. operators, which do not advance aviation
safety. AUVSI applauds section 955 and urges Congress to ensure the
provision is implemented properly to meet Congressional intent, which
aligns with industry's needs, and which will be in the best interest of
advancing aviation safety.
Additionally, we urge FAA to expeditiously implement and Congress
to fully fund the Electric Aircraft Infrastructure Pilot Program.
Section 745 in the legislation establishes a five-year pilot program
allowing up to ten (10) eligible airports to acquire, install, and
operate charging equipment for electric aircraft and to construct or
modify related infrastructure to support such equipment. These early
projects will serve as a framework for safe integration and scaling of
AAM operations in an airport environment, and will open tremendous job
opportunities, creating direct and indirect job opportunities in
operations, maintenance, and support services.
Aviation Workforce Provisions
The Subcommittee's work on aviation workforce issues is best
represented in Title IV, which is entirely focused on improving the
aerospace and aviation workforce. We are encouraged to see the FAA
Reauthorization Act of 2024 prioritize bringing more qualified
individuals into the aviation industry, an industry that fosters high
paying, high tech, and high demand jobs. AUVSI wants to continue to
build from the momentum in the legislation and work hand in hand with
Congress and the Executive Branch to bring more people from various
communities into aviation professions, including women, minorities,
people with disabilities, those in rural areas typically disconnected
from the aviation industry, and people from underserved, disadvantaged
communities. The UAS and AAM industries are at the forefront of
technology that can better the lives of all Americans and we are proud
of the work of our member companies whose efforts consistently yield
sustained interest in our segment of the industry.
AUVSI applauds Section 440 of the FAA Reauthorization Act of 2024,
the Aviation Workforce Development Program, which authorizes grants to
support education and recruitment in the areas of aircraft pilots,
maintenance workers, and technical workers and engineers. Specifically,
the section seeks to strengthen aviation workforce pipelines by
broadening the reach of training programs to include populations that
are underrepresented in the aviation industry, including in
economically disadvantaged geographic areas and rural communities.
AUVSI applauds the direction to construct programs at various stages of
the educational curriculum, including high schools, secondary schools,
and higher education programs with a mix of apprenticeship, internship,
and scholarship programs. Section 440 also authorizes money for various
existing workforce development programs housed within the FAA, in
addition to giving program oversight to the Secretary of
Transportation. Section 440 also sensibly notes the opportunity to
support the transition to UAS operators for members and veterans of the
U.S. armed forces.
Congress should fully fund the Drone Education and Workforce
Training Grant Program in the FAA Reauthorization Act of 2024, Section
913, which directs the Department of Transportation (DOT) to establish
a program to make grants available to educational institutions for
small UAS workforce training. In addition, this section authorizes $5
million for each of fiscal years 2025 through 2028 to be appropriated
from the Operations account of the FAA. Unfortunately, the program is
not funded in the House Transportation, Housing and Urban Development,
and Related Agencies appropriations bill, which is something we urge
action on to correct.
Congress should fully fund the DIIG Act grant program, Section 912
of the FAA Reauthorization Act of 2024, which would afford grants to
local, state, and tribal governments to purchase and use U.S.-made
drones for critical infrastructure inspection and construction
projects. The current House Transportation, Housing and Urban
Development, and Related Agencies appropriations bill funds the DIIG
Act for fiscal year 2025 at the $10 million level with an additional $1
million appropriated for administrative expenses. While this is
positive, we urge you to consider fully funding it in fiscal year 2025
at the $12 million level authorized in Section 912. The DIIG Act also
provides grant funding for workforce development programs, working with
community colleges and four-year institutions, to enable the future
workforce required for the U.S. to remain a global aviation leader.
Lastly, the DIIG Act will spark investment in the U.S. industrial base,
with a particular emphasis on manufacturing job growth, to meet the
demands for new drones to fulfill the Act's infrastructure inspection
mission.
Collegiate Training Initiative (CTI) Program for UAS
Section 914 of the FAA Reauthorization Act of 2024 directs the
Government Accountability Office (GAO) to study the effectiveness of
the CTI Program for UAS that Congress established in the FAA
Reauthorization Act of 2018. Launched on April 30, 2020, the UAS-CTI is
a program designed for the FAA to recognize institutions that prepare
students for UAS-focused careers. Today there are more than 140
participating colleges and universities, including four minority
serving institutions to ensure diversity in the workplace. CTIs engage
with the FAA, industry, local governments, law enforcement, and
regional economic development entities to address labor force needs in
the UAS industry. This collaboration ensures that UAS-CTI school
graduates have the knowledge and skills needed to pursue a successful
career in a UAS-related field. The efforts, certifications, and
programs have been crucial for advancing industry standards and overall
progress with workforce development for this industry. By aligning
regulatory demands with industry needs, these initiatives establish
initial benchmarks for pilot proficiency and operational safety. This
foundational work not only meets present industry demands but also sets
the stage for future innovations in drone and AAM technologies.
AUVSI is engaged with numerous CTI schools as part of our drone
training program, Trusted Operator, which provides advanced training
beyond the minimally prescriptive operating regulations, such as the
FAA's Part 107. Working together, AUVSI and CTIs provide higher level
of drone knowledge, flight proficiency, and safety and risk management
practices that are valued by employers and customers of commercial UAS
operators. The certification is administered by public and private
universities, and for-profit training providers that are accredited by
AUVSI to ensure a consistent level of training for students while
allowing institutions to adapt the program to fit their educational
needs. Many of the public universities engaged as Trusted Operator
Training Providers that administer AUVSI's Trusted Operator
Certification also hold the designation of approved CTI schools,
including Clemson University, Embry Riddle, Fullerton College, NC State
University, Northland Community and Technical College, Virginia Tech,
and Warren Community College. To date, AUVSI's training providers have
issued over 1,600 Trusted Operator certificates to drone pilots.\2\
AUVSI applauds the FAA's recent launch of the Youth Drone
Initiative under the UAS-CTI, targeting leaders, coaches, and educators
of students aged 11-18.\3\ This initiative aims to promote
collaboration and disseminate safety information and best practices
within the youth drone community, with a goal of reaching 200 schools
by year-end. The Know Before You Fly (KBYF) initiative, established in
2020 through a partnership between the FAA, AUVSI, the Academy of Model
Aeronautics (AMA), and the Consumer Technology Association (CTA), is a
Congressional Directive authorized by the FAA Reauthorization Act of
2018.\4\ KBYF supports educational initiatives by providing drone kits
and lesson plans to teachers for classroom and extracurricular use,
fostering a culture of safety and innovation from a young age to ensure
future generations are proficient in safe drone operations. KBYF-funded
activities also focus on Public Service Announcements (PSAs),
education, and outreach concerning safety topics such as drone
registration, the Recreational UAS Safety Test (TRUST), and drone
participation in the Aviation Safety Reporting System (ASRS). We are
encouraged that the FAA Reauthorization Act of 2024 extends the KBYF
program through 2028.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ https://www.auvsi.org/trusted-operator
\3\ https://www.faa.gov/uas/educationalusers/youth-drone-initiative
\4\ https://knowbeforeyoufly.org/home
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
It is imperative for stakeholders to continue supporting,
enhancing, and aligning these efforts to ensure a skilled workforce
ready to navigate and lead in this evolving field. CTI programs, and
more broadly, university apprenticeship programs, are a promising
avenue for recruitment for both industry and the FAA. Many universities
are offering comprehensive aviation programs. These programs not only
provide technical skills but also expose students to the real-world
flying experience. One program unique to the drone space is the
federally registered apprenticeship program at Fullerton College. This
program provides not only education and certification for commercial
drone operations, but also funnels students into paid on-the-job
training and a journeymen certification. We need to encourage more
universities to offer such programs and ensure they are accessible to
all.
AUVSI thanks Congress for directing GAO to study the program for
its effectiveness, and along with our members and training partners,
look forward to providing GAO with feedback on this study, and
recommendations for Congress and the FAA on improvements to the
program.
Impacts on FAA Workforce
AUVSI welcomes Section 424 of the FAA Reauthorization Act of 2024,
which expresses the sense of Congress that the FAA should leverage the
UAS-CTI to address any staffing challenges and skills gaps within the
FAA to support efforts to facilitate the safe integration of UAS and
other new airspace entrants (which AUVSI interprets to include eVTOL
and AAM aircraft) into the NAS.
Congress further recognized this skills gap within the FAA by
specifically calling out unmanned systems and other new airspace
entrants (which AUVSI interprets to include eVTOL and AAM aircraft) in
Section 428 of the FAA Reauthorization Act of 2024, which authorizes
the FAA Administrator to utilize direct-hire authority for positions
related to aircraft certification and aviation safety. AUVSI applauds
this recognition by Congress and urges the FAA Administrator to use the
direct-hire authority swiftly to enhance the aircraft certification and
safety teams within the FAA.
As Congress urges, the FAA should partner with UAS-CTI schools to
ensure they are recruiting individuals with direct knowledge of how UAS
and AAM are designed, manufactured, flown, and maintained.
Additionally, there is a significant gap in knowledge, broadly
speaking, within the FAA on advanced automation and autonomy, which
will deliver enormous leaps in aviation safety, but are not yet widely
understood within the FAA. This gap is reflected in recent FAA actions,
such as the FAA's proposed Powered-Lift rule, which would require
``technically advanced powered-lift aircraft'' to be equipped with a
specific set of legacy displays which may not be appropriate to the
actual operation of the aircraft and may inadvertently negatively
impact aviation safety by creating more display clutter. In the same
draft rule, the FAA prohibits safety-enhancing autoflight systems from
being able to be used during some phases of flight most susceptible to
pilot error accidents, whereas autonomous takeoff and landing are being
routinely and safely demonstrated by eVTOL and other aircraft today.
These short-sighted and safety-limiting proposals are examples of the
FAA lacking the workforce and knowledge to apply advanced aviation
rationale, and instead defaulting to legacy aviation methods, which are
often inappropriate for drones and AAM and potentially detrimental to
the safety benefits our industry offers.
Beyond the sense of Congress and direct-hire authority, however, we
must recognize a crucial need: the FAA requires real dollar increases
to meet its staff challenges, not merely a reshuffling of existing
staff. New funds are essential to hire the subject matter experts
capable of tackling the unique challenges of AAM and UAS integration.
As Congress notes, the UAS-CTI program is an excellent source of talent
the FAA can and should tap to address the skills gap. The FAA's current
workforce, though dedicated and skilled, and respected by AUVSI and its
members, is deeply rooted in traditional methods. To navigate the
future of aviation, the FAA needs to bring in fresh minds, innovative
thinkers, and a willingness to embrace a new paradigm. Further, FAA
should implement continuous education and training programs for FAA
employees to ensure they remain current with the latest advancements in
aviation technologies and safety protocols, including advanced
avionics, autonomy, and electric propulsion. Only by making these
investments can we ensure that the FAA is equipped to guide the
industry safely and efficiently.
FAA Data Analytics to Advance Aviation Safety
The potential to advance the FAA's safety mission through the vast
collection and analysis of UAS and AAM data is significant. There is an
urgent need within the FAA workforce to assimilate and apply insights
derived from this data to progress across various initiatives. The
pressure on the workforce to formulate and disseminate industry
guidance based on these insights is immense. This task exceeds the
capacity of any single FAA Line of Business (LOB). Therefore, the FAA
should prioritize developing an enterprise solution that alleviates the
burden on staff offices, providing a scalable and integrated approach
to managing and utilizing UAS and AAM data effectively.
Advancing UAS Operations: Workforce Needs, Economic Impact, and Future
Innovation
Today, across the nation, drone operations, including for
infrastructure inspection, agriculture, delivery, and other missions,
offer Americans a wide variety of good paying job opportunities as
drone pilots, operations managers, engineers, ground support personnel,
and much more. The expansion of UAS operations will necessitate an
increased demand for pilots, operators, package loaders, maintenance
technicians, and other job categories. Notably, the barriers to entry
in these fields are significantly lower than those in traditional
aviation. This reduction in barriers facilitates the inclusion of
individuals from diverse backgrounds, thereby broadening the pool of
qualified candidates. AUVSI member companies are universally committed
to equal employment opportunities and engage in robust training and
mentorship programs to attract and retain the best talent.
Drones are compact yet powerful devices that have emerged as a
pivotal component of the future of aviation, ushering in a new era of
aerial services. They have proven to be a cost-effective and efficient
solution for a myriad of tasks, from public safety operations to
surveying and inspections to package delivery, including for emergency
response. Their unique ability to access areas that were previously
unreachable and to capture high-resolution data has fundamentally
altered our interaction with our environment. They are not merely an
incremental addition to our industry; they represent a significant leap
forward in aviation technology and an opportunity to grow and build the
next generation of our aviation workforce, and to utilize existing
workforces in more efficient and safer ways. For example, drones
conducting inspections can inspect large areas and hard-to-reach
locations quickly, reducing the time required for manual inspections.
This allows workers to focus on analyzing data and making informed
decisions rather than spending time on physical inspections. Drones can
cover expansive fields, long line linear power lines, railroads and
pipelines, and tall structures in a fraction of the time it would take
for a human inspector to do so manually. By taking over hazardous
inspection tasks, drones significantly reduce the risk of accidents and
injuries among the workforce. Workers can operate drones from safe
locations, avoiding potential exposure to dangerous environments like
high-voltage areas, toxic chemical sites, or unstable structures.
Drone Operators
In the context of the aviation workforce, the competencies required
for successful drone operation in highly automated systems differ
markedly from those needed for traditional crewed aircraft piloting.
Certification requirements for ``Pilot in Command'' ratings in these
automated systems should be tailored to each specific operation. These
requirements may vary between companies but must consistently
demonstrate the operator's competence to meet FAA-defined safety
standards and acceptable risk levels as mandated by agency regulations.
A drone operator engaged in advanced UAS operations must possess
skills in monitoring weather conditions, other aircraft in the
vicinity, and potential anomalies. However, certain restrictions and
requirements that apply to conventional pilots may not be pertinent to
highly automated drone operations. Autonomy is fundamental to drone
services, enabling significant scalability. Consequently, the future
aviation workforce must include engineers proficient in the
intersection of autonomy and aviation, as these skills are driving
innovation and will remain in high demand as the industry progresses.
This emerging cadre of aerospace engineers and innovative thinkers will
develop solutions for safely scaling small drone operations and
augmenting pilot capabilities in crewed aviation, thereby contributing
to enhanced safety and the ongoing effort to reduce aviation fatalities
to zero.
Drone Maintenance Personnel
Presently, most advanced UAS operations, including package delivery
companies, often use company-trained repairmen as well as Airframe &
Powerplant (A&P) mechanics, when necessary. It is important to
recognize that most drone operations, including most package delivery
companies, are utilizing simple, small, low-risk drones that do not
involve complex systems. Accordingly, most maintenance tasks can be
safely performed by trained personnel that are neither certificated
repairpersons nor A&P certificated mechanics, which as noted, reduces
barriers to entry into this growing workforce, and which facilitates
the inclusion of individuals from diverse backgrounds, thereby
broadening the pool of qualified candidates. AUVSI encourages the FAA
to recognize the low-risk nature of UAS systems and to not simply to
default to traditional aviation methods of always requiring certified
maintenance personnel. This is not an appropriate risk-based approach,
nor does it recognize the unique opportunity to grow the aviation
workforce with new individuals.
Wider Economic Impact of Drone Operations
Allowing UAS operations to scale, as the BVLOS rule would allow,
has broad positive economic benefits for the United States. Drone
operations open new economic activity, and sources for job creation,
outside of core aviation jobs. One study of the Dallas-Fort Worth area,
where the FAA is allowing for drone delivery operations to occur BVLOS
through waivers and exemptions, indicates that drone package delivery
can help participating businesses increase annual sales by $26,000 per
business or generate roughly $197 million in new economic activity for
the Dallas-Fort Worth Metroplex overall.\5\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ https://storage.googleapis.com/wing-static-us/us/
Dallas%20Impact%20Report.pdf
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Advancing the AAM Industry: Workforce Development, Infrastructure
Utilization, and Economic Impact
Alongside drones, we have seen the AAM industry design, build,
test, and scale novel propulsion systems, battery technology,
composites, and flight controls. Electric propulsion is revolutionizing
aviation, as jet population did sixty years ago. Advanced avionics will
enhance safety by improving situational awareness, enhancing
communication, automating complex tasks, and providing better data
analysis. Developing the workforce that can meet the growing demands of
the AAM industry, prioritizing aviation safety above all else, is a
core mission for AUVSI and its member companies.
Many of our AAM member companies' aircraft have flown enough miles
to go around the world, and for some companies, more than once. They
are demonstrating how AAM operations can stimulate local economies with
increased cargo and delivery capacity and enable reliable medical
transport services to address urgent patient care. The AAM industry, in
particular, can take advantage of underutilized, existing
infrastructure and create a point-to-point network for transportation
that can unlock access for a diverse set of communities and geographies
across the U.S. The AAM industry can leverage existing but
underutilized infrastructure at regional airports to establish new
routes and services. This revitalization can transform these airports
into bustling hubs of activity, creating direct and indirect job
opportunities in operations, maintenance, and support services.
To demonstrate this potential, a 2023 report from California State
University studied the economic impact of an Urban Air Mobility (UAM)
network covering the city of Long Beach and the greater Los Angeles-
Orange County region. The construction of a twenty-vertiport network
would generate 2,133 jobs and $174 million in labor income.\6\ By
introducing new transportation options, AAM operations can stimulate
local economies. Enhanced connectivity can attract businesses that rely
on efficient transportation of goods and people, thereby increasing
regional economic activity. The ability to quickly transport medical
supplies, cargo, and passengers can make these areas more attractive to
a variety of industries.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\ https://wisk.aero/wp-content/uploads/2023/10/The-Economic-
Impact-of-Establishing-and-Expanding-Urban-Air-Mobility-Operations-in-
Southern-California-online-version.pdf
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
To complement efforts to enhance the FAA's technical workforce, it
is crucial to attract and retain a competent and capable workforce for
the AAM industry. The industry currently faces challenges in filling
technically skilled jobs needed to operate, maintain, and manufacture
aircraft. This workforce challenge will become more acute as aviation
evolves through innovation, requiring a more diverse workforce with
broader competencies and new skill sets. We appreciate the leadership
shown by the Committee in this area.
Through the FAA's Part 145 program, AAM companies are working to
develop a skilled workforce by training and certifying maintenance
technicians in specialized procedures. These experts gain holistic
experience by rotating through real world operations and eventually
become licensed line mechanics working on the company's aircraft in the
field. As there are no existing training programs for mechanics on
eVTOL aircraft or electric propulsion, companies are creating these
programs internally.
The 2018 FAA Reauthorization Act empowered DOT to provide up to $10
million in grants to facilitate workforce development for pilots and
maintenance providers. We thank the members of this Committee, and
Congress as a whole, for the significant funding provided to date.
Furthermore, AUVSI appreciates the modification to the program included
in Section 440 of the 2024 Reauthorization which increases the
allowable grant funding for a company in a single year from $500,000 to
$1 million.
AUVSI believes that the scope and funding for AAM-related workforce
programs should be significantly expanded, particularly given the high
demand for this funding. Additionally, we believe programs should
specifically include manufacturing workers to complement the previous
focus on pilots and maintenance personnel.
We also encourage the Subcommittee to provide oversight over
implementation of the FAA Reauthorization Act of 2024 provisions that
measure results and gather feedback from participants, engage school
counselors more directly in aviation workforce efforts, and train
teachers on how to start and conduct successful aviation education
programs. Furthermore, it is important to track how aviation workforce
development program applicants will connect students with jobs or the
next step in the education process (e.g., from high school to college
or a technical school) to sustain a long-term talent pipeline for the
industry. Emphasis should be placed on activities that engage, educate,
and equip participants to directly feed into the aviation sector,
ensuring the next generation of safety-focused aviation professionals.
The FAA has awarded $13.5 million in grants to thirty-two (32)
schools across the United States to attract and train future aviation
professionals, including pilots and maintenance technicians.\7\ These
grants are divided into two programs:
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\7\ https://www.faa.gov/about/office_org/headquarters_offices/ang/
grants/awd/awards
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
1.  The Aircraft Pilots Aviation Workforce Development Grants
program, providing $4.5 million to 12 schools for developing
curriculums to prepare high school students for careers in aviation and
related fields.
2.  The Aviation Maintenance Technical Workers Workforce
Development program, distributing $9 million to 20 schools to address
the shortage of maintenance professionals.

One of our member companies received a $1 million grant, authorized
at $500,000 per year for two years, under the maintenance program. This
grant supports their developing Part 145 Maintenance, Repair, and
Operations (MRO) work on eVTOL aircraft and emphasizes their commitment
to workforce development. The project aims to establish a new,
accessible career path for aviation maintenance technicians. Trainees
will begin a paid mechanic apprenticeship immediately after completing
the Light Sport Repairman-Maintenance (LSRM) certification program.
Upon completing the 30-month paid apprenticeship, trainees will qualify
for an Airframe and Powerplant (A&P) certification, paving the way for
further employment as certificated aviation maintenance technicians.
This program, and others like it being established by other AUVSI
members, aims to broaden access to aviation maintenance technician
careers, particularly for women, people of color, veterans, and
underserved populations.
Other grant recipients include universities, high schools, and
technical colleges, such as Purdue University, Kent State University,
and notably Louisiana State University in the Subcommittee Chairman's
state. The grants offer flexibility for establishing educational
programs, scholarships, apprenticeships, outreach initiatives, and
support in economically disadvantaged areas. This initiative addresses
the aviation industry's current challenges and technological
advancements, aiming to ensure its long-term sustainability by
fostering innovation and developing a skilled workforce.
Leveraging Automation, AI, and Autonomy for Enhanced Training and
Operational Efficiency in Aviation
AUVSI member companies are focused on making the most out of what
technological evolutions can provide to the development of human
skills. To this effect, an adequate and skilled use of automation, AI,
and autonomy are undeniably tools to develop advance flight safety and
operational efficiency and to support the training of the highly sought
after workforce in the aviation industry. Autonomy is becoming a tool
to provide support to crew members in situations where human factors
reportedly impacted flight safety. This idea of complementing human
skills can naturally be transferred to enhance the training of human
crews and be transferred to other essential domains of the aviation
industry such as manufacturing and maintenance.
Automation and autonomy can contribute as well to alleviating the
pilot shortage by performing certain tasks where human factors
increasingly contribute to the deterioration of flight safety. Drones
can, for instance, serve in niche domains to perform very specific and
repetitive tasks such as delivering parcels, medical supplies, and
organs on regular, shorter routes. Drones and AAM aircraft can deliver
medical supplies, parts, and eventually people, to offshore oil rigs
and remote islands or rural areas. Further development and regulation
of these technologies will not only spark increased interest in the
aviation industry but will provide solutions to alleviate the pilot and
skilled workers shortage by providing tools to the workforce that will
valorize their expertise, enhance their safety, and thus encourage them
to a continuous contribution and retention in the aviation workforce.
Growing the Future Workforce and Promoting Inclusion in UAS and AAM:
Democratizing Aviation for Underrepresented Groups
As this Subcommittee knows and appreciates, as demonstrated by
Section 440 of the FAA Reauthorization of 2024, the aviation industry
is currently facing significant workforce challenges, both in the
immediate and long-term future. Accordingly, AUVSI member companies are
taking extraordinary proactive measures to recruit, retain, and engage
aviation talent. Our members are engaged in multiple partnerships with
education institutes at all levels--starting as early as elementary
school with drone academies, competitions, and clubs to build interest
and excitement in advanced aviation careers. Drone and AAM companies
are joining forces with high schools, community colleges, vocational
schools, and four-year colleges across the U.S. to construct quality
training, internship and apprenticeship programs, mentorship programs,
scholarships, and more to get the future workforce real world training,
experience, and mentorship.
Both because it is the right thing to do, and because the pool of
available workforce must grow to meet current and future demands, AUVSI
members are taking active steps to open aviation career opportunities
to a broader workforce, including underserved communities, including
workers with physical disabilities, those without advanced technical
degrees, women, minorities, veterans, and rural workers who do not live
near economic centers of legacy aviation. AUVSI appreciates that
Congress agrees with this approach through its policy guidance in
Section 440.
As a veteran-led organization \8\, AUVSI fully supports America's
service veterans getting more involved in UAS and AAM professions.
Multiple AUVSI member companies have scholarship programs to provide
veterans job opportunities in advanced aviation, including as pilots,
mechanics, and in manufacturing.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\8\ The Chair, Vice Chair, and 50% of the members of the AUVSI
Board of Directors are U.S. military veterans, and the AUVSI President
& CEO presently serves in the U.S. Navy Reserve.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
AUVSI has also been involved in discussions on the best path for
transitioning veterans who flew UAS in the U.S. military into operating
aircraft, including eVTOLs, in commercial service. As it stands, credit
for hours flown while on active duty do not transfer equally or
consistently, and a deeper discussion is needed to unlock this
potentially knowledgeable and skilled group for these workforce
opportunities. Section 425 of FAA Reauthorization Act of 2024 calls for
the establishment of a Joint Aviation Employment Working Group to
evaluate and compare eligibility, training, and experience requirements
for transitioning military aviation professionals to the civilian
workforce. AUVSI encourages this Working Group to consider military
drone pilots, particularly of large UAS (Group 3-5), as part of this
evaluation.
AUVSI applauds the inclusion of Section 403 in the FAA
Reauthorization Act of 2024 which establishes the Bessie Coleman Women
in Aviation Advisory Committee. The provision creates the Committee and
directs it to advise DOT and the FAA on matters and policies related to
the recruitment, retention, employment, education, training, career
advancement, and well-being, of women in the aviation industry and in
aviation-focused Federal civil service positions. Currently, less than
10% of licensed pilots are women and less than 3% are airline captains.
The Committee created in the legislation satisfies the Women in
Aviation Advisory Board's chief recommendation to focus on bringing
more women into aviation careers and the entire industry.
Numerous AUVSI member companies have partnerships with
organizations like the Girl Scouts of the USA, the Academy of Model
Aeronautics, girls' academies, and other organizations to showcase
opportunities in advanced aviation for women. AUVSI member companies
work to introduce students to drone technology, from design and
manufacturing to practical applications in public safety, energy
utilities, and various sectors. These programs not only inspire young
minds to pursue careers in aviation and technology but also provide
hands-on experience and mentorship.
UAS and AAM industry jobs are highly accessible for people with
disabilities, who may otherwise be precluded from pursuing professional
opportunities in the more traditional aviation sector (i.e., becoming a
commercial airline pilot). People with physical disabilities can obtain
a remote pilot's license under the FAA's Part 107 rules, which govern
the commercial use of drones. The licensing process for remote pilots
focuses on knowledge and skills that do not require physical mobility,
making it inclusive for those with disabilities. AUVSI members in the
drone industry have made it possible to adapt control systems for
drones to suit various physical limitations. Customized interfaces and
assistive devices can enable individuals with disabilities to
effectively operate drones and related equipment. Further, the UAS and
AAM industries offer a wide range of job roles beyond piloting, such as
data analysis, mission planning, maintenance, and software development.
Many of these roles can be performed from accessible work environments,
using standard or adapted computer equipment.
Once hired, retention of employees is also a top priority for AUVSI
members. Accordingly, AUVSI members are investing in their employees
with additional training and upskilling, which is teaching current
employees new skills or enhancing their existing skills to keep up with
changing job requirements and technological advancements.
Manufacturing Opportunities
The U.S. leads in commercial, business, and general aviation
manufacturing and has a total aviation workforce of more than half a
million people.\9\ But there is one segment of the aviation industry
that the United States does not lead: domestic drone manufacturing.
While the U.S. has been content to maintain leadership of traditional
segments in the aviation industry, the People's Republic of China (PRC)
understood the tremendous economic and national security implications
of uncrewed aviation and took aggressive measures to dominate the
global UAS manufacturing and technology market.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\9\ https://datausa.io/profile/naics/aircraft-parts-manufacturing
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
AUVSI believes that we must move away from being reliant on PRC
companies and intellectual property for our drones, as the U.S. is
doing with other critical technologies. A reasonable, common-sense
transition is required to ensure that these critical lifesaving tools
are available to public safety, while at the same time we move rapidly
to diversify manufacturing and technology supply lines outside of
China. AUVSI is advocating for a multi-pronged effort to support
policies that would encourage investment, innovation, and ultimately
scaled production of drone supply chains within the United States and
its allied partners to lead us to a more balanced level of self-
sustainment.
This is important because multiple U.S. government agencies--
including the Departments of Defense \10\, Treasury \11\, Commerce
\12\, Homeland Security \13\, and the FBI \14\--have made it quite
clear that the continued reliance on PRC drones is a risk to national
security. Nevertheless, despite a shift away from PRC-drones by some
public safety departments, approximately 90% of public safety agencies
nationwide with drone programs are still using at least some Chinese
drones as part of their fleets, despite the U.S. government's warnings
about the security threats these drones pose.\15\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\10\ https://www.defense.gov/News/Releases/Release/Article/2706082/
department-statement-on-dji-systems/
\11\ https://home.treasury.gov/news/press-releases/jy0538
\12\ https://www.federalregister.gov/documents/2020/12/22/2020-
28031/addition-of-entities-to-the-entity-list-revision-of-entry-on-the-
entity-list-and-removal-of-entities
\13\ https://www.cisa.gov/resources-tools/resources/cybersecurity-
guidance-chinese-manufactured-uas
\14\ Ibid.
\15\ Airborne International Response Team, 2024 Public Safety UAS
Survey, Initial Analysis for Public Release, 11 May 2024
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Our objective is simple: To support a strong and competitive
industrial base and to build global leadership in this critical
industry that is relied on by so many agencies and enterprise
organizations, including public safety.
Grant programs for public safety, like the proposed Drones for
First Responders (DFR) Act, H.R. 8416, would create, will ensure public
safety has the tools they need to do their jobs, and demand is
generated for platforms produced outside the PRC, which will kickstart
the flywheel for innovators and manufacturers. This is vital to reduce
risk, and to build the industrial base that is sorely lacking--for all
users, including public safety.
Looking to the AAM industry, Congress made it clear in Section 952
of the FAA Reauthorization Act of 2024 that it wants the U.S. to be the
world leader in AAM and the industry is moving forward rapidly, and
safely, to achieve this goal. As AAM moves from the testing phases into
offering commercial services for both cargo carrying and passenger
travel, multiple companies are working to open high-rate production
facilities. In October 2023, an AUVSI member company opened a
production facility at an international airport that local officials
expect to spur more trade schools in the area to feed the need for
trained workers to fill the hundreds of jobs the company expects to
create.\16\ Additionally, another AUVSI member company recently
acquired a facility to support their initial manufacturing with plans
to invest up to $500 million, create up to 2,000 high-quality clean
manufacturing jobs, and in a facility capable of producing up to 500
eVTOL aircraft per year.\17\ A third AUVSI member company is on track
to complete their initial phase manufacturing facility by the end of
the summer with a planned capacity of up to 650 eVTOL aircraft per year
and a potential phased increase to over 2,000 aircraft per year.\18\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\16\ https://www.beta.team/timeline/
\17\ https://www.jobyaviation.com/news/joby-acquires-facility-ohio/
\18\ https://news.archer.com/archer-closes-previously-announced-
financing-and-development-agreements-to-complete-worlds-highest-volume-
evtol-aircraft-manufacturing-facility
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The U.S. has long been the world leader in aviation manufacturing
and leadership. It is vital that the policy and regulatory frameworks
being developed today enable U.S. leadership to continue in the
advanced aviation segments of the industry, including drones, eVTOL,
and other AAM aircraft.
Standard Occupational Classification Codes
The 2018 Standard Occupational Classification (SOC) system is a
federal statistical standard used by federal agencies to classify
workers into occupational categories for the purpose of collecting,
calculating, or disseminating data. All workers are classified into one
of 867 detailed occupations according to their occupational definition.
These codes are critical for understanding labor market trends, guiding
education, and training programs, and informing workforce policies. As
the advanced aviation industry evolves rapidly, the lack of specific
SOC codes for various occupations within the drone and AAM sectors is
another barrier that presents considerable challenges for workforce
development, policy-making, and economic planning.
These codes also impact educational planning and funding at the
state and local level. High School, Technical, and College programs
focus on growing job categories, and it is important that these new
functions are effectively captured to spur curriculum development,
faculty focus, and degree programs.
Challenges Posed by the Lack of Specific SOC Codes:
1.  Underestimating Growth & Impact The current segmentation of
uncrewed technologies occupations within general industry statistics
lacks specific reference to the uncrewed industry, resulting in an
underestimation of its growth and impact. By updating the SOC codes to
include the unique job roles within this field, the Bureau of Labor
Statistics (BLS) will capture accurate data on the industry's economic
contribution, employment trends, and overall significance. This gap
hinders the ability of policymakers and industry leaders to make
informed decisions based on reliable labor market data. As a result,
efforts to address skills gaps, training needs, and workforce shortages
are currently hampered.

2.  Educational and Training Program Advancements Universities and
technical colleges rely on statistical data to justify investments in
educational programs by aligning their programs with workforce demands
and illustrating employability. Updated SOC codes related to the
uncrewed technologies industry will enable universities to market their
programs to students by displaying salary levels and industry growth.
This alignment ensures that educational offerings remain responsive to
the industry's needs and ensures the success of educational programs in
the field.

3.  Deterrence of Funding SOC codes are essential tools for
economic planning and the development of workforce policies. Without
accurate occupational classifications, it is difficult to allocate
resources effectively, design targeted workforce development
initiatives, and measure the economic impact of the drone and AAM
industries. This lack of precise data can result in inefficient
resource allocation and at times lock this industry out of potential
funding opportunities such as Career and Professional Education Funding
Programs and Grants.

AUVSI, in partnership with industry, government and academic
partners have identified SOC codes that we recommend being added for
the next SOC update, which heavily relies on industry and public input.
The next opportunity for submissions is upon us now, and AUVSI is
working to submit input that will address the industry gaps. The next
opportunity to begin the process to add SOC codes will be in 2033, as
SOC codes are only updated once every ten years.
Conclusion
To ensure the continued growth and safety of the aviation industry,
we must invest in a diverse, skilled, and adaptable workforce. This
includes expanding funding, developing innovative training programs,
and supporting accessibility across the board. Further, the forthcoming
BVLOS rulemaking for drones, and the Powered-Lift SFAR eVTOL aircraft,
are required for the U.S. to remain the world leader in aviation and
aviation safety and to build the workforce of the future.
Our industry's potential hinges on the strategic actions we take
today, from legislative support to executive branch staffing and
community engagement. By fostering a robust and dynamic workforce, we
will not only meet the current demands but also pave the way for future
advancements in aviation safety and technology.
AUVSI appreciates the Committee's leadership in these efforts and
stands ready to collaborate in building a strong and resilient future
for aviation.

Mr. Graves of Louisiana. Thank you, Mr. Robbins. I
appreciate it.
Jack, do you have anything to add or correct in your
father's testimony?
Jack. I love my dad.
Mr. Graves of Louisiana. I've got to tell you, I was
wondering about his discretion, bringing a young, innocent
child to Congress. This is no place to marinate.
No, welcome to the committee. I appreciate you being here.
Ms. Damato, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Ms. Damato. Chairman Graves, Ranking Member Cohen----
Mr. Graves of Louisiana [interrupting]. Please turn your
microphone on.

TESTIMONY OF JOANNE M. ``JO'' DAMATO, CAM, SENIOR VICE
PRESIDENT OF EDUCATION, TRAINING, AND WORKFORCE DEVELOPMENT,
NATIONAL BUSINESS AVIATION ASSOCIATION (NBAA)

Ms. Damato. Chairman Graves, Ranking Member Cohen, and
members of the Transportation and Infrastructure Aviation
Subcommittee, thank you for holding this hearing on the
importance of recruiting, retaining, and engaging aviation
talent.
I am Jo Damato. I am the senior vice president of
education, workforce development, and training at the National
Business Aviation Association. I have been there since 2001. On
behalf of NBAA's 11,000 member companies, I am honored to
testify today. Many of our members are small businesses who
rely on general aviation to connect to communities all over the
country. They support 1.2 million American jobs and $247
billion in economic output.
Thanks to the leadership of this committee, we have all
welcomed the strong, bipartisan FAA reauthorization to ensure
America can lead in fostering the future of the aviation
workforce. Notably, the law includes the first ever general
aviation title, recognizing the importance of GA to the larger
aviation community.
I am also honored to testify today as a member of the Youth
Access to American Jobs in Aviation Task Force which sunset in
2022. As someone who wanted to be a pilot since she was 8 years
old, the opportunity to serve on the task force resonated with
me.
I grew up in south New Jersey, and no one in my family was
connected to aviation. My high school guidance counselor did
not know how to advise me on an aviation career path. As a
teen, I was the only young woman learning to fly at my local
airport. Because of my gender, I was not permitted to fly all
of the flight school's airplanes--because of my gender. I can't
believe I still hear stories like this, and I am hopeful we can
bring about some real change with this bill.
I am also the proud mom of two teenagers pursuing aviation
as their career paths. My husband, an airline captain, and I,
know their future success and that of their peers means that
aviation needs a diverse, dynamic, and engaged workforce to
help it continue to thrive in this country.
And despite the high demand, multiple challenges exist as
barriers to those who want to embark on an aviation career
path.
The FAA reauthorization bill will help remove barriers for
those seeking aviation careers, while expanding the aviation
workforce pipeline. It mandates that the FAA implement key
strategic recommendations from the Women in Aviation Advisory
Board and the Youth Task Force to address these challenges. And
if implemented effectively, these provisions should move
aviation workforce forward in ways that have not been possible
in recent decades.
There are five areas that reflect the recommendations
submitted.
First, early awareness and engagement. Engagement with
young people needs to start early. The FAA's STEM Aviation and
Space Education Program, AVSED, is best positioned to be that
connective tissue across the nine FAA regions to bring together
all stakeholders to create these early awareness opportunities.
Second, access to information. There is a need for easy-to-
access resources for caregivers, teachers, guidance counselors,
and youth to learn about information and resources to become a
career aviation professional. We need a ``one-stop shop''
national website to be the destination and central source of
information on pursuing a career in aviation. FAA AVSED has a
web page. It could be the foundation for this destination.
Third is collaboration. The bill calls for a national
strategic plan for aviation workforce development, key to
meaningful progress, a connected career pathway that draws
students into aviation aerospace all across the United States.
There are so many examples of national aviation associations
addressing workforce with their own initiatives--EAA, Women in
Aviation, OBAP, GAMA, AOPA, and NBAA. Together with the FAA,
they have the potential to create an entire journey for an
individual.
The financial hurdle. We know cost is one of the greatest
barriers to entry. The workforce development grants that were
established in 2018 for pilots and aviation maintenance
technical workers have been expanded with the reauthorization
in 2024 to include manufacturing technical workers, and 20
percent grants for the Willa Brown Aviation Education Program.
And finally, and one of the hardest to change, the barrier
is culture. Culture is the biggest barrier to women in
aviation. It is the hardest to change, and I know that
firsthand. Thankfully, the bill establishes the Bessie Coleman
Women in Aviation Advisory Committee, which will help continue
the work to address the factors that negatively impact the
recruitment and retention of women in aviation.
This hearing highlights the importance of recruiting,
retaining, and engaging aviation talent and the work that must
be energized as outlined in the FAA Reauthorization Act of
2024. The FAA, together with the support of its stakeholders,
needs to be invested in its success through implementation of
the provisions in this bill.
Now is the time to create awareness for aviation careers
everywhere in the United States. Now is the time to ensure
access to resources needed to achieve career success--
information sharing, collaboration, and removal of financial
and cultural barriers. The pipeline is critical to our strength
as a Nation.
NBAA and our members appreciate this subcommittee's
continued leadership, and we welcome the opportunity to be here
today. Thank you.
[Ms. Damato's prepared statement follows:]

Prepared Statement of Joanne M. ``Jo'' Damato, CAM, Senior Vice
President of Education, Training, and Workforce Development, National
Business Aviation Association (NBAA)
Chairman Graves, Ranking Member Cohen, and Members of the
Transportation and Infrastructure Aviation Subcommittee, thank you for
holding this hearing to address the importance of recruiting, retaining
and engaging aviation talent. On behalf of the National Business
Aviation Association's (NBAA's) 11,000-member companies, I am honored
to testify at this hearing.
My name is Jo Damato and I am the Senior Vice President, Education,
Training and Workforce Development at NBAA where I have been employed
since 2001.
NBAA's members, many of which are small businesses, rely on general
aviation (GA) aircraft to meet some portion of their transportation
needs. These aircraft provide connectivity to communities in nearly
every congressional district, many of which do not receive airline
service. While those airlines serve only around 500 airports, business
aviation can reach 5,000 airports, located in places some people have
never heard of. This unique American idea of connecting each other--no
matter where we live and work--supports 1.2 million American jobs and
$247 billion in economic output.
GA is where aviation was born, and it's the point of entry for many
in the larger aviation community, from the pilot's first hours of
flight to the mechanic's first oil change. A healthy and vibrant
general aviation community is central to a successful and productive
national aviation industry, with workforce as a critical foundation.
NBAA and the business aviation community greatly appreciate the
opportunity to contribute to the discussion on eliminating bottlenecks
and examining the opportunities to recruit, retain, and engage aviation
talent.
As the Subcommittee knows, aviation needs a dynamic, diverse and
engaged workforce to help it continue to thrive in our country. There
is a demand for qualified and trained professionals in nearly every
aspect of the aviation industry, especially a need for FAA-certified
pilots and aircraft mechanics. Despite the high demand for these
professionals, multiple challenges exist for these new entrants to
embark on an aviation career path. These challenges include a lack of
awareness that these careers exist, lack of information on how to
proceed once awareness is established, lack of regional and national
collaboration among all stakeholders and the financial barrier to
afford the training needed to achieve the career goals. In addition to
these challenges, the biggest barrier to recruit and retain women in
aviation is a culture barrier keeping women from feeling like they
belong in aviation.
Thanks to the leadership of Chairman Graves, Ranking Member Cohen,
and full Committee Chairman Sam Graves and Ranking Member Rick Larsen,
as well as the leadership of the Senate Committee on Commerce, Science,
and Transportation, the United States Congress enacted the FAA
Reauthorization Act of 2024 a strong, bipartisan five-year
authorization that ensures that America will continue to lead the world
in aviation safety, security, sustainability, innovation, workforce
development and investment in airports and other critical
infrastructure. Notably, the law includes the first-ever general
aviation (GA) title, recognizing the importance of GA to the larger
aviation community.
In the area of workforce, the FAA Reauthorization Act of 2024 will
help remove barriers for those seeking aviation careers while expanding
the aviation workforce pipeline and improving training standards. It
strengthens critical aviation workforce development grants established
in the 2018 Reauthorization law that have been successful in enabling
the training of more pilots and aviation maintenance technical workers,
and expands the grants to manufacturing technical workers.
The law also mandates that the FAA implement key strategic
recommendations from the Women in Aviation Advisory Board (WIAAB) and
the Youth Access to American Jobs in Aviation Task Force (Youth Task
Force), two independent groups established under the FAA
Reauthorization Act of 2018 to address the significant
underrepresentation of women in aviation and facilitate and encourage
students to pursue studies and careers in aviation and aerospace. The
dedicated focus of these two groups yielded groundbreaking insights
into the aviation workforce challenges and provided over 70
recommendations for consideration of lawmakers, many of which are
reflected in the FAA Reauthorization Act of 2024. If implemented
effectively, these provisions should move aviation forward in ways that
have not been possible in recent decades.
These groups included 50 nominated representatives from all aspects
of the aviation ecosystem including general aviation, airlines,
aerospace companies, member associations, non-profit organizations,
United States military, and school administrators and academia
representing multiple levels of education including higher education
and trade schools as well as subject matter experts from the FAA STEM
Aviation & Space Education Program (AVSED).
The Women in Aviation Advisory Board, chaired by Dr. Heather
Wilson, former Secretary of the Air Force, was tasked to develop
strategies and recommendations to encourage women and girls to enter
the field of aviation through an assessment of existing education,
training, mentorship, outreach, and recruitment of women in the
aviation industry. After two years of work they not only identified
barriers to recruiting and retaining women but also released their
final report of 55 recommendations for change to mitigate these
barriers. This report was submitted in March 2022 to Industry, FAA, DOT
and Congress.
The Youth Access to American Jobs in Aviation Task Force, chaired
by Dr. Sharon DeVivo, President & Chief Executive Officer, Vaughn
College, was tasked to develop and provide independent recommendations
and strategies to facilitate and encourage high school students in the
United States to enroll in and complete career and technical education
courses, including science, technology, engineering, and mathematics
(STEM), to prepare them to pursue a course of study related to an
aviation career at an institution of higher education, a community
college, or trade school; to facilitate and encourage these students to
enroll in a course of study related to an aviation career, including
aviation manufacturing, engineering and maintenance, at an institution
of higher education, including a community college or trade school; and
to identify and develop pathways for students to secure registered
apprenticeships. The Youth Task Force submitted their final report of
21 recommendations to Industry, FAA, DOT, and Congress in September
2022.
Both groups independently met with this subcommittee in November
2022 following their submissions. They each provided a brief summary
focused on their recommendations that required Congressional action as
it related to FAA Reauthorization. Many of those recommendations have
been reflected in the FAA Reauthorization Act of 2024.
While the two groups operated independently, many of the members
were known to each other through other industry work. There was a warm
and steady exchange between the two groups over the two years of their
individual charters. They identified similar challenges and made
similar recommendations. Their final reports have many overlapping
recommendations. Of the 55 recommendations of the WAIAB and the 21
recommendations from the Youth Task Force, 14 of them were aligned in
the same four areas: lack of awareness that these careers exist, lack
of information on how to proceed once awareness is established, lack of
regional and national collaboration among all stakeholders and the
financial barrier to afford the training needed to achieve the career
goals. As previously stated, lack of an inclusive culture was also
identified as the biggest barrier to recruiting and retaining women in
the aviation workforce.
I personally served on the Youth Task Force and found it to be a
worthwhile and rewarding experience. I grew up in South New Jersey and
wanted to become a pilot since the age of 8 years old. No one in my
family was connected to aviation. My three older brothers played
multiple sports but I was more interested in airplanes.
I brought a unique perspective to my participation on the Youth
Task Force and collaboration with my colleagues on the Women in
Aviation Advisory Board, as someone who wanted to be a pilot and who's
high school guidance counselor did not know how to advise her on a
career path. Her only guidance to me was to tell me I had to apply to
aeronautical engineering programs and that maybe I could keep flying at
a local airport near a college campus. Her other suggestion was the
military. My learning about the existence of 4-year collegiate aviation
programs was only through a chance meeting with a recent graduate from
one of those programs. That single conversation instantly changed the
trajectory of my education and my career. Unfortunately, this exact
example still happens all the time. If a young person is intrigued
about pursuing an aviation career they often find that the authority
figures in their lives--parents, guardians, teachers and counselors--
are unable to tell them how to do so and are themselves unsure of where
to find more information. We must change this. It is not acceptable
that this is still an issue more than 30 years from when I encountered
this personally as a teenager.
My service and connection to the Task Force and WAIAB further
connected with me as a sixteen-year-old high schooler who was the only
teenager and the only young woman learning to fly at my local airport
where I was not permitted access to all of the flight school's
airplanes because of my gender. One of the owners of one of the 3
airplanes available to students was adamant that a female not use his
airplane. Competing for access with the other two aircraft in my
limited daylight time after school or on weekends made it difficult for
my flight training to progress as fast as it could have. I was still
able to take my first solo flight at age 16 and I did earn my rating at
age 17 before I left for college but it came down to less than a week
between earning my rating and leaving for college where having my
private pilot rating was a prerequisite to begin my first flight course
on campus. Again, this is an example I continue to hear about where
young women eager to begin their own flight training find they are
unwelcome or marginalized or discriminated against in the flight
training environment. This unwelcome culture can serve as a revolving
door causing them to discontinue flight training at the student pilot
level at an alarming rate compared to their male counterparts. It is
unacceptable that this culture continues to exist and that capable and
passionate future aviation professionals are not given the opportunity
to thrive and make meaningful aviation workforce contributions.
I am proud that I was a young goal-getter from New Jersey who was
old enough to fly an airplane on solo cross-country flights at age 16
but was not old enough in NJ to get my drivers license until age 17. It
is a bucket list item for many NJ teens who pursue flight training. I'm
also a proud mom who, 28 years later, watched my own sixteen year old
son solo an airplane at that same general aviation airport in South New
Jersey, the Flying W Airport (N14), where I did. I had to drive him to
his lessons when he was old enough to take a Piper Warrior on a solo
cross-country flight but not to drive himself to or from the airport.
It is not lost on me that the only reason he has had this opportunity
is because his mother and his father are both in the industry and were
not only able to inspire his career path but were also able to help him
begin his journey. He has had ``see it, be it'' examples in front of
him his entire life as well as access to resources to begin his
aviation journey. Most do not have a friend or family resource to help.
In fact, I had the opportunity to speak to a group of economically-
disadvantaged high school students about aviation in Camden, NJ which
is about 4 miles away from my oldest son's high school. Some of the
students were excited to learn about a potential career in aviation
but, unlike my son and his classmates, they had no idea that more than
one general aviation airport was within a 20-minute drive and that they
could take flight lessons. There was no ``see it, be it'' for them.
This too is something that our recommendations can address.
Today, in 2024, my work in aviation workforce development has
entirely crossed over to my being a parent raising two aviation teens.
My oldest son is currently working on his commercial certificate in a
four-year aviation university pursuing an aviation bachelor's degree.
My other son, enrolled in a Career and Technical Education high school
for automotive technology, has been exploring the best training for him
after high school to pursue becoming an aircraft technician. This
summer he will be a camp counselor at the same local aviation summer
camp he and his older brother have attended off and on for the last
decade. AEROSPACE4KIDS.COM, LLC, started as a Rutgers Cooperative
Extension, 4-H Youth Development program. Based in Somerset County, NJ,
the original program called ``Blue Sky Below my Feet,'' focused on
aviation education, and was offered to area schools as a 45-minute
hands-on program. The program was so successful that it went from being
offered as a Saturday event into a week long, hands on, summer aviation
camp. The camp ends with an Experimental Aircraft Association (EAA)
Young Eagles program where the students each get an opportunity to fly
in a general aviation airplane. This is a terrific example of
attracting and engaging young people to aviation through STEM and fun.
It is also a great example of using collaborative resources to create
something local like this camp and connect it nationally to an
association like EAA. There are so many examples like this and we just
need to create the connective tissue for them to exist and complement
each other to create a real aviation workforce pipeline instead of
small experiences that don't connect to a potential career path.
While I always have my mom hat on for my own kids, throughout my
career in aviation, I have also encouraged many students to begin their
own aviation journey. It is a dream come true for me to lead workforce
and professional efforts at NBAA where I get to collaborate with teams
and work with them to design professional development activities that
attract, develop and retain industry professionals every day.
Building the Workforce of the Future
Many recommendations from the WAIAB and the Youth Task Force were
recognized for their importance and have been reflected in the FAA
Reauthorization Act of 2024. As a member of the Task Force, my
colleagues and I often discussed our excitement around the work we were
doing and the impact the recommendations could have on recruiting,
retaining and engaging aviation talent. We also discussed our fear that
our hard work might get forgotten and that the Task Force might sunset
without an understanding of recommendation adoption, implementation and
oversight. We are thankful that the importance of our recommendations
were recognized through this bipartisan legislation and that there is
an opportunity through this testimony to emphasize their value. I
submit that the original recommendation categories created in the Youth
Task Force report are the areas to emphasize in addition to the culture
barrier identified as the largest barrier to attracting and retaining
women in aviation.
1. Early Awareness and Engagement
Engagement with young people needs to start early.
The FAA Reauthorization Act of 2024 SEC. 423 states that not later
than 2 years after the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary,
acting through the Administrator, shall submit to the appropriate
committees of Congress a report on the implementation of the following
recommendations of the Youth Access to American Jobs in Aviation Task
Force of the FAA established under section 602 of the FAA
Reauthorization Act of 2018 (Public Law 115-254) including this
recommendation:

``Collaboration across regions of the FAA on outreach and
workforce development programs.''

The FAA can be the connective tissue to bring together all
stakeholders to create early awareness opportunities. The office
already exists as the FAA STEM Aviation and Space Education program or
STEM AVSED. It was created in the 1960's with the program mission is to
``inspire youth from diverse backgrounds to pursue aerospace careers
and create a consistent pipeline of professionals for a robust
workforce of the future.''
The FAA's STEM AVSED program has 9 offices focused on educational
outreach around the United States to provide support for aerospace-
based STEM programs and to connect stakeholders and educators. There is
a Regional Program Analyst (RPA) in each region to manage this.
The Youth Task Force recognizing the existence of the office and
talent and passion for aviation workforce development among the RPAs,
made these recommendations to Congress to expand the reach and
effectiveness of FAA AVSED.
Specifically, they encouraged ``the FAA's AVSED office to develop a
standardized curriculum that could be used by aviation and aerospace
professionals to incentivize young people to consider aviation and
aerospace as a potential career.''
Examples cited by both groups for how to address early awareness
through AVSED included:

developing easy-to-implement aviation and aerospace
activities for after school programming

establishing professional development opportunities and
aviation/aerospace teaching ``academies'' for educators in K-12 with
the goal of enhancing a teacher's knowledge of aviation/aerospace
careers and pathways; a ``train-the-teacher'' concept.

The recommendation intent is for FAA AVSED to identify standards as
well as the learning outcomes that programs can work toward.
The Youth Task Force report also called upon FAA AVSED to manage
and coordinate regional advisory councils to be ``conveners of like-
minded individuals and organizations across the nine regions of the
United States to share information about best practices, solicit data
from students, caregivers and educators about what they need, as well
as create responsive systems (e.g., adding information to the national
website, creating greater opportunities to visit aircraft manufacturers
or fly a drone etc.).''
2. Information Access
There is a need for easy-to-access resources where caregivers,
teachers, guidance counselors and youth can find out more information
and connect to local resources.
The FAA Reauthorization Act of 2024 SEC. 423 states that not later
than 2 years after the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary,
acting through the Administrator, shall submit to the appropriate
committees of Congress a report on the implementation of the following
recommendations of the Youth Access to American Jobs in Aviation Task
Force of the FAA established under section 602 of the FAA
Reauthorization Act of 2018 (Public Law 115-254) including this
recommendation:

``Improve information access about careers in aviation and
aerospace.''

Awareness of an aviation career path can create a desire to learn
more but it means nothing if the individual cannot gain the knowledge
or ability to do so. Both the Youth Task Force and the Women in
Aviation Advisory Board recommended a ``one-stop shop'' national
website as the destination and central source of information on
pursuing a career in aviation. We currently lack this universal
destination to help a caregiver, teacher, guidance counselor, a young
person or anyone else trying to help that individual to get started
once they gain awareness that an aviation career is possible.
Lacking this universal destination, many organizations have been
going about this themselves. Their enthusiasm and intent are well-
placed. Everyone wants to be a partner in promoting aviation careers
and sharing scholarships, mentorship opportunities, education
initiatives and more. However, all of these sites may be just drops in
the ocean versus creating one place for national awareness. If you are
fortunate enough to know about them they can be very helpful but likely
each of these independent sites offers only some pieces of information
and not the comprehensive information that is needed. They can be
expensive to build and maintain to retain their effectiveness and
require a consistent campaign to continue to bring awareness to their
existence.
Many of us have had a friend or neighbor who has asked us for help
for their young person who might have an interest in an aviation
career. We all have that in common. And we all give different answers.
Our answers are not wrong but they typically lack structure and
direction beyond our own experience or connections. What we need is to
be able to all share our unique experiences but to be able to give only
one answer for a place to go to for resources that can take that from
early interest to their first job in the industry.
Aviation is competing with many other industries to spark interest
in young people. We often have only one chance to spark their interest
and turn that into desire and engagement for them to want to learn
more. We need one simple URL that anyone in this industry can easily
remember and share and that is also easy for someone not in this
industry to remember after their interest is sparked.
A great example from another industry is the BuildSubmarines.com
campaign. In March 2024, BlueForge Alliance, the non-profit integration
partner of the U.S. Navy and its Submarine Industrial Base, announced a
``new multi-year partnership with Major and Minor League Baseball
designed to recruit skilled workers across the country. As an Official
Partner of MLB and MiLB, BFA will expand their reach and engagement to
promote BuildSubmarines.com, a platform in partnership with the Navy
for attracting, recruiting, and training the more than 10,000
manufacturing workers per year over the next decade needed to build and
maintain the United States Navy's next generation submarines. The
partnership begins with the launch of MLB Opening Day Pick `Em game
presented by BuildSubmarines.com.The BuildSubmarines.com platform will
be featured across a number of MLB Jewel Events throughout the season,
including MLB All-Star Week, the MLB Postseason, the World Series
presented by Capital One, and presenting partnership of Opening Day.
The partnership will also include BuildSubmarines.com promotion across
40 Minor League ballparks.''
This is exactly the type of exposure that aviation needs to find
the pilots, mechanics, air traffic controllers and other skilled
workers to help this industry create a steady pipeline of newly
qualified personnel to replace those who have left or will soon leave
the industry.
Again, FAA AVSED has a webpage that has the foundation to
potentially become this universal destination. What they need is a
partner in the same way that BlueForge Alliance has partnered with the
US Navy to create the campaign and the destination for the entire
industry to support and contribute. The Youth Task Force report
recommended utilizing ``current FAA AVSED group and their expertise as
subject matter experts for the site and its contents--calling up on
other expertise as needed.'' The regional advisory councils mentioned
earlier will be integral to providing content oversight, particularly
as it pertains to their region and to keep the site up to date.
3. Collaboration
Create a connected career pathway that draws students into aviation
and aerospace among all of the amazing programs across the United
States
The FAA Reauthorization Act of 2024 SEC. 441 calls for a ``National
Strategic Plan for Aviation Workforce Development'' and states not
later than September 30, 2025, the Secretary of Transportation shall,
in consultation with other Federal agencies and the Cooperative
Aviation Recruitment, Enrichment, and Employment Readiness Council (in
this section referred to as the `CAREER Council') established in
subsection (c), establish and maintain a national strategic plan to
improve recruitment, hiring, and retention and address projected
challenges in the civil aviation workforce and that The CAREER Council
shall be appointed by the Secretary from candidates nominated by
national associations representing various sectors of the aviation
industry.
A national strategic plan to improve recruitment, hiring and
retention created by members of the national aviation associations
addressing workforce challenges can be the key to progress.
This goes in hand with promoting awareness of careers and sharing
information about how to achieve them. They need a strategy and
stakeholder guidance to ensure they are effective.
Both the Women in Aviation Advisory Board and the Youth Task Force
were populated with many national association professionals passionate
about recruiting, retaining and engaging aviation talent.
There are many examples of national aviation associations that have
their own workforce initiatives. All of these programs are admirable.
Their missions to engage youth and aspiring young professionals in
aviation are similar but their programs are unique. Together with the
FAA and other partners they have the potential to create an entire
journey for an individual The following examples highlight individual
efforts to create, attract, retain and engage aviation talent from the
age of Kindergarten through high school, trade school and/or college
and university graduation to the workplace.
The Experimental Aviation Association's Young Eagles program,
launched in 1992, has EAA member volunteers giving free introductory
flights to youth ages 8-17. This program has reached over 2.3 million
young people. Youth can also participate in the Young Eagles Flight
Plan after they take their first flight. An EAA student membership is
available FREE of charge to any young person aged 8-18 who has
completed a Young Eagles flight. This then gives them access to free
online private pilot ground school ($299 value), qualification for a
free first flight lesson at a flight school of their choice ($160
value) and EAA will even reimburse the student for the exam fee after
they pass the FAA Knowledge Exam ($175 value).
In 2024, Women in Aviation International (WAI) will celebrate the
10th anniversary of their Annual Girls in Aviation Day. Girls in
Aviation Day is part of a multi-faceted international youth STEM
education program designed by WAI to inspire girls to pursue careers in
aviation and aerospace. The program, called Aviation for Girls,
includes GIAD events, as well as free Junior membership to youth 18
years old and younger. Two annual issues of Aviation for Girls are
published and distributed worldwide as well as included on the Aviation
for Girls app. The free AFG app also includes monthly webinars focused
on aviation STEM education activities and more. In 2023, through unique
local events hosted by WAI chapters and corporate members, the number
of GIAD participants nearly doubled to over 30,000 compared with 16,000
attendees at GIAD 2022. The number of countries where events were held
grew to 31 countries versus 19 countries in 2022. The number of events
also increased to 168 events compared with over 120 in 2022.
The Organization of Black Aerospace Professionals (OBAP) Project
Aerospace offers annual opportunities to inform and prepare aspiring
aerospace professionals for their future careers. One of these
programs, Aerospace Career Education (ACE) Academy, provides middle and
high school youth with exposure to opportunities in aerospace through
week-long summer academies. Endorsed by the Federal Aviation
Administration (FAA), OBAP has played a leading role in establishing
ACE Academies nationwide to introduce, educate and guide diverse
students towards careers in aerospace. ACE Academies are in 38
locations including Honolulu, Puerto Rico, and the U.S. Virgin Islands,
three academies in Houston, and two in Louisville. The program engages
1,100 students annually.
The Aircraft Owners and Pilots Association (AOPA) Foundation's You
Can Fly program created a High School initiative. Working with
professional instructional designers, The AOPA Foundation offers a
four-year high school aviation STEM program that falls along two
tracks--pilot and unmanned aircraft systems or drones. The program
conforms to math and science standards and, in keeping with career and
technical education best practices, leads to a certification or
industry-accepted test, such as the FAA Private Pilot knowledge test or
a Part 107 drone pilot certification.
The General Aviation Manufacturers Association (GAMA) Aviation
Design Challenge is a competition offering U.S. high school students
the ability to improve their knowledge of Science, Technology,
Engineering and Mathematics (STEM) skills through aviation curriculum.
GAMA launched the Aviation Design Challenge in 2013 to help increase
the number of young people entering the general aviation field. Each
year GAMA sends registered teams, which must have a minimum of four
students including one female, complimentary teacher and student copies
of Fly to Learn curriculum and software powered by X-Plane. Over the
course of six weeks, the students learn about topics such as the four
forces of flight, aspect ratio and even advanced subjects such as
supersonic flight. They then compete in a fly-off that requires them to
modify a virtual airplane and fly a specifically tasked mission. Since
establishing the Aviation Design Challenge, GAMA has reached over 1,800
students in over 400 high schools spanning 43 states and Washington,
D.C.
The National Business Aviation Association (NBAA) engages with
college-aged students already interested in aviation as a career path
through our Collegiate Connect program hosted annually at NBAA-BACE,
our business aviation convention and exhibition. We connect high-school
and college-aged students with industry leaders and emerging leaders
from our Young Professionals (YoPro) community to engage with them on
careers in nine different categories including pilot and maintenance
professionals. A recent partnership with America's oldest professional
co-ed aviation fraternity, Alpha Eta Rho, has increased this engagement
to their 65 collegiate chapters nationwide. In separate 2024 events,
NBAA helped to bring 30 Alpha Eta Rho students and nearly 70 YoPros to
meet with their members of Congress. This leadership development is a
great example of retention and engagement for our pipeline of industry
leaders.
In addition to the above examples, all of these organizations and
many more not named offer multiple scholarship opportunities, in-person
events to engage the aviation community and to inspire future aviation
enthusiasts and professionals, access to mentors, and real-time
glimpses into ``day in the life'' and ``see, be it'' aviation snapshots
through their social media and other media content.
The establishment of a CAREER Council collaboration of FAA and
industry workforce experts can be the connective tissue needed to unite
multiple offerings into carefully-crafted pipeline journeys for
America's youth.
These regional efforts would come together under the national
CAREER Council.
4. Financial Hurdle
Provide both individual financial support to pursue training and
education and create a sustainable funding model for organizations.
The FAA Reauthorization Act of 2024 strengthens critical aviation
workforce development grants established in the 2018 Reauthorization
law that have been successful in enabling the training of more pilots
and aviation maintenance technical workers, and expands the grants to
manufacturing technical workers.
SEC. 625. AVIATION WORKFORCE DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMS states that the
Secretary of Transportation shall establish program(s) to ``provide
grants for eligible projects to support the education and recruitment
of: future aircraft pilots and the development of the aircraft pilot
workforce; aviation maintenance technical workers and the development
of the aviation maintenance workforce; and aviation manufacturing
technical workers and aerospace engineers and the development of the
aviation manufacturing workforce.''
The 2022 ``Breaking Barriers for Women in Aviation'' report
submitted by the Women in Aviation Board did an excellent job
highlighting the economic factors that are barriers to aviation as a
career path:
``Although cost is not a gender specific barrier, it is an
identified roadblock for women and should be addressed. To date, there
is a disconnect between organizations that wish to supply financial
support and people seeking support opportunities. Varieties of aid for
aviation-related education include grants, foundation scholarship,
concurrent enrollment, federal work studies, internships, tuition
reimbursement, private loans, institutional aid, state aid, and federal
aid . . . Identifying funding channels that are supported by agencies,
government, and industry are crucial to removing barriers to entry and
welcoming more talent, including women, to aviation. Although more
scholarships and internships for women and better communication of
these opportunities is imperative, there is also a shortage and
maldistribution of flight schools at state-supported universities where
students can take advantage of scholarships, grants, and aid to reduce
the out-of-pocket education costs.''
The new legislation does an excellent job highlighting the
recommendations from the Women in Aviation Advisory Board in this area
emphasizing the need to develop not only pilots and the aviation
maintenance workforce but also aviation manufacturing technical workers
and aerospace engineers. It further calls for not less than 20% of the
funds allocated to be used for grants as the ``Willa Brown Aviation
Education Program.'' Willa Brown was the first African-American woman
to earn her pilot's rating in the United States. This grant money is to
be used for recruitment of populations in economically-disadvantaged
geographic areas and rural communities and to strengthen aviation
programs at minority-serving institutions.
Also, in line with Youth Task Force recommendations, grant money
has also been allocated to bring aviation education to high school and
secondary school students in a meaningful way to prepare them for
careers as aircraft pilots or uncrewed aircraft systems operators,
aviation mechanics and aviation maintenance technicians, or as aviation
manufacturing technical workers or aerospace engineers and to also
establish or improve registered apprenticeship, internship or
scholarship programs.
The Youth Task Force reported that ``programs should begin in high
school whenever possible to close the gap between exposure to a career
and full training leading to certification.''
5. Culture Barrier
At the conclusion of her appointment as Chair of the Women in
Aviation Advisory Board, Dr. Heather Wilson wrote, ``The biggest
barrier that discourages women from entering and staying in aviation
careers is culture--and it is the hardest to change. Women don't feel
like they belong. Changing culture requires consistent leadership
commitment over time in thousands of large and small actions across
government and industry.''
As a woman in aviation since I took my first flight over 30 years
ago at age 15, I am appreciative of the passage of this Act which
includes SEC. 403., the establishment of the Bessie Coleman Women in
Aviation Advisory Committee no later than 6 months after the date of
the Act enactment. This honors the service of the 30 women who
participated in the WAIAB from 2020-2022 on behalf of all of the women
in aviation. They gave us a voice and now it will continue to be heard.
This creation of this important Committee, named after Bessie
Coleman who was the first woman of African American and Native American
descent to earn her pilot's license, shall advise the Secretary and the
Administrator on matters and policies related to promoting the
recruitment, retention, employment, education, training, career
advancement, and well-being of women in the aviation industry and
aviation-focused Federal civil service positions.
Data included in the WAIAB report cited that in most aviation
occupations, women make up less than 20% of the workforce with only 5%
of women as air transport pilots and only 3.6% as captains. This
compares to women representing 47% of the total US. workforce and 26%
of people working in STEM fields globally. It also cited that in the
last fifteen years, the percentage of women private pilots and women
aviation technicians has shown virtually no change over time.
One of the conclusions reached from the pages of data in the report
is that ``aviation is failing to access the full range of skills and
talent that the industry needs. The continued strength and success of
the U.S. aviation industry must not be taken for granted. Aviation
faces significant workforce challenges that threaten the industry's
sustainability, profitability, and ability to innovate. Identifying and
recruiting talent from underrepresented groups is an obvious and
necessary strategy to address workforce needs throughout the
industry.''
Dr. Rebecca Lutte, a member of the Women in Aviation Advisory
Board, testified to this Subcommittee in July 2021 at a hearing focused
on ``Bridging the Gap: Improving Diversity and Inclusion in the U.S.
Aviation Workforce.'' Her testimony included references to her research
which cited that women choose aviation careers because they have a
passion for aviation, they have a perception that aviation is a fun and
adventurous profession, that they have an opportunity to prove personal
abilities and a desire for a challenging career.
Her testimony also referenced the factors that negatively impact
the recruitment and retention of women in aviation which include:

Economic factors, including cost of entry--particularly
for flight training

Family and work balance challenges

The need for additional outreach about career options and
pathways

Lack of women in leadership positions

Need for leadership commitment to diversity and inclusion

Navigating the workplace culture including gender bias
and sexual harassment

The Women in Aviation Advisory Board report unequivocally stated
that Aviation's culture must become more inclusive; this fundamental
point runs through their recommendations. ``For women to have an
indisputable sense of belonging, the FAA and industry must increase the
visibility of women in aviation careers.'' The creation of the Bessie
Coleman Women in Aviation Advisory Committee is an excellent
continuation of the 2 years of work completed by the Women in Aviation
Advisory Board (WIAAB) when it was sunset in 2022 after submitting
their recommendations.
By some estimates, we're looking at an astonishing 280,000 new jobs
coming online, in twenty-first century positions, meaning those in
Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics.
According to the Boeing company, more than 600,000 new pilots and
technicians are needed to address projected growth in the next 20 years
\1\. Meeting this projected demand is dependent upon the investment in
a steady pipeline of newly qualified personnel to replace those who
have left or will soon leave the industry.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Pilot and Technician Outlook 2023-2042: https://www.boeing.com/
commercial/market/pilot-technician-outlook/
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
While we work to strengthen industry workforce, we also must
enhance the FAA workforce. New and emerging technologies will offer
more high-skill, high paying jobs people want--and the FAA will need
the support of Congress to hire people with the right technical skills
to ensure the safe integration of these technologies. Thanks to a
provision in the FAA Reauthorization Act of 2024 the DOT Inspector
General must conduct an audit of the FAA workforce plan. Following the
audit, the DOT IG must assess staffing levels and workforce retention
trends, review gaps in safety-critical and senior positions, and review
opportunities for FAA employees to expand knowledge and training
opportunities to enhance FAA's technical capabilities.
Additionally, the FAA needs the resources to hire and train a
strong workforce and modernize the Air Traffic Control System so that
our workers are utilizing the best technology in the most state-of-the-
art facilities through targeted guaranteed spending from the Airport
and Airway Trust Fund (AATF). The FAA Reauthorization Act of 2024
improves air traffic control workforce hiring, training and staffing,
requiring the FAA to provide additional information about unfunded ATC
system capital investment needs and development of an air traffic
control realignment report. To build on these initiatives, the NBAA
supports the Biden Administration's request for $8 billion in mandatory
spending to restore its facilities to good condition and make a down
payment on a Facility Replacement and Radar Modernization Program
required to ensure resilience and safety in the National Airspace
System.
We support the implementation of the Promoting Service in
Transportation Act, passed into law through the Infrastructure
Investment and Jobs Act (IIJA), and encourage continued funding of the
program.
Conclusion
This hearing highlights the importance of recruiting, retaining and
engaging aviation talent and the work that must be energized as
outlined in the FAA Reauthorization Act of 2024. All stakeholders need
to be invested in its success and ready to contribute to solutions that
create awareness for aviation careers everywhere in the United States
and access to the resources needed to achieve career success through
information sharing, collaboration, and removal of financial and
cultural barriers. This pipeline is critical to our strength as a
nation. NBAA and our members appreciate this Subcommittee's continued
leadership, and we welcome the opportunity to testify at this critical
hearing.

Mr. Graves of Louisiana. Thank you, Ms. Damato. As the
brother of three trailblazer sisters and the father of two
trailblazer daughters, I appreciate your efforts. And just want
to make note, I had a female pilot who flew us in to DC on
Monday, and she did a fantastic job.
Mr. Garcia of Illinois. Thank you. And with the chair's
blessing, I would like to call on Mr. Spero for 5 minutes to
present his testimony.

TESTIMONY OF DAVID J. SPERO, NATIONAL PRESIDENT, PROFESSIONAL
AVIATION SAFETY SPECIALISTS, AFL-CIO (PASS)

Mr. Spero. Good morning. Thank you.
Chairman Graves, I guess Ranking Member Garcia now at the
moment, and members of the subcommittee, thank you for inviting
me to testify on behalf of the Professional Aviation Safety
Specialists.
My name is Dave Spero. I am the president of PASS. PASS
appreciates the opportunity to share information and
recommendations regarding the FAA workforce.
PASS represents approximately 11,000 FAA and DoD employees.
The largest PASS bargaining unit is technical operations. PASS
represents approximately 4,800 technicians responsible for
installing, operating, maintaining, and repairing more than
74,000 systems and equipment used for air traffic control and
navigation.
The number of employees performing these critical tasks has
been on a consistent decline for years, helped in part by an
increasing number of retirements. While the media focuses on
the shortage of air traffic controllers when reporting on
nonweather-related flight delays, the shortage of technicians
is just as serious. The consequence of insufficient technician
staffing manifests itself in increased restoration times during
an outage and more air traffic delays. It also causes
inadequate shift coverage for technicians, which means we do
not have the right person available to resolve a crisis when it
occurs.
The situation became concerning enough that the FAA
performed an analysis and found a correlation between the
shortage of technicians and the frequency and duration of
corrective maintenance actions. The report concluded that an
increase in unscheduled equipment outages was directly related
to less maintenance being performed.
Hiring and training new technicians is cumbersome.
Technicians must be skilled and proficient on multiple systems.
It takes years to fully train a technician to perform all
necessary duties related to the position.
The FAA has been developing a technical operations staffing
model for over a decade, but progress is slow. PASS is asking
the FAA be directed to establish a workforce plan for technical
operations and collaborate with PASS in its creation and
implementation. While PASS has made it clear to the FAA that we
are ready and willing to assist in the development of a plan,
our offers have been declined or ignored.
PASS also represents aviation safety inspectors and other
employees within the Office of Aviation Safety. PASS is
extremely concerned about the agency's inability to effectively
and consistently staff the inspector workforce. Considering
recent events, it is more important than ever that the agency
knows how many inspectors are needed to safely monitor the
system.
FAA Administrator Mike Whitaker testified before your
Senate colleagues last month and said more inspectors are being
sent to Boeing to oversee Boeing and its suppliers. However, we
do not know where the agency is transferring these inspectors
from and if the oversight of other manufacturers or airlines
will be impacted.
The staffing model currently being used by the agency is
insufficient to determine the number of aviation safety
inspectors needed.
While each of PASS's bargaining units has specific
challenges in ensuring proper recruitment, retention, and
engagement, there are overarching hurdles that face the agency.
We have concluded that the FAA is not hiring enough
technicians and inspectors, and this is the primary bottleneck
that limits the opportunities for aviation workers in the FAA.
Retention of current employees and new hires goes hand-in-
hand with recruitment. The FAA must provide a clear career
progression path for its employees, with opportunities for
professional growth which, in turn, would open up opportunities
for new employees. Offering flexible working conditions and
ensuring a healthy work-life balance can help retain employees.
PASS thanks this committee for their work to pass
legislation reauthorizing the FAA for the next 5 years.
Important language in the legislation that PASS supported will
go a long way toward protecting our workforce now and in the
future.
It is worth noting that PASS is currently in negotiations
on new contracts with the FAA for the employees we represent in
the ATO and Aviation Safety. These negotiations present a
significant opportunity for PASS to work with the agency on
ways to enhance recruitment and retention.
PASS respectfully requests that the committee consider our
areas of concern and recognize the critical contributions made
by the employees we represent. PASS is ready to work with you
to ensure that the U.S. air traffic control system remains the
safest aviation system in the world.
Thank you.
[Mr. Spero's prepared statement follows:]

Prepared Statement of David J. Spero, National President, Professional
Aviation Safety Specialists, AFL-CIO (PASS)
Chair Graves, Ranking Member Cohen, and members of the
subcommittee, thank you for inviting me to testify on behalf of the
Professional Aviation Safety Specialists, AFL-CIO (PASS).
PASS represents approximately 11,000 Federal Aviation
Administration (FAA) and Department of Defense employees throughout the
United States and abroad. PASS-represented employees in the FAA
install, maintain, support and certify air traffic control and national
defense equipment, inspect and oversee the commercial and general
aviation industries, develop flight procedures, and perform quality
analyses of complex aviation systems used in air traffic control and
national defense in the United States and overseas. PASS members work
to ensure the safety and efficiency of the aviation system that
transports over 2.9 million airline passengers across more than 29
million square miles of airspace (domestic and U.S. airspace over
oceans) every day. The diversity of the PASS-represented workforce
provides insight into the safety of the system they maintain and the
industry they oversee. PASS members are tasked with ensuring that the
U.S. aviation system remains the gold standard of safety.
PASS thanks the members of the subcommittee for turning their
attention toward examining opportunities to recruit, retain and engage
aviation talent. As PASS has long emphasized, the FAA cannot accomplish
its safety mission without the right number of employees in the
necessary positions. Unfortunately, our workforce faces many challenges
that hinder the ability to ensure adequate staffing.
It is worth noting that PASS is currently in negotiations on new
collective bargaining agreements with the FAA for the employees we
represent in the Air Traffic Organization and Aviation Safety. These
negotiations present a significant opportunity for PASS to work with
the agency on ways to enhance recruitment and retention.
PASS appreciates the opportunity to share information and
recommendations regarding the FAA workforce. This includes the Air
Traffic Organization and Aviation Safety workforces, staffing
challenges at the FAA, and PASS's recommendations for eliminating
bottlenecks, which includes oversight of important FAA legislation
recently enacted.
Air Traffic Organization
The largest PASS bargaining unit is the Air Traffic Organization
(ATO) Technical Operations unit, consisting of technical employees who
install, maintain, repair and certify the radar, navigation,
communication and power equipment that comprises the U.S. National
Airspace System (NAS).
Within Technical Operations, PASS represents FAA airway
transportation systems specialists, more commonly referred to as
technicians. Technicians ensure the functionality of communications,
computers, navigational aids and power systems vital to safe air travel
and the mission of pilots and air traffic controllers. PASS-represented
employees in Flight Program Operations (AJF), Mission Support Services
(AJV) and Air Traffic (AJT) also provide important support to the
system by conducting flight inspections, developing instrument flight
procedures and other important work.
Technical Operations Staffing
There are approximately 4,800 FAA technicians responsible for
installing, operating, maintaining and repairing more than 74,000
radar, communications, navigational aids, airport lighting, backup
power, heating, ventilation and air conditioning (HVAC) at FAA
facilities.\1\ This number of employees has been on a consistent
decline for years, helped in part by the increasing number of
retirements.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Federal Aviation Administration, Airway Transportation Systems
Specialists, updated October 6, 2022. Accessed July 3, 2024: https://
www.faa.gov/jobs/career_fields/aviation_careers/atss_join. This number
does not reflect the number of technicians that are fully certified.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Insufficient technician staffing can result in increased
restoration times during an outage and more air traffic delays. It can
also make it difficult to ensure adequate shift coverage by
technicians, a situation that increases the risk of major air traffic
issues. In fact, an analysis performed by the FAA NAS Policy & Quality
Control Group found disturbing connections between the number of FAA
technicians and the frequency and duration of corrective maintenance
(LCM) actions. The analysis states that the agency has lost
approximately 8% of the technician workforce since 2017 and that this
``loss of experienced technicians correlates with the rise in longer
times to complete preventative maintenance and the increase in LCM
number and LCM duration.'' \2\ Performing preventative maintenance is
essential to avoiding system disruptions, with the data from the report
indicating that the average number of unscheduled outages per facility
has been trending upward since 2017.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ Federal Aviation Administration, NAS Policy & Quality Control
Group, NAS Technical Performance & Analysis Team: AJW-184, ``Impacts on
Maintenance,'' p. 5.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
While the media focuses on the shortage of air traffic controllers
when reporting on non-weather-related flight delays, the shortage of
FAA systems specialists is just as acute. This lack of technician
staffing is not going unnoticed. For example, in April, a group of
Texas lawmakers sent a letter to the FAA administrator regarding the
inadequate staffing in the San Antonio System Support Center (SSC). The
specific concern related to the number of qualified and credentialed
radar technicians at the facility. There is only one full-time
technician to service three radar sites between 120 and 200 miles away
from the San Antonio airport. The representatives urged the FAA to work
to ``mitigate staffing shortages by hiring, training, and certifying
technical staff to be ready to assume those critical radar maintenance
duties as technicians retire.'' \3\ Although the situation rose to a
level of congressional inquiry, it is certainly not an anomaly.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ Letter to FAA Administrator Mike Whitaker from Reps. Greg
Casar, Joaquin Castro and Henry Cuellar on radar technician staffing,
April 10, 2024.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In addition, inadequate staffing has resulted in PASS-represented
employees being unable to serve on important agency groups and
initiatives. PASS has long called attention to not only the need for
sufficient technical staffing but also to the lack of a reliable
staffing model on which to base staffing decisions and placement.
PASS is currently in contract negotiations with ATO over a new
collective bargaining agreement. PASS views this as an opportunity to
develop processes and incentives better aimed at recruiting and
retaining employees throughout the ATO.
Technical Operations Training
Hiring and training new technicians is not a quick or easy process.
FAA technicians must be skilled and proficient on a number of systems.
It can take years to fully train an FAA technician to perform all
necessary duties related to the position. According to the Department
of Transportation Inspector General (IG), ``Most FAA systems require
specific training and certification, and FAA does not typically train
maintenance technicians on every equipment type. Therefore, individual
maintenance technicians cannot work on all equipment, increasing the
complexity of the technician workforce planning effort.'' \4\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ Department of Transportation Inspector General, Opportunities
Exist for FAA To Strengthen Its Workforce Planning and Training
Processes for Maintenance Technicians, Report No. AV2023027, May 2,
2023, p. 6.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Since there are so many different pieces of equipment and systems
in the NAS, there must be several technicians on site who can do the
different work necessary to keep the aviation system safe and
functioning. In other words, the staffing of this workforce is not just
about people; it is about people with the right skills and training.
PASS consistently hears from our members that adequate training is
a recurring issue and that without proper training, there is an
increased risk to aviation safety. Many factors impact the ability to
fully train FAA technicians, including availability of travel funding,
instructor availability and course development. In addition, the FAA is
still playing catch up after its training academy in Oklahoma City was
shuttered during the COVID-19 pandemic. While the agency did turn to
some virtual coursework, it is a poor substitute for hands-on training
with actual equipment. It can take years to fully train an FAA
technician to perform all necessary duties related to the position.
Another detriment to adequate training is the number of employees
who are nearing retirement. These skilled systems specialists have
valuable knowledge and experience that can benefit new employees.
However, the FAA is not hiring in a manner that would take advantage of
this institutional knowledge. The agency hires only when a position
becomes vacant. This is obviously impacting staffing levels at
facilities nationwide. There needs to be a continuous investment in
employee training and development programs to enhance skills and
knowledge.
Technical Operations Workforce Plan
The FAA has been developing the Technical Operations staffing model
(TSM) for over a decade. In 2018, the IG noted the lack of progress:
``The Agency also lacks a comprehensive workforce plan to address
hiring and training needs for its entire technical workforce. In
addition, FAA does not currently account for planned retirements or
track how long it takes on average to train new technicians, data that
would be useful for determining future training and hiring needs.'' \5\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ Id., p. 8.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The FAA's TSM only addresses the technical employees in the field
who perform preventative maintenance and cannot be relied upon to
address staffing for other duties they perform. These other duties
include work related to unscheduled outages; corrective maintenance in
the case of outages or disruptions; tasks related to specific technical
disciplines, such as Communication or Radar; labor reporting and other
administrative tasks, which are necessary to accurately track the work
being done; travel time (technicians may be responsible for facilities
located in remote locations or multiple locations); among others. Due
to staffing insufficiencies, PASS often hears of incidents in which a
facility has fallen below the coverage requirements for a watch
schedule. The model also does not reflect the work performed by support
personnel who are not directly interfacing with live NAS equipment and
systems. Furthermore, the model does not consider many human factors.
PASS does not believe that the TSM is a reliable tool for determining
staffing for this workforce. In addition, the administrative program
for tracking these duties is burdensome and difficult to manage.
PASS is asking that the FAA be directed to establish a Technical
Operations Workforce Plan and collaborate with PASS in its creation and
implementation. PASS believes that the abilities and skills that Tech
Ops employees provide, if utilized and staffed properly, can provide a
distinct improvement in the implementation of new NAS systems. The
development of the Technical Operations Workforce Plan should serve as
a model for other plans to follow for Mission Support Services and
Flight Program Operations.
Of utmost importance, the agency must be directed to
collaboratively work with PASS on the creation of any workforce plan.
While PASS has made it clear to the FAA that we are ready and willing
to assist in the development of a plan, our offers have been declined
or ignored.
Aviation Safety
PASS represents aviation safety inspectors and other employees
within the Office of Aviation Safety (AVS). Flight Standards Service
(AFS) and Aircraft Certification Service (AIR). Aviation safety
inspectors are responsible for certification, education, oversight,
surveillance and enforcement of the entire aviation system.
Funding Challenges
PASS thanks the Committee for passing the Aircraft Certification
Safety and Accountability Act in late 2021, in which Congress
authorized $81 million to recruit and retain safety specialists related
to certification. Unfortunately, Congress did not follow through on its
directive and failed to appropriate the money. While PASS was
encouraged by the language in the law, it did not actually accomplish
any recruitment or retention goals because there were no appropriated
funds.
Aviation Safety Inspector Staffing
PASS is extremely concerned about the agency's inability to
effectively and consistently staff the FAA inspector workforce. In
fact, according to a 2021 report by the Department of Transportation
Inspector General (IG), an alarming 59% and 79% of Certificate
Management Office and Flight Standards District Office managers,
respectively, said their offices are short-staffed.\6\ Among the
reasons cited in the IG report for understaffing are the same reasons
cited by PASS over the years. These include increasing workload, hiring
challenges, extended hiring and training periods, and increasing
oversight responsibility (including for the evolving unmanned aerial
system segment).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\ U.S. Department of Transportation Office of Inspector General,
FAA Can Increase Its Inspector Staffing Model's Effectiveness by
Implementing System Improvements and Maximizing Its Capabilities,
August 11, 2021, p. 5.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The agency itself has recognized the need to maintain a robust
inspector workforce. According to the FAA, ``To meet the safety needs
of the NAS, AVS will need to recruit, hire, maintain, and retain a
workforce with outstanding technical expertise, capabilities, and
adaptability. Our efforts must ensure we can hire and retain the right
people with the right skills and mindset, engaged at the right time,
with systematic coordination between certification and operational
suitability.'' \7\ PASS agrees with the FAA and we are eager to assist
in the endeavor.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\7\ Federal Aviation Administration, Aviation Safety Workforce Plan
2021-2030, p. i.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
PASS also agrees with the FAA administrator's June 13, 2024,
testimony before the Senate Committee on Commerce, Science and
Transportation where he encouraged stakeholders to provide mentoring to
newer employees. ``There has been a significant loss of experienced
workers and a lack of that natural transfer of knowledge,''
Administrator Mike Whitaker testified. ``What we are encouraging
operators in the system to do is recognize that as a risk and build
programs around that to mitigate that risk, which means more training,
more mentoring and more time to complete tasks.'' \8\ However, with
inspector staffing at inadequate levels within the agency, this is a
challenge with the current workforce.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\8\ ``FAA Oversight of Aviation Manufacturing,'' Hearing before the
Senate Committee on Commerce, Science and Transportation, June 13,
2024.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
As stated earlier, PASS is currently in contract negotiations with
AVS for a new collective bargaining agreement. This should serve as a
perfect vehicle to develop processes and incentives aimed at promoting
recruiting and retention. One of the issues focused on is telework,
which has become a major recruiting and retention tool. Aviation
employees in the private sector, including those representing airlines,
general aviation and pilot certification, value the flexibilities of
telework offered by the industry. While the private sector is
oftentimes the recruiting grounds for new FAA employees, these
incentives must remain available to remain competitive with the private
sector.
Aviation Safety Inspector Staffing Model
The ``staffing model'' currently being used by the agency is
insufficient to determine the number of aviation safety inspectors
needed. As noted by the IG in 2021, due to the model not including
relevant inspector staffing data, it ``will be limited in its ability
to determine whether the model provides reliable information on
projected inspector staffing levels.'' The same report noted that
managers are reluctant to use the model.
PASS is asking that the FAA be directed to revise its inspector
staffing model in collaboration with the union. In light of recent
events, it is more important than ever that the agency knows how many
inspectors are needed to safely monitor the system. At the recent
hearing before the Senate Commerce Committee regarding the agency's
oversight of aviation manufacturing, FAA Administrator Whitaker
recognized that the FAA was misguided in overseeing Boeing by being too
``hands off.'' He acknowledged that the FAA should have had much better
visibility into what was happening at Boeing.
The administrator did claim that the agency now had more inspectors
on the ground at Boeing factories and the factory of its primary
supplier. He explained that the FAA previously had 24 inspectors at
Boeing and Spirit AeroSystems and, while the number is now in the low
30s, the target is 55 inspectors. He emphasized that the FAA can no
longer afford to simply be ``reactive.''
PASS appreciates that the agency recognizes the need for greater
oversight at Boeing. This is something the union has been emphasizing
for years, even before the two fatal crashes of the 737 Max in 2018 and
2019. However, we question how the FAA determined the number of
inspectors necessary at Boeing and Spirit; its plans to maintain that
number; and where they are finding the inspectors who have the required
experience in manufacturing. Simply moving inspectors from other
manufacturing environments is not a solution. Taking inspectors from
other certificates will leave those manufacturers without oversight.
The FAA should consult with stakeholders to ensure the safety of the
system. As always, PASS stands ready to provide input and assistance as
our AVS workforce knows best what resources are needed to ensure the
safety of the American flying public.
Staffing Challenges at the FAA
While each of PASS's bargaining units has its specific challenges
in ensuring proper recruitment, retention and engagement, there are
overarching hurdles that face the agency when considering the staffing
of technicians and aviation safety inspectors.
Recruitment
The FAA must do a better job of recruiting new talent to join the
workforce.
For example, the FAA often struggles to offer salaries that are
competitive with the private sector, which can deter highly skilled
professionals. While federal employees received a 5.2% pay increase in
2024, the size of this increase was a rare occurrence and did not
assist in closing the pay gap between the federal and private sectors.
According to the Federal Salary Council, over the last year, federal
employees earned on average 27.54% less in wages than their private
sector counterparts. This is the second consecutive year that the
federal pay gap has widened. It is anticipated that federal employees
will receive a 2% increase for 2025.
To maintain the current workforce and attract new employees to
public service, the agency should consider starting salaries that are
more competitive with the private sector and other incentives to
recruit a new generation of highly skilled and dedicated workers.
Recruiting and retaining properly skilled FAA employees can only offer
the flying public further reassurances that the aviation system is safe
and that ensuring that safety is the agency's top priority.
In addition, the hiring and training process for FAA employees can
be long and tedious. While PASS emphasizes that there is a certain
amount of time that goes into fully training employees represented by
the union to serve in such safety-critical positions, the process for
doing so can be streamlined to avoid bottlenecks in training. This
could also be resolved by managing workloads for employees that permit
them to specialize in particular fields rather than be considered
``jacks of all trades.''
There is also a lack of effective outreach and marketing to attract
diverse talent pools, including women, minorities and young
professionals. In fact, according to new data from the Partnership for
Public Service, most young people think a career in government is a way
to have a positive impact but relatively few have considered such a
career.\9\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\9\ Partnership for Public Service, Making the Federal Government
an Employer of Choice for Early Career Professionals. Accessed July 5,
2024: https://ourpublicservice.org/publications/making-the-federal-
government-an-employer-of-choice-for-early-career-professionals/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
PASS urges the agency to consider additional ways to recruit new
talent, including modernizing the human resources system at the FAA.
Within Technical Operations, an internship program has shown signs of
success, but it is in its early stages of development. Security
clearances for sensitive positions delay the process, as does
onboarding additions to the workforce. Also, there is no current
assessment test for technicians in the hiring process to determine what
skill they are best suited for in Technical Operations before being
hired. Finally, frequent changes in FAA leadership positions strain the
ability to create a stable environment.
Retention
Retention of current employees and new hires goes hand in hand with
recruitment. The FAA must provide a clear career progression path for
its employees with opportunities for professional growth. Because
staffing is critically low in many locations, employees are often not
allowed to volunteer for ``solicitations of interest'' (SOIs) that
permit them to temporarily gain experience in another job role that can
only benefit the agency.
While recruitment figures for the federal government may be low,
the retention trends are even more concerning. Federal employees are
looking for new careers in droves following return-to-office plans put
forth starting in 2021, post-pandemic. Offering flexible working
conditions and ensuring a healthy work-life balance can help retain
employees.
Congress should consider the unintended consequences when
regulating workplace flexibilities. In our view, agencies should
continue to develop telework and other workplace flexibilities, subject
to the collective bargaining process, that make sense for their
workforces and allow them to be competitive with the private sector.
Several years before the COVID-19 pandemic, Flight Standards had
already moved away from geography in order to be more nimble in
regulating the aviation industry. This was an intentional business
strategy by FAA to make the workforce more flexible in aviation
oversight. This strategy also allows the agency to rely upon a broader
pool of employees to work together across the country in situations
where they normally would be isolated. This type of organizational
design may assist in reducing bottlenecks on recruitment and retention.
It also allows the agency to reorganize more efficiently to better
regulate the ever-changing aviation industry. To this end, telework and
remote work flexibilities are important options to help retain
employees.
In addition, current legislation targeting federal employees,
including limiting or monitoring official time and implementing
legislation that would strip federal employees of certain rights, does
not paint the federal government in a positive light. If the federal
government does not recognize the rights and professionalism of its
workforce, it will not be able to retain capable employees.
Ensuring engagement of employees is also essential to retaining the
workforce. Implementing programs that recognize and reward outstanding
performance can boost morale and engagement.
Eliminating Bottlenecks: FAA Reauthorization Priorities
PASS thanks this subcommittee for their work to pass legislation
reauthorizing the FAA for the next five years. Important language in
the legislation, that PASS supported, will go a long way toward
protecting our workforce now and in the future.
PASS provided support and background on many important elements of
the bill including language directing the FAA to review and revise the
aviation safety inspector staffing model; instructing the IG to review
FAA workforce plans from the past five fiscal years, raising the safety
standard of foreign repair stations to better align with U.S.
standards, and, for the first time, the legislation included pivotal
language on telework.
Strong policy language on telework in the legislation reinforces
concepts proposed by PASS during current contract negotiations for its
collective bargaining agreements. The new law states that any telework
arrangement should not ``adversely impact the mission of the FAA'' and
``not reduce the safety or efficiency of the national airspace.'' It
also indicates that any arrangement will optimize the work status of
employees teleworking and ensure timely completion of duties to meet
the needs of stakeholders.
While the law does not supersede the FAA's requirement to bargain
with its unions over working conditions, it does require the agency to
consult with its unions when devising any policy. This has not been the
case historically. PASS believes Congress must ensure that the FAA
follow through with its directives in the reauthorization legislation
to develop workforce plans and staffing models. Securing the strongest
FAA workforce--and retaining that workforce--is essential to a safe and
efficient aviation system.
Conclusion
The work of the highly trained and skilled employees represented by
PASS is essential to protecting aviation safety and fulfilling the
agency's mission. PASS recognizes that having the appropriate and
skilled workforce in place is essential to maintaining the safety of
the system. We want to work with the agency to recruit and retain the
very best employees.
PASS respectfully calls on this committee to consider our areas of
concern and recognize the critical contributions made by the employees
we represent. PASS is ready to work with you to ensure that the United
States air traffic control system remains the safest aviation system in
the world.

Mr. Graves of Louisiana. Thank you, Mr. Spero.
I appreciate all of your testimony today.
I am going to yield 5 minutes to the gentleman from
Arkansas, the chair of the Highways and Transit Subcommittee,
Mr. Crawford.
Mr. Crawford. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I thank the
witnesses for being here today.
Mr. Robbins, I am particularly interested in what the FAA
needs to be doing for new entrants in national airspace, AAM,
and unmanned systems, especially when it comes to
cybersecurity.
So, we talk about the aviation industry, and the first
thing you think of is probably going to be a pilot or something
like that, but I am concerned about some of the other areas
that we should be focused on as we see the expansion of
nontraditional aircraft. For example, how do we strengthen the
FAA's cybersecurity policies and ensure that the FAA has the
appropriate workforce in place to deal with that?
It is very extensive in this industry. So, talk about that
a little bit, the policies that we need to be engaged in, what
you think the future holds with regard to that particular
aspect of the aviation industry.
Mr. Robbins. Yes. Thank you very much for that question,
Congressman.
About 2 years ago, AUVSI launched our Trusted Cyber
Programs to tackle this challenge head on. We recognize that
this is a shared responsibility between industry and Government
and that it is important for us to also be educating our
members and sort of be the tip of the spear on getting
cybersecurity right as drones and advanced air mobility are
integrated into the NAS.
The FAA reauthorization, as you know, sir, contains a
provision directing the FAA to establish a new executive
director for cybersecurity. We think that is a terrific step in
starting to build the subject matter expertise within the
agency.
FAA is a safety organization, so, sometimes security
doesn't always fit perfectly into their mission set, but I
would give the FAA a lot of credit for making significant
headway just in the last couple of years and moving the ball
forward.
AUVSI stands ready to work with the FAA on this issue and
bring subject matter expertise to the table, whether that is
through aviation rulemaking committees which draw upon industry
for advice and counsel, or even perhaps the use of special
Government employees to bring in workforce from industry
temporarily--SGEs--to help provide subject matter expertise.
AUVSI also offers a certification program for platforms and
components to go through and be certified on both their
cybersecurity as well as their supply chain risk. They go
through a very vigorous pen test, and they also go through a
significant supply chain review.
And we have a standing MOU with the Defense Innovation Unit
of the Department of Defense, where all of the information we
gathered is immediately transferred over to the DoD so they can
then understand the integrity of the systems that AUVSI has
validated, to be able to pull them over for the warfighter as
well.
Mr. Crawford. Appreciate that.
Mr. Robbins. Thank you, sir.
Mr. Crawford. Mr. Montgomery, if I heard you correctly in
your testimony, you mentioned that you had been basically
career military as a maintainer. Is that right?
Mr. Montgomery. Yes, sir.
Mr. Crawford. Talk about what the--we talk about recruiting
and retention and, again, when we talk about aviation, we tend
to think about pilots--but the opportunities in what your
career field was, that you spent in the military, and how that
translates over into civilian aviation industry.
Mr. Montgomery. With mechanics, we--or maintainers, we
definitely have work to do within Louisiana Tech. We want to
open up our doors and start producing mechanics.
Mr. Graves of Louisiana. Mr. Montgomery, would you mind,
just make sure you are on microphone.
Mr. Montgomery. Yes, sir. Thank you, sir.
So, we would like to work further with--we have a couple of
partners within Louisiana. We are going to start producing
mechanics. We see it as a need. I see it, from my experiences
in the military, as something we need to work on, because our
maintenance bills are extremely high and just getting higher
with the least amount of mechanics we have out there.
Is that about what you were looking for, sir?
Mr. Crawford. Well, I am kind of--kind of wanted to drill
down on the career path, what a young person graduating from
high school, what the future might hold for them in the
industry outside of flying or operating, but as a maintainer,
and could they expect a fulfilling and rewarding career on the
maintainer side of things?
Mr. Montgomery. Oh, yes, sir. Absolutely. I love
maintenance. I love to get out there, getting my hands dirty,
turning wrenches. Anything working with the engines, the
airplanes, airframes, anything else like that is so fun.
If we could get it out there that there is more to aviation
than just being the pilots and the great jobs, that would be
huge.
Mr. Crawford. Appreciate that. Thank you, sir.
Thank you all for being here today.
Mr. Graves of Louisiana. Thank you, Mr. Crawford.
I recognize the ranking member of the subcommittee, Mr.
Cohen from Tennessee, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Cohen. Thank you, sir.
It is good to follow Mr. Crawford. He is across the river
from me. I hope you asked some good questions that help Memphis
too.
Mr. Crawford. Always.
Mr. Cohen. Monty, I want to start with you. LA Tech and
Memphis State--now Louisiana Tech University and University of
Memphis--we still have some of the same problems. We are not
maybe getting as much as LSU or UT in some of the funding
programs.
University of Memphis has told me, as well as our community
college, Southwest, that they have challenges in getting
provisionally certified as a part 141 flight school. They want
to set up a knowledge testing center there.
Did Louisiana Tech University face similar difficulties in
getting certifications or other approvals, and does this affect
your ability to recruit and retain students?
Mr. Montgomery. Yes, sir. We are definitely--we were
seeking in-house DPE examining authority, but our recent rates
of passing the test have dipped below the 90-percent
requirement, so, we are facing problems there. However, we do
have airmen knowledge testing within Louisiana Tech that we
provide students on a as-needed basis.
Mr. Cohen. Is there any reason that you know why--they
require 90 percent passage to continue the program?
Mr. Montgomery. I believe, sir. I would have to verify that
data to ensure.
Mr. Cohen. I guess the idea is that they want to be where
they are most likely to have graduates, but at the same time,
some of the students maybe didn't have--possibly they didn't
have adequate preparation, and so, they keep them in the hole
and don't give them a chance to go up.
Is that something you have seen, some of the people at LA
Tech that maybe didn't get the grade but have potential?
Mr. Montgomery. Yes, sir. As we crack open the
enrollments--we have had over 370 applicants this year and 270
last year. So, as we crack that open to get more students in,
we are going to get more of a variance on people that can pass
the test or not.
We do have students that are great pilots; they just can't
pass the test. And so, you could see a dip in that, and as well
as we make our aviation maintainers--management take the FAA
test as well.
Mr. Cohen. Do you think there should be some change to that
standard, the test score, the 90-percent requirement, or is
that something we just have to deal with?
Mr. Montgomery. I believe some research would be good in
that area to verify that is a good standard and that, if a
flight school is extremely difficult on their own airmen, that
maybe that should be taken into account.
Mr. Cohen. We have something else in common: getting our
hands dirty. You like to do it with machines. I like to do it
with ribs.
But often the most visible members of the aviation system
are our flightcrews and pilots, but aircraft maintenance
technicians also play a vital part in ensuring safe and
efficient operation.
What is the role of schools and universities in training
that part of the air workforce?
Mr. Montgomery. In training mechanics, sir?
Mr. Cohen. Yes, training technicians and mechanics that
work to support the airplanes.
Mr. Montgomery. With being a mechanic, you could be a good
mechanic without a college education, but you can be a great
mechanic with a college education. Once I obtained my degrees,
I could understand statistics and outliers, and I could better
change--track down difficult positions.
So, the university providing the rest of the information
you need to help run a maintenance program is direly needed. It
turns you just from a wrench turner into a manager, a leader.
Mr. Cohen. Thank you, sir.
Ms. Damato, you testified that when you were learning to
fly, you were not allowed to use one of the aircraft available
to students because the owner would not let a woman fly his
plane. Even in 2024, I fear some of my constituents in the
majority and minority cities, Memphis, Tennessee, may face
similar hurdles due to race or gender.
Can you talk about the importance of a diverse talent pool
for the future success of our aviation industry?
Ms. Damato. Thank you for that question.
It does astound me that the challenges that I encountered
in the mid-1990s are still challenges that women and minorities
are encountering today. Shouldn't be happening.
I do want to deliver some good news. The collegiate
aviation programs, I attended one of them. My son attends one
of them. And I spent a lot of time with collegiate aviators. It
doesn't seem to be something that they are encountering once
they get into that formal flight training environment. But when
you are at the general aviation airports, where it still might
be rare to find someone who is interested in aviation as a
career path, that doesn't look like everybody else at the
airport, you are still the odd person out.
Chairman Graves, you noted that you had a female pilot on
your flight yesterday. The fact that you noticed that means
there are still not enough of us, and we need to make
improvements to attract women and minorities to aviation, to
show them more examples of ``see it, be it''; to give them
mentoring opportunities; to understand the resources they can
take advantage of, especially funding being one of them; how
they can work on being both a caregiver and also pursuing an
aviation career and the support they need to do that; and
really that sense of belonging, that culture is not going to
hold them back.
When we are a diverse industry, we can get to more
efficiency, we can get to more safety. That diversity of
thought allows us not to all just agree with each other but to
bring different perspectives from where we come from, from all
over this country, and from different environments, and use
that for better decisionmaking, which will have a great impact
on the future of our industry.
Also, that is the only way we are going to fill all these
jobs that are available. Women make up 47 percent of the
American workforce, but we are still stuck at about 20 percent
in aviation representation. Women in leadership positions in
aviation, still single digits. Women airline captains, also
still single digits. There is a lot of work to be done.
Mr. Cohen. Thank you so much. Are you--I missed it. Are you
from Louisiana?
Ms. Damato. I am from New Jersey.
Mr. Cohen. New Jersey. All right. Your name looks like a
linebacker at LSU.
Ms. Damato. No relation.
Mr. Graves of Louisiana. Thank you.
I recognize the--you--recognize the gentleman from
Arkansas, the chair of the Natural Resources Committee, Mr.
Westerman, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Westerman. Thank you, Chairman Graves. Thank you to the
witnesses for being here today.
Ms. Damato, your testimony is inspiring, not only the 5
minutes that you had, but I think the 17 pages of single-
spaced, written testimony shows that you are obviously
passionate about what you do. You have got a great story to
tell. And I think you had five different areas that you said
you are working on, in the written testimony, are places that
things need to be improved. Information sharing, collaboration,
all of those are very important. And you alluded a little bit
to removing financial barriers.
So, in the FAA reauthorization of 2024, we did put in
targeted reforms to strengthen the Aviation Workforce
Development Grant that was established in the 2018 FAA bill.
And given that the greatest barrier to entry facing most
individuals in the workforce is the high cost of education, how
important of a role do grant programs such as these play in
attracting a wide array of individuals into the aviation
workforce?
Ms. Damato. Thank you for the question, and thank you for
recognizing my passion for aviation.
I mean, it really was something that started when I was 8
years old, and that story is really common. It is just a matter
of, do you stick with it as that just one opportunity and no
one is there to encourage you and you turn around? Or if it is
not a culture issue, is it a financial barrier or something
else that puts the thought in your head and then removes it
just as quickly?
The financial hurdle to becoming an aviation professional
is real. It is the most expensive for a pilot. It is still
expensive for someone who wants to be a technician. And having
access to--having the desire for that career path and the
passion is wonderful, but if you can't match it with the
ability to pay for it, then it becomes concerning, because it
becomes a revolving door, and we lose wonderful people who want
to work in our industry to some other industries that have less
barriers to entry.
The grants are fantastic. Mr. Montgomery talked in his
testimony about the type of funding that they need at their
public university to be able to support continuing their fleet
modernization, attracting the instructors that they need to
build an air traffic program, what would that look like for
them, and what expertise do they have to have.
And so, the schools need the funding to be able to develop
and grow with this new technology that we are all trying to
understand how do we educate to. And the students need access
to these grants as well, because they may have--they are
caregivers themselves, they may have low credit scores, they
may not have the ability to get access to the loans that they
need.
And, again, if they can't get enough merit from where they
want to attend, they may find themselves just with a wonderful
passion but an unattainable goal. So, it is incredibly
important.
Mr. Westerman. Right. And then you also talk about
information sharing, and related the experience of your
guidance counselor who really didn't know how to advise you on
an aviation career, I think, told you to go study aeronautical
engineering, which obviously would have given you a path into
an aviation job. But it was almost by accident you found out
that there are actually college programs for pilots.
How do we get that message out so that guidance counselors
understand the wide array of jobs that are available?
In my district--and I would guess if you talked to most
high school kids and said, would you like a career in aviation,
the first thing, ``I want to be a `Top Gun' pilot,'' or ``I
want to fly for an airline.'' But the jobs in aviation in my
district are fabricating parts for airplanes, doing maintenance
on parts.
We have a large aerospace manufacturing business, and even
on the defense side, we have one of the biggest aerospace
industrial defense parks in the country. They build the HIMARS
and all of that good stuff.
So, how do we get that message out so that other kids that
want to go into aviation aren't told their route is either to
go in the military or to be an aeronautical engineer?
Ms. Damato. It needs to be intentional and not accidental.
And for all of us and all the people I know sitting behind me
and watching here who are passionate about aviation, we all
have an answer. We all have part of the answer when somebody's
interested.
We all need to have the same answer, that one-stop shop,
what is the one national resource we are going to send you to.
I watch a lot of major league baseball, and I see
buildsubmarines.com commercials during every single game, and
you can't miss it.
We need something like that, that rolls off all of our
tongues that gets that individual, caregiver, educator,
guidance counselor, youth, to say, let me go to that URL, let
me scan that code, and let me find the information that I need
so my desire turns to awareness, turns to knowledge and
ability.
Mr. Westerman. Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Graves of Louisiana. Thank you, Mr. Westerman.
The gentleman from Arizona, Mr. Stanton, is recognized for
5 minutes.
Mr. Stanton. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, for hosting
this important hearing of witnesses for being here today.
The FAA acknowledges it is experiencing an air traffic
controller shortage, and this shortage has major impacts: fewer
flights, longer delays, and the risk of near-misses. And we
have seen too many of those this year.
In the bipartisan FAA reauthorization, we focus on the
recruitment, hiring, and retention of air traffic controllers.
One of the FAA's most successful Government-industry
partnerships is the FAA Federal Contract Tower Program. There
are seven contract towers in Arizona, including Phoenix-Mesa
Gateway, and these are the busiest contract towers in our
country.
These contract towers account for approximately one-third
of all the contract tower operations in the Nation, and many of
these contract controllers are veterans. We need to use all the
tools in our toolbox to make sure we have enough air traffic
controllers to staff our country's needs.
Mr. Montgomery, your written testimony mentions plans to
apply for the FAA's Air Traffic Collegiate Training Initiative,
AT-CTI. Please expand upon this and how will it help Louisiana
Tech attract and train more air traffic controllers, and how
can the bill that we recently passed, the FAA reauthorization,
support these important efforts?
Mr. Montgomery. Thank you, sir, for the question.
With the Air Traffic Controller Collegiate Training
Initiative, we have just submitted the final document on that.
That is at the standard level. The standard level will give my
aviation management airmen a pipeline to get to the FAA, and
they will get 5 weeks off of their training for that.
Eventually, we would like to grow that program into the
enhanced version, and at that time, I would need some
simulators, and then I would have to find an air traffic
controller that would like to come to Ruston to teach.
With that, it is making my aviation management program more
valuable, and those airmen going into that, those students
going in that, coming out of there, will be able to go into
that process. Going into air traffic controller, it is a great
program.
Mr. Stanton. All right. I am really glad to hear that, and
we are going to try to mimic that around the country, including
in Arizona.
Sky Harbor Airport in my community is one of the busiest
airports in the country. It provides thousands and thousands of
jobs for our region. FAA technicians in my district who work at
Sky Harbor have shared with me that two of the three system
support centers which install and maintain equipment for the
airport's facilities, radar, and communications are
significantly understaffed. These technicians are responsible
for key elements like navigational aids, airport lighting,
backup power, heating, ventilation, and air-conditioning that
keep our airports running. The work was done by approximately
30 people working shifts of 16 hours a day, 7 days a week, but
now due to staffing shortages, this workforce has been cut by
one-third.
Mr. Spero, your capacity as the president of the
Professional Aviation Safety Specialists, give us advice, what
can we do to recruit and retain more technicians critical to
our system?
Mr. Spero. Congressman, thank you for the question.
Well, first of all, the FAA needs to develop a workforce
plan for technical operations. We are hiring technicians in the
same manner we have in the 1990s and early 2000s, and it is a
game of Whac-A-Mole. Wherever the problem seems to be the
biggest, we will hire technicians there.
There is not an overall plan to make a determination of
what staffing should look like going forward. To have a
workforce plan would put in place a strategy to say, this is
what we want to do with this very talented, skilled, educated
workforce that knows how the air traffic control system in the
United States works and would effectively be money in the bank
for the FAA moving forward to come up with new solutions for
implementing new systems across the country.
They have not gone forward with that. And by doing that, we
would be able to establish how many people we need in Phoenix
Sky Harbor, how many we need in Chicago, how many we need in
Miami. And that is not in place right now.
Mr. Stanton. And a followup question for you. Last month,
Phoenix's extreme heat temperatures made it harder and more
dangerous for planes to fly. Heat also places great strain on
the ramp workers responsible for much of the behind-the-scenes
work, like fueling the planes and baggage handling.
So, Mr. Spero, tell us about the impact of heat on your
members, PASS members, and if so, what do you think we should
do to address the issue as we work to recruit and retain
aviation specialists?
Mr. Spero. So, folks that work--thank you again for that
question.
Folks that work out in the field are always under heat
stress. The ability for them to manage that stress is sometimes
not always facilitated by the FAA. Recently, we even had to go
to an arbitration to determine that the FAA had to give water
to our technicians out in the field, because they were
unwilling to provide them with potable water, which we did win
that case.
Mr. Stanton. Thank you very much. I yield back.
Mr. Graves of Louisiana. Thank you, Mr. Stanton.
I recognize the gentleman from South Dakota, Mr. Johnson,
for 5 minutes.
Mr. Johnson of South Dakota. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Spero, I want to talk with you a little bit this
morning. Of course, part of solving the challenges with our
aviation workforce is making sure that we are making effective
and efficient use of the resources we do have.
So, I want to talk a little bit about the new TSA aviation
worker screening proposal. And clearly, security needs to be
really important. But as you know, the new proposal would, in
essence, put airports in charge of screening aviation workers.
Airports would have to develop, implement, and operate this
screening protocol for randomized physical screening of
aviation workers. This would put, I think, a pretty substantial
new operational obligation, with substantial costs, on
airports. Maybe some of the big airports would be able to
handle it. I am not sure smaller airports like Rapid City,
Sioux Falls, Aberdeen, Pierre, Watertown, would be able to do
so. I was glad to see TSA pushing back for a year their
proposal to implement this. But any observations about this?
It seems to me that TSA is the expert on airport screening
and security. TSA should be in charge of this process rather
than making, in essence, the landlords, the airports, come up
with these new screening protocols.
Mr. Spero. Well, thank you for the question.
I would tend to agree with you. I don't represent the TSA
employees, and I am not an expert on screening. And I would
tend to agree with you that TSA should work and help make those
recommendations.
Mr. Johnson of South Dakota. Yes, I certainly agree as
well.
For any of the panelists, we have talked about some of the
challenges. Talk about some bright spots. I mean, what is
really working well? What would we want to raise up as
something that is replicatable in a broader sense?
Ms. Damato. Oh, I would love to talk about some of the
bright spots because they are what brighten my day, too. I
mean, there is so much good news out there.
I mentioned that there is a lot of connective tissue among
the associations and passionate people all around the country
who want to share their love for aviation and spark that
interest.
Women in Aviation is going to have their 10th annual Girls
in Aviation Day this year. EAA has given over 2 million flights
through their Young Eagles programs to young people who want to
get into aviation.
And the joy that you see, if you haven't been to a Young
Eagles Day--and my kids have taken advantage of this a few
times--when they are all lining up and they are getting into
the airplane, and it is their turn, and they are doing rock,
paper, scissors to see who gets to sit in the front and who is
riding in the back, that is a formative moment. And the more we
can put those together and string those together, we can
capture that excitement and keep that feeling alive all the way
through to where they will become leaders in our industry.
So, I see these bright spots all the time. They make me
really happy when I get a chance to celebrate them.
Mr. Johnson of South Dakota. Anybody else want to share a
bright spot?
Mr. Robbins. Well, I will build on Ms. Damato's sentiments
that with the uncrewed system and autonomy industry, we are
opening up the opportunity to engage in aviation, either as a
workforce or as a hobby, in new ways that previously were
unavailable given the high cost of aviation.
Mr. Johnson of South Dakota. So, what about--and I am not
talking about pilot retirement age because I just don't want to
lob that grenade into this----
Mr. Robbins [interposing]. Appreciate that.
Mr. Johnson of South Dakota [continuing]. Hearing room
today. But what about other positions in the aviation
workforce? Are we doing a good job of holding on to people on
the back end of their career, making sure that they feel value
so they stick around for another year or two? I mean, we could
really use them, right? They know what they are doing.
Mr. Robbins. I think in our industry, sir, we don't have
too many people on the back end of their career since we are a
very new and nascent industry, but I will defer to my
colleagues to maybe answer that question.
Mr. Spero. Congressman, yes, I would like to weigh in on
that. When it comes to staying on, especially in the FAA, a lot
of employees now are looking at this and saying, it is time to
punch out, and retiring, whereas they may be able to stay on a
little longer and pass on some of the knowledge that they have
obtained over the years to the younger employees that come
forward.
And in the technical operations part of the FAA, in the
ATO, they don't hire anyone until that predecessor has left.
So, you lose 30, 35, 40 years of experience for a new employee
that might have the opportunity to be mentored by that employee
that has all that experience. You lose all of that. And they
need to develop a process now for, when they hire folks, to be
able to do it in advance of someone retiring.
Mr. Johnson of South Dakota. Thanks much.
Mr. Chair, I yield back.
Mr. Graves of Louisiana. Thank you, Mr. Johnson.
I recognize the gentleman from Illinois, Mr. Garcia, for 5
minutes.
Mr. Garcia of Illinois. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and
Ranking Member and, of course, to all of the witnesses who are
just seeing present and future challenges in the aviation
sector.
I proudly represent Illinois' Fourth District, which
includes Midway Airport, and I border on O'Hare, as well.
Together, these two airports generate more than $45 billion in
annual economic activity and create 540,000 jobs in the region.
O'Hare is the fifth busiest airport in the country, and
processed nearly 36 million passengers in 2023. Recognizing
O'Hare's size and significance, it is alarming that a month
ago, there was a ground stop ordered due to the technical issue
with air traffic control radar system.
Mr. Spero, we hear a lot about air traffic controller
shortages causing disruptions to the National Airspace System,
or NAS, and while this is an extremely pressing issue,
technicians are also understaffed--you touched on it--which
poses a different set of challenges. Mr. Spero, can you
describe what happened during the June ground stop at O'Hare
and how technician staffing levels may have contributed to this
incident?
Mr. Spero. Congressman, thank you for the question. I can
explain what happened. So, a radar feed from a long-range radar
was malfunctioning. Our technicians went out to work on it, but
since that feed goes into the Chicago large TRACON and the
Chicago Air Route Traffic Control Center, it goes into systems
that feed out to Midway and other airports, including O'Hare
tower. They did not have on staff at the large TRACON an
employee that was skilled and trained and certified on how to
exclude that radar system from the feed. Because of that, air
traffic controllers were seeing multiple targets on their
displays.
The only solution at that particular point was to put a
ground stop in place because they did not know where the
aircraft were. Fortunately, we had a technician that was off
duty that was called in on overtime and made it in a short
period of time and came in and resolved the problem, but that
problem would have been resolved if they had the right number
of people with the right amount of training, and that was a
conscious decision made by the agency there in Chicago to say,
``We don't need anyone on staff that has that training right
now.''
Mr. Garcia of Illinois. I think your testimony sheds light
that we do. Thank you. It is clear that we need to invest in
our aviation workforce not only from a recruiting standpoint
but also from a quality-of-life standpoint. If we want to
attract more workers, we need to improve working conditions.
This brings me to my next point. Ms. Damato, I, like other
Members up here, was struck by your testimony that, as a young
woman pursuing a career in aviation, you were barred from
training on some airplanes because of your gender. This bias
culture is one of the most prominent obstacles to recruiting
women and minorities into aviation. Countless examples of
racial bias have created similar barriers for people of color.
In your opinion, what is needed to shift this culture, and do
you think that the provisions in the FAA reauthorization bill
do enough to address this problem? And I am thinking about the
factor of childcare, maternity leave, the feasibility of a
career in aviation while balancing raising a family and, of
course, what type of support women specifically who are seeking
a career in aviation will need moving forward.
Ms. Damato. Thank you for the question, and it is an honor
to be a professional in aviation, but certainly a number of us
who are women in aviation, we talk about these issues all of
the time, and we offer each other support and mentoring to help
those that have been through some of those challenges, coached
some of those who are facing them now. There is some really
great stuff in the FAA Reauthorization Act that addresses
things like helping a new mother find time to pump her breast
milk while she may be performing the roles of a pilot.
There is information on the safety of uniforms and
accommodations made for a woman who is pregnant and still needs
to comply with uniform regulations. There is information from
the Women in Aviation Advisory Board that talks about the
hurdles that have to do with caregiving and being able to
manage the work-life balance. There are great opportunities
within aviation to find your support network and to find
scheduling and employers that work with your specific needs and
your values, but a lot of the work that needs to be done is to
understand that there are typically--men are parents, too, and
so, if we are talking about caregivers specifically, it is
wonderful to know that schedules can be balanced so that the
women who want to have a flying career don't feel like they
have to stop flying because they also want to be caregivers.
They just need to understand or they need help in the
accommodations for 1-day trips or how they can schedule their
trips in a way that still accommodates the priorities that are
important to them.
There is so much work to be done here. It is a difficult
subject that the Women in Aviation Advisory Board put a lot of
effort into with their 55 recommendations, and the
reauthorization act is just a few of those, but there is work
to be done, and I think that is what that permanent Women in
Aviation Advisory Committee is going to help address so that
employers understand what they need to do to help accommodate
the women.
Mr. Graves of Louisiana. Can you wrap up?
Mr. Garcia of Illinois. Thank you, and I appreciate the
indulgence, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Graves of Louisiana. Thank you, Mr. Garcia.
I recognize the gentleman from Utah, Mr. Owens, for 5
minutes.
Mr. Owens. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and Ranking Member, and
the witnesses for today. This hearing bridges two of my
assignments both on this committee and the Education and the
Workforce Committee. My work on both the FAA Reauthorization
and the College Cost Reduction Act have been in part focused on
flight education provisions that assist students trying to
become commercial airline pilots. These are certified
undergraduate programs of flight training. With collegiate
flight training adding on an average of an additional $80,000
on top of costs of 4-year college bachelor degrees, it is
understandable that the dropout rates for private pilots are
near 80 percent.
Mr. Montgomery, I was impressed with your testimony in the
ways that Louisiana Tech has innovated to adapt to the bleak
reality facing aviation industry's recruitment of talent. This
is seen in Louisiana Tech's partnering with private aviation
companies to increase flight training opportunities and pairing
aviation management degrees with industry certification. This
innovative approach allows students to begin working
immediately upon graduation. Can you share additional
strategies that the school has implemented to reduce the costs
of aviation education?
Mr. Montgomery. Yes, sir. Thank you for the question. We
are resource-restricted in all of our aircraft. We have 13
aircraft are paid by students through flight fees. I have seen
that and dealt with that. That to me is unacceptable. There are
grants out there. We are going to chase them down. We are going
to get those grants one way or the other.
There are other ways we can expand our program, and one of
those is in aviation management. With adding more students and
more options for aviation management, it means more resources.
Doesn't mean more resources from added flight fees. That is
more resources from just basic students paying for----
Mr. Owens [interrupting]. Can you speak a little bit closer
to the mic?
Mr. Montgomery. Yes, sir. I apologize. So, adding more
aviation management and adding more options for aviation
management will in the end get me more resources. More
resources I can turn and put back into the places we need it,
specifically aircraft, drones. If we can get our mechanics
going, if we can get a shop going, that would be good. We are
looking at a couple partners with some community colleges and
then also with some Louisiana Tech businesses. If we can marry
their A&P certifications with our management program, that will
make it more valuable. That goes further with the air traffic
controller standard initiative through the AT-CTI and a couple
other things as well as our MBA with aviation concentration.
Mr. Owens. Thank you.
Ms. Damato, my team has been working to create
opportunities for students to identify interest and career
paths earlier. If a college football coach can identify
potential talent of students as young as seventh grade, I see
no reason why aviation education programs cannot do the same.
Once interest and dreams are married, students can get the head
start on numerous aviation industry certifications before they
even graduate from high school. Can you share any work that you
and others are doing to incentivize careers in aviation and get
kids excited about flying or working at a much younger age?
Ms. Damato. Thank you for the question. The research that
was done through the task force and the Women in Aviation
Advisory Board shows that you have got two ages that have a
high impact on getting attention, age 10 and age 18. Then that
window between those ages is really critical, too. The time
that they are able to earn an FAA certification really starts
once they have that 15- and 16-year-old mark, so, you have got
to keep them interested until they are old enough to earn their
first certification.
What is beautiful about aviation is that that age does line
up with high school. There are opportunities that they have to
take advantage of outside of their high school like I did to
know that you need to go to your local airport and do your
flight training, but for high schools, especially career and
technical education high schools who offer aviation programs
and AOPA with their high school curriculum that is in a number
of high schools around the country, there are opportunities to
provide that education formally through the 4 years that you
are in high school, to perhaps get the written test out of the
way, to earn some stackable credentials for the technicians,
maybe a specialty or a module in sheet metal fabrication or
safety wiring so that you are gaining these skills that allow
you to find employment and apprenticeship in high school or
immediately after high school and then allow you to do those
jobs while you are earning the rest of the certifications that
you receive formal education for. It is incredibly important,
and we have got to take advantage of that time window.
Mr. Owens. We are looking on education being a little bit
more innovative, and we look forward to having some
conversations with you about this because, the earlier our kids
get exposed, the sooner they get out and get their careers
going and build a dream. We look forward to spending more time
talking about these issue. Thank you so much.
I yield back.
Mr. Graves of Louisiana. Thank you, Mr. Owens.
I recognize the gentleman from Pennsylvania, Mr. Deluzio,
for 5 minutes.
Mr. Deluzio. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Good morning, everyone. Thank you for being here. I will
start by commending the work done by many on this subcommittee
and full committee on the FAA Reauthorization Act; I think a
really important bill, bipartisan bill that tackles many of the
issues we are talking about today. One of the greatest
challenges, again, we have heard about today facing aviation is
issues around workforce. Pilots, flight attendants, mechanics,
air traffic controllers, you name it. The FAA reauthorization
has some good provisions to tackle some of those issues, and we
have heard about some today. I will start with one issue that I
have heard about from my district, an airline that flies in and
out of Pittsburgh International in my district has been using
noncompete clauses to keep their pilots from going to bigger
commercial carriers.
Ms. Damato, I will ask you, do you think it is more
important for us to try to grow workforce, in this case pilots
through programs like joint aviation employment training
working group or the pilot program to provide veterans with
pilot training services, just citing some examples, that are
included in the reauthorization rather than companies relying
on noncompetes to keep folks from seeking other opportunities?
Ms. Damato. Thank you for the question. We need to recruit
pilots and technicians and all the other positions that exist
in aviation from everywhere we can get them, so, the FAA
Reauthorization Act of 2024 introduces a lot of opportunities
to attract veterans separating military to aviation. It talks
about high schoolers and how to attract them as well if they
don't want to pursue a formal collegiate or trade school
education. There are opportunities everywhere. I think we want
to leave no stone unturned.
What we need to understand is: what does that demand look
like and how do we find someone, their best aptitude and what
it is they want to do. I only ever wanted to be a 121 airline
pilot, but as you can see, I decided to do something different
with my aviation management and flight degree, and I have five
college students that are graduates of collegiate aviation
programs who work at NBAA sitting behind me who may--some of
them are pilots, and some of them aren't. But they decided that
aviation management was something that they are really
interested in, and they have all developed unique career paths
that you can't read about in a textbook or follow a flight plan
for, so, it is really cool that we should get anybody anywhere
for anything they want to do in this profession.
Mr. Deluzio. Thank you.
Mr. Spero, I will come to you. Your members perform a bunch
of tasks, critical maintenance, repair FAA systems, equipment,
operation of those systems, and the rest. What would the
increase for facilities equipment and equipment in the FAA's
budget request mean for your folks and the folks you work with?
Mr. Spero. Congressman, thank you for that question. Just
to get started and to hire at least 800 technicians within the
next year and get them trained would probably cost the agency--
in conversations that I have had with folks over there at 800
Independence Avenue--about $90 million.
Mr. Deluzio. Substantial.
Mr. Spero. Yes, sir.
Mr. Deluzio. OK. Look, on the topic of workforce issues,
one of, again, airport in my district, Pittsburgh
International, one of its advantages is that nearby we have the
Pittsburgh Institute of Aeronautics, a very widely respected
aviation mechanic school. Students there complete a 20-month
course, become certified to work on commercial aircraft. Many
go into good-paying solid jobs, particularly at Pittsburgh
International, which is about an hour away. The airport itself,
like many, though, is not a training center, and so, there are
some limitations.
Mr. Montgomery, come to you. What changes do you think, if
any, are needed to expand these aeronautical job training
programs on airport, off airport, some mix of presence on both?
Mr. Montgomery. Thank you, sir. Opportunities--I mean,
aviation is such a great experience. It is such a great
industry. The more internships I have out there, the better
airmen I can produce. We get them to go all over the place,
like Ms. Damato is saying. When they go out there and they get
the experience and they come back with that experience, it just
is so different. You can see them just lighting up, because
they are taking all that education and turning it into a career
with love and passion for it. It is great. So, anything we can
do and anything out there that I can allow me the opportunity
to just get those guys into airports or share experience with
them would be a plus.
Mr. Deluzio. In the little bit of time we have left, do you
think the proximity and getting access to seeing real
operations at airports is an important part of this training
and the avenues you want to see expand?
Mr. Montgomery. Yes, sir, absolutely.
Mr. Deluzio. Very good.
With that, Mr. Chairman, I will yield back. Thank you.
Mr. Graves of Louisiana. Gentleman from Georgia, Mr.
Collins, recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Collins. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. As I sit here, I have
more and more questions, so, I am going to try to speed up. For
somebody from the South, that is a little tough. I am going to
open this up to everybody my first question, because I was
recently at a private school where you can get your general
aviation, your private pilot license. And the young man there
that owns the place has been trying to get his DPE. For 3 years
now he has had his application in. In the State of Georgia, we
only have 31 DPEs, and I know that the ranking member mentioned
that the FAA has addressed a little bit of that, but that is
for oversight and coordinating of our current DPEs, so, I guess
my question is, what are you all seeing that needs to be done
to increase the DPEs, and are you seeing people or hearing of
people like I heard that have their application in to become a
DPE and are still waiting to become a DPE or a designated pilot
examiner?
Ms. Damato. I can speak about that. Thank you for the
question. I can speak about that from the parent standpoint and
the struggles that I see especially happening in the summertime
before students need to be starting their collegiate aviation
programs. There is an amazing Facebook group called Raising
Aviation Teens started by parents, and it is just a bunch of
parents who are not aviation professionals trying to share
tips.
As recently as last week, someone in my region was
desperate to find a DPE for their child who is starting a 4-
year program in the fall who has to go in with their private
pilot's certificate, and they can't find anybody within the
tristate area and they went to this group to see if anybody
could recommend somebody. They have to start in May to find
somebody by August, and those are some target-rich areas of
DPE, so, the concern is that geographically there is a lot of
places in the country that don't even have that coverage, and
you have got to travel to go and find an examiner. So, it is a
real concern, especially when it is something that could cause
somebody to give up and try something else if they just really
can't accomplish what they need to accomplish.
Mr. Collins. And I think it contributes to the bottleneck
of what we are talking about this morning. I mean, if you, God
forbid, you get COVID and you have to reschedule your
checkride, you may be looking at 6 months or who knows when.
And so, when I am visiting in my district and I hear people,
``Well, I have had my application in. I have got thousands of
hours. I own a private company that teaches people to fly, and
for 3 years, I still haven't gotten my certification.'' I don't
know if you all had been hearing this.
Ms. Damato, I also wanted to make a comment. I know you and
Congressman Westerman were talking about college and how you
were routed to college for your pilot's license. As someone who
is big on technical schools and what I see as a culture, and it
has been a culture of: everybody that graduates from high
school has got to go to college; you've got to go to college. I
would encourage you, as you are looking at this one-stop shop,
there are so many different options--from the gentleman on the
end who has got technical school to private schools that are
able to give you that same training to become a pilot--and you
don't have to go to college to get that degree and to go to
work in general aviation or commercial aviation. So, I don't
know if that is something that you have thought about or are
pushing?
Ms. Damato. Yes, sir. We know not every student wants to go
from high school into a collegiate program. That is the
importance of some of the things they can earn in high school
that can make them immediately employable if they are able to
earn some of those credentials that they can then stack and
turn into something like an A&P, which would be amazing for
them.
Mr. Collins. Right.
Ms. Damato. The trade schools are amazing. A collegiate
program for some is what they seek. My son goes to a career and
technical education high school in New Jersey. They don't offer
aviation, but they offer automotive, and he has already earned
every certification from the ASE for the certification for auto
mechanics. So, seeing something like that for aviation would be
incredible.
Mr. Collins. Good. The last thing I wanted to talk about
was a bill that I introduced in Congress this year, or last
year, rather, and it is the Aviation Workforce Development Act,
and it deals with 529s, where you can use your own savings
plan, educational savings plan, to send your student to become
a commercial airline pilot or an aviation mechanic. I am proud
to say that the House Ways and Means marked that up with their
other 529s this week and passed that out. And I just wanted
to--well, I don't have any time left, but I want to encourage
you--that is H.R. 8915 now. It is the Education and Workforce
Freedom Act. It is going to come up for the full House for a
vote. I encourage you to get out there and make sure people
know about it and encourage their Representative to vote for
it. When we get it over to the Senate, make them pass it. They
have got about 160 of our bills sitting over that they are not
taking up. This would have an immediate effect on people's
availability to get their child or their young person into this
career quickly and help eliminate this problem immediately.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I yield back.
Mr. Graves of Louisiana. Thank you, Mr. Collins.
I recognize the gentlelady from Michigan, Ms. Scholten, for
5 minutes.
Ms. Scholten. Fantastic. Thank you so much, Mr. Chair.
Thank you so much to all of our witnesses for being here
today. We have a robust aviation talent pipeline in west
Michigan and a strong aviation manufacturing base as well. West
Michigan Aviation Academy is, in my district, a great training
ground for future pilots and aviation mechanics. I am a proud
cosponsor of Mr. Collins' bill, as well, the expanded Aviation
Workforce Development Act to reauthorize increased funding for
critical pilot and aviation maintenance technician workforce
development programs.
I am thrilled that the fiscal year 2024 FAA reauthorization
builds on the Aviation Workforce Development Grants program
success. There is so much more that needs to be done.
Ms. Damato, how can such early investments in educating and
recruiting aviation talent ease barriers to entering the
industry and alleviate bottlenecks? Additionally, how can
Congress better support flexibilities, spoiler alert, to
credential career and technical education instructors,
including high school aviation teachers?
Ms. Damato. Thank you for that question. We have a very
robust workforce effort through our Michigan Business Aviation
Association. I know they do a lot in that region, and we have
gotten to participate in a lot of those efforts they do to get
students interested. That is really the key. We have got this
opportunity where we know where our kids are from kindergarten
to 12th grade. They have a curriculum on all the STEM subjects,
and there are opportunities to weave aviation into all of the
existing curriculum, and that is a recommendation from the
Youth Task Force that is reflected in the reauthorization act.
It is critical. I think that is something that FAA's Aviation
and Space Education Program can help to develop that curricula
to a national standard and get that into our schools. That is
how you spark the interest and keep the conversation with those
practical scenario-driven examples that make them want to turn
that into a career as they complete their education.
Ms. Scholten. I couldn't agree more. Listening to you talk
about your son in vocational training programs, I have got two
young sons. They are not quite there yet. But making sure that
we have the type of environment culturally, socially that could
encourage students to pursue these trades, it strikes me, no
matter the amount of funding that we have there, while we have
barriers in society that prevent our students from considering
this as a viable career path, we are never going to make
progress.
That is why I introduced a bill called the Honoring
Vocational Education Act, which changes the way the United
States census tracks higher education. Currently, you only get
to check that box for higher education if you have completed a
college degree. I think it should also include highly skilled,
highly educational vocational training programs like this. So,
again, I will repeat Mr. Collins' request. Make sure people are
paying attention to this. We have got over 65 bipartisan
cosponsors on it. It is a fantastic bill.
Mr. Spero, on that note, how can we boost awareness of
these nontraditional forms of education to further build the
aviation workforce pipeline and enable folks to earn good-
paying, highly skilled jobs?
Mr. Spero. Thank you for the question. I will kind of break
this up a little bit. In the Aircraft Certification, Safety,
and Accountability Act, this committee authorized $81 million
to bring on aviation safety inspectors and engineers and other
folks that are human factor specialists. That was never funded
on the other side, so, jobs that are available, should be
available by the agency were never funded. They don't have the
money, and they never brought it forth.
In the technical operations side of the world, they have
brought forth a program that brings on interns now, and it was
a good concept. It is a good concept. I met one last week, 2
weeks ago in Chicago, as a matter of fact, that went through
the program. Once he graduated school, they brought him on,
hired him as an airway transportation system specialist there
in Chicago Center. So, there are opportunities that should be
expanded within the FAA to provide that to more students, to
bring them on through the pipeline, be able to expose them to
that environment and make a determination that that is for them
or maybe they decide it isn't for them.
But there is certain--right now they are only doing a small
number of them, 150 or so across the country. They hire them on
as students. They work around their schedules. But they could
expand it to allow them to go to more places around the
country.
I had one a few weeks ago I spoke to in Oklahoma City,
highly skilled, ready to go. He is in an aviation program. He
wanted to get picked up in this program but they would only
bring him on in Fort Worth, not in Oklahoma City. So, that
didn't really work for the young man, and that is an
opportunity missed in my opinion.
Ms. Scholten. Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Graves of Louisiana. Thank you, Ms. Scholten.
Gentleman I skipped over, Mr. Stauber from Minnesota,
recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Stauber. Thank you very much, Mr. Chair.
So, in my previous life, I served 23 years as a law
enforcement officer in the city of Duluth, and I saw the
technology within the drones become increasingly needed, and I
just saw how they could save lives, help officers de-escalate,
find lost people, now we are seeing drones being able to be
flown out at a high rate of speed to people that may be having
difficulty in the water. I think that that is that next public
safety step, and I saw it in law enforcement. I mean, we see it
in the fire service. Sometimes those drones can get up and look
from the top of the building, see the smoke earlier or look
inside a collapsed building.
Mr. Robbins, as president and CEO of the Association for
Uncrewed Vehicle Systems International, I am wondering if you
could speak to some of the innovative ways drones are enhancing
public safety operations from your standpoint.
Mr. Robbins. Absolutely, sir, and thank you very much for
that question. I actually had the opportunity to testify before
your colleagues in the Homeland Security Committee on this
exact topic just a few weeks ago. It is definitely a good news
story. There is no doubt that drones are saving lives in public
safety both for the officers in public safety by keeping them
out of harm's way or giving them situational awareness as they
arrive to a scene, whether that is an incident or a fire. They
have better intelligence to make informed decisions.
It also, as you noted, is allowing emergency response to be
much more effective, whether that is search and rescue or
delivering an AED or an anti-venom for a snakebite or, as you
mentioned, life-saving devices for those that may be caught in
a riptide or something. Time and time again we have seen public
safety agencies being incredibly innovative with their use of
advanced technology, including drones, and getting that out
there into the community, and this is definitely a very
positive use case. It is only going to get better as the FAA
regulations to allow for operations to occur beyond visual
line-of-sight are expanded.
And, once that framework is in place, Drone as a First
Responder is really going to take off, which is a program where
drones are pre-positioned around a community; and when a 911
call comes in, that drone is the first dispatched, and it is on
site typically under 90 seconds in the communities that have it
now and, again, providing that situational awareness back to
the officers who are typically arriving after the drone has
already been on site. Once we get that regulatory framework in
place from the FAA, this is going to be an even better story to
tell.
Mr. Stauber. I think that we, as a Nation and public
servants, have to really push that. I mean, there is a
situation in my hometown where a young girl was--there was an
attempted kidnapping. It was in an area of town where we could
have had the drone up and description of the suspect, you could
follow that suspect, whatever building. That is so incredibly
important that we use this technology, as you said, rightfully
so. It is going to save not only the--it is not only part going
to save the safety of the officer and his or her life, but also
the suspect and other bystanders. We have such an--the
capability, and I am just so excited about the future of what
that capability can provide for our communities.
So, my next question is, what is the status of drone
manufacturing in the United States, and do we have the
workforce to complement the clearly increasing demand for this
technology?
Mr. Robbins. That is a great question, sir. The drone
workforce in the U.S. right now for manufacturing is growing.
Candidly, it is a small industry at the moment in large part
because, for the last decade, the People's Republic of China
has dominated this industry, and most of the drones in service
right now in the U.S. have been imported below market rates
from China. They flooded the market with cheap unsecured
drones. This is a huge problem and one that the United States
Congress is seeking to address.
There is a bill before Congress right now called the Drones
for First Responders Act, which would provide higher tariffs on
Chinese drones and then funnel the money from the existing and
the new tariffs into a grant program so that first responders,
critical infrastructure owner and operators, and agriculture
can purchase new secure drones, and that would certainly help
enhance the U.S. workforce in terms of drone manufacturing by
creating that demand that isn't always there right now because
many operators are defaulting to cheap Chinese drones.
Mr. Stauber. I absolutely agree with you. One of the
companies that I won't name in the United States makes drones
in the United States for law enforcement that can actually
smash through windows.
Mr. Robbins. Yes, sir.
Mr. Stauber. You know which company I am talking about?
Mr. Robbins. Yes.
Mr. Stauber. Can you imagine being able to get a suspect in
a murder, smash through and get a visual of the inside of the
residence for the tactical team?
Mr. Robbins. SWAT teams love it.
Mr. Stauber. It is unbelievable. I am really happy. I think
you are on the cusp of things, and I think that by the end of
your career you are going to say look how far we have grown and
for us and Members of Congress to do the same.
Mr. Chair, I yield back. Thank you.
Mr. Graves of Louisiana. Thank you, Mr. Stauber.
The gentlelady right here, representing the District of
Columbia; Ms. Norton is recognized for 5 minutes.
Ms. Norton. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Ms. Damato, in your testimony, you emphasized the need for
a diverse aviation workforce, including the implementation of
recommendations from the Women in Aviation Advisory Board to
address the significant underrepresentation of women in
aviation who make up just 8.3 percent of the aircraft pilots
and flight engineers and only 4.3 percent of aircraft mechanics
and service technicians.
One of the barriers to entry for women you mentioned is
discrimination in flight school. How can Congress and the FAA
ensure a more inclusive environment in flight school and the
aviation workforce?
Ms. Damato. Thank you for that question. What is really
important for any training environment--whether it is the local
airport, it is part of a flight school, a collegiate program, a
trade school--is being able to find the allyship. Of course,
culture starts at the top with leadership, so, it needs to be a
top-down approach, but what really works for anybody who feels
that they are underrepresented or having a hard time finding
their allies are the important affinity groups that exist in a
number of these places.
At a flight school, you will typically find a Women in
Aviation chapter, an OBAP chapter, an NGPA chapter. It is
wonderful for the students to join these groups either as a
member of them or as an ally to them and find that they can
make changes from within.
I went to a 4-year university and had a wonderful aviation
experience at my flight school. I didn't experience anything
there that made me feel like an other. Those are stories I have
been hearing less and less about now as enrollment in aviation
flight school has been increasing, but what does happen is that
women don't convert as much as men from student pilot to
private pilot and on to commercial. We find that is because
they may experience bias or harassment or feeling like they are
not welcome. So, being able to find these affinity groups for
support to have leadership address the issues is really
important.
The Women in Aviation council, the committee that is cited
in the FAA Reauthorization Act, is going to be critical to
that. That is an opportunity where we can have this group that
sunset in 2022 and leaders in our industry roll their sleeves
back up and address all of the hurdles that were identified and
work with industry and FAA and Congress to address them.
Ms. Norton. Thank you. Another significant barrier you
mentioned is cost. I am pleased that the FAA Reauthorization
Act of 2024 establishes a pilot program to provide grants to
flight schools for the flight training and education of
veterans. Do you think similar financial assistance programs
targeted towards women, youth, and minorities could have a
positive effect on the diversity of our aviation workforce?
Ms. Damato. Yes, ma'am. Thank you for that question.
Absolutely. The financial hurdle is real. It keeps people from
turning a passion for aviation into reality, and the struggle
to find access to the funding that they need to invest in
themselves, regardless of what path in aviation they have
chosen, is something that gets them to either be successful in
their quest through scholarship, access to grant money, loans
at varying interest rates, or it has them find that it is just
not going to be possible for them, and they go and look at
another industry. Those are going to be hugely impactful if we
are able to increase funding for anybody who feels like
aviation is the place for them that we need to make sure we can
make this the place for them.
Ms. Norton. Mr. Spero, in your testimony, you also cite a
lack of sufficient outreach to women as well as minorities and
youth within the aviation sector. Another provision I was glad
to see included in the FAA bill is a $60 million investment
into programs that will strengthen recruitment and retention of
aviation workers, including $12 million for the Willa Brown
Aviation Education Program, which focuses on advancing aviation
opportunities in underserved areas. Besides increases,
outreach, and education, how else can Congress and the FAA
address the underrepresentation of women, minorities, and youth
in the aviation workforce?
Mr. Spero. Congresswoman, thank you for the question.
Recently I attended an annual conference for an FAA employees
association group called the Technical Women's Organization.
And, although it was well attended by some of the senior
leadership on the Air Traffic Organization side, I didn't see
much of a presence from the Aviation Safety line of business
which could lean in very much and help begin to lean into these
programs that help recruit women into these types of jobs.
There is only about 4 percent of the aviation safety inspectors
right now that are women, and most of them look more like me,
and that is really not an acceptable way to continue on and
ignore it. They are not really, from my perspective, trying to
make a difference when it comes to that. So, the agency could
certainly do more of that and get involved in many more of the
programs that some of the employee associations are currently
working.
Mr. Graves of Louisiana. Thank you, Mr. Spero.
I recognize the gentleman from Kansas, Mr. Mann, for 5
minutes.
Mr. Mann. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you for having
this important hearing this morning, and thank you all for
being here.
As part of the FAA reauthorization we passed this year,
vital policy solutions were included to bolster our Nation's
aviation workforce. I was proud to work with many people on
this committee to ensure that several of these provisions were
included in the final bill, such as section 625, workforce
expansion, air traffic controller training initiatives, and
strengthening the pilot and certification workforces.
Our Nation's economy relies on aviation, whether that be
commercial, cargo, defense operations, agriculture. That
certainly is true in my State of Kansas. Any hindrance to this
system can negatively affect our supply chains, livelihood, and
our national security, which is why having strong workforce of
these key professions within our aviation industry is of the
utmost importance. I applaud Chairmen Graves and Graves--sounds
like a law firm, by the way, Graves and Graves--for working to
create a reauthorization bill aimed at strengthening these
professions.
First question for you, Ms. Damato. In Kansas, there are
several schools and programs that offer certifications and
degrees in aviation workforce professions. To keep up with the
demand of commercial and cargo air operations in Kansas and
around the country, it is imperative that these programs
continue to grow and succeed in producing the next generation
of aviation workforce. Do the schools and programs that you see
have the proper tools, resources, and infrastructure needed to
successfully train our workforce, and how can this Congress
ensure the FAA continues to provide your members with the
resources needed to improve these programs?
Ms. Damato. Thank you for that question. Absolutely. Our
aviation youth, those that are attracted to the collegiate
programs, have so many different offerings in front of them. It
is not like there is just one choice. They are consumers. They
are shopping around, and they're comparing them for a number of
different attributes.
The schools themselves need to stay competitive, and the
way that they are going to be able to do that is having access
to fleets that are equipped with the most modern technology
that the students will be using when they complete the program.
If they have a maintenance program or an air traffic control
program, the experience of instructors that are needed is
something that is a concern, but when you lose that experience
and that mentoring opportunity, you lose some of the depth
there, too. So, it is both--I know Mr. Montgomery will talk
about this, and he did in his testimony, a lot of it I know has
to do with financial but also that educational knowledge that
we can't lose from those experts in our field that we need to
come back and spend time with the students.
Mr. Mann. And a critical time in my view is the aviation
workforce has changed a lot in the last 5 years. When you look
at what COVID did, you look at the impacts, retirements; times
are changing. It is important to recognize these changes to
make sure the industry is growing and changing.
Ms. Damato, what new trends are you seeing in workers'
needs across the industry, and what initiatives have your
members implemented to address these changes? What are you
seeing out there that you see that's really working?
Ms. Damato. At NBAA, we have this incredible tapestry of
young professionals. They are called the YoPros. They were here
actually 2 weeks ago for a DC fly-in. A few of them are sitting
behind me. They come from all over the country and from all of
our members, and they work in 9 or 10 or more different
categories where they would find themselves professionals in
aviation. They let us know what is important to them is
community, having that ability to connect with each other, even
if they are not in the same geographical place. They want to be
advocates for themselves and where they are locally and
regionally but also taking into account how they can change the
national landscape. And, of course, just like anybody, they
enjoy a really great work-life balance, and they want to be
able to have that lifestyle that they get to carve out for
themselves as individuals versus feeling they are part of the
prescriptive plan. I think our members have been learning from
them and have been adapting as much as they can to make that
the reality to retain them.
Mr. Mann. That is great. Last question for you, Mr.
Montgomery. Commercial air travel has been increasing greatly,
and that is a great thing. The need for skilled workforce is
imperative, but keeping air travel efficient and successful as
the demand hopefully continues to grow, what are your plans to
add additional programs at your school or plans to grow current
programs at your school?
Mr. Montgomery. Thank you, sir, for that question. We plan
to expand into unmanned aeronautical vehicles both large and
small, and then we want to start up an A&P program, air traffic
controls through the AT-CTI program, and then, from there, we
want to acquire more aircraft, because we are turning away too
many students that want to be airmen.
Mr. Mann. Great. Thank you all for being there.
With that, I yield back the balance of my time.
Mr. Graves of Louisiana. Thank you, Mr. Mann.
I recognize the gentleman from Georgia, Mr. Johnson, for 5
minutes.
Mr. Johnson of Georgia. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I
thank the witnesses for your testimony today. And the U.S.
aviation industry will experience significant growth
contributing an estimated $1.37 trillion to our GDP. The $60
million annual investment under the Federal Aviation
Administration Reauthorization Act of 2024 is our bipartisan
commitment to meeting this growing demand. As we prepare for
the surge in aviation in Georgia, Delta Airlines is leading the
way by providing equitable opportunities for everyone to
contribute and benefit from the industry's prosperity. They
lead the charge as the Nation's most significant aviation
industry employer. We must support airlines like Delta through
initiatives like the Willa Brown Aviation Education Program to
close representation gaps. This legislation allocates $48
million through fiscal year 2028 with 20 percent of it set
aside from the FAA's Workforce Development programs for
recruitment initiatives in lower income and underserved
communities.
Mr. Spero, in your testimony, you highlight the ongoing
challenges of recruiting and retaining sufficient aviation
talent within the FAA. These challenges include competitive
salary disparities with the private sector, lengthy hiring
processes, and inadequate staffing models that fail to
accurately predict workforce needs. How do these workforce
challenges, particularly recruitment and retention, impact day-
to-day aviation operations and safety within the U.S. airspace
system?
Mr. Spero. Thank you for the question, Congressman. So, in
the aviation safety inspector world over in AVS, this manifests
itself in inspectors having to manage multiple certificates for
various in what we will call the charter airline world, the 135
operators. We will have inspectors that have to manage many of
them. In some locations, some of those certificates have not
yet been assigned to anyone because of the shortage of
inspectors.
I was on a call last night with some folks that talked
about how 90 of those certificates in their office have not
been assigned to anyone because of the attrition in their
office, where they don't have enough people to do the work. You
take this into the technical operations world and you have got
mission support as well. We have procedures specialists, folks
that draw maps for air traffic control, develop procedures.
There is not enough of them either. We lose people, and we are
not able to replace them, and we don't have that pipeline
coming in. We are not prepared to replace someone when they
leave, as I pointed out earlier.
In technical operations, that attrition has gone on for
almost 10 years, and it manifests itself in situations like we
talked about in Chicago. And that is just the tip of the
iceberg. Every day that we are not working on systems across
the National Airspace System for air traffic control is another
day we may not have uncovered a problem.
Mr. Johnson of Georgia. Thank you. Can you elaborate on
specific provisions of this FAA Act that are particularly
crucial for addressing the staffing challenges?
Mr. Spero. Indeed. Thank you. So, as I mentioned earlier, I
squeezed this one in a little earlier, but the Aircraft
Certification, Safety, and Accountability Act, this committee
authorized $27 million consecutively over 3 years. That money
was never appropriated. That was to recruit and retain aviation
safety inspectors. So, all the good intentions of creating all
of these authorizations, if they are not funded, the agency is
not going to hire the people.
Mr. Johnson of Georgia. Thank you.
Ms. Damato, in your testimony, you highlighted the
expansion of Aviation Workforce Development Grants and the
initiatives like the Willa Brown Aviation Education Program to
support underrepresented populations. Can you elaborate on how
these programs will address the specific barriers faced by
women and economically disadvantaged individuals seeking
careers in aviation?
Ms. Damato. Yes. Thank you for the question. That 20
percent is going to be critical. We need to get to the HBCUs,
minority-serving institutions, and those that are interested in
aviation but aren't currently getting access to the grants or
aren't able to get as much allocated towards them as they would
like. It is going to be impactful for them.
As we all know, we need so many people to enter aviation to
be able to keep up with the demands for all of the jobs that
exist now and that will exist. And we have to engage. The other
50 percent of the population through women and all of the
minorities that see aviation as something that--aviation is for
everyone. And so, making opportunities for everyone to be able
to be in aviation is critical, and that is reflected in the
great work of the Reauthorization Act of 2024 and specifically
calling out the Willa Brown Education Program as one of those.
Mr. Johnson of Georgia. Thank you, and I yield back.
Mr. Graves of Louisiana. Thank you, Mr. Johnson.
I recognize the gentleman from New York, Mr. Molinaro.
Mr. Molinaro. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I appreciate all of you testifying today. Mr. Spero, I am
glad you're at the table. It was about a week ago in this very
room we had a hearing where we were talking about workforce
shortages and a gentleman from a think tank suggested that the
only way we could expand access and broaden access to workforce
was to undermine labor protections and to ignore collective
bargaining agreements. I assure you that I had opposed that
theory last week and would continue to do so this week.
I don't have a question for you just yet, but your
testimony is helpful. I come to this conversation having spent
the last 12 years as a county executive in New York State where
I managed the busiest general aviation airport in the State of
New York, 48,000 takeoffs and landings each year. But beyond
that, we developed in partnership with a community college, our
community college, a pilot A&P degree program, but also a
mechatronics certification program, so, I know at least the
demand that we have to educate this next workforce. And,
despite this country's capacity to expand our aviation sector,
we know that the bottlenecks and the lack of access to
workforce is one of our if not the greatest challenge in doing
so. So, each of you obviously comes to this with a degree of
experience.
When I came here to Congress, we wanted to work to
effectively ensure adequate funding for aviation workforce
development programs. I introduced the AIR Act, the Aviation
Investment and Recruitment Act. I was thrilled and thankful to
Chairmen Graves for ensuring that this bill is embedded in the
FAA reauthorization and further doubles the FAA's workforce
development grant programs by, again, another $20 million.
I am going to start with Ms. Damato and Mr. Montgomery. Can
you just speak broadly, if you would like, to the importance of
the increased funding to these grant programs and how we might
better make use of those grant programs from your perspective?
Ms. Damato. I know Mr. Montgomery talks about this as well.
I see it as a collegiate aviator and as a parent of a
collegiate aviator. You want to make sure that your students
have access to modern fleets, that they are able to be
maintained in a way that doesn't take them offline, and you
have more students than you have access to airplanes.
Same thing with the scheduling. We can't control the
weather, but knowing that the airplanes are ready and able to
fly, that they are well maintained, the equipment is working,
and that you have enough instructors who are able to teach your
students is really important. If any of those things go away,
again, we can't control the weather, but everything else, that
leads you into a position where you have got students who have
paid money to consume a product that they are not able to
access. And so, this funding could allow for an increase in the
number of those concerns to change that landscape.
Mr. Molinaro. Thank you for that.
Mr. Montgomery, I guess maybe more specifically, how might
these dollars broaden and widen your programming?
Mr. Montgomery. Thank you, sir. If we can get the funding,
we are going to use that in aircraft. We are going to use that
in equipment. What that does is it takes my hourly rate and
drops it. The further down where I can push it, the more
Americans I can serve. Right now there are so many that can't
afford flight, because every maintenance lease and insurance is
in that air flight-hour. With those grants, we will be able to
take that down and open up the doors, buy more aircraft. We
will be able to service better.
Mr. Molinaro. Yes. When we launched our program, it was
oversubscribed the semester we started.
Mr. Robbins, as you likely know, I worked hard to secure
the Future of Aviation Act into law, thankfully, a bill I
drafted to allow Federal dollars to be used for airports to
build out advanced air mobility infrastructures, such as eVTOL
stations in regional airports like the ones I represent in
upstate New York. Advanced aviation is a critical opportunity
to grow capacity. And I am grateful that we are able to include
this in the FAA reauthorization. Can you just speak to the
importance of ensuring greater--more employees, enough
employees, and in greater training programming to allow for
this technology to build out in a more timely fashion?
Mr. Robbins. Absolutely. Thank you for that question and
thank you for your leadership, sir, in getting that provision
in the FAA reauthorization bill. There is no doubt that the
electric vertical takeoff and lift and broader advanced air
mobility industry is emerging in the U.S. right now, and
Congress has expressed a desire for the U.S. to be the world
leader and is going to open up significant economic
opportunities to areas like yours and everyone along the
committee's by opening up infrastructure that maybe is
underutilized or not being utilized at all right now to be a
place where aircraft can take off and land that is disconnected
from traditional legacy aviation centers. There is tremendous
workforce opportunities associated with expanding mobility.
There is also tremendous opportunities with all of the jobs
that come along with that, both the core jobs in aviation,
whether it is pilots or flight operators or mechanics or
manufacturers, but also the second- and third-order effects of
jobs that open up when advanced air mobility enters into an
underserved region.
Mr. Molinaro. And advanced air mobility is a great
opportunity to broaden apprenticeship programming as well, so,
thank you all.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Graves of Louisiana. Thank you, Mr. Molinaro.
The gentleman from California, Mr. DeSaulnier, is
recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. DeSaulnier. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Let me just say
you look healthier and happier recently. I don't know what has
changed in your life, but I wish--no, I am not going to do the
same thing.
I have two comments, or questions, I should say, and I will
put them in one package, and I would like Mr. Spero to start
and maybe Ms. Damato to make any comments. The first comment is
based on your reference to human factors. I have spent a lot of
time on this for flight controllers at SFO. I am from the bay
area. After the near-miss years ago, we almost had a huge
aviation disaster. Learning best practices, and the national
labs, we have done a lot of this on nuclear risk assessments
and making sure that all this new technology also has a support
of human factors. How we train people, while they are being
trained technically for all this great innovation, which we
have to be careful about, as a Member from the bay area, not to
be oversold, that this technology sometimes is a little bit
oversold--but how do we make sure that the human factors are
incorporated as we get young people to go in the fields,
whether it is a pilot, air traffic controller, particularly
where it is a challenge in metropolitan areas like San
Francisco where the costs don't always match the benefits
because of the costs in the area? That is the first question
generally.
Secondarily, we worked on programs again in the bay area
when we in California had put so much money and success in the
UC/CSU system and the community college system in college
degrees, master's degrees, but we had to go back in and rebuild
our career tech. One of our real successes was a bipartisan
effort with then-Governor Schwarzenegger. I was a chair of the
senate labor committee, to do academies, so, in my old district
in Richmond, California, high unemployment rate, lots of
poverty, we started with a small academy that was affiliated.
So, you get apprenticeship credits, young kids in high school
with the building trades in California, and then they went
right to school in this instance in refineries and chemical
plants in northern California. It has been such a success at
Kennedy High School in Richmond, it now has 850 kids in the
program.
So, the two questions are, how do human factors in new
technology, how do we prepare for that to make sure people are
being trained properly with human factors? And then,
secondarily, how do we get more academies like this to
particularly get low-income communities, where the unemployment
rate is higher, to partner with the trades, unions, or with
businesses and workforce development boards? I have taken up
half my time with the two questions.
Mr. Spero. So, you would like me to speak to human factors.
So, any new systems that go out there, any new programs,
airplanes, whatever it might be, you have to collect data. You
have to have enough information to be able to make informed
decisions. You have to have people that understand the work,
people that do that sort of thing to be able to depend upon
them to tell you what works and what doesn't work. I am not a
human factors expert, but there is a lot of science that goes
into it. That investment needs to be made on the front end.
When it comes to the FAA and when it comes to some of the
things that we work on in the technical operations world, some
of those human factors don't come into play, and on the back
end, we wind up going through voluntary safety reporting
programs to say this isn't right, that isn't right, and now we
have to mitigate those on the back end.
The idea behind a good human factors program is it
mitigates those problems on the front end and doesn't cause it
later on where employees have to report it, and then go through
a process that sometimes they get a lot of pushback because a
lot of money has been invested in something that now people are
complaining about and say it doesn't work. So, that causes a
lot of difficulty.
But to be able to be involved in those things for us as a
labor union on the front end would be very, very important.
Ms. Damato. Thanks for that. I am not a human factors
expert. I don't know that I have a comment for you now, but I'd
be happy to get back to you on that, but regarding the
collaboration of what can happen, the Youth Task Force
recommendation was adopted in the FAA Reauthorization Act for
that national council made up of the nine regional councils
that the FAA has already divided into nine regions. That is
Aviation and Space Education Office, AVSED. Those regional
program analysts know their regions the best. They know where
the underserved areas are and what deserts exist around them
where there could be some great opportunity; are there
employers in the area that would want to partner with the
students for apprenticeships or pre-apprenticeships? It is
critically important, and I think the work of the national
strategic plan for aviation workforce development that is
specified in the bill is what needs to happen to take this to
the next level.
Mr. DeSaulnier. Nice job. It is like we rehearsed this. You
did very well.
Ms. Damato. Not at all.
Mr. DeSaulnier. Thank you, Mr. Chair. I yield back.
Mr. Graves of Louisiana. Thank you. I appreciate it.
The gentleman from Indiana, Mr. Yakym.
Mr. Yakym. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you to our
witnesses for being here today. This is the first Aviation
Subcommittee hearing since the FAA reauthorization became law,
so, I first want to thank the chairman, the ranking member, the
staff, and everyone who has put such hard work to get a strong,
collaborative, bipartisan bill to the President's desk. Though
that journey may have seemed long between all the hearings and
markups, the delays in the other body, the President's
signature, it is really just the beginning. Now we need to make
sure that the bill is implemented correctly and in a timely
manner while in the meantime continuing to explore and grapple
with some of the foundational questions impacting our aviation
industry.
This hearing speaks to both of these goals. The FAA
reauthorization included important investments in the aviation
workforce that we want to see implemented. But there are also
still a number of issues impacting the aviation workforce that
warrant continued examination.
Mr. Robbins, the FAA reauthorization requires the FAA to
issue a notice of proposed rulemaking on beyond visual line-of-
sight regulations by September. Can you please speak to the
importance of the FAA delivering this on time both for the
industry and for the workforce?
Mr. Robbins. Yes. Thank you for that question, Congressman
Yakym, and we appreciate your leadership on this issue. The
bill, as you mentioned, the reauthorization bill gave the FAA 4
months to publish the notice of proposed rulemaking for beyond
visual line-of-sight. So, it is a draft rule. So, we are
looking at September 16th in order to meet that deadline, and
we certainly encourage this committee to continue its oversight
and hold the FAA accountable to that deadline.
The FAA then has 16 months after issuing that rule to then
issue the final rule. Our industry is ready to go. The
technology is there. It has been proven in areas where the FAA
had allowed operations to emerge using a waivers and exemptions
from the rule, but without the rule there, it continues to be
incremental progress. Much of the country as a result is not
seeing the benefit of drones, whether it is, as we discussed
with your colleague, for public safety or for infrastructure
inspection or other operations like drone delivery.
There are lots of workforce opportunities, and this is a
great opportunity for the U.S. to set the record again as the
leader in aviation safety by getting this rule right, so, we
are ready to work with FAA to get this done and we ask that the
draft rule come out by that September 16th deadline, and it is
a draft, so, let's not let the perfect be the enemy of the
good, because then we are going to have 16 months for everyone
to comment on it and then issue that final rule.
Mr. Yakym. Very good. Thank you. Also, Mr. Robbins, the FAA
reauthorization additionally directed the FAA to establish a
drone education and training grant program to make grants
available to educational institutions for workforce training on
small unmanned aerial aircraft systems. How important will
grant programs like this be in getting people interested in a
career in aviation?
Mr. Robbins. Thank you for that question, Congressman.
Section 913 is a great opportunity for Congress to provide
grants to universities to build programs that are desperately
needed to build the workforce both for the UAS industry and the
drone industry but also for the FAA to recruit from, to bring
in the needed talent to help ensure that they have the
expertise on UAS integration. It is a win/win for industry and
it is a win/win for the FAA.
Unfortunately, based on the draft appropriations bill so
far, we have seen that, while you have authorized that program,
it has not yet been funded, and we are hopeful that that is
something that is corrected as the appropriations process
continues. Thank you, sir.
Mr. Yakym. Great. Thank you.
And, Ms. Damato, do you agree with the premise that, as
some groups claim, there is no pilot shortage?
Ms. Damato. I know that we have a number of jobs we need to
fill in this industry and a number of jobs that we don't even
have a harness around how many we are going to need as we move
forward with new technology. We need anyone who is interested
in aviation to pursue that career path now, and we will help
you find your why.
I went to pilot training. I only wanted to be a 121 pilot.
Turns out, after graduation and after flight instructing, I
found there was an incredible opportunity for me in business
aviation, and I followed that path.
But we need to bring these pilots, technicians, everybody
else in, and then figure out what their careers are going to
look like. My collegiate aviator right now, I have no idea what
the landscape will look like for him when he graduates, but it
is going to be a ton of opportunities for him if he works hard
and makes the right connections.
Mr. Yakym. Great. Thank you for that.
And with that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Graves of Louisiana. Thank you, Mr. Vice Chairman. I
appreciate that.
I recognize the gentleman from New Jersey, Mr. Menendez,
for 5 minutes.
Mr. Menendez. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you to our witnesses for their testimony this
morning.
I am proud to have worked with my fellow members of this
committee to pass the bipartisan FAA Reauthorization Act of
2024, which contains many provisions that are aimed at
addressing our aviation workforce needs.
We are hearing about workforce shortages across all
sectors, but in the aviation industry, workforce shortages have
serious implications, not just for the flying experience, but
for our safety.
In New Jersey's Eighth Congressional District, flyers
traveling to and from the New York-New Jersey area are
experiencing the impacts of the national air traffic controller
shortage. Just last week, the FAA slowed flights in and out of
Newark Liberty Airport in our district. At one point, there
were 40 aircraft stuck, waiting to depart on an otherwise clear
evening.
These delays are just the beginning of reduced service and
delays that are expected to impact our airspace for the rest of
the summer.
Mr. Montgomery, your testimony notes that Louisiana Tech
University is focusing on addressing the pressing issues in the
aviation industry, including providing training to air traffic
controllers. Do you see any recurring barriers to participation
in air traffic controller training, and how have you addressed
these barriers?
Mr. Montgomery. Barriers to the training, from our
perspective, would be more about the simulators and actually
having one of those professionals come and teach at our
location.
At this time, I don't have the expertise of the air traffic
controller on hand, but I do have enough to get through the
standard processes. So----
Mr. Menendez [interrupting]. Let me ask you a question with
respect to something that the FAA is currently standing up. It
is an enhanced Collegiate Training Initiative program that will
allow qualified graduates from colleges that participate to
bypass initial training at the FAA Training Academy in Oklahoma
City.
The training academy can currently handle about 1,800
trainees per year, which has been a chokepoint in the process
to place new air traffic controller trainees into their
facilities for certification.
I am wondering if Louisiana Tech is exploring this option,
and do you think this approach could hold promise to enhance a
pipeline of qualified air traffic controllers?
Mr. Montgomery. Yes, sir. I think anything will reduce the
workload on them. I mean, they have 5 weeks off, but us
providing them and other universities is a significant resource
reduction.
Mr. Menendez. Appreciate that.
I also want to focus on recruitment and the importance of
ensuring airport-adjacent communities, such as Newark and
Elizabeth in our district, which often experience the impacts
of airport operations most acutely, also see the economic
benefits.
Airlines and labor unions continually raise the issue of an
aviation maintenance technician, or AMT, shortage. AMTs are
tasked with ensuring that aircraft are safe and meet the
highest standards of airworthiness. These are well-paying,
often union jobs, that don't require a 4-year degree, and we
should focus our recruitment efforts on local communities that
have so much to offer.
For any of the witnesses on the panel, how can we better
connect airport-adjacent communities with careers in aviation?
Ms. Damato. I would start with the high schools.
Mr. Menendez. Yes.
Ms. Damato. There are career and technical education high
schools, especially in New Jersey, in every county. I am not
sure how many of them offer aviation programs, but if there are
employers in the area who would take them on as apprentices so
they can do the school-to-work program as they gain the
stackable credentials, then you have got people from their
local area who are getting trained locally, they are part of
their community that wants to employ them afterwards, and they
are making an investment right where they grew up, which I
think would be pretty incredible.
Mr. Menendez. Appreciate that.
Any other panelists?
Mr. Robbins, how would you, in terms of introducing
exposure to the aviation industry at an earlier point and some
of the cost barriers especially for local high schools,
elementary schools, do you believe that drones and the use of
drones in high schools is a more affordable, cost-efficient
option to give people some exposure, not just to this
burgeoning industry, but also to the larger aviation industry?
Mr. Robbins. Yes. Thank you for that question, Congressman.
Absolutely. We actually partner with the FAA on the Know
Before You Fly program, which was extended in the FAA
Reauthorization Act, which we appreciate your leadership on.
That program, one of its initiatives is actually sending drone
kits to schools so that students can become familiar with the
technology, familiar with flying, and sort of learn the
fundamentals associated with drones, which hopefully sparks an
interest in an aviation career. Maybe it is in drones, maybe it
is in advanced air mobility, maybe it is in another segment of
more legacy aviation.
The goal behind that program is to sort of spark that
excitement and to build a little bit of foundational knowledge
that they can build upon in later programs.
Mr. Menendez. That is great. I appreciate your work on
this----
Mr. Robbins [interposing]. Thank you, sir.
Mr. Menendez [continuing]. And we will continue to partner
with you.
And with that, I yield back.
Mr. Graves of Louisiana. Thank you, Mr. Menendez.
The other gentleman from New Jersey, Mr. Van Drew, is
recognized for 5 minutes.
Dr. Van Drew. Thank you. Yes, we have got more than one
from New Jersey, right. It is good to be with you.
Staffing shortages are plaguing the vast majority of
industries in our country right now, especially aviation. You
know this. It is what we have been talking about all morning.
It is why it is essential that the measures in the FAA
Reauthorization Act of 2024 are carried out to the fullest
extent of the law to provide the necessary and appropriate
staffing levels to keep American travelers safe. It is great we
have it in the law, but we also have to enforce the law.
I am excited that my proposed amendment to make the FAA
Technical Center permanent and, more specifically, dedicated to
advanced aerospace, has been enshrined into law as well.
I want to thank Chairman Graves, Ranking Member Larsen, in
the full committee; Chairman Graves and Ranking Member Cohen on
the Aviation Subcommittee, for their hard work to put this
reauthorization together in general. It was a pleasure working
with all of them and all of you.
The newly named FAA Technical Center for Advanced Aerospace
will be a permanent fixture in the southern New Jersey
community, providing a steady stream of jobs and opportunity
for technical advancement aimed at bettering the safety and the
capabilities of air travel. By streamlining and optimizing the
FAA's organizational structure to facilitate as much
technological advancement as we possibly can, the American
aviation industry won't only be able to compete with China,
they will be able to supersede China, and they will remain the
gold standard for advanced aerospace development and practice.
Now that the FAA reauthorization has been signed into law,
as I said, and I will probably say over and over again, it has
to be enforced.
As a side note here--not really a side note--something I
think of interest. During a recent visit to the Atlantic City
Airport, I discovered that the flight control tower--I was
amazed at this--that they still use floppy disks. Floppy disks.
They have been done for for a quarter of a century. They use
them for their IDS4 systems. It is a piece of technology that
is actually from 1994. We researched it. It is responsible for
tracking all reference information for flight patterns, weather
conditions, and other items integral to air traffic control.
Floppy disks. They haven't been used for a long time, and
they are obsolete. And thank God the tech center is planning to
roll out an updated system to replace this technology in fiscal
year 2025.
But this is not just happening at the Atlantic City
Airport. It is happening across the country. This technology is
still used across the country. It is obsolete. It is obsolete
technology.
It also greatly exacerbates workforce issues. It takes
hundreds of thousands of hours to update the information in the
IDS4 system, which requires pulling personnel from other
departments that are already facing these significant staff
shortages.
How can places like the FAA control towers be behind the
times so much technologically? Who wants to answer that
question?
Mr. Spero. I am all ready to jump in here, so, thank you.
Dr. Van Drew. You were ready. I could tell.
Mr. Spero. I am ready.
Dr. Van Drew. Body language.
Mr. Spero. Let's go with this one. Thank you for that.
Look, it takes the FAA many years to implement new systems.
They have waterfalls. They have the process that they have to
determine they need a new system and give to the program
management organization to build a contract and send it out to
a contractor, and it takes 6 or 7 years to put out 1 system
across 400 airports in the country, is antiquated.
We have a workforce out there that--in technical
operations--if properly staffed, properly trained, can
implement multiple systems at multiple times, and you are not
sitting around waiting for this to get done and continue to be
funded while there are dozens and dozens of programs that are
running, implementing a variety of different systems.
If we begin to implement systems using the operational
workforce that we have, that are the best at doing this at
every airport, we wind up getting way out in front of this, and
10 years from now, we are not talking about----
Dr. Van Drew [interrupting]. Are these internal actions
that take place? Does this require--this doesn't require
legislation, right? I mean, this is something----
Mr. Spero [interrupting]. It would require staffing and
funding, and you do have a bit of a fine line here--a bright
line between implementation money and operations money that the
FAA has to figure out how to manage.
But at the same time, that is the solution to the problem:
use the thousands of employees we have across the country to
not only staff them well enough so that they can do this work
and that work. We can walk and chew gum. Just give us the
opportunity.
Dr. Van Drew. So, I would look forward to--and I will close
with this--I have other questions, but I will submit them for
the record. I would look forward to working with you all on
that, and I know there are other Members here who would as well
if we really do want to be on the cutting edge.
I mean, it is not like we were a little behind there. And I
am not being critical of anybody. I love the FAA. I know the
people that work there well. I am supportive. It is just that
it is not fair to them, it is not fair to the United States of
America, it is not fair to the air industry. It just isn't a
good thing.
So, I would love to work on that. Please get in contact
with my office and my people, and I know there are other folks
as well.
With that, Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Graves of Louisiana. Thank you, Mr. Van Drew.
I recognize the gentlelady from Nevada, Ms. Titus, for 5
minutes.
Ms. Titus. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And thank you, Mr. Robbins, for acknowledging earlier our
work together. It has been a pleasure. You are a real resource
for our caucus, and I thank you for your help there. And the
chairman's leadership. We have worked well together, and this
industry is going to miss you, I have to say, Mr. Graves. So,
just putting that on the record.
I would like to go back to some of the grants in the FAA
reauthorization program. There is one that Mr. Stanton
introduced. It is called Drone Infrastructure Inspection Grant.
I was pleased to cosponsor it. I want it to get off the ground,
no pun intended, but we have some programs like that in my
district, and I think other areas could benefit from it.
So, as the FAA rolls out programs like that, do you have
any recommendations for how they might improve that process,
get the word out, assist with application processes?
Mr. Robbins. Yes, absolutely. Thank you so much, ma'am.
And, again, thank you for your leadership as cochair of the
Unmanned Systems Caucus. The two of you, you and Chairman
Graves, have done terrific work together, and we appreciate it.
The Drone Infrastructure Inspection Grant Act is a terrific
bill that was wrapped into the FAA reauthorization, and the UAS
industry is extremely grateful for that.
As we all know, across the country, our Nation's
infrastructure is struggling. It is crumbling. There is lots of
inspection required. We don't have the workforce and the number
of people to be able to do it and to do it safely.
And the Drone Infrastructure Inspection Grant Act is a
program to allow States to use drones and hire the workforce to
use those drones to engage in critical infrastructure
inspection.
Now, the program has only been authorized about 2 months,
so, some baby steps have taken place but not a whole lot yet.
But we stand ready to work with the Department of
Transportation, the FAA, and State DOTs to build awareness
about this program and to ensure it is implemented.
And we are pleased to see that, while not fully funded, it
did receive near fully funding in the appropriations bill, and
we are hopeful that we can get that full funding before the
appropriations are done.
Ms. Titus. Great. Will you just keep us kind of posted on
that as it moves forward?
Mr. Robbins. Absolutely, yes, ma'am.
Ms. Titus. Well, thank you.
And speaking of out-of-date things, there are real
challenges in modernizing facilities and equipment. The budget
request this year was nearly $500 million increase for this
equipment and facilities. And there is a new proposal--I
believe it is called the Facility Replacement and Radar
Modernization program--that is $8 billion over the next 5
years, replacing old, aging radar systems.
The average age for many of these facilities is 60 years
old. You heard about the floppy disks.
I just wonder, Mr. Spero, your members are doing the
critical maintenance and repair of these systems of technology.
What implications do you think this increase will have for your
workforce, and what are the areas that need the greatest amount
of investment?
Mr. Spero. Well, everything needs a great amount of
investment, and I think it depends on the systems you are
talking about. We do have a blend of very modern technologies
that we take care of, state-of-the-art things. At the same
time, there are legacy systems out there, and part of that has
to do with the process that the agency uses to replace this. It
is going to take a very long time to replace all of the radar
systems that they are talking about.
But at the same time, the life cycle for those systems is
out of date. It is difficult sometimes to get parts for these
systems. You all have been talking about as these--for a little
while now, Airport Surface Detection Equipment. Nobody wants to
make them. And the fact of the matter is, it is too expensive
to put them out there. You have to find other technologies.
So, the impacts on our folks clearly are, we are
maintaining legacy systems right now, and at the same time,
they are implementing and we are maintaining new technologies.
And across the board, we are having to get involved in
various electronics disciplines in the tech ops world, and that
is not the best way to develop proficiency. And now we have got
to go to training as well, and Oklahoma City is where all the
classes go.
So, now we have a backlog of training that it takes to get
to go to school out there and get all the folks certified. So,
the process right now is enormously time-consuming, and it is
very costly.
Ms. Titus. So, it is a good investment, but it comes with
challenges and new demands on your workforce.
Mr. Spero. It does, and it takes opportunity--you have to
think outside of the box a little bit in some way, shape, or
form to find ways to implement these things more quickly.
Ms. Titus. Ms. Damato, in your world, do you find this
investment in equipment at all? How is that affecting your
folks?
Ms. Damato. Yes, ma'am. Absolutely. We need modernized
equipment everywhere, and also for the training environment. We
need to be able to train the youth who are in the programs
right now and who are going to be working with us. They want to
work on the latest and greatest technologies and be proficient
in it. That is what they do in their personal lives outside of
the industry, so, they should expect to work with the same type
of equipment when they have the opportunity in their
profession.
Ms. Titus. I think going into the high schools and talking
about the excitement of this new technology and the careers
that you can have is just really important. I am glad you all
are doing that.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Graves of Louisiana. Thank you, Ms. Titus.
I recognize the gentleman from New York, Mr. D'Esposito,
for 5 minutes.
Mr. D'Esposito. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And good morning--
or good afternoon, everybody.
Air traffic controllers are the backbone of our national
aviation infrastructure, safeguarding the journey of nearly
100,000 flights per day. Their skill is essential to upholding
the standards of safety and efficiency in American aviation and
deserve to be treated as such. Unfortunately, this is the
opposite of what is happening because of the FAA's failure to
address the staffing shortfall at the N90 TRACON facility and
other facilities across the Nation.
The FAA began issuing forced relocation letters to 17
controllers at N90 to Philadelphia in the next 12 weeks. July
28 is the first day for them to operate in Philadelphia.
Last year, I secured language in the House version of the
FAA reauthorization plan that safeguarded jobs at N90, which
falls right in the center of my district. My language would
have prevented the FAA Administrator from requiring forced
transfers from N90 to Philadelphia and prevented the FAA from
reducing staffing levels of N90.
While this was unfortunately removed from the final FAA
reauthorization bill in the Senate, I was glad to see other
provisions that would address the shortfall included, but want
to ensure that these provisions help the N90 facility.
So, to Ms. Damato and Mr. Montgomery, as you know, section
437 directs the FAA to set the minimum hiring target for new
air traffic controllers for each of the fiscal years 2024
through 2028. It also directs the Transportation Research Board
to identify the most appropriate staffing models for future air
traffic controller workforce needs, and requires the FAA to
revise its staffing standards no later than May 16 of 2025.
From your industry perspectives, how do you believe the
increased hiring targets for air traffic controllers will
impact operations at critical and complex facilities like the
N90 TRACON in the long term?
Ms. Damato. Well, thank you for that question.
And obviously, our members operate in N90 in the Northeast,
and all around the country and the world, at great volume. So,
we appreciate that we need the staffing at all of the airports
and in all of the centers, and we don't want to be experiencing
delays, just like any other of the traveling public, because
the staffing can't meet the demands of the industry.
Mr. Montgomery. Thank you, sir. I think we need to forecast
better. We keep on hitting low and high trends with aviation
with all our professions. If we could forecast better, if we
could train to those standards, we can produce to those
standards. So, in the end, I think it is a forecasting issue.
Mr. D'Esposito. Ms. Damato, while these provisions will
help in the long term, given the imminent forced relocations at
the N90 facility, in your opinion, what else can be done to
address the staffing at N90 TRACON in the short term other than
forced relocations?
Ms. Damato. This is just not my area at NBAA. I would be
happy to get to my colleagues near traffic services and get
back to you after the hearing.
Mr. D'Esposito. That would be great.
Mr. Montgomery?
Mr. Montgomery. I am probably not the right person to ask.
For the last 30 years, the Government told me to go somewhere,
I went somewhere.
Mr. D'Esposito. So, obviously, this is an issue that I know
is specific to my district and the N90 facility, but I believe
that it is a problem that is happening across the country. And
I just--I think that there are so many other opportunities for
the FAA to find ways, people in training, and send them to
places that we need it, instead of taking hard-working air
traffic controllers that have been in these facilities for so
long. People that have roots in the communities that they live
in, people who have, unfortunately, children that need certain
care that they can only get here in the--or back home in the
tristate area, are now being forced to relocate.
So, I thank you all for being here today.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Graves of Louisiana. Thank you, Mr. D'Esposito.
I recognize the gentlelady from Oregon, Mrs. Chavez-
DeRemer, for 5 minutes.
Mrs. Chavez-DeRemer. Thank you, Chairman. Good afternoon. I
wasn't sure if it was still morning.
Earlier this year, through my work on the Education and
Workforce Committee, the Flight Education Access Act was
included in the major student loan reform package. This
commonsense proposal closes the pilot workforce gap by letting
prospective pilots access the same loan opportunities available
to students at traditional 4-year schools. It increases the
total maximum amount of Federal direct unsubsidized Stafford
loans an eligible dependent may borrow to $111,000, and it
increases the maximum amount for independent students to
$137,500, and increases the maximum amount of Federal direct
Stafford loans to a total of $65,000.
This is a huge step in resolving the shortage of pilots and
signals to those concerned about the high cost of commercial
pilot school that their Representatives want to help. Last
February, FAA Administrator Whitaker called this bill a very
useful initiative.
Mr. Montgomery, I would be interested to hear your thoughts
on this bill as well. So, here is the question: If prospective
pilots could access these types of student loans and use them
when completing the FAA's regulated training, would that help
improve the pilot shortage?
Mr. Montgomery. Yes, ma'am. My perspective is--and thank
you for the question--is our dropout rate is 68.2. The primary
reason is money. There are so many Americans that cannot afford
flight, that any help you can give them, it is going to
increase production.
Mrs. Chavez-DeRemer. Mr. Spero, I will ask you your
thoughts as well on the student loan assistance for pilots in
our bill. Do you believe this will help with recruiting, one,
and two, do you see any other barriers to recruitment as well
that pertain to flight school?
Mr. Spero. So, not necessarily my area of expertise when it
comes to the private sector and where they go, but from the
perspective of opportunities within the FAA, as folks get more
seasoned in aviation jobs, the opportunities to become aviation
safety inspectors from that world could be opened up
tremendously if we could get the funding to assure that we can
hire the inspectors that we need, and get the numbers correct
so that we know how many aviation safety inspectors we need
across the country.
Those opportunities are part of the pipeline for people to
advance into jobs.
Mrs. Chavez-DeRemer. Thank you.
Flight school can definitely be expensive, especially with
the amount of hours required for prospective pilots to meet.
The United States must make sure that the best pilot training
and experience counts.
Every pilot in America who flies in a Cessna 172 on a solo
recreational flight gets to count those hours, and every
cropduster does as well. However, neither of them has probably
ever flown into Portland International or Atlanta Hartsfield-
Jackson.
As our regulations are presently written, an airline first
officer at a commuter airline is often unable to log his hours,
even though he is part of the professional flightcrew flying
paying passengers into a major hub and participating in every
aspect of the aircraft's operation.
So, Mr. Montgomery, final question: Do you believe this to
be a regulation that needs to be changed? And would such a
change help alleviate the pilot workforce issues our industry
currently faces?
Mr. Montgomery. Yes, ma'am. Thank you.
I do believe we need to look at more ways to document and
get those pilot charge hours, and that includes also large
UAVs, whereas we are flying drones that are bigger than 55
pounds, they should be counted.
Mrs. Chavez-DeRemer. OK. Thank you.
With that, Mr. Chair, I will yield back my time.
Mr. Graves of Louisiana. Thank you, Mrs. Chavez-DeRemer.
I now recognize myself for 5 minutes.
Mr. Montgomery, following up on Mrs. Chavez-DeRemer's
question, if I just heard you correctly, you said you had a
dropout rate of 68 percent. Is that what I heard?
Mr. Montgomery. Yes, sir.
Mr. Graves of Louisiana. Can you talk a little bit about
prevailing issues or reasons as to why that is such a high
percentage?
Mr. Montgomery. Yes, sir. Thank you.
Most of the students that I have coming through there, they
struggle to go to school full time, work full time, and then
they spend their entire week's paycheck on a couple hours of
flight.
So, what happens is it is a negative downward spiral, where
they can't get enough training each month because they are
trying to live, they are trying to go to school. So, they take
private pilot into a year or two later, and they are still in
private pilot because they can't afford it.
Mr. Graves of Louisiana. So, basically, cost and time
constraints are two issues that are big obstacles to being able
to finish the program?
Mr. Montgomery. Yes, sir. Those are the ones we can fix.
The other obstacle is, it takes a lot to be a pilot. You have
to multitask, you have to be able to communicate, navigate,
stay in the air. So, there are other things that are out there,
but the money factor is something we can fix.
Mr. Graves of Louisiana. In regard to that 32 percent that
does stay in the program, can you talk about the percentage of
those that may stay in Louisiana versus those that leave and
why you believe we are unable to maintain a larger aviation
workforce in the State?
Mr. Montgomery. Yes, sir. The majority of our students go
outside of Louisiana because of the major airlines. The ones
that do want to stay within Louisiana, they look for corporate
or teaching gigs or something like that, but it is hard to
find.
With us building the rotary-wing program hopefully out of
Lafayette sooner this year, we are going to look to better
support Louisiana, because Louisiana deserves to have pilots
here.
Mr. Graves of Louisiana. Thank you. Appreciate it.
Mr. Robbins, section 937 of the FAA Reauthorization Act of
2024 directs the Administrator to prioritize the authorization
of additional eligible UAS test ranges in the Gulf of Mexico to
look at the impacts of operations in saltwater environments and
the transportation of cargo and passengers to offshore energy
infrastructure.
Can you speak about the important role that UAS test ranges
play in terms of bringing new technologies and innovation to
the marketplace?
Mr. Robbins. Yes, absolutely. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for
that question and for your leadership.
In many instances right now, the only opportunity for
drones or other advanced air mobility to operate is over
private land or in UAS test ranges designated by the FAA. And
there are--while the test ranges that are in service right now
are doing tremendous work, they are somewhat limited in terms
of size and scale, and there are also significant portions of
the country that lack test ranges, including, as you mentioned,
in your area of Louisiana and the gulf.
So, weather is very important. Factors on local environment
are very important. So, understanding how drones operate in
different environments. So, there does need to be a wider range
of diversity in the test sites to be able to test different
types of operations and different types of reliability.
Mr. Graves of Louisiana. Thanks. And the FAA has a unique
role to play as a partner and regulator when it comes to
certification integration, operational frameworks necessary for
UAS. And title IX of the FAA reauthorization bill made clear
both the roles and responsibilities of the FAA through the
process and stressed the need for standardization across the
board.
How can we as Congress ensure the FAA continues to evolve
its standards to accommodate new aviation technologies,
recognizing the dynamic nature of innovation and workforce
training, while maintaining that gold standard of safety that
we all talk about?
Mr. Robbins. Yes. Thank you for that, Congressman.
Well, first, there are a number of provisions in the FAA
reauthorization bill that are laid out in our written testimony
that direct the FAA to take steps to bring in new types of
workforce, and that includes a sense of Congress that the FAA
should look to the UAS Collegiate Training Initiative as a
source for additional workforce to the FAA as they are hiring.
As I mentioned in my opening, the needs of the UAS and AAM
industries for integration are different than they are for
legacy aviation. But the certification for an 11-pound
Styrofoam drone looks a lot like the certification of a Boeing
777.
So, there is a need for some different skill sets and
different ways of thinking about things there within the FAA,
and I think the FAA bill, as you mentioned, has a lot of good
provisions to change the way the FAA operates.
So, from your perspective now, it comes down to oversight
and holding them accountable with timelines, holding them
accountable--and every time you hold a hearing and you bring
the FAA forward, it forces them to study, forces them to sort
of dig in on these issues, and it brings them to the forefront.
So, we would encourage more hearings in the Aviation
Subcommittee going forward that focus on advanced technologies,
because that forces the agency to look at advanced technologies
through a finer lens.
Mr. Graves of Louisiana. Mr. Robbins, thank you. And I am
so excited about the future of your industry and just look
forward to see what the future holds.
Mr. Robbins. We appreciate your leadership.
Mr. Graves of Louisiana. Thank you.
Mr. Montgomery, I have got someone here from Louisiana
Tech, one of our interns, Emma Sarradet from Addis, is joining
us today and, again, a Louisiana Tech student. We also have
Alex Foret, who is interning with our office and joining us.
But I believe you have someone with you, and want to give you
an opportunity to introduce her.
Mr. Montgomery. Thank you, sir. I have my wife with me,
Sheila. She has been a military wife for many, many years, so,
she has been OK.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Graves of Louisiana. Mr. Montgomery will get a chance
to revise and extend your remarks. Otherwise, you are going to
pay for that.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Graves of Louisiana. No, thank you very much for
joining us.
I have a unanimous consent request. I ask unanimous consent
to enter into the record a statement by the Regional Airline
Association, received July 10, 2024.
Without objection, so ordered.
[The information is on pages 89-100.]
Mr. Graves of Louisiana. OK. With that, any further
questions from any members of the subcommittee who have not
been recognized?
Seeing none, that concludes our hearing for today. I would
like to thank each of the witnesses for your testimony.
I ask unanimous consent that the record of today's hearing
remain open until such time as the witnesses have provided
answers to any questions that may be submitted to them in
writing.
Without objection, so ordered.
I also ask unanimous consent the record remain open 15 days
for any additional comments and information submitted by
Members or witnesses to be included in the record of today's
hearing.
Without objection, so ordered.
The subcommittee stands adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 12:45 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]

Submissions for the Record

----------

Statement of Faye Malarkey Black, President and Chief Executive
Officer, Regional Airline Association, Submitted for the Record by Hon.
Garret Graves
Chairman Graves, Ranking Member Cohen, and members of the
Subcommittee on Aviation:
The Regional Airline Association (RAA) thanks the U.S. House
Committee on Transportation & Infrastructure, Subcommittee on Aviation
for holding the hearing titled, ``Eliminating Bottlenecks: Examining
Opportunities to Recruit, Retain, and Engage Aviation Talent.'' RAA
submits this statement for the record to inform the Committee on the
state of the regional airline industry's workforce. Foremost, we want
to thank Chairmen Sam Graves (R-MO) and Garret Graves (R-LA) along with
Ranking Members Larsen (D-WA), Cohen (D-TN), and members of this
Committee for their leadership in passing a five-year reauthorization
of the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) that will provide
stability and certainty to the aviation community.
Current Status of the Regional Airline Workforce
The RAA has fifteen airline members and collectively, our industry
employs more than 60,000 individuals who transport passengers and cargo
to their destinations and uphold the highest principles and practices
of aviation safety \1\. As has been well documented, the United States
continues to face substantial workforce shortages for pilots and
aviation maintenance technicians in the immediate and long term.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ https://www.raa.org/content-hub/annual-reports/
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Industry efforts, alongside workforce outreach policies this
Committee has crafted, have helped to renew interest in pilot careers.
As a result, aviation schools and pilot training institutions report
increased interest in their programs. However, many interested
candidates face significant barriers in accessing training. Not only
does this constrain supply, it hinders diversity. Fewer than 10% of
today's pilots are women or people of color.\2\ Policies to improve
career access and training are an important part of correcting this
imbalance, while strengthening pilot supply. Although we have seen
improvement in the pipeline of first officers, certification numbers
fluctuate significantly from month to month and have moderated after
earlier, post-pandemic spikes.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ https://www.bls.gov/cps/cpsaat11.htm

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Pilot data courtesy of FAA Registry Services and Information Branch,
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
AFB-730

Recently, aircraft delivery disruptions have caused both major and
low-cost airlines to slow or suspend the hiring of pilots previously
slated to crew aircraft now behind on delivery. This short-term
disruption has led to a temporary reduction in major airline hiring and
regional airline pilot attrition. However, RAA cautions stakeholders
against mistaking these pilot hiring trends as anything other than
temporary--and wholly driven by aircraft delivery delays. Just as
hiring paused during the COVID-19 pandemic onset only to roar back with
the return of demand, any amelioration in the pilot shortage we see
today will rapidly reverse when larger aircraft deliveries resume.
Meanwhile, pilot retirements are increasing dramatically and will
peak in 2029, when 51 percent more qualified Air Transport Pilots will
reach mandatory retirement age compared with 2024. Retirements will
stay near that peak for the next decade and will exceed 2024 levels for
nearly three decades. Unfortunately, the pipeline we have today will
not produce the number of pilots we need to replace retirements and
enable growth tomorrow. The United States must address its pilot
shortage to be prepared when mainline aircraft deliveries resume and
before the coming tsunami of pilot retirements.

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Failing to prepare will undermine the efforts of hundreds of
communities across the country that are already fighting to restore air
service lost under the pilot shortage. Network airlines have made
valiant efforts to restore air service, but smaller American
communities have still not recovered: Comparing July 2019 with July
2024 \3\, airlines are making 4% fewer departures across commercially
served U.S. airports, despite soaring demand. In the same period, 274
(64%) airports suffered air service reduction or loss, with 124 (30%)
airports losing more than a quarter of their flights, 43 airports (10%)
losing more than half of their flights and 11 airports losing all their
flights. Thirty-four states have seen an overall decline in air
service.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ Source: Independent analysis of OAG Schedules Analyser: U.S.
Carrier (scheduled passenger operations), data retrieved 7/7/24

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Source: Independent analysis of OAG Schedules Analyser: U.S. Carrier
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
(scheduled passenger operations), data retrieved 7/7/24

Smaller communities continue to experience the brunt of a
contracting network with reductions in both departures and total
available seats, and all exits have occurred in Nonhub and Nonprimary
airports. Notably, the airports experiencing the largest air service
reductions are often those with the least frequency and seats to begin
with. As airlines respond to pilot shortages by using larger aircraft
to transport more passengers at once, (known as upgauging), the result
has been more available seats but dramatically reduced connectivity:
fewer flights, fewer destination options, less convenient connections,
and higher travel costs. Upgauging is particularly pronounced at Small
Hub airports, which have 11% fewer departures despite 16% more
available seats.

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Source: Independent analysis of OAG Schedules Analyser: U.S. Carrier
(scheduled passenger operations), data retrieved 7/7/24

On July 7, 2024, the Transportation Security Administration
observed a new, single-day screening record, with more than three
million passengers passing through security checkpoints in a single
day--the Agency's highest ever.\4\ Simultaneously, news outlets have
been covering a ``surge in passenger complaints'' after the U.S.
Department of Transportation (DOT) released final 2023 complaint
data.\5\ A correlation between passenger complaints and the reduced
number of flights merits consideration. More passengers are flying than
ever, with more seats available than ever, yet there are fewer flight
options available when booking, fewer direct flights, fewer connection
options, and fewer opportunities to recover during irregular operations
(IROPS). When a major weather event occurs, it takes longer for
airlines to recover a hub (or an entire network), leaving more
passengers frustrated and stranded.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ https://abcnews.go.com/GMA/Travel/tsa-sets-new-single-day-
record-3-million/story?id=111750113
\5\ https://www.transportation.gov/briefing-room/air-travel-
consumer-report-june-december-2023-full-year-2023-airline-consumer
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Aircraft maintenance technicians are another workforce in short
supply, despite their enormous importance at every airline. These
professionals are key players in aviation safety, ensuring that every
aircraft taking off has been inspected and found airworthy. According
to Oliver Wyman's Global Fleet and MRO Forecast 2022-2032, 2027 is `` .
. . projected to be the worst year for the shortage--the bleakest
scenario has the supply deficit at more than 48,000 aircraft
maintenance workers or a shortfall of about 27%.'' \6\ As with pilots,
a persistent lack of diversity also hinders the technician workforce.
According to 2023 Bureau of Labor and Statistics (BLS) data, just 4% of
aircraft maintainers are women, 10% are Black, 5% Asian, and 21%
Hispanic.\7\ Regional airlines have been working to change this, and
solutions include outreach to a younger, more diverse and under-
represented population--as early as middle school--to support a wide
net of future candidates.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\ https://www.oliverwyman.com/our-expertise/insights/2022/feb/
global-fleet-and-mro-market-forecast-2022-2032.html
\7\ https://www.bls.gov/cps/cpsaat11.htm
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Regional airlines often provide a career entry point for
technicians. Many RAA members lead maintenance ``earn as you learn''
programs as well as agreements with major airline partners where
technicians can advance through planned career flow programs. Pay for
maintenance technicians starts at around $70,000 and increases quickly
with experience.\8\ As with many professions, technicians are looking
for careers where they want to live. Increasingly, recruiting efforts
are capitalizing on the beauty and quality of life available in smaller
communities. For example, RAA Associate Member MHI RJ Aviation Group
(MHIRJ) has launched a talent attraction initiative called ``Live Your
Best Life in Tucson,'' focusing a national campaign on the benefits of
living and working in Southern Arizona, partnering with local civic
leaders to showcase the investment of high-wage jobs in vibrant, local
communities. The company is making similar investments in Bridgeport,
West Virginia, where the beautiful countryside provides an organic
recruiting strategy.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\8\ https://www.ziprecruiter.com/Salaries/Entry-Level-Aircraft-
Mechanic-Salary
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Airlines of all sizes have now launched or partnered with flight
training institutions, providing deep tuition subsidies and airline-
backed lending, and offering scholarships, tuition reimbursements, and
numerous other supports to help pilots access and afford training.
Republic Airways opened the first airline-owned flight training
institution, LIFT (Leadership in Flight Training) Academy, which
utilizes state-of-the-art equipment and training practices to train the
next generation of pilots. Students who complete the LIFT career
pathway program have a guaranteed pathway to a career as a pilot at the
air carrier. LIFT Academy costs $112,000 and Republic offers a $20,000
subsidy, reducing costs to $92,000. After graduation, Republic offers
an additional $6,300 in tuition reimbursement, further lowering costs
to $85,700. Supporting the LIFT academy is an aviation maintenance
apprenticeship program in partnership with the U.S. Department of
Labor. Apprentices earn as they learn over 36 months, and upon
completion will be ready to begin a career as an aviation maintenance
technician.
Other regional carriers partner with local schools to invest and
grow their future workforce. Cape Air, which is headquartered in
Hyannis, Massachusetts supports a 24-month airplane maintenance
training program at Cape Cod Community College to help meet their need
for highly skilled technicians, training them in airframe and power
plant repair and culminating in certification--including full FAA
Certification. Upon completion, students are offered incentives to join
Cape Air after graduation. CommuteAir's assisted funding program for
airframe and powerplant licenses for mechanics is another example of
the many programs aimed to improve and diversify the pool of aircraft
maintainers.
These programs are effective, and we need them on an even broader
scale. This is one reason for RAA's strong support for the expansion of
the Federal Workforce Development Grant Programs. The dramatic increase
in funding, combined with the renewed focus on reaching
underrepresented populations in the manufacturing, maintenance, and
pilot professions is warranted, given the substantial demand for these
occupations throughout the aviation sector. Recruiting and attracting
underrepresented populations is not only a deeply held value but will
be key to resolving shortages as today's workforce rapidly approaches
retirement. For these reasons, RAA thanks the Committee for expanding
both the eligibility criteria for participation and the eligible
activities under the pilot workforce grant program. Regional airlines
and other aviation stakeholders are working to break down barriers to
aviation careers, and the grant program supports and incentivizes this
approach.
RAA will continue to advance meaningful solutions to the pilot and
technician shortages, and we applaud Congress for its work toward this
objective. The long-term health of our industry--and the small
communities we serve--rests on our collective ability to navigate and
resolve these shortages while ensuring the next generation of
professionals has the skills and training to uphold the highest
standards of aviation safety.
Key FAA Reauthorization Act of 2024 Provisions for the Regional Airline
Workforce
RAA greatly appreciates that the FAA Reauthorization Act of 2024
includes several workforce and training provisions that were strongly
supported by regional airlines. Foremost, we applaud the inclusion of
Section 372, Enhanced Qualification Program (EQP) for Restricted
Airline Transport Pilot Certificate. This bipartisan provision directs
the FAA to create an additional Restricted Airline Transport Pilot
Certificate (R-ATP) training pathway, helping to ensure that aspiring
airline pilots receive structured training paired with the latest
flight training technologies for a higher level of safety. It is
fitting that the EQP program is found in the safety title, not the
workforce title. While additional EQP pathways will help to open the
career path for future pilots, the most important aspect is ensuring
that the FAA's approach to pilot training does not remain static while
our aviation and airspace environment changes. Among their many safety-
enhancing attributes, EQP pathways will incorporate scenario-based
training so that pilots master challenging and potentially dangerous
situations in the aircraft they will be flying. Numerous peer-reviewed
academic studies have demonstrated that these structured training
pathways produce highly qualified pilots with excellent performance in
airline initial training.\9\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\9\ https://www.pilotsourcestudy.org
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In partnership with subject matter experts on the Air Carrier
Training Aviation Rulemaking Committee (ACT ARC), the FAA has regularly
reviewed, assessed, and validated the safety-enhancing attributes of
structured training pathways. In fact, the EQP provision codifies many
of the prior recommendations to the FAA by the ACT ARC.\10\ Given the
Agency's substantial body of work on safety-enhancing R-ATP pathways--
along with its clear direction to enhance aviation safety by improving
pilot training--we believe it is both imperative and achievable for the
FAA to meet the six-month deadline to stand up the new Enhanced
Qualifications Program R-ATP pathway.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\10\ https://www.faa.gov/sites/faa.gov/files/about/office_org/
headquarters_offices/avs/ACT_ARC_Reco_16-8.pdf
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
As mentioned earlier in this statement, RAA is strongly supportive
of the expansion of the Federal Workforce Development Grant Programs.
The dramatic increase in funding combined with the renewed focus on
reaching populations that are underrepresented in the manufacturing,
maintenance, and pilot professions will be extremely helpful to
addressing the substantial demand for these occupations throughout the
aerospace and aviation sectors.
Lastly, RAA appreciates Congress authorizing a pilot program to
provide veterans with pilot training services under Section 418 of the
law. RAA fully supports efforts to incentivize veterans to pursue this
highly lucrative and in-demand profession. Service members who are
transitioning out of the military, including our nation's veterans,
often bring transferable skills and training to the airline industry,
alongside unique life experiences and backgrounds they bring to their
work. Unfortunately, limitations and inconsistencies in today's
programs deter veterans from using their benefits to pay for flight
education and training. For example, GI bill benefits cannot be used to
pay for a private pilot certificate. The private pilot certificate is
the first step in the commercial airline training path and costs
between $15,000 and $20,000.\11\ The GI bill covers all other flight
training and education costs associated with a professional pilot
degree program, but the failure to cover this expensive first step
presents veterans with an enormous access barrier. We appreciate this
Committee recognizing these challenges and doing what it could within
its jurisdiction to address them in the FAA Reauthorization law.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\11\ https://www.indeed.com/career-advice/career-development/how-
much-does-it-cost-to-get-a-
pilot's-
license#: :text=Private%20pilot%20license%20(PPL)&text=It%20requires%20s
tudents
%20to%20complete,ranges%20from%20%2415%2C000%20to%20%2420%2C000.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Public Policy Solutions to Address the Continuing Pilot Shortage
While regional airlines are grateful for those provisions that will
help the industry continue to make progress in addressing our workforce
challenges, additional steps can be taken to create a more robust
supply of well-trained pilots, and we encourage members of this
Committee to support them.
First, as this Committee knows, the House passed FAA
Reauthorization bill raised the pilot retirement age to 67 years of
age. We are grateful to Congressman Nehls (R-TX), along with Chairmen
Sam Graves (R-MO) and Garret Graves (R-LA), for their leadership on
this issue. Had this provision been enacted, it would have empowered an
additional 5,000 pilots with the option to work two years longer. For
perspective, this number equates to about the number of ATPs produced
in all of 2021.\12\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\12\ Pilot data courtesy of FAA Registry Services and Information
Branch, AFB-730
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Raising the retirement age would also alleviate the captain
shortage, a bottleneck that is worsening and elongating the pilot
shortage. Most pilots approaching retirement age work at larger
carriers, but when they retire it sets off a cascade of upgrades that
eventually necessitates recruitment from smaller carriers. This has
fueled rapid attrition of regional airline captains and even high-time
first officers nearing captain eligibility. Regional airlines cannot
simply replace a captain with a first officer from the pipeline,
because first officers must be paired with another captain. Instead,
the carriers' workforce contracts until existing first officers gain
enough experience to upgrade and a new first officer can be hired.
Increasing the retirement age would slow attrition, allowing newer
pilots to gain more flying time with experienced captains while
stabilizing the regional airline workforce. This in turn would help to
stabilize and eventually rebuild air service to many smaller
communities.
The retirement age was last raised in 2007 without any negative
impacts on safety. Today, other countries, such as Australia, New
Zealand, and Japan, have safe service with higher mandatory retirement
ages. Even in the United States, pilots over the age of 65 are flying
complex aircraft in the same airspace under parts 91 and 135. For these
reasons--and because we believe it is wrong to discriminate based on
age and in the absence of negative safety data--we believe that raising
the pilot retirement age continues to be a safe, proven solution worthy
of Congressional support. We hope the Committee will urge the FAA to
take on a leadership role within the International Civil Aviation
Organization and in other forums, to help drive change on this matter.
The second public policy solution would address the high cost of
flight education and training programs, which presents and enormous
barrier to pilot careers. According to the Bureau of Labor Statistics,
the median annual wages for airline pilots in scheduled air
transportation was $257,840 in 2023.\13\ Published reports show that
wages for senior pilots are dramatically higher--reaching $700,000.\14\
Pilot careers are life-changing, with a stellar return on the training
investment. Unfortunately, the high cost of education and training,
coupled with inadequate student loan support, reserves these otherwise
transformative careers for those with wealth or the means to privately
finance flight education. Federal financial aid does not even approach
flight education costs. As a result, aspiring pilots must use personal
funds or borrow from private lenders with high interest rates--assuming
their parents qualify and can shoulder the burden. Families who lack
credit histories and scores needed to qualify are locked out. Unlike
other career paths that require expensive professional credentialing,
such as doctors and lawyers, students in accredited pilot training
programs cannot access additional lending through graduate aid
programs.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\13\ https://www.bls.gov/oes/current/oes532011.htm
\14\ https://www.barrons.com/articles/pilot-pay-soaring-airlines-
stock-travel-delta-american-united-db94a84e
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Aligning the student loan cap for accredited flight education and
training programs with the real costs associated with these programs
will provide equitable career access to everyone. In turn, this will
both grow the pipeline and support more people from underrepresented
populations entering the profession. RAA commends Representatives
Allred (D-TX) and Chavez DeRemer (R-OR) for authoring the Flight
Education Access Act and working to advance this critical piece of
legislation. We urge other members of this Committee to join them in
this effort.
Conclusion
Thank you for the opportunity to submit this statement for the
record. We also thank the Committee and its staff for their relentless
efforts toward a safe and strong airline workforce--as evidenced by the
numerous, important provisions included in the FAA Reauthorization Act
of 2024. The Regional Airline Association looks forward to working
collaboratively with members of this Committee and the FAA to
successfully implement the Act to strengthen our workforce, and to
rebuild safe, reliable air service to communities of all sizes.
Appendix I: Communities with Air Service Loss
Independent analysis of OAG Schedules Analyser: U.S. Carrier (scheduled
passenger operations), data retrieved 7/7/24

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Location                             State                     Airport Code          Percentage
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Birmingham-Shuttlesworth International...  AL.........................  (BHM)......................        8.30%
Mobile Regional..........................  AL.........................  (MOB)......................       11.39%
Montgomery Regional (Dannelly Field).....  AL.........................  (MGM)......................       24.94%
Dothan Regional..........................  AL.........................  (DHN)......................       46.55%
Mobile Downtown..........................  AL.........................  (BFM)......................       60.87%
Northwest Alabama Regional...............  AL.........................  (MSL)......................       70.75%
Bill and Hillary Clinton Ntl/Adams Field.  AR.........................  (LIT)......................        1.03%
Boone County.............................  AR.........................  (HRO)......................        1.25%
Memorial Field...........................  AR.........................  (HOT)......................        1.25%
South Arkansas Regional at Goodwin Field.  AR.........................  (ELD)......................        1.25%
Jonesboro Municipal......................  AR.........................  (JBR)......................       15.79%
Fort Smith Regional......................  AR.........................  (FSM)......................       35.26%
Texarkana Regional-Webb Field............  AR.........................  (TXK)......................       46.09%
Show Low Regional........................  AZ.........................  (SOW)......................        2.47%
Tucson International.....................  AZ.........................  (TUS)......................        5.61%
Yuma MCAS/Yuma International.............  AZ.........................  (YUM)......................       21.85%
Page Municipal...........................  AZ.........................  (PGA)......................       25.00%
Flagstaff Pulliam........................  AZ.........................  (FLG)......................       39.27%
Grand Canyon Ntl Park....................  AZ.........................  (GCN)......................       57.41%
San Diego International..................  CA.........................  (SAN)......................        2.66%
Sacramento International.................  CA.........................  (SMF)......................        3.17%
Palm Springs International...............  CA.........................  (PSP)......................        6.56%
Jack McNamara Field......................  CA.........................  (CEC)......................       10.42%
California Redwood Coast-Humboldt County.  CA.........................  (ACV)......................       12.37%
Merced Regional/Macready Field...........  CA.........................  (MCE)......................       13.71%
Metro Oakland International..............  CA.........................  (OAK)......................       17.13%
Los Angeles International................  CA.........................  (LAX)......................       19.59%
San Francisco International..............  CA.........................  (SFO)......................       21.73%
Norman Y Mineta San Jose International...  CA.........................  (SJC)......................       26.72%
Stockton Metro...........................  CA.........................  (SCK)......................       30.00%
Mammoth Yosemite.........................  CA.........................  (MMH)......................       41.94%
Santa Maria Public/Capt G Allan Hancock    CA.........................  (SMX)......................       55.56%
Field.
Grand Junction Regional..................  CO.........................  (GJT)......................        8.74%
Pueblo Memorial..........................  CO.........................  (PUB)......................       12.35%
Durango-La Plata County..................  CO.........................  (DRO)......................       12.81%
Montrose Regional........................  CO.........................  (MTJ)......................       17.43%
Cortez Municipal.........................  CO.........................  (CEZ)......................       34.38%
Telluride Regional.......................  CO.........................  (TEX)......................       55.71%
San Luis Valley Regional/Bergman Field...  CO.........................  (ALS)......................       60.15%
Bradley International....................  CT.........................  (BDL)......................        3.08%
Tallahassee International................  FL.........................  (TLH)......................        2.46%
Orlando Sanford International............  FL.........................  (SFB)......................        7.27%
Daytona Beach International..............  FL.........................  (DAB)......................        7.50%
Jacksonville International...............  FL.........................  (JAX)......................       11.70%
Fort Lauderdale/Hollywood International..  FL.........................  (FLL)......................       12.28%
Gainesville Regional.....................  FL.........................  (GNV)......................       14.29%
Dekalb-Peachtree.........................  GA.........................  (PDK)......................      100.00%
Augusta Regional at Bush Field...........  GA.........................  (AGS)......................        9.89%
Hartsfield-Jackson Atlanta International.  GA.........................  (ATL)......................       14.31%
Columbus.................................  GA.........................  (CSG)......................       26.09%
Southwest Georgia Regional...............  GA.........................  (ABY)......................       26.19%
Valdosta Regional........................  GA.........................  (VLD)......................       28.74%
Brunswick Golden Isles...................  GA.........................  (BQK)......................       31.87%
Kahului..................................  HI.........................  (OGG)......................        9.14%
Ellison Onizuka Kona International at      HI.........................  (KOA)......................       19.34%
Keahole.
Kapalua..................................  HI.........................  (JHM)......................       84.46%
Dubuque Regional.........................  IA.........................  (DBQ)......................      100.00%
Waterloo Regional........................  IA.........................  (ALO)......................        4.92%
Des Moines International.................  IA.........................  (DSM)......................       10.12%
The Eastern Iowa.........................  IA.........................  (CID)......................       22.36%
Southeast Iowa Regional..................  IA.........................  (BRL)......................       25.87%
Sioux Gateway/Brig General Bud Day Field.  IA.........................  (SUX)......................       46.55%
Fort Dodge Regional......................  IA.........................  (FOD)......................       59.54%
Mason City Municipal.....................  IA.........................  (MCW)......................       65.58%
Joslin Field/Magic Valley Regional.......  ID.........................  (TWF)......................       30.34%
Pocatello Regional.......................  ID.........................  (PIH)......................       33.33%
Chicago O'Hare International.............  IL.........................  (ORD)......................       18.76%
Central Il Regional/Bloomington-Normal...  IL.........................  (BMI)......................       20.07%
Quad Cities International................  IL.........................  (MLI)......................       21.40%
General Downing-Peoria International.....  IL.........................  (PIA)......................       23.09%
Abraham Lincoln Capital..................  IL.........................  (SPI)......................       36.09%
University of Illinois/Willard...........  IL.........................  (CMI)......................       54.61%
Veterans Airport of Southern Illinois....  IL.........................  (MWA)......................       67.28%
Decatur..................................  IL.........................  (DEC)......................       68.07%
Indianapolis International...............  IN.........................  (IND)......................        3.53%
Fort Wayne International.................  IN.........................  (FWA)......................        5.38%
South Bend International.................  IN.........................  (SBN)......................       16.26%
Evansville Regional......................  IN.........................  (EVV)......................       39.73%
Liberal Mid-America Regional.............  KS.........................  (LBL)......................        1.85%
Manhattan Regional.......................  KS.........................  (MHK)......................       13.89%
Dodge City Regional......................  KS.........................  (DDC)......................       33.75%
Salina Regional..........................  KS.........................  (SLN)......................       34.57%
Hays Regional............................  KS.........................  (HYS)......................       50.93%
Louisville Muhammad Ali International....  KY.........................  (SDF)......................        1.65%
Cincinnati/Northern Kentucky               KY.........................  (CVG)......................       13.16%
International.
Blue Grass...............................  KY.........................  (LEX)......................       17.55%
Owensboro/Daviess County Regional........  KY.........................  (OWB)......................       50.00%
Barkley Regional.........................  KY.........................  (PAH)......................       54.31%
Baton Rouge Metro, Ryan Field............  LA.........................  (BTR)......................        6.35%
Louis Armstrong New Orleans International  LA.........................  (MSY)......................       10.35%
Lafayette Regional/Paul Fournet Field....  LA.........................  (LFT)......................       15.96%
Shreveport Regional......................  LA.........................  (SHV)......................       17.26%
Monroe Regional..........................  LA.........................  (MLU)......................       20.00%
Alexandria International.................  LA.........................  (AEX)......................       32.18%
Norwood Memorial.........................  MA.........................  (OWD)......................      100.00%
Worcester Regional.......................  MA.........................  (ORH)......................        0.83%
Nantucket Memorial.......................  MA.........................  (ACK)......................       23.14%
Cape Cod Gateway.........................  MA.........................  (HYA)......................       24.88%
Provincetown Municipal...................  MA.........................  (PVC)......................       25.87%
New Bedford Regional.....................  MA.........................  (EWB)......................       66.04%
Salisbury-Ocean City Wicomico Regional...  MD.........................  (SBY)......................        2.79%
Baltimore/Washington International         MD.........................  (BWI)......................        7.47%
Thurgood Marshall.
Hagerstown Regional/Richard A Henson       MD.........................  (HGR)......................       67.88%
Field.
Bangor International.....................  ME.........................  (BGR)......................       10.35%
Alpena County Regional...................  MI.........................  (APN)......................        1.89%
Delta County.............................  MI.........................  (ESC)......................        3.70%
Cherry Capital...........................  MI.........................  (TVC)......................        4.73%
Gerald R Ford International..............  MI.........................  (GRR)......................        5.77%
MBS International........................  MI.........................  (MBS)......................       12.89%
Pellston Regional/Emmet County...........  MI.........................  (PLN)......................       18.57%
Detroit Metro Wayne County...............  MI.........................  (DTW)......................       23.92%
Sawyer International.....................  MI.........................  (MQT)......................       37.41%
Bishop International.....................  MI.........................  (FNT)......................       37.47%
Gogebic/Iron County......................  MI.........................  (IWD)......................       39.33%
Capital Region International.............  MI.........................  (LAN)......................       39.94%
Kalamazoo/Battle Creek International.....  MI.........................  (AZO)......................       47.62%
Range Regional...........................  MN.........................  (HIB)......................        3.70%
Bemidji Regional.........................  MN.........................  (BJI)......................       11.43%
Minneapolis-St Paul International/Wold-    MN.........................  (MSP)......................       15.86%
Chamberlain.
Thief River Falls Regional...............  MN.........................  (TVF)......................       34.57%
Duluth International.....................  MN.........................  (DLH)......................       36.59%
Rochester International..................  MN.........................  (RST)......................       42.94%
Kansas City International................  MO.........................  (MCI)......................        1.62%
Waynesville-St Robert Regional Forney      MO.........................  (TBN)......................        1.85%
Field.
Springfield-Branson Ntl..................  MO.........................  (SGF)......................        5.29%
St Louis Lambert International...........  MO.........................  (STL)......................       11.79%
Columbia Regional........................  MO.........................  (COU)......................       33.54%
Cape Girardeau Regional..................  MO.........................  (CGI)......................       37.65%
Kirksville Regional......................  MO.........................  (IRK)......................       43.01%
Joplin Regional..........................  MO.........................  (JLN)......................       69.23%
Branson..................................  MO.........................  (BKG)......................       77.78%
Hattiesburg/Laurel Regional..............  MS.........................  (PIB)......................       14.52%
Tupelo Regional..........................  MS.........................  (TUP)......................       21.52%
Key Field................................  MS.........................  (MEI)......................       43.01%
Golden Triangle Regional.................  MS.........................  (GTR)......................       43.12%
Greenville Mid-Delta.....................  MS.........................  (GLH)......................       61.73%
Billings Logan International.............  MT.........................  (BIL)......................        3.73%
Helena Regional..........................  MT.........................  (HLN)......................       11.85%
Great Falls International................  MT.........................  (GTF)......................       21.12%
Raleigh-Durham International.............  NC.........................  (RDU)......................        4.24%
Coastal Carolina Regional................  NC.........................  (EWN)......................        5.69%
Albert J Ellis...........................  NC.........................  (OAJ)......................       20.98%
Piedmont Triad International.............  NC.........................  (GSO)......................       22.20%
Fayetteville Regional/Grannis Field......  NC.........................  (FAY)......................       25.75%
Pitt-Greenville..........................  NC.........................  (PGV)......................       32.52%
Concord-Padgett Regional.................  NC.........................  (USA)......................       49.02%
Hector International.....................  ND.........................  (FAR)......................        5.98%
Minot International......................  ND.........................  (MOT)......................       16.49%
Williston Basin International............  ND.........................  (xwa)......................       17.91%
Bismarck Municipal.......................  ND.........................  (BIS)......................       23.39%
Jamestown Regional.......................  ND.........................  (JMS)......................       32.14%
Grand Forks International................  ND.........................  (GFK)......................       43.89%
McCook Ben Nelson Regional...............  NE.........................  (MCK)......................        3.70%
North Platte Regional/Lee Bird Field.....  NE.........................  (LBF)......................        3.70%
Alliance Municipal.......................  NE.........................  (AIA)......................        3.70%
Western Nebraska Regional/William B        NE.........................  (BFF)......................        3.70%
Heilig Field.
Kearney Regional.........................  NE.........................  (EAR)......................        8.62%
Eppley Airfield..........................  NE.........................  (OMA)......................       11.35%
Central Nebraska Regional................  NE.........................  (GRI)......................       22.77%
Lincoln..................................  NE.........................  (LNK)......................       33.64%
Portsmouth International at Pease........  NH.........................  (PSM)......................       26.19%
Manchester Boston Regional...............  NH.........................  (MHT)......................       27.29%
Morristown Municipal.....................  NJ.........................  (MMU)......................      100.00%
Newark Liberty International.............  NJ.........................  (EWR)......................        4.86%
Trenton Mercer...........................  NJ.........................  (TTN)......................       49.10%
Albuquerque International Sunport........  NM.........................  (ABQ)......................        2.76%
Roswell Air Center.......................  NM.........................  (ROW)......................       13.21%
Clovis Regional..........................  NM.........................  (CVN)......................       45.83%
Boulder City Municipal...................  NV.........................  (BLD)......................       25.81%
Elko Regional............................  NV.........................  (EKO)......................       46.55%
New York Skyports SPB....................  NY.........................  (NYS)......................      100.00%
East Hampton.............................  NY.........................  (HTO)......................      100.00%
Laguardia................................  NY.........................  (LGA)......................        1.04%
Plattsburgh International................  NY.........................  (PBG)......................        2.56%
Watertown International..................  NY.........................  (ART)......................        6.56%
Albany International.....................  NY.........................  (ALB)......................        6.79%
Ogdensburg International.................  NY.........................  (OGS)......................        7.02%
Frederick Douglass/Greater Rochester       NY.........................  (ROC)......................       11.77%
International.
Long Island MacArthur....................  NY.........................  (ISP)......................       14.37%
Buffalo Niagara International............  NY.........................  (BUF)......................       15.71%
Greater Binghamton/Edwin A Link Field....  NY.........................  (BGM)......................       41.79%
Niagara Falls International..............  NY.........................  (IAG)......................       55.26%
Ithaca Tompkins International............  NY.........................  (ITH)......................       56.04%
Elmira/Corning Regional..................  NY.........................  (ELM)......................       63.18%
New York Stewart International...........  NY.........................  (SWF)......................       76.87%
Cincinnati Municipal/Lunken Field........  OH.........................  (LUK)......................      100.00%
Burke Lakefront..........................  OH.........................  (BKL)......................      100.00%
John Glenn Columbus International........  OH.........................  (CMH)......................        8.61%
Cleveland-Hopkins International..........  OH.........................  (CLE)......................       15.12%
Rickenbacker International...............  OH.........................  (LCK)......................       19.63%
Akron-Canton Regional....................  OH.........................  (CAK)......................       27.96%
James M Cox Dayton International.........  OH.........................  (DAY)......................       41.23%
Eugene F Kranz Toledo Express............  OH.........................  (TOL)......................       85.87%
Will Rogers World........................  OK.........................  (OKC)......................        3.77%
Lawton-Fort Sill Regional................  OK.........................  (LAW)......................       20.00%
Stillwater Regional......................  OK.........................  (SWO)......................       27.91%
Mahlon Sweet Field.......................  OR.........................  (EUG)......................        5.96%
Roberts Field............................  OR.........................  (RDM)......................       11.67%
Portland International...................  OR.........................  (PDX)......................       18.11%
Rogue Valley International-Medford.......  OR.........................  (MFR)......................       30.64%
Venango Regional.........................  PA.........................  (FKL)......................      100.00%
Dubois Regional..........................  PA.........................  (DUJ)......................        0.59%
Pittsburgh International.................  PA.........................  (PIT)......................        9.06%
Philadelphia International...............  PA.........................  (PHL)......................       16.07%
Harrisburg International.................  PA.........................  (MDT)......................       17.91%
Lehigh Valley International..............  PA.........................  (ABE)......................       33.74%
Arnold Palmer Regional...................  PA.........................  (LBE)......................       36.08%
University Park..........................  PA.........................  (SCE)......................       41.88%
Wilkes-Barre/Scranton International......  PA.........................  (AVP)......................       46.08%
Altoona/Blair County.....................  PA.........................  (AOO)......................       46.55%
Williamsport Regional....................  PA.........................  (IPT)......................       47.06%
John Murtha Johnstown/Cambria County.....  PA.........................  (JST)......................       54.07%
Erie International/Tom Ridge Field.......  PA.........................  (ERI)......................       61.18%
Rhode Island Tf Green International......  RI.........................  (PVD)......................        2.49%
Columbia Metro...........................  SC.........................  (CAE)......................        8.00%
Hilton Head..............................  SC.........................  (HHH)......................       17.65%
Florence Regional........................  SC.........................  (FLO)......................       47.86%
Watertown Regional.......................  SD.........................  (ATY)......................        8.62%
Joe Foss Field...........................  SD.........................  (FSD)......................       10.20%
Rapid City Regional......................  SD.........................  (RAP)......................       27.46%
Pierre Regional..........................  SD.........................  (PIR)......................       41.57%
Memphis International....................  TN.........................  (MEM)......................       11.21%
Lovell Field.............................  TN.........................  (CHA)......................       18.69%
McKellar-Sipes Regional..................  TN.........................  (MKL)......................       30.09%
Del Rio International....................  TX.........................  (DRT)......................      100.00%
George Bush Intcntl/Houston..............  TX.........................  (IAH)......................        1.71%
Lubbock Preston Smith International......  TX.........................  (LBB)......................        4.53%
East Texas Regional......................  TX.........................  (GGG)......................       27.91%
Abilene Regional.........................  TX.........................  (ABI)......................       28.37%
Jack Brooks Regional.....................  TX.........................  (BPT)......................       29.55%
Tyler Pounds Regional....................  TX.........................  (TYR)......................       30.83%
Victoria Regional........................  TX.........................  (VCT)......................       43.01%
San Angelo Regional/Mathis Field.........  TX.........................  (SJT)......................       45.56%
Sheppard AFB/Wichita Falls Municipal.....  TX.........................  (SPS)......................       46.09%
Robert Gray AAF..........................  TX.........................  (GRK)......................       46.15%
Waco Regional............................  TX.........................  (ACT)......................       48.60%
Easterwood Field.........................  TX.........................  (CLL)......................       49.45%
Vernal Regional..........................  UT.........................  (VEL)......................        1.85%
Salt Lake City International.............  UT.........................  (SLC)......................        7.09%
Cedar City Regional......................  UT.........................  (CDC)......................       41.57%
Roanoke/Blacksburg Regional (Woodrum       VA.........................  (ROA)......................        0.16%
Field).
Washington Dulles International..........  VA.........................  (IAD)......................        2.66%
Norfolk International....................  VA.........................  (ORF)......................        4.57%
Shenandoah Valley Regional...............  VA.........................  (SHD)......................        8.62%
Richmond International...................  VA.........................  (RIC)......................        9.42%
Charlottesville-Albemarle................  VA.........................  (CHO)......................       23.19%
Newport News/Williamsburg International..  VA.........................  (PHF)......................       58.33%
Burlington International.................  VT.........................  (BTV)......................       19.52%
Seattle Lake Union Seaplane Base.........  WA.........................  (LKE)......................      100.00%
Spokane International....................  WA.........................  (GEG)......................        2.67%
Tri-Cities...............................  WA.........................  (PSC)......................       14.00%
Walla Walla Regional.....................  WA.........................  (ALW)......................       23.08%
Boeing Field/King County International...  WA.........................  (BFI)......................       33.33%
Yakima Air Trml/McAllister Field.........  WA.........................  (YKM)......................       44.04%
Pangborn Memorial........................  WA.........................  (EAT)......................       47.90%
Pullman/Moscow Regional..................  WA.........................  (PUW)......................       51.22%
Snohomish County (Paine Field)...........  WA.........................  (PAE)......................       70.72%
Rhinelander/Oneida County................  WI.........................  (RHI)......................        2.15%
General Mitchell International...........  WI.........................  (MKE)......................        5.87%
Dane County Regional/Truax Field.........  WI.........................  (MSN)......................       14.33%
Green Bay/Austin Straubel International..  WI.........................  (GRB)......................       18.51%
Central Wisconsin........................  WI.........................  (CWA)......................       47.59%
La Crosse Regional.......................  WI.........................  (LSE)......................       57.28%
Chippewa Valley Regional.................  WI.........................  (EAU)......................       64.52%
Morgantown Municipal (Walter L Bill Hart   WV.........................  (MGW)......................        0.59%
Field).
North Central West Virginia..............  WV.........................  (CKB)......................        2.25%
Tri-State/Milton J Ferguson Field........  WV.........................  (HTS)......................       19.35%
West Virginia International Yeager.......  WV.........................  (CRW)......................       29.55%
Laramie Regional.........................  WY.........................  (LAR)......................        1.85%
Southwest Wyoming Regional...............  WY.........................  (RKS)......................        3.13%
Cheyenne Regional/Jerry Olson Field......  WY.........................  (CYS)......................        3.33%
Sheridan County..........................  WY.........................  (SHR)......................       15.07%
Yellowstone Regional.....................  WY.........................  (COD)......................       25.77%
Central Wyoming Regional.................  WY.........................  (RIW)......................       37.37%
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Statement of the FAA Managers Association, Submitted for the Record by
Hon. Rick Larsen
The FAA Managers Association (FAAMA) appreciates the opportunity to
submit the following statement for the record in conjunction with
today's House Aviation Subcommittee hearing entitled ``Eliminating
Bottlenecks: Examining Opportunities to Recruit, Retain, and Engage
Aviation Talent.''
FAAMA is comprised of over 1,500 managers and supervisors from
across the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA). While many of our
members come from the air traffic control ranks, we also have members
who serve in technical operations, flight services, and other sectors
of the FAA. For over 40 years, FAAMA has promoted aviation safety and
efficiency, advocated for our members' interests, and prepared the
managers of today to be the aviation leaders of tomorrow. During the
last few decades, we have worked very closely with both FAA leadership
and Congress to identify and address the many issues that have arisen
within the aviation sector. No issue has been more front and center in
FAAMA's priority list than the subject of today's hearing--addressing
the staffing pipeline challenges that have been impacting the FAA's
workforce ranks for a number of years.
The goal of today's hearing is to identify areas within the greater
aviation spectrum that could be improved to address the growing
workforce needs. While we can only comment from the perspective of
FAAMA, we are pleased to see the broader examination of the entire
sector as the scale of workforce needs are extensive and shortcomings
in one area can quickly have a ripple effect across the operations of
the entire aviation community. From the perspective of the managers and
supervisors within the FAA, we appreciate this examination of the
various bottlenecks within the system and offer a few suggestions to
help positively contribute to a larger solution.
1. Building Awareness of the Problem
For well over a decade, the number of Air Traffic Operations (ATO)
Supervisors has declined significantly, mirroring much of what has been
seen amongst the ATO Controller ranks. This decline in supervisors has
led to the diminished efficiency of air traffic operations in recent
years and has exacted a significant toll on the remaining workforce.
With the growing number of ATO supervisors and controllers approaching
retirement, we only expect this situation to grow more problematic in
the future unless more aggressive actions are taken. While the FAA
Managers Association (FAAMA) is certainly supportive of efforts by
other groups to directly address the shortage of ATO controllers
through various legislative mechanisms, we strongly believe that a
specific effort is also needed to address the ATO supervisor shortage
issues.
During the 1990s, there were approximately 2500 supervisors and
managers across the ATO. Currently, we estimate the number of
supervisors and managers in the ATO has dipped well below 2000. While
the FAA has no formal established method for determining the
appropriate number of supervisors required in safety-related
occupations such as Air Traffic Control or Technical Operations, FAA
ATO Leadership has indicated that we are currently operating at an
Operations Supervisors (OS) Level of 74% capacity. Similarly
concerning, a 2023 USDOT Inspector General Report found that ``As of
August 2022, the number of operational supervisors in 25 of 26 critical
facilities . . . were below authorized levels.'' \1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ FAA Faces Controller Staffing Challenges as Air Traffic
Operations Return to Pre-Pandemic Levels at Critical Facilities https:/
/www.oig.dot.gov/sites/default/files/FAA%20Controller
%20Staffing%20and%20Training%20at%20Critical%20Facilities%20Final%20Repo
rt-06-21-23.pdf
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
We are concerned that such an imbalance in sufficient managerial
oversight in safety-related occupations can only enhance risk to the
ATC system and our members. And while we are very supportive of both
Congress' and the FAA's commitment to maximum hiring of new controllers
over the next few years (approximately 1800 per year), we are concerned
as to whether we will have enough supervisors to align with this surge.
Although a number of these controllers may eventually become managers
and supervisors, that process can be lengthy, simply because of the
additional years of necessary training and experience required to
providing managerial safety oversight. Thus, we encourage Congress to
continue working with the FAA to provide adequate funding to increase
the supervisor ranks within the ATC system and put us more on par with
the staffing level which were in place during the 1990s.
2. Pursuing Creative Solutions
The FAA has an ongoing need for highly qualified Operations
Supervisors/Supervisory Traffic Management Specialists (MSS-2)
throughout the National Airspace System (NAS) and the hiring pool of
qualified candidates is limited. Traditionally the FAA has only hired
air traffic controllers from within Air Traffic Organization (ATO), and
in some cases from Air Traffic Safety Oversight (AOV), for the position
of MSS-2. Supervisors work in the MSS-2 position for an average of 5
years before being promoted to higher level management positions. A
consistent and alternative stream of qualified candidates is key to
ensure continuity of mission success.
After conducting extensive research, and with the assistance of Air
Traffic SUPCOM, FAAMA has reached the following determinations as it
relates to a potential partnership with the U.S. Department of Defense
(DOD):

DOD-2152 current controllers are the equivalent to FAA
controllers at air traffic facilities, Level 8 and below.

DOD-2152 controllers are enrolled in FERS which is the
same retirement plan as FAA controllers.

DOD-2152 controllers with intent to achieve FAA
employment may be willing to bid on duty locations not normally
desirable to FAA controllers.

DOD-2152 controllers are not subject to the bargaining
unit release agreement with NATCA, and thus, could be available to the
Agency of MSS-2 positions in less, if not minimal time, if selected.

DOD-2152 candidates selected and hired into the FAA would
be qualified to successfully complete all mandatory training and all
position certifications of FAA candidates.

There are currently over 1800 civilian air traffic controllers
within DOD. On several occasions, we have seen instances where some of
the controllers in the DOD supervisor ranks have expressed a desire to
move into a similar FAA position only to be told that no such process
currently exists that would allow for such movement. FAAMA believes
that the hiring of qualified DOD-2152 air traffic controllers would
make immediately available an eligible source of potential MSS-2
candidates. Thus, we have been working with FAA leadership over the
past two years to establish a pilot program that would help both the
FAA and DOD examine exactly how such a process could work. While we
understand that a path forward will require some careful discussions
amongst the various stakeholders, we are most appreciative of FAA and
ATO leadership for their willingness to ``think outside-the-box'' and
explore further.
We were also very pleased that the recently passed FAA
Reauthorization bill included a provision creating a ``Joint Aviation
Employment Training Working Group between the FAA and DoD to improve
career transitions between the military and civilian workforces.'' Such
creative thinking aligns well with the spirit of our efforts in
identifying alternative pipelines for managers and supervisors and we
encourage both the FAA and Congress to continue approaching today's
staffing challenges with innovative solutions.
3. Understanding Workforce Needs
A key component to understanding the challenges facing any
workplace setting is gaining a better foothold on the state of mind of
the collective workforce. At FAAMA, we have been working with the FAA
to do just that over the past few years--particularly as it relates to
our Frontline Managers.
The last formal study of the Frontline Manager (FLM) position was
conducted by the ATO in the mid-2000s. Due to the many changes
(operating in a pandemic, drones, commercial space, air taxi, etc.) to
the FLM role over the past decade, a new study of FLM position and
workload responsibility is needed. This new study should address ATO
challenges in the human factors under the following R&D focus areas:
Improved Safety, Reduced Hazards, and Error Mitigation in ATC. The
study should update the Frontline Manager's Quick Reference Guide (QRG)
to reflect current operational context and standards and should be
conducted in accordance with the Human Factors/Human Performance
guidelines.
Given this position, we were very pleased that the recently passed
FAA Reauthorization included language requiring ``a Frontline Manager
Workload Study to assess challenges posed by the staffing shortage and
increased complexity of the National Airspace System (NAS).'' FAAMA
looks forward to working with Congress and the FAA on the
implementation of the study and sharing those findings with all that
are interested.
4. Ending Continued Budget Uncertainties
While both the FAA and Congress have taken important steps forward
on the issues described above, one area where Washington continues to
fall short is the carrying out of a more stable and certain budgetary
process. For well over a decade now, FAAMA has listed ``funding the
government'' as a top priority at the beginning of each legislative
year.
In 2018-2019, we saw the historic 35-day federal government
shutdown which severely impacted all FAAMA members and federal
employees. As essential workers, most FAA managers and supervisors are
required to continue working without pay during any federal government
shutdowns. Lapses in pay cause immediate struggles for our members and
their families, as they must still make mortgage payments, pay
childcare costs, and deal with other recurring expenses. While there is
typically backpay that occurs following the end of any shutdown, it
does not replace the financial stresses that occur throughout the
shutdown. And given the length of the last shutdown in 2018-2019, such
financial stresses can last quite long.
Most notably, government shutdowns only compound the much-discussed
issue of supervisor and controller staffing shortages that currently
challenge our national air traffic system. In addition to the
individual hardships, these shutdowns directly impact FAA controller
and manager hiring and training. The negative consequences of pausing
training and hiring extend well beyond the end of the shutdown. These
instabilities make it difficult to attract and retain new employees in
this unique, important career field.
Heading into this fall and a ``lame duck'' Congressional session,
we will once again face the prospect of another potential shutdown as
Congress tries to finish the FY25 Appropriations process. The
uncertainty that comes with any such post-election session is no doubt
concerning for FAAMA and our members. Whether it's Congress passing
appropriations bills in regular order or pushing through legislation
aimed at preventing future shutdowns, FAAMA encourages the next
Congress to seriously address this issue once and for all. Furthermore,
resolution of this unnecessary annual impediment will do more than any
other suggestion referenced above to address the workforce pipeline
concerns that are impacting our community.
Conclusion
As always, the FAA Managers Association thanks this subcommittee
for the opportunity to share the thoughts of our over 1,500 members. On
behalf of the managers and supervisors from across the FAA, we once
again applaud you for passing a very strong FAA Reauthorization bill
earlier this year. We look forward to working with you and the FAA on
implementation. Please continue to use FAAMA as a resource as you move
forward in working to address vital issues affecting aviation safety
and efficiency. For additional information regarding this Statement for
the Record, please contact FAAMA Executive Director Ron Eritano.

Appendix

----------

Questions to David J. Spero, National President, Professional Aviation
Safety Specialists, AFL-CIO (PASS), from Hon. Rick Larsen

Question 1. Mr. Spero, your testimony highlights that the FAA is
currently using an insufficient staffing model for aviation safety
inspectors. With the agency's heightened focus on safety, particularly
in response to recently reported lapses in aircraft manufacturing and
quality control processes, how would the continued use of this
antiquated model impact the agency's efforts to increase its oversight
role?
Answer. The current staffing model used by the agency is inadequate
for accurately determining the necessary number of aviation safety
inspectors. It lacks reliability, was developed without collaboration
with the union, and should not serve as the basis for informed staffing
decisions. Understaffing has caused delays in certifying traditional
entrants into the national airspace system, and additional resources
are urgently needed to manage the growing demand from nontraditional
entrants, such as advanced air mobility and unmanned aerial systems.
In response to recent lapses in aircraft manufacturing and quality
control, the FAA has announced plans to increase the number of
inspectors overseeing Boeing and Spirit AeroSystems. Currently, the
number of inspectors is in the low 30s, with a target of 55, according
to the FAA administrator. While PASS supports any effort to strengthen
oversight, especially given recent issues, the union raises concerns
about how the agency arrived at the figure of 55 inspectors. If an
unreliable staffing model was used to make this determination, the
calculated number may not be based on accurate or reliable information.
PASS has consistently highlighted the shortage of aviation safety
inspectors. If additional inspectors are assigned to Boeing and Spirit,
personnel will likely be diverted from other critical oversight roles.
Simply reshuffling inspectors as a stopgap measure does not provide a
sustainable solution to ensuring the safety of the aviation system.
Additionally, Boeing's Organization Designation Authorization (ODA)
office has approximately 1,000 employees. Under the ODA program, the
FAA delegates certain oversight responsibilities to non-agency
personnel, which can lead to manufacturers effectively overseeing their
own work, with only limited FAA oversight by an already understaffed
inspector workforce. Given the scale of this workforce, the assignment
of just 55 inspectors may be insufficient.
Although the Aircraft Certification Reform and Accountability Act
was enacted, in part, to address these concerns, PASS remains deeply
concerned that current oversight efforts are still inadequate.
PASS is asking that the FAA be directed to revise its inspector
staffing model in collaboration with the union. As always, PASS stands
ready to provide input and assistance as our safety workforce knows
best what resources are needed to ensure the safety of the American
flying public.

Question 2. Section 430 of the recently enacted 2024 FAA
reauthorization law directs the agency to review and revise this
aviation safety inspector staffing model. Mr. Spero, please elaborate
on how the model can be improved and what factors the FAA should
consider in complying with the requirements of the law?
Answer. Improving the aviation safety inspector staffing model
requires a comprehensive approach that incorporates collaboration with
key stakeholders, modern data analytics, and industry trends.
PASS has long raised concerns about the FAA's aviation safety
inspector staffing and the outdated staffing model the agency relies
on. For decades, the union has called for meaningful collaboration with
the FAA to ensure all factors are thoroughly considered in developing a
more effective staffing strategy. The current approach relies on a
single national figure for the number of inspectors, which fails to
address the unique needs of individual offices. Conducting a detailed
analysis of each office's specific requirements, along with projecting
future staffing needs, would provide a clearer picture of the workload
and address a key recommendation made by the Department of
Transportation Inspector General in 2021.
Collaboration with key stakeholders is critical for success.
Engaging with unions like PASS will ensure that the staffing model
reflects the real-world experience and expertise of the workforce.
Union input can help ensure the model is practical and realistic.
Likewise, working closely with manufacturers, airlines, and other
industry stakeholders will provide insights into their operations,
allowing the FAA to better forecast staffing needs and develop new
safety protocols tailored to current industry realities.
Investing in workforce development is equally important. Continuous
training and specialization will ensure that inspectors are well-
equipped to handle modern aviation's complexities. Continuous training
and keeping inspectors up to date on new technologies is vital to
ensuring the workforce remains efficient and capable of handling
emerging challenges. Succession planning is crucial as well, with a
focus on recruiting and training the next generation of inspectors to
prevent gaps in oversight as the workforce ages.
A data-driven approach is essential, where risk-based allocation is
used to assess areas of high risk, such as complex manufacturing
processes or emerging technologies like advanced air mobility (AAM) and
unmanned aerial systems (UAS). The model should integrate real-time
data from aircraft operations, manufacturing, and maintenance, enabling
dynamic adjustments to staffing needs instead of relying on outdated
static models.
The FAA must also consider industry trends and technological
advancements when refining the staffing model. The rapid growth of
traditional and nontraditional entrants in aviation introduces new
complexities in oversight. The model should be designed to account for
these emerging sectors.
The model must also account for geographic and operational
differences. Different regions may require varying levels of oversight
depending on factors like air traffic density, the presence of major
manufacturers, or the growth of new aviation sectors. Likewise, more
complex operations, such as international routes or cutting-edge
technologies, demand more intensive oversight. The model should be
flexible enough to address these differences while maintaining high
safety standards.
Flexibility and scalability are essential components of the new
staffing model. The FAA should ensure that the model can quickly adapt
to industry changes, such as new regulations or unexpected challenges
like economic downturns or pandemics. A scalable model will allow for
adjustments in staffing levels without compromising safety. Efficient
resource allocation, including sharing resources across regions during
peak demand and telework, will also help optimize the use of existing
resources and talent.
Since aviation safety oversight cannot rely on a one-size-fits-all
approach, a comprehensive analysis of these and other factors is
necessary to accurately assess the number of inspectors needed and
where they should be allocated. By addressing these factors, the FAA
can create a more robust, adaptable staffing model that meets the
evolving demands of the aviation industry while upholding the highest
safety standards.

Question 3. In recent years the FAA's aging legacy systems and
vulnerabilities in critical safety and communications equipment have
strained an increasingly complex U.S. airspace--at times even causing
delays and safety incidents. However, without a robust and highly
skilled technical workforce to maintain and enhance these systems, we
will not be able to keep pace with airspace demands. How does the FAA
reauthorization begin to address the agency's technical operations
staffing? needs What else can Congress and the FAA do to support PASS
members?
Answer. The FAA reauthorization does not mandate a Technical
Operations workforce plan. The FAA needs a Technical Operations
workforce plan to adequately staff the national airspace system (NAS).
According to the FAA, Technical Operations ``provide the services that
support the technical backbone of our national airspace system,
managing hardware and software that support safe and efficient flight
operations.'' This workforce installs, operates, maintains and repairs
more than 74,000 pieces of radar, communications, navigational aids,
airport lighting, backup power, heating, ventilation and air
conditioning equipment. The Technical Operations workforce falls into
five categories: environmental, radar, navigational aids,
communications, and automation.
Since 2014, the Technical Operations workforce has shrunk by nearly
10 percent, dropping from 5,810 to 5,303 employees. The overall number
of 2101 series employees has experienced a similar decline, falling
from 5,348 to 4,845. At the same time, the percentage of trainees has
surged by 250 percent, increasing from 240 to 615, while the number of
certified technicians has decreased by 25 percent, from 3,638 to 2,725.
This shift has left the workforce understaffed and overburdened, as
trainees--who are officially in developmental training for up to three
years--cannot fully compensate for the loss of experienced certified
technicians. The pandemic exacerbated this issue by significantly
reducing necessary hands-on training, with virtual training proving an
inadequate substitute for real-world experience. To address the
increasing shortage of certified technicians, training processes must
be accelerated while maintaining high standards of quality. The common
saying within the FAA, ``We don't hire until they retire,'' highlights
the urgency of this situation, especially considering that 34 percent
of the current workforce is 55 or older.
Insufficient technician staffing can lead to longer restoration
times during outages, resulting in increased air traffic delays.
Additionally, it becomes challenging to ensure adequate shift coverage,
raising the risk of significant air traffic disruptions. During the
July 10, 2024, hearing ``Eliminating Bottlenecks: Examining
Opportunities to Recruit, Retain, and Engage Aviation Talent,'' PASS
highlighted a ground stop on June 1st at Chicago O'Hare International
Airport (ORD) as a prime example of the consequences of understaffing.
At the time of the incident, no technician on site had the necessary
radar skills to resolve the issue, causing unnecessary aircraft delays.
Had the agency employed the right number of properly trained
technicians, the problem could have been addressed immediately. This
incident underscores the critical need for sufficient staffing and
training to maintain the safety and efficiency of the air traffic
system.
Unfortunately, this issue has resurfaced since the hearing. On July
14th, another ground stop occurred in Chicago due to an equipment
failure, with no technician available on-site to resolve it. This
ground stop was caused by a power supply failure in the Airport Surface
Detection Equipment, Model X (ASDE-X). ASDE-X is a surveillance system
using radar, multilateration and satellite technology that allows air
traffic controllers to track the surface movement of aircraft and
vehicles. While the failure cleared within seconds, it required
technician intervention to return it to service and caused a ripple
effect impacting Cleveland, Indianapolis, Kansas City and Minneapolis
airspace. And there was no ASDE-X-certified technician on duty at the
time to do so. This incident further emphasizes the urgent need for
adequate staffing and proper training to ensure swift responses to
technical issues that impact air traffic operations.
PASS acknowledges the congressional-driven directive for the
Department of Transportation Inspector General (IG) to review FAA
workforce plans from the past five fiscal years. We believe that an
evaluation of the Technical Operations workforce plan is not only
overdue but essential for addressing current staffing deficiencies.
However, additional steps are needed to ensure that technical
employees are strategically positioned throughout the National Airspace
System (NAS). PASS is calling for the FAA to be required to develop a
comprehensive Technical Operations Workforce Plan in collaboration with
PASS. This plan should serve as a model for other workforce strategies.
We are confident that, with proper staffing and utilization, the
expertise of Technical Operations employees will enhance the
implementation of new NAS systems and improve on-the-job training.
Despite PASS's readiness and willingness to assist in creating this
plan, the FAA has either declined or ignored our offers to contribute.

Question to David J. Spero, National President, Professional Aviation
Safety Specialists, AFL-CIO (PASS), from Hon. Jefferson Van Drew

Question 1. Are there other areas of technological advancement that
you and the Aviation community want to see at the FAA and what can
Congress do to support those changes?
Answer. The FAA's ability to modernize and advance the aviation
system relies heavily on having a well-staffed and skilled workforce.
Currently, the agency faces significant shortages in both certified
technicians and safety inspectors. Moreover, there is no comprehensive
staffing plan to accurately assess the number of certified technicians
required or their optimal placement within the system. Without this
crucial planning, it is challenging to ensure that the workforce is
effectively aligned with the needs of the evolving aviation
infrastructure.
The lack of a staffing plan for the Technical Operations workforce
means that it is hard for PASS subject matter experts to support the
agency's introduction of new technological advancements. This
stakeholder involvement has allowed for a more streamlined process
where any issues with a new system or technology are often discovered
before full release thanks to the expertise and knowledge of the
involved PASS members.
However, in some cases, members have been denied the opportunity to
participate in such efforts due to understaffing. This impedes the
agency's ability to advance and stay current with technological
advancements. In one instance, a member who had been an integral
participant in the Data Communications (DataComm) initiative was
recalled to his facility because of understaffing. The DataComm program
provides air-to-ground data link infrastructure and applications that
allow controllers and flight crews to exchange air traffic control
information more efficiently than traditional voice communications.
While PASS is pleased that members of Congress have recognized the
important role stakeholders play in modernization of the system,
without enough staffing in place, the agency stands to miss out on
vital insight and information provided by frontline employees.
The successful implementation and management of new technologies in
aviation necessitate sufficient staffing levels, which includes not
only the recruitment of additional personnel but also ensuring that
existing staff receive the necessary training and certification.
Congress can support this by aligning the FAA's budget with the need
for increased staffing to accommodate technological advancements. This
involves allocating funds for additional positions and creating
specialized roles required for the effective management and integration
of new systems.
Training also means implementing specialized training programs to
equip technicians, safety inspectors, and other aviation professionals
with the skills required for new technologies. Congress can help by
funding advanced training programs and simulations, supporting
educational partnerships, and ensuring that certification programs are
updated to match the latest technological developments.
Workforce modernization is also critical, as the skills required
for various aviation positions must be continuously updated to align
with technological progress. Ongoing professional development is
essential to maintain and enhance workforce competency. Congress can
facilitate this by providing funding for advanced education and
training programs, fostering a culture of lifelong learning, and
ensuring that the workforce is equipped to adapt to future
technological innovations.
By focusing on staffing and training its federal workforce, the FAA
ensures that its employees are well-equipped to support aviation
modernization and leverage technological advancements effectively,
maintaining high standards of safety and efficiency in the aviation
sector.

[all]
