- MARKUP OF: H.R. 6079, "MICROLOAN IMPROVEMENT ACT OF 2020" H.R. 6078, "MICROLOAN TRANSPARENCY AND ACCOUNTABILITY ACT OF 2020" H.R. 6133, "STEP IMPROVEMENT ACT OF 2020" H.R. 6021, "NORTHERN MARIANA ISLANDS SMALL BUSINESS DEVELOPMENT ACT"

[House Hearing, 116 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

MARKUP OF: H.R. 6079, ``MICROLOAN IMPROVEMENT ACT OF 2020'' H.R. 6078,
``MICROLOAN TRANSPARENCY AND ACCOUNTABILITY ACT OF 2020'' H.R. 6133,
``STEP IMPROVEMENT ACT OF 2020'' H.R. 6021, ``NORTHERN MARIANA ISLANDS
SMALL BUSINESS DEVELOPMENT ACT''

=======================================================================

HEARING

before the

COMMITTEE ON SMALL BUSINESS
UNITED STATES
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED SIXTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

HEARING HELD
MARCH 11, 2020

__________

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Small Business Committee Document Number 116-079
Available via the GPO Website: www.govinfo.gov

______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
41-895                WASHINGTON : 2020

HOUSE COMMITTEE ON SMALL BUSINESS

NYDIA VELAZQUEZ, New York, Chairwoman
ABBY FINKENAUER, Iowa
JARED GOLDEN, Maine
ANDY KIM, New Jersey
JASON CROW, Colorado
SHARICE DAVIDS, Kansas
JUDY CHU, California
MARC VEASEY, Texas
DWIGHT EVANS, Pennsylvania
BRAD SCHNEIDER, Illinois
ADRIANO ESPAILLAT, New York
ANTONIO DELGADO, New York
CHRISSY HOULAHAN, Pennsylvania
ANGIE CRAIG, Minnesota
STEVE CHABOT, Ohio, Ranking Member
AUMUA AMATA COLEMAN RADEWAGEN, American Samoa, Vice Ranking Member
TROY BALDERSON, Ohio
KEVIN HERN, Oklahoma
JIM HAGEDORN, Minnesota
PETE STAUBER, Minnesota
TIM BURCHETT, Tennessee
ROSS SPANO, Florida
JOHN JOYCE, Pennsylvania
DAN BISHOP, North Carolina

Melissa Jung, Majority Staff Director
Justin Pelletier, Majority Deputy Staff Director and Chief Counsel
Kevin Fitzpatrick, Staff Director

C O N T E N T S

OPENING STATEMENTS

Page
Hon. Nydia Velazquez.............................................     1
Hon. Steve Chabot................................................     2

APPENDIX

Additional Material for the Record:
H.R. 6079, "Microloan Improvement Act of 2020"...............    13
H.R. 6078, "Microloan Transparency and Accountability Act of
2020"......................................................    20
H.R. 6133, "Step Improvement Act of 2020"....................    25
H.R. 6021, "Northern Mariana Islands Small Business
Development Act"...........................................    33

MARKUP OF: H.R. 6079, ``MICROLOAN IMPROVEMENT ACT OF 2020'' H.R. 6078,
``MICROLOAN TRANSPARENCY AND ACCOUNTABILITY ACT OF 2020'' H.R. 6133,
``STEP IMPROVEMENT ACT OF 2020'' H.R. 6021, ``NORTHERN MARIANA ISLANDS
SMALL BUSINESS DEVELOPMENT ACT''

----------

WEDNESDAY, MARCH 11, 2020

House of Representatives,
Committee on Small Business,
Washington, DC.
The committee met, pursuant to call, at 11:34 a.m., in Room
2360, Rayburn House Office Building. Hon. Nydia Velazquez
[chairwoman of the Committee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Velazquez, Finkenauer, Golden,
Kim, Crow, Davids, Evans, Schneider, Espaillat, Delgado,
Houlahan, Craig, Chabot, Radewagen, Hern, Hagedorn, Stauber,
Burchett, Joyce, and Bishop.
Also Present: Representative Sablan.
Chairwoman VELAZQUEZ. Welcome to our first markup of the
Second Session of the 116th Congress. Today, we will be
considering four bipartisan bills: two of them modernizing the
Microloan program, and another will give small businesses the
tools they need to enter and thrive in the global marketplace.
The last bill will ensure that 1,7000 small businesses that
employ 18,000 people in the Commonwealth of the Northern
Mariana Islands will have access to valuable SBA programs and
resources.
Before we get down to business, I would like to take a
moment to thank the Ranking Member and his staff and all of the
Members of the Small Business Committee for their tireless
bipartisan work on behalf of small businesses.
Over the course of the past year, our committee has held a
number of hearings to review programs at SBA. We have heard
from Administrator Carranza and her team of associate
administrators, Inspector General Ware, and small businesses
throughout the country to determine what is working well and
what can be improved at SBA.
The four bills that we are considering today are a plethora
of hard work. They will make much needed improvements to SBA
programs to make it easier for entrepreneurs to grow their
small businesses.
With that, let us turn to the bills under consideration.
H.R. 6079, the Microloan Improvement Act of 2020,
introduced by Mr. Kim and cosponsored by Mr. Burchett; H.R.
6078, the Microloan Transparency and Accountability Act of
2020, introduced by Mr. Burchett and cosponsored by Mr. Kim;
H.R. 6133, the State Trade Expansion Program Improvement Act of
2020, introduced by Ms. Finkenauer and cosponsored by Mr.
Spano; and H.R. 6021, the Northern Mariana Islands Small
Business Development Act, introduced by Mr. Sablan of the
Commonwealth of Northern Mariana Islands and cosponsored by Ms.
Radewagen of American Samoa.
All of today's bills are a result of the committee's
commitment to bipartisanship, and I urge Members to support
them.
I would now like to recognize our Ranking Member, Mr.
Chabot, for his opening remarks.
Mr. CHABOT. Thank you, Madam Chair, for holding today's
meeting. Again, I appreciate your willingness to work with me
and with all the Members on our side, as well as our staff in
such a bipartisan manner.
All four of these bills are led by Members of both parties,
which has become standard practice in our committee, and we
thank you for that.
I will be brief in my opening as we will discuss each bill
as it is called.
Before we begin, I want to say that work here in our
committee continues to be of critical importance.
Just yesterday, for an example, we held an exceptional
hearing where we discussed, in depth, the effect coronavirus is
having on American's small businesses and could have in the
immediate and long-term future.
As each of us know here in this committee, as the small
business economy goes, so goes our national economy.
Because of the coronavirus pandemic, small firms are
suffering from significant supply chain disruptions, economic
uncertainty, and a generalized sense of concern.
Historically, such sentiments do not bode well for
business, and especially small business. Without question, the
health of our citizens is our number one priority, but in this
committee our responsibility is to continue to seek out ways to
help small firms and their employees navigate difficult times
such as these.
Today, we have the opportunity to advance four bills that
strengthen several initiatives administered through the Small
Business Act. I support each of these measures and thank each
of our Members, both republican and democratic alike, for their
leadership and work on these bills.
I yield back.
Chairwoman VELAZQUEZ. Thank you, very much. The gentleman
yields back.
Before we get into the individual bills, are there any
Members present who seek recognition for the purposes of making
an opening statement?
H.R. 6079
Our first bill today is H.R. 6079, the Microloan
Improvement Act introduced by Mr. Kim and cosponsored by Mr.
Burchett. The bill enhances the Microloan program, which has
been a lifeline of affordable capital for thousands of aspiring
entrepreneurs each yeah, especially those from underserved
communities.
I would like to now recognize the gentleman from New
Jersey, Mr. Kim, the sponsor of the bill, for an opening
statement.
Mr. KIM. Thank you, Chairwoman. Thank you to my colleague
from Tennessee, Mr. Burchett, for working across the aisle with
me on this important legislation that will modernize SBA's
Microloan program.
Many entrepreneurs, especially those from underserved
communities, have great difficulty in securing much-needed
capital for their businesses. For these individuals,
traditional loans may be out of reach. The Microloan program
helps to alleviate this problem by extending business loans and
technical support to entrepreneurs.
Earlier this month, I chaired a hearing under the
Subcommittee on Economic Growth, Tax, and Capital Access, which
examined the SBA's Microloan program where we heard testimony
that reinforced the immense value of this program. The program
has meaningfully improved the well-being of tens of thousands
of businesses nationwide.
In my district alone, 198 businesses received microloans in
the total amount of almost $3.25 million in fiscal year 2019.
Without these microloans, many of these entrepreneurs would be
unable to pay bills, would have to cut staff, or worse, shut
their doors.
However, the program in its present form is not without its
faults. Many of the shortcomings of the program stem from the
fact that it is long overdue for modernization.
A common critique form participating lenders is that
antiquated rules unnecessarily restrict their lending activity.
To resolve this and other concerns regarding the Microloan
program, Mr. Burchett and I introduced the Microloan
Improvement Act. In short, this bill seeks to inject the
program with much-needed flexibility that will ease access to
capital for small business owners.
This bill is an important step toward improving a program
that has been critical to the success of small businesses. I
thank this committee for its support of these efforts, and I
look forward to a new chapter for the Microloans Program.
I yield back.
Chairwoman VELAZQUEZ. Thank you. The gentleman yields back.
I now would like to recognize the gentleman from Tennessee,
Mr. Burchett, the cosponsor of the bill, for an opening
statement.
Mr. BURCHETT. Which bill are we on? We are on 6079?
Chairwoman VELAZQUEZ. Correct.
Mr. BURCHETT. Okay, great.
Well, thank you Madam Chair. I appreciate you and the
Ranking Member's leadership on this issue, and I was happy to
work with Mr. Kim on the Microloan Improvement Act in order to
help grow small businesses in our rural areas. I ask for
overwhelming support. I do want to thank our staffs for all the
hard work they do both sides of the aisle. They seem to do all
the work and we get all the credit, so it would be nice to
recognize them at this time. I also want to thank everybody for
their support.
I yield the remainder of my hard-earned time. Back to you,
Chairlady.
Chairwoman VELAZQUEZ. Thank the gentleman. The gentleman
yields back.
Now are there any other Members who wish to be recognized
for a statement on H.R. 6079?
I now recognize the Ranking Member.
Mr. CHABOT. Thank you, Madam Chair. I will be brief.
To assist small dollar borrowers, the SBA offers the
Microloan program, where small businesses can receive loans of
$50,000 or less from nonprofit intermediaries. Beyond
financing, the Microloan program also requires the nonprofit
intermediaries to deliver technical assistance in counseling
small business borrowers.
I want to thank Mr. Kim from New Jersey, and Mr. Burchett
from Tennessee, for working in a bipartisan manner to introduce
this bill. H.R. 6079 updates and modernizes outdated provisions
in the Microloan program, such as the 155th rule, while also
adding key flexibility requirements. I fully support this
commonsense legislation and urge my colleagues to vote yes.
I yield back.
Chairwoman VELAZQUEZ. The gentleman yields back.
I now recognize myself briefly.
The Microloan program provides funding to nonprofit,
intermediary lenders, who in turn lend to very small businesses
and startups that are not ready for bank loans.
These intermediaries help small businesses succeed by
providing training and technical assistance. Mr. Kim put forth
a bill designed to make it easier for microloan intermediaries
to provide affordable capital to existing microbusinesses and
prospective entrepreneurs. Notably, the bill illuminates the
owners 155th rule.
I want to thank Mr. Kim and Mr. Burchett for their
leadership on this issue, and I encourage all my colleagues to
vote yes.
I would like to ask unanimous consent to submit letters of
support from friends of the Microloan program, AEO, WIPP, that
are for our microloan bills today.
So ordered.
If there is no further discussion, the committee will come
to consideration of H.R. 6079.
The clerk will read the report of the title of the bill.
The CLERK. H.R. 6079, the Microloan Improvement Act.
Chairwoman VELAZQUEZ. Without objection, H.R. 6079 is
considered as read and open for amendment at any time.
Are there any Members who wish to offer an amendment?
Seeing none, the question is now on H.R. 6079.
All those in favor, say aye.
All those opposed, say no.
In the opinion of the chair, the ayes have it.
H.R. 6079 is agreed to.
The question now occurs on reporting H.R. 6079 to the
House.
All those in favor, say aye.
All those opposed, say no.
In the opinion of the Chair, the ayes have it, and H.R.
6079 is reported to the House.
Without objection, the committee staff is authorized to
correct punctuation, make other necessary technical
corrections, and conforming changes.
Members have 2 days to file additional supplemental,
dissenting, and minority views.
H.R. 6078
Our second bill today is H.R. 6078, the Microloan
Transparency and Accountability Act introduced by Mr. Burchett
and cosponsored by Mr. Kim. These bills offer incentives to
microloan intermediaries to provide management assistance to
rural entrepreneurs.
I would now like to recognize the gentleman from Tennessee,
Mr. Burchett, around an opening statement on H.R. 6079.
Mr. BURCHETT. Thank you, Chairlady and Ranking Member. I
really do appreciate you all's leadership and allowing us to
bring these important issues forward.
I am also thanking you all's staffs and our staffs that
really do great work, and I am very appreciative of it.
Do you have to have an end course to get the results that I
think we are getting for American small business owners?
Again, I want to thank my colleague, Mr. Kim. That will be
Kim Tim in 2020 could be the new slogan. I do not know. His
work with me on this bill, the Microloan Transparency and
Accountability Act, this legislation would incentivize
microloan intermediaries to involve themselves in rural small
business and the Microloan program, while also improving the
transparency on how taxpayer dollars are being spent at the
SBA. Expanding the program is essential to small businesses in
rural areas, but ensuring the accountability is also important.
I ask for everyone's support. Once again, I yield the
remainder of my hard-earned time back to the committee, as long
as we all endorse the Kim Tim 2020 plan. Thank you.
Chairwoman VELAZQUEZ. The gentleman yields back.
Now I would like to recognize the cosponsor of the bill,
the gentleman from New Jersey, Mr. Kim.
Mr. KIM. Thank you, Chairwoman. Just to make sure, so I am
at the top of the ticket?
Mr. BURCHETT. Yes, sir. I do not really want all that
hassle.
Mr. KIM. You just want to be in the mix there.
Mr. BURCHETT. Yeah, you know.
Chairwoman VELAZQUEZ. I endorse that.
Mr. BURCHETT. The occasional picture in front of the
Christmas tree at Christmas time.
Mr. KIM. We will get our staff to work out the details.
Chairwoman VELAZQUEZ. Two minutes remain.
Mr. BURCHETT. Chairlady, you are out of order.
Mr. KIM. It has been really great working with my colleague
from Tennessee on these bills, trying to find ways that we can
move the needle forward, and this was a great example of,
again, just finding something very tangible, something very
specific that we can build off of.
I really think that this is something that is very much
needed. The studies are showing the rural businesses,
especially those in the developmental stages, are in particular
need of the strategic support.
For this bill to be able to have the bonus 5 percent
technical assistance grant to intermediary servicing rural
areas, these are the types of things that are just real
tangible things that can move the needle forward.
It has been a pleasure working with Mr. Burchett on this,
and we are going to do Kim Tim 2020.
I yield back. Thanks a lot.
Chairwoman VELAZQUEZ. The gentleman yields back.
Now we recognize the Ranking Member, Mr. Chabot.
Mr. CHABOT. Thank you, Madam Chair.
I would suggest that the gentleman that has just been
talking should include Mr. Hagedorn. Then we would have the Kim
Tim and Jim Plan. So there you go.
To enhance the dissemination of microloans in rural areas--
do we have another one?
Chairwoman VELAZQUEZ. That was a boom.
Mr. CHABOT. Maybe I should just yield back my time now.
Specifically, H.R. 6078 gives microloan intermediaries that
service rural communities the opportunity to receive bonus
technical assistance grants. Additionally, it requires the SBA
to conduct an annual portfolio risk analysis to ensure the
growing program is protecting and safeguarding taxpayer
dollars.
I would like to thank Mr. Burchett and Mr. Kim for working
together to protect American taxpayer dollars and to ensure our
rural communities utilize this program to its fullest.
I yield back my time.
Chairwoman VELAZQUEZ. The gentleman yields back.
Now I recognize myself briefly.
Earlier this Congress, this committee held hearings on the
program where, among other things, we heard about the
challenges that intermediaries face in providing technical
assistance, especially in rural areas. Intermediaries must
drive 2 hours or more to a borrower's place of business to
conduct training, which can be expensive.
These costs all come out of the intermediaries' bottom line
and the measure the gentleman from Tennessee has put forward to
make numbers with at least 25 percent of their loan portfolio
in rural areas eligible for a bonus technical assistance grant
is a reasonable one that I support and will encourage my
colleagues to support.
I thank both Mr. Burchett and Mr. Kim, and I urge a yes
vote. I yield back the balance of my time.
If there is no further discussion, the committee will come
to consideration of H.R. 6078.
The clerk will read the report of the title of the bill.
The CLERK. H.R. 6078, the Microloan Transparency----
Chairwoman VELAZQUEZ. Without objection, H.R. 6078 is
considered as read and open for amendment at any time.
Does anyone wish to offer an amendment?
Seeing none, the question is now on H.R. 6078.
All those in favor, say aye.
All those opposed, say no.
In the opinion of the Chair, the ayes have it.
H.R. 6078 is agreed to.
The question now occurs on reporting H.R. 6078 to the
House.
All those in favor, say aye.
All those opposed, say no.
In the opinion of the Chair, the ayes have it.
H.R. 6078 is reported to the House.
Without objection, the committee staff is authorized to
correct punctuation, make other necessary technical
corrections, and conforming changes.
Members have 2 days to file additional supplemental,
dissenting, and minority views.
H.R. 6133
The third bill that we are considering today is H.R. 6133,
the STEP Improvement Act of 2020 introduced by Ms. Finkenauer
and cosponsored by Mr. Spano. centsThis bill reauthorizes the
State Trade Expansion Program (STEP) through 2024 and makes
important improvements to streamline the application process
and provides states with increased flexibility to use funds.
I would now like to recognize the gentlewoman from Iowa,
Ms. Finkenauer, the sponsor of the bill, for an opening
statement.
Ms. FINKENAUER. Thank you, Madam Chair.
As the Congresswoman from Iowa's 1st Congressional
District, I know firsthand that for our small businesses, the
ability to access new markets and export goods promotes
economic successes at home and in our communities.
Given the importance of trade in my home state, especially
for our farmers and our small business owners, who our farmers
are also small business owners and manufacturers, I have made
it a priority to improve and strengthen the State Trade
Expansion Program.
The State Trade Expansion Program gives small businesses
the tools they need to start exporting and expanding into new
markets. Many small businesses operate with razor-thin margins
and only have a few employees. They do not always have the
resources to attend a new trade show, design an international
marketing campaign, or navigate foreign countries' complex
rules and regulations.
That is where the State Trade Expansion Program comes in.
It is important that we reauthorize this program before it
expires at the end of September. At the same time, we also need
to fix some of the program's administrative challenges which we
have heard about from folks in Iowa, from folks who have come
to testify in front of our committee and other stakeholders.
In the Rural Development, Agriculture, Trade, and
Entrepreneurship Subcommittee that I chair with Ranking Member,
Dr. Joyce, we held two hearings, actually, dedicated to better
understanding and addressing the challenges that have come up
with the State Trade Expansion Program. I also have a
roundtable in my district to hear from the Iowa Economic
Development Authority and small businesses that have used this
program and used it successfully. What we heard was that the
State Trade Expansion Program (STEP) is a great resource for
our states. But we also heard about very confusing application
process, really tight timelines, and poor communication from
staff at the Small Business Administration.
That is why today, taking all the feedback I have heard
here in D.C., and especially back at home, I am proud to
introduce the STEP Improvement Act of 2020. This bill will
reauthorize the State Trade Expansion Program for 4 more years
and make improvements, like creating a standard timeline and
timeframe for applications, opening more channels for input and
communication between the Small Business Administration and the
states, and collecting better data on how the program helps our
small businesses.
I want to thank my colleague, Mr. Spano, who is introducing
this legislation with me today, you know, this is a bipartisan
issue, one that we have been happy to work on bipartisanly in
Congress, you know, this last year, but for many years prior to
this as well when this program was originally created, and I am
glad we were able to work across the aisle again to get this
done today.
I urge all Members of this committee to support this bill.
With that, Madam Chair, I yield back.
Chairwoman VELAZQUEZ. Thank you. The gentlelady yields
back.
Are there any other Members who wish to be recognized for a
statement on H.R. 6133?
The Ranking Member is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. CHABOT. Thank you, Madam Chair. I would like to thank
Ms. Finkenauer and Mr. Spano for their leadership on this
legislation.
H.R. 6133, the STEP Improvement Act of 2020, will
reauthorize the SBA's State Trade Expansion Program for the
next 4 fiscal years. The program facilitates small business
participation and trade missions, ensures international
marketing efforts, workshops, and other promotional activities.
Since its establishment as a pilot initiative in 2010, STEP
has been subject to numerous oversight reports issued by the
GAO and the SBA's Office of the Inspector General. This
committee has carefully reviewed each report and collected
feedback from stakeholders to determine the reforms included
within the STEP reauthorization. State trade agencies and the
State International Development Organization have sent in
letters of support for the bill.
H.R. 6133 reinforces our commitment to seeing the SBA
fulfill its goals relating to the STEP program and maximizes
every dollar to help small businesses reach their potential in
the international market. The bill provides greater flexibility
to state trade agencies and enhances accountability at the SBA,
a balance that will greatly improve program functions.
Therefore, I would support this legislation and urge my
colleagues to do so on both sides and yield back my time.
Chairwoman VELAZQUEZ. Thank you. The gentleman yields back.
Now I recognize myself briefly.
First, I would like to commend Representative Finkenauer
for the work she did as the Chair of the Rural Development,
Agriculture, Trade, and Entrepreneurship Subcommittee, which
held two substantive hearings on STEP. This bill is a product
of those efforts and a tremendous amount of hard work.
The State Trade Expansion Program helps small businesses
navigate the complexities of an international marketplace and
is an invaluable tool for small businesses looking to export.
In fiscal year 2019, SBA supported $974 million in export
sales from STEP. While impressive, more can be done to help
small businesses access new markets and export goods abroad and
in turn boost our local economies at home. This bill delivers
on the committee's priority to expand exporting opportunities
and ensures small businesses have the resources they need to
compete abroad.
I thank Ms. Finkenauer and Mr. Spano for their leadership,
and I urge my colleagues to support this bill.
I ask unanimous consent to enter a letter of support from
the State International Development Organizations.
Without objection.
If there is no further discussion, the committee will move
to consideration of H.R. 6133.
The clerk will read the report of the title of the bill.
The CLERK. H.R. 6133, the----
Chairwoman VELAZQUEZ. Without objection, H.R. 6133 is
considered as read and open for amendment at any point.
Are there any Members who wish to offer an amendment?
Seeing none, the question is now on H.R. 6133.
All those in favor, say aye.
All those opposed, say no.
In the opinion of the Chair, the ayes have it.
H.R. 6133 is agreed to.
The question now occurs on reporting H.R. 6133 to the
House.
All those in favor, say aye.
All those opposed, say no.
In the opinion of the Chair, the ayes have it.
H.R. 6133 is reported to the House.
Without objection, the committee staff is authorized to
correct punctuation, make other necessary technical
corrections, and conforming changes.
Members have 2 days to file additional supplemental,
dissenting, and minority views.
H.R. 6021
The final bill before us today is H.R. 6021, the Northern
Mariana Islands Small Business Development Act, sponsored by
Mr. Sablan of the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands,
and cosponsored by Ms. Radewagen of American Samoa.
This bill takes the long-overdue step of including the
Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands in the Small
Business Development Center programs and the FAST program.
I would now like to recognize the bill's sponsor, the
gentleman from the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana
Islands, Mr. Sablan, for an opening statement.
Mr. SABLAN. Thank you very much Chairwoman Velazquez,
Ranking Member Chabot, and Members of the committee, for
allowing me to sit in and explain my view on H.R. 6021.
Thank you for your leadership supporting small businesses
and for including my bill, the Northern Mariana Islands Small
Business Development Act in today's markup.
My bill ensures the 1,700 small businesses in the Marianas
are eligible for grants through the Small Business Development
Center Program and through FAST, the Federal and State
Technology Program.
The Marianas is the only place in the United States not
included in these programs which help small businesses access
the knowledge and capital needed to compete successfully for
federal contracting opportunities. My bill would correct that
by ensuring access on the same basis as their counterparts
across the nation.
Under H.R. 6021, the Marianas can apply to establish a lead
SBDC, which would make available renewable funding to expand
the reach and capacity of the existing SBDC service center on
Saipan.
With additional funding, small businesses on Saipan,
Tinian, and Rota, the three mostly inhabited islands in the
Marianas, will have better access to free or low-cost services
such as incubator workspaces for entrepreneurs, business
planning, operations, and other areas required for small
business growth and success.
H.R. 6021 would also help our small businesses participate
in federal research and development opportunities.
My bill does this by including the Marianas in the SBA's
FAST program which funds outreach and assistance to small
businesses interested in competing for the Small Business
Innovation Research and Small Business Technology Transfer
programs.
I want to also thank the committee for including a
provision from my bill H.R. 2603, into H.R. 6079, the Microloan
Improvement Act just voted for reporting to the House.
My provision would provide Marianas small business owners
access to the SBA's Microloan program.
SBA microloans provide up to $50,000 typically not offered
by banks for working capital or the acquisition of materials,
supplies, or equipment. This program also provides marketing,
management, and technical assistance to assist women, low-
income and veteran entrepreneurs in my district.
Both H.R. 6021 and H.R. 6079 provide the small businesses
in my district access to the full range of SBA resources needed
to help our economy and help aspiring entrepreneurs make their
dreams of small business ownership a reality.
I would like to thank the gentlelady from American Samoa
for cosponsoring my bill H.R. 6021.
Madam Chair, I yield back the remainder of my time. I urge
members of the committee to support H.R. 6021. I yield back.
Thank you.
Chairwoman VELAZQUEZ. Thank you. The gentleman yields back.
I would now like to recognize the bill cosponsor, the
gentlewoman from American Samoa, Ms. Radewagen, for an opening
statement.
Ms. RADEWAGEN. Talofa and Hofa Adai.
Today, I am proud to speak in support of H.R. 6021, the
Northern Mariana Islands Small Business Development Act. This
bill would allow the Northern Mariana Islands to establish a
Small Business Development Center and gain access to other
Small Business Administration programs. As of right now, the
Northern Marianas is the only territory that does not have an
SBDC, and I urge all my colleagues to support this bill.
I yield back, Madam Chair.
Chairwoman VELAZQUEZ. The gentlelady yields back.
Are there any other Members that wish----
The Ranking Member is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. CHABOT. Thank you, Madam Chair, and I will be brief.
I would like to congratulate and thank Mr. Sablan and Ms.
Radewagen for their leadership on this legislation. I want to
also thank you, Madam Chairwoman.
Our last bill is one that extends a matter of simple
fairness to American citizens. Currently, the Northern Mariana
Islands, part of the United States since 1975, is the only U.S.
jurisdiction not included for eligibility in certain SBA
programs, such as the very important SBDC Lead Center Grant
program. The Northern Mariana Islands 55,000 inhabitants
deserve the same access to SBA programs as any other American
citizens, and this bill ensures that they do have that.
It is quite simple, bipartisan, and it is a just piece of
legislation. I urge my colleagues to support it. Again, I thank
Mr. Sablan and Ms. Radewagen, and I yield back.
Chairwoman VELAZQUEZ. The gentleman yields back.
Now I recognize myself briefly.
First, I would like to commend Mr. Sablan and Ms. Radewagen
for their work on this bill. Mr. Sablan, it is true that
representation matters. I am sorry that it took this long to
bring fairness and access to all the programs that exist under
the Small Business Administration. That should be the rule in
every federal agency--that we open all of the programs to
American citizens.
With that, if there is any further discussion, the
committee will move on to consideration of H.R. 6021.
The clerk will read the report of the title of the bill.
The CLERK. H.R. 6021, the Northern Mariana----
Chairwoman VELAZQUEZ. Without objection, H.R. 6021 is
considered as read and open for amendment at any time.
Does anyone wish to offer an amendment?
Seeing none, the question is now on H.R. 6021.
All those in favor, say aye.
All those opposed, say no.
In the opinion of the Chair, the ayes have it.
H.R. 6021 is agreed to.
The question now occurs on reporting H.R. 6021 to the
House.
All those in favor, say aye.
All those opposed, say no.
In the opinion of the Chair, the ayes have it.
H.R. 6021 is reported to the House.
Without objection, the committee staff is authorized to
correct punctuation, make other necessary technical
corrections, and conforming changes.
Members have 2 days to file additional supplemental,
dissenting, and minority views.
I would like to thank all of the Members for their
participation today. If there is no further business to come
before the committee, we are adjourned. Thank you.
[Whereupon, at 12:09 p.m., the committee was adjourned.]

A P P E N D I X

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
