- 21
st
CENTURY SBA: AN ANALYSIS OF SBA'S TECHNOLOGY SYSTEMS

[House Hearing, 116 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

21st CENTURY SBA: AN ANALYSIS OF SBA'S
TECHNOLOGY SYSTEMS

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON INVESTIGATIONS,
OVERSIGHT, AND REGULATIONS

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON SMALL BUSINESS
UNITED STATES
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED SIXTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

HEARING HELD
JULY 22, 2020

__________

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Small Business Committee Document Number 116-089
Available via the GPO Website: www.govinfo.gov

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
41-300                       WASHINGTON : 2021

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

HOUSE COMMITTEE ON SMALL BUSINESS

NYDIA VELAZQUEZ, New York, Chairwoman
ABBY FINKENAUER, Iowa
JARED GOLDEN, Maine
ANDY KIM, New Jersey
JASON CROW, Colorado
SHARICE DAVIDS, Kansas
KWEISI MFUME, Maryland
JUDY CHU, California
DWIGHT EVANS, Pennsylvania
BRAD SCHNEIDER, Illinois
ADRIANO ESPAILLAT, New York
ANTONIO DELGADO, New York
CHRISSY HOULAHAN, Pennsylvania
ANGIE CRAIG, Minnesota
STEVE CHABOT, Ohio, Ranking Member
AUMUA AMATA COLEMAN RADEWAGEN, American Samoa, Vice Ranking Member
TROY BALDERSON, Ohio
KEVIN HERN, Oklahoma
JIM HAGEDORN, Minnesota
PETE STAUBER, Minnesota
TIM BURCHETT, Tennessee
ROSS SPANO, Florida
JOHN JOYCE, Pennsylvania
DAN BISHOP, North Carolina

Melissa Jung, Majority Staff Director
Justin Pelletier, Majority Deputy Staff Director and Chief Counsel
Kevin Fitzpatrick, Staff Director

C O N T E N T S

OPENING STATEMENTS

Page
Hon. Judy Chu....................................................     1
Hon. Ross Spano..................................................     3

WITNESS

Mr. Guy Cavallo, Deputy Chief Information Officer, U.S. Small
Business Administration, Washington, DC........................     5

APPENDIX

Prepared Statement:
Mr. Guy Cavallo, Deputy Chief Information Officer, U.S. Small
Business Administration, Washington, DC....................    18
Questions for the Record:
None.
Answers for the Record:
None.
Additional Material for the Record:
None.

21
st
CENTURY SBA: AN ANALYSIS OF SBA'S TECHNOLOGY SYSTEMS

----------

WEDNESDAY, JULY 22, 2020

House of Representatives,
Committee on Small Business,
Subcommittee on Investigations, Oversight and
Regulations,
Washington, DC.
The Subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 1:02 p.m., in
Room 2360, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Judy Chu
[chairwoman of the Subcommittee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Chu, Evans, Craig, Chabot,
Burchett, and Spano.
Chairwoman CHU. I call the meeting to order.
Without objection, the Chair is authorized to declare a
recess at any time.
I want to thank everyone, especially our witnesses, for
joining us today for our Committee's hybrid hearing.
I want to make sure to list some important requirements.
Let me begin by saying that standing House and Committee rules
and practice will continue to apply during hybrid proceedings.
All members are reminded that they are expected to adhere to
the standing rules, including decorum.
During the covered period as designated by the Speaker, the
Committee will operate in accordance with House Resolution 965
and the subsequent guidance from the Rules Committee in a
manner that respects the rights of all members to participate.
House regulations require members to be visible through a
video connection throughout the proceedings, so please keep
your cameras on. Also, if you have to participate in another
proceeding, please exit this one and log in later.
In the event a member encounters technical issues that
prevent them from being recognized for their questioning, I
will move to the next available member of the same party, and I
will recognize that member at the next appropriate time slot,
provided they return to the proceedings.
And, finally, remember to remain muted until you are
recognized to minimize background noise. In accordance with the
rules established under House Resolution 965, staff have been
advised to mute participants only in the event there is
inadvertent background noise.
For those members physically present in the committee room
today, we will also be following the health and safety
guidelines issued by the Attending Physician, which includes
social distancing and especially the use of masks. I urge
members and staff to wear masks at all times while in the
hearing room, and thank you in advance for your commitment to a
safe environment here today.
I am pleased to be holding this important hearing today to
learn more about the Small Business Administration's
information technology systems, IT modernization efforts, and
cybersecurity strategy. SBA has counted on its technology
systems to implement the programs to help entrepreneurs launch
and grow their small businesses, and millions of small
businesses have relied on them over the past few months to
access the assistance they need to survive the coronavirus
pandemic.
I would like to thank Mr. Guy Cavallo, the Deputy Chief
Information Officer for SBA, for being here today to discuss
SBA's efforts to modernize its systems and address some of the
technical issues that have hampered the rollout of economic
relief programs.
Ineffective IT systems have been a persistent problem at
SBA. While significant progress has been made to upgrade the
system in recent years, the magnitude of the pandemic has
demonstrated the need for more modern systems that are safer,
faster, and more efficient at delivering services to America's
small businesses.
Six months after the first confirmed case in the U.S., our
country remains in the grips of the coronavirus pandemic. Small
businesses have relied on Congress and SBA to help them survive
the necessary State-ordered public health lockdowns,
restrictions and operating capacity, and significant revenue
losses resulting from our fight to contain this virus.
This crisis has made it necessary for unprecedented numbers
of small businesses to rely on your agency's technology to
access loan applications, connect to their local resource
partners, find translated resources, and answer their urgent
questions in a timely manner. However, several technical issues
have arisen during the pandemic, making it both frustrating and
difficult for small businesses to receive the relief they need
in a timely manner.
This Committee acknowledges the toll that this
unprecedented level of activity has taken on SBA systems, and
we commend you and your staff for working around the clock to
fix several of the issues. The coronavirus has placed a
historic burden on SBA, and we in Congress must ensure that you
have the resources you need to assist the American people. But
many of these system weaknesses have been known for years and
should have been addressed and modernized long before this
pandemic. In fact, some of the issues were brought to SBA's
attention as early as 2014 by the Government Accountability
Office and, in fact, there was a 2011 report from the GAO
before that.
According to the Committee on Oversight and Reform's IT
scorecard, SBA has made improvements to its IT infrastructure
overall, but is still scoring a D on cybersecurity. This is
particularly concerning given the cybersecurity breach that
occurred with the EIDL application.
In late March, SBA detected a vulnerability in the EIDL
application, which allowed applicants' personally identifiable
information to be viewed by other applicants. Even more
troubling, the individuals that were potentially affected were
not notified until mid-April, nearly 20 days after the data
breach, and the notification was simply a paper letter.
The Committee heard from several recipients who were
inquiring whether it was a scam or a verifiable document. At
the time, SBA had failed to make any public announcement about
the breach, again, showing a lack of transparency that had been
a consistent concern for the committee throughout the COVID-19
pandemic. Affected businesses lost their place in the queue,
were forced to reapply, and then were shut out of the program
when SBA inexplicably limited applications to only agricultural
businesses.
We recognize that your office was not directly involved in
those decisions, but they demonstrate the tremendous downstream
impacts faced by small businesses that were affected by the
initial IT systems failure.
Other problems that arose during the pandemic were related
to SBA's loan processing system, E-Tran, which is a legacy
system that SBA had planned to replace in an effort to
modernize its IT infrastructure. The issues concerning E-Tran
are not new. In 2014, the GAO reported that SBA may be
unprepared for a large volume of applications to be submitted
quickly following future disasters which could result in delays
in loan funds for disaster victims. And in this report, SBA
actually stated that E-Tran would be replaced by 2015. However,
in 2020, SBA is still relying on the same system.
Shortly after the launch of the Paycheck Protection Program
portal, the system was inundated by applicants, causing it to
go offline for 4 hours. The system then crashed again a second
time when the PPP portal reopened in late April.
While we recognize that SBA quickly increased bandwidth to
increase the system--to address the system crash both times,
the agency cannot rely on a system that is incapable of meeting
high demand in a crisis.
The Committee plans to explore what steps must be taken to
improve SBA's IT systems moving forward in order to prevent
these issues from reoccurring should Congress reauthorize or
authorize further small business assistance as we continue to
fight the virus or if a natural disaster should strike and
compound the stress on SBA's systems. It is imperative that
SBA's technology systems be modernized to meet the demands of
the 21st century.
With that, I look forward to hearing from Mr. Cavallo on
the changes SBA plans to implement to its technology systems
and what he needs from Congress in order to address these
technical failures to ensure the SBA IT infrastructure is fully
prepared in the future.
I now yield to the Ranking Member, Mr. Ross Spano, for his
opening statement.
Mr. SPANO. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman.
While all of the oversight hearings we hold in this
Committee are important, examining the state of the SBA's
information technology is truly one of the most vital. We live
in an era dominated by modern technology and the internet, so
there is little else that has changed the way we live our lives
so dramatically.
This pandemic has underscored our reliance on modern
technology to do almost anything and everything, from running a
successful business and allowing employees to telework, to
socializing while maintaining social distancing. Technology has
been and will continue to be critical in allowing the private
sector and public government to respond to and recover from
this pandemic. The SBA is no exception.
As technology continues to improve, implementing innovative
technological solutions to streamline manual processes or
upgrade legacy systems are actions that any responsible Federal
agency should consider. Once these new technologies are
deployed, it is imperative that the agency ensure they are
secure, operational, and meet mission objectives.
For instance, the SBA's decision to move from mail-in,
paper-based application processes to online loan and
contracting applications certainly has advantages for both the
agency and the participant. Unfortunately, it also comes with a
host of other challenges, for instance; vulnerability to
computer bugs, data breaches, and cyber attacks.
As has been widely reported in the news, the technological
system supporting the Paycheck Protection Program suffered from
a number of these mishaps. Reports regarding the Economic
Injury Disaster Loan Program have not fared well. While the
EIDL advanced program intended to provide emergency grants to
small businesses within 3 days of their application being
filed, the SBA took nearly 6 weeks to approve less than 1
percent of the total application backlog.
Even though I appreciate the SBA's recent efforts to meet
the surging demand, reports show that little more than a third
of the amount Congress authorized to support the EIDL program
has been approved. Adding insult to injury, a glitch in the
EIDL portal led to nearly 8,000 EIDL applicants' personal
information being compromised, including Social Security
numbers, birth dates, and addresses.
I cannot overstate just how dire the situation is for small
businesses everywhere in this country, including in my own
district. They need these funds now. And if technology is the
solution or the problem, we need to take appropriate action
immediately.
Addressing the issues with SBA's loan programs is not the
only reason why I am interested in hearing from you today, Mr.
Cavallo. As the SBA continues to invest in new technologies, it
is imperative that the agency ensures that the investment was
worth it, that the outcome achieves the intended goals.
The SBA has made some questionable IT investments into its
contracting and business development programs, making various
attempts to streamline application processes and enhance staff
oversight and management of these programs. Unfortunately, we
have seen some of these investments fail in the past. And I
understand the SBA is now investing in a new technological
initiative called certify.sba.gov, to which over $27 million
has already been spent, but the system has not yet fully
realized its intended purpose.
Indeed, according to the Committee on Oversight and
Reform's December 2019 Federal Information Technology
Acquisition Reform, or FITARA, report, the SBA received a C
grade for its IT portfolio management, indicating that the
Office of Management and Budget found the SBA demonstrated poor
management of commodity IT spending in alignment with agency
mission and business functions. Also deeply troubling is the D
grade that the SBA received in the FITARA report for
cybersecurity, indicating severe deficiencies in cybersecurity
measures taken by the SBA.
I understand that we live in unprecedented times and the
wheels of government often move slower than the pace of
technology. However, we have to strive to do better and be
better. Small businesses across the country depend on the SBA
to get it right, and we must do all we can to ensure the
agency's success.
Thank you, Madam Chairwoman. I yield back.
Chairwoman CHU. Thank you, Ranking Member Spano.
I need to explain how this hearing will proceed. Each
witness will have 5 minutes to provide a statement and each
committee member will have 5 minutes for questions. Please
ensure that your microphone is on when you begin speaking and
that you return to mute when finished.
With that, I would like to introduce Mr. Guy Cavallo, the
Deputy Chief Information Officer at SBA. In this capacity, Mr.
Cavallo provides leadership and direction in the creation,
development, and execution of the agency's information
technology management programs. He was previously the executive
director of IT operations at Transportation Security
Administration. He has also had an impressive career in the
private sector implementing innovative technologies in
governmental organizations.
We welcome you to the committee, and you are now recognized
for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF MR. GUY CAVALLO, DEPUTY CHIEF INFORMATION OFFICER,
U.S. SMALL BUSINESS ADMINISTRATION, WASHINGTON, DC

Mr. CAVALLO. Chairwoman Chu, Ranking Member Spano, and
members of the Subcommittee, Thank you for the opportunity to
discuss how the Small Business Administration has modernized
and transformed----
Mr. SPANO. Excuse me, sir. Could you make sure your
microphone is on?
Mr. CAVALLO. The button is on. How is that?
Mr. SPANO. That is perfect.
Mr. CAVALLO. There we go. Thank you.
Again, thank you for the opportunity to talk about how SBA
has modernized and transformed its IT and cybersecurity
capabilities, which we know are critical to enhancing our
service delivery to citizens and small businesses.
In July of 2017, SBA Chief Information Officer Maria Roat
testified before the House Small Business Committee describing
her vision for a 21st century SBA. Today, SBA has turned much
of her vision into reality.
With the strong executive leadership and support of
Administrators Carranza and McMahon, SBA is now viewed as a
technology leader in the Federal Government.
Over the past 3-1/2 years, we have implemented the
necessary building blocks to deliver and accelerate our IT
modernization. That foundation includes a reliable network
infrastructure and leveraging the power of the cloud. In early
2017, I served as the executive sponsor of SBA's cloud journey.
Within 82 days, we built SBA's first cloud, an accomplishment
that may take others a year-plus to achieve. With that network
and cloud platform in place, SBA could now leverage those
foundations to meet our critical role in the upcoming CARES
Act.
Having SBA's cloud operational and leveraging commercial
cloud services to support our modernization efforts were
critical in our overnight move to nearly 100 percent telework
status for the SBA staff and for the thousands of surge workers
who may never work in an actual SBA office.
I also want to highlight that one of the most significant
benefits of moving to the cloud has been the tremendous
improvement in our cybersecurity protections. For example,
since April of 2018, our security team has partnered with DHS
to take down 1,380 malicious websites that we uncovered by
stopping phishing attempts into SBA.
Now, based upon our enhanced cybersecurity capabilities, we
conducted two pilots with DHS to validate the cloud
protections. Our pilots on the Trusted Internet Connection and
the continual diagnostic and mitigation programs allowed us to
successfully demonstrate alternative ways of meeting the goals
of those programs, and our results led DHS to modify the
Federal security policies for those programs.
In addition to those cybersecurity capabilities, we
leveraged the cloud to build new CARES Act solutions, including
a new portal for the $10,000 EIDL advances, a front end to the
lender gateway for banks to access the E-Tran system, an
updated find a lender tool to display eligible lenders of the
PPP program by ZIP Code, and a new customer service hub for
better tracking all the millions of citizen requests we
receive.
All of these new solutions were implemented within 8 days
or less. My team worked round the clock to make sure that we
had these in place as fast as possible.
We also accelerated implementing GSA's login.gov common
identity management solution, which allows a small business to
use one set of credentials when accessing any SBA system or any
other government portals that adopted login.gov. However, I do
want to acknowledge that until these new systems were in place,
several of the legacy systems did experience outages and slow
response times from the overwhelming demand.
For example, the disaster loan access portal began
suffering outages due to the demand exceeding its capacity.
Within a day, we implemented a replacement interim cloud
solution to intake loan applications until the final
replacement EIDL rapid intake portal was ready. However, while
making multiple system changes in the middle of the night in
such a short time, a mistake was made in one of the system's
configuration which accidentally exposed PII data for some
individuals. Within 3 hours, we discovered that exposure and
quickly fixed the problem. And to support the potential
exposure of those individuals that may have been exposed, we
have offered free credit monitoring services.
There is still much to do, but the positive steps taken
over the last 3-1/2 years have positioned SBA to be able to
continue modernizing our legacy systems.
And I want to thank you for the opportunity to speak to
that today, and I look forward to the Committee's questions.
Chairwoman CHU. Thank you, Mr. Cavallo.
I will begin by recognizing myself for 5 minutes for
questions.
Mr. Cavallo, it wasn't just a few persons who had their
data exposed; it was 8,000 individuals. There were so many
egregious things that happened in that situation where EIDL
data was exposed, the data of small business owners who were
trying to get relief from COVID-19, and it caused SBA to tell
the applicants to reapply, they lost their place in line, and
the applications were subsequently closed to anyone who wasn't
in the agricultural industry.
So, Mr. Cavallo, how did this breach happen, and what
specific steps did SBA take to fix the issue that caused the
data breach? Also, the breach occurred on March 25. Why did it
take until April 13 for SBA to notify these small businesses
who may have been affected?
Mr. CAVALLO. I want to thank you for asking that question.
First of all, I want to clarify that we did not suffer a data
breach; we suffered a data exposure. The big difference is that
there was no data break-in, any download of data. They are both
serious, but a potential data exposure is quite different, and
as I said, we were not breached.
I can tell you how it happened. My staff was working around
the clock, pulling all-nighters, trying to get the new loan
portal set up as fast as possible. A human error was made at 6
a.m., which caused the potential for that exposure to occur,
and within 3 hours, we implemented taking the portal down and
limiting the exposure.
But we followed our standard procedures for dealing with a
PII exposure, which means we reported it immediately to US-Cert
within an hour. We convened our executive response team on
March 29. That team decided to make sure that everybody that
was potentially a user during those 3 hours would receive
credit monitoring services.
And then, ma'am, we don't have in place a contract to pay
for credit monitoring services, so we had to go to GSA to
compete the credit monitoring services, which we did on March
29 and 30. Once that was awarded, we brought the vendor on
board. They reviewed the logs and found that there were some
logs that we didn't have valid addresses and information, and
then they were able to issue the letter on April 13 to those
individuals offering credit monitoring and free call center to
use toll free and provide support.
I would have liked that to be faster, but that was how long
it took to get there.
Chairwoman CHU. Well, what it shows is that there clearly
needs to be improvement in SBA's IT. And I noted that there
have been GAO reports since 2011 expressing concern about this.
And then GAO did another report in 2014, which said that SBA
was not prepared for large volumes of applications that could
come in after a disaster.
Now, I acknowledge that SBA has made some improvements to
its technology system in the IT scorecard, but in the most
recent scorecard, the SBA received a D on cybersecurity, which
was its lowest mark in any category. So what has been the
holdup to improvements in this area, and what specific steps
has SBA taken to improve particularly on cybersecurity?
Mr. CAVALLO. Yes. One thing I do want to point out that
we--the way the cybersecurity score is calculated, there are
two different criteria. One is an assessment from our Inspector
General, and our Inspector General uses the OMB maturity model
that measures eight different domains. To receive a higher
score in that, you must have no KPMG findings in the domain. It
is one of the toughest scores to be able to obtain. My
understanding is only one Federal agency has been able to
achieve the top score.
The other component of that is how you are performing on
your cross-agency CAP Goals. In the last 2 years, we have moved
from a 30 percent CAP goal implementation to 80 percent
implemented.
So, ma'am, we are taking it very seriously, and we are
working hard to get that score up. We think the combination of
those scores do not accurately reflect where we are today;
otherwise, DHS would not have selected us to pilot two critical
cybersecurity pilots with them that have changed Federal
policy. And, in fact, they have asked us now to help them
implement the CDM Program in a new cloud-based solution.
So, we realize how the scores were obtained. We have taken
many steps to improve our cybersecurity. I highlighted the
number of websites we are taking down. We have full visibility
of all attempts to get into SBA. We also--with the PPP and EIDL
loans, implemented geofencing so that a foreign adversary
applying from a foreign country could not even get to the loan
system.
So, we are radically different from where we were in 2012
or 2014. Still work to be done, but we would like to see that
score increase. I mean, over the last 3 years, we have gone
from a D-minus to a B-plus, and right now, we have the third
highest FITARA score in government.
Chairwoman CHU. Thank you. My time has now expired.
The Ranking Member, Mr. Spano from Florida, is now
recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. SPANO. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman.
Mr. Cavallo, I assume that the SBA must have anticipated
that a wave of applications were going to be incoming through
the E-Tran system once the PPP and EIDL launched. However, we
all know there were concerns about that early on, portal
crashing, other technical difficulties that occurred right
there at the start.
Were any actions taken or undertaken or any efforts made to
prepare for what, it would seem to me, would have been an
anticipated load on the E-Tran system?
Mr. CAVALLO. Yes. Thank you. Thank you for that question.
Yeah, the E-Tran system is not managed by the Office of the
Chief Information Officer. We partner with our business offices
to do that. It is definitely on our list of systems that need
to be modernized, and we are following the CIO Council's
Application Rationalization Playbook to determine how to
modernize. That is going to be a long-term project, sir, and
that is something that we could not do between March 1 and when
this all hit.
The steps that my office specifically took was that we
doubled the network connectivity speed because we knew there
was this influx of people coming. That took a week or two to
happen, but we were able to get ahead of the surge exceeding
the demand. We also built that front-end lender gateway as a
cloud-based application to basically take the load off on some
of the front of E-Tran to allow our small banks to apply
easier. And then we worked with our partner at the Office of
Capital Access to spread out their workday. So instead of
getting hit with all the applications coming in at 9 a.m. from
certain banks, they spread out the schedule to be able to take
applications throughout the day.
Those are all things that we could do now to lessen the
demand on E-Tran. The last thing we did is we approved a
significant hardware investment to up the horsepower of the E-
Tran system, but it is going to take time to modernize that
system. It is a very complex financial system.
So those were the things we could take to support it.
Definitely there were issues and there was trouble along the
way, but each of these steps helped lessen the impact or reduce
them from happening in the future.
Mr. SPANO. Does the continued challenges apparently that
you still have with the E-Tran system, are those impacting the
pace, the slow pace at which the EIDL loans are being
processed?
Mr. CAVALLO. I don't think I can answer that. It is more of
a program office answer on how they are handling the
processing. As I said, the system is up and running, that is--
--
Mr. SPANO. I guess my question is, you mentioned that
problems with PPP and the EIDL were a function of or based on
the fact that the E-Tran was not built to sustain that level of
demand. What I am asking you is, is the EIDL demand still such
that E-Tran cannot handle the load?
Mr. CAVALLO. From everything I have seen, we seem to be
handling the load now.
Mr. SPANO. Okay. So that is not--E-Tran is not the reason
for apparently the slowdown, the slow process of EIDL, as far
as you are concerned?
Mr. CAVALLO. Yes. From the technology side, I am seeing
that it is up and that the connectivity is there.
Mr. SPANO. Gotcha.
So the SBA received an additional $2.1 billion for SBA
salaries and expenses intended to help the agency staff up in
order to meet the need generated by the pandemic. Can you tell
us how this money has been spent so far?
Mr. CAVALLO. I can address how we have spent it in the OCIO
office.
Mr. SPANO. With respect to your area.
Mr. CAVALLO. Yes. With us increasing the size of SBA by
about 500 percent, I knew immediately that our IT help desk,
our network operations center, monitoring and making sure that
our networks are working fine, and our security operations
center providing cybersecurity, those were all designed for
3,000 to 4,000 users, not well over 12,000. So, we have used
the funds to help supplement that, and my staff working in
those areas, to make sure that the connectivity is there, that
the cybersecurity protections are there, that we are not being
overwhelmed by it. It has been a slow process to ramp that up.
We are using both temporary Federal employees and contractors
to do that.
So, in our office, yes, we are all well on the way of
staffing up to deal with this increase of size.
Mr. SPANO. Okay. I only have 20 seconds left. But you talk
about in your testimony that--you discuss in your testimony
using webcasts to connect with small businesses that save
thousands of dollars over the SBA's previous teleconferencing
solution.
My question is, are there any other uses of existing
technology in your arsenal that can be deployed to find other
cost-savings benefits?
Mr. CAVALLO. One of the things we did is we stood up a
virtual command center, which saved us the cost of setting up a
command center for our senior leadership to get together.
Definitely the web conferencing, we can host 10,000 businesses
at once now at no extra cost, when before, that would have cost
us thousands of dollars. Leveraging the cloud is keeping us
from buying more hardware. So that has also been a significant
impact.
Mr. SPANO. Thank you.
I yield back, Chair.
Chairwoman CHU. Thank you. The gentleman's time has
expired. The gentleman yields back.
And now, the gentleman from Pennsylvania, Mr. Evans, is now
recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. EVANS. Thank you, Madam Chairperson and Ranking Member.
The IRS announced yesterday that they are establishing a
new office to spearhead the efforts to modernize the management
of taxpayer cases. The new office will be responsible for
updating its outdated IT systems and making several of its
processing paper documents digital.
Would the SBA consider a similar strategy to bring the IT
system, infrastructure, and management documents into the 21st
century? And would the office of the CIO be well suited to
implement the strategy?
Mr. CAVALLO. Thank you for that question. As an agency, we
have adopted the Federal CIO Council's Application
Rationalization Playbook. To put that in non-CIO terms, you
basically have a methodology to look at each information system
and decide are you going to modernize it where it is, are you
going to move it to the cloud, do you need to rewrite it, or do
you need to shut the system down. So, we are going through our
major applications looking at that first before we start
spending money just heading down a modernization path without
having a clear direction.
What IRS has done is what I see a lot of the other Federal
agencies doing, and we have been doing that from day one. Over
the last 3-1/2 years, we have modernized major parts of SBA.
The financial systems are by far the biggest and most complex
ones, so we are taking that on next. But we will work closely
with the CFO and Capital Access and ODA on heading down that
modernization path.
I think until we do that analysis, we won't be able to
provide our CFO, our Administrator what the cost would be to do
this so that they can come, present that to you, but we are
doing that homework now.
Mr. EVANS. How could Congress support the SBA in
establishing a new office to spearhead IT becoming modern and
digital across the entire agency?
Mr. CAVALLO. Again, we appreciate all offers of help.
Today, we have a Chief Technology Office that leads our
modernization efforts. I am not sure that we would ask for
anything additional to that. As I said, we have the methodology
in place that we intend to use to make the decisions about
modernizing systems, and then through our budget process and
through the Administrator, we will come back to Congress and
make those requests for funds when we are ready.
Mr. EVANS. In mid-April, the SBA announced that on March
25, it discovered that the application system for the EIDL may
have disregarded personal information to other applicants of
the program. What personal information was divulged?
Mr. CAVALLO. Let me check for that, sir. I don't want to
give you a wrong answer.
Looks like I don't have that information with me. There was
a formal report that we filed with US-Cert, so I can supply
that information with you as a follow-up.
Mr. EVANS. Okay. No problem.
Since I am talking about it, for EIDL application status,
the only updates provided are processing and then accepted or
rejected. This has caused severe stress for small business
owners in my district who have great difficulty checking the
status of the application. Is the SBA working on improving the
status checking on these loan applications? And let me give you
a followup real quick. What is the timeline for improving loan
application status checking?
Mr. CAVALLO. The Office of the Chief Information Officer
does the enterprise networking and connectivity and
infrastructure. What you are asking about is a program office
decision that is run by the Office of Disaster Assistance.
Mr. EVANS. Right.
Mr. CAVALLO. So, I can't answer that for them.
Mr. EVANS. Okay. Real quick, I think I----
I yield back to the Chair my remaining time.
Chairwoman CHU. Thank you. The gentleman yields back.
And now, the gentleman from Tennessee, Mr. Burchett, is now
recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. BURCHETT. Thank you, Chairlady, Ranking Member.
Eighty-six percent of the PPP loans in Tennessee in the
Second District where I represent are under $150,000. Do you
know how many of those are nationwide and the amount, total
amount that would be?
Mr. CAVALLO. No, sir. That is not something that I would
have in the Chief Information Office.
Mr. BURCHETT. How would I go about getting that?
Mr. CAVALLO. We can provide that from our business offices
that would have that up to date daily.
Mr. BURCHETT. Great. If you all could send that to me, that
would be great.
And I have been hearing some complaints the E-Tran system
is too complicated, especially for those who are new to SBA
lending. What can the SBA do to make its public-facing
technology systems more user friendly?
Mr. CAVALLO. Again, a very good question. It is something
that my team is dedicated to do. A lot of the new programs that
I highlighted that we implemented, especially for the CARES
Act, are much easier to use than the legacy systems. And
whenever we can, for something like E-Tran that we can't
modernize overnight, what we are trying to do is put a new
front end in front of it so that the small business owner or
the citizen is able to more easily interact with the system. We
were able to do that successfully for a number of these
programs.
Mr. BURCHETT. Right.
Mr. CAVALLO. Overall, it is a major initiative to improve
the customer experience for any SBA user. I mentioned earlier
that we have moved to login.gov, which is a common way that GSA
provides the Federal agencies, where before, if you logged in
to separate SBA systems, you might have to fill out your
company's information over and over again. Again, we are taking
steps to eliminate that and use more of these common platforms,
so you have one identity.
Mr. BURCHETT. Okay. Do you feel that the SBA has the
capacity to manage all these new lenders moving forward?
Mr. CAVALLO. Again, from the CIO's office, we have been
able to absorb the 500 percent increase in staff and support
the systems. The program offices that actually work with those
lenders, they would be better able to answer that question,
sir.
Mr. BURCHETT. Okay. All righty. Thank you very much.
Chairwoman CHU. Okay. At this point, the gentleman yields
back.
And at this point, all the members present have asked a
question. So we actually have time for a second round of
questions, so please be present if you would like to go a
second round. I will start by recognizing myself for 5 minutes.
Mr. Cavallo, when we arranged this committee hearing, we
discovered that your Office of the Chief Information Office
only oversees 37 percent of SBA's IT program. And this raises
several new concerns, including why SBA would take such a
disjointed approach to IT and cybersecurity, and why it did not
entrust its chief information officer with managing IT for the
PPP and EIDL, and to what extent the deputy CIO was brought in
to help when PPP and EIDL both encountered significant
technology system failures.
So why is the SBA's IT staff decentralized? Who controls
the remaining 63 percent, and how has it helped or hindered
SBA's ability to respond to the coronavirus pandemic?
Mr. CAVALLO. Thank you for that question, ma'am. You know,
SBA has long had a history of being decentralized, and one
thing in a decentralized world is that you get some of the IT
staff closer to the program operations than staying in a
central location. What we have done is partner with those
offices. Most of those staff members are in the Office of
Disaster Assistance and the other program offices. We partnered
with them throughout this process.
Going back to your question, how involved were we in all of
this, we were very involved. None of the program offices went
off and worked on their own on this. We put teams together and,
like I said, sometimes pulling all-nighters to get these new
programs in place so that lenders could apply.
There are different models for IT. Like I said, right now
at SBA, we are more decentralized, so what we have done over
the years is make sure that we have a strong partnership with
those offices. The CIO Office does have FITARA approval of
every IT procurement of $50,000 or more. So, if an office tried
to do something without having us involved, there is a hard
stop that they can't proceed without the CIO.
So, we have worked very well together. We spend time at
each other's conferences and work together as a team. So right
now, the model is working for us.
Chairwoman CHU. But would there be greater improvement if
this operation was centralized?
Mr. CAVALLO. That is a great political science debate over
time. We can find as many people arguing that centralizing
everything is better than decentralizing, and we can find just
as many people arguing with that.
I think, Madam Chairwoman, the important part is that we
partner together. If we ran independently, I would absolutely
give you a different story. But we work so well together that
it doesn't matter who we report to, that we are all pulling
together in the same path of making sure that we have these
systems up and operational as much as possible. So, I really
can't give you a better answer than that.
Chairwoman CHU. Well, were you aware of the deficiencies
with the portals used to implement the Paycheck Protection
Program prior to its launch, and did the Office of Capital
Access request assistance?
Mr. CAVALLO. As far as deficiencies, I am not sure which
part you are talking about. As far as just the recommendation
that they be expanded, yes, we were working with them on those
expansions before that point. Just in the last year, we have
added our cybersecurity coverage across their systems, which
previously were done independently. So, yeah, we have worked
well together, and they have asked for our help and we have
jumped in and helped them throughout this process. For example,
putting a front end to E-Tran was something we did together. We
did not force that on them. They recognized that we had the
expertise in our office to do the new cloud-based systems. They
had the expertise in E-Tran. And we used both teams together to
get that new front end put in as quickly as possible.
Chairwoman CHU. And I know you have--the CIO has an annual
budget of $28 million. What percentage of this is towards
improving cybersecurity?
Mr. CAVALLO. Off the top of my head, I would say that--
again, our move to the cloud was our biggest eye opener on
cloud cybersecurity capabilities, so we got a benefit from that
right away. We are probably spending $13 million of that on
cyber, and everything that we are doing is based on cyber.
One thing that my development teams do is we have security
built into it so that it is not an afterthought. So, I can't
give you a number for all of that because they are part of the
team, but we take our cyber very seriously. And, in fact, as I
mentioned earlier, DHS relies on us as being one of their prime
agencies that they go to on how best to do cyber.
Chairwoman CHU. Okay. My time has expired.
Now, I would like to recognize the Ranking Member from
Florida, Mr. Spano, for 5 minutes.
Mr. SPANO. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman.
Mr. Cavallo, you referenced a couple of times now putting a
front end onto the system. Can you explain to those of us who
are computer illiterates what that means?
Mr. CAVALLO. Yes. It is great to have IT talk. You can
have, even back to the old green screen days, a very difficult
and complex screen to fill out that the data goes into in an
old legacy system, or we can put a new web page that has
dropdowns and colors and you can see exactly where you are, and
the data still goes into the legacy system. So that is----
Mr. SPANO. It is the way that the user interfaces with the
system, more user-friendly essentially.
Mr. CAVALLO. Yeah. We have simplified the user interface,
made it easier for them to access the system than the old----
Mr. SPANO. But you can't conduct substantive kind of
fundamental changes to the system with these front-end patches,
I guess?
Mr. CAVALLO. No. That is where you need to do the full
modernization and look at the right path.
Mr. SPANO. Got it. Okay.
It is our understanding that the SBA has spent
approximately $27 million on its new certify.sba.gov system. Do
you have an updated figure on that?
Mr. CAVALLO. Yes, I do. If I brought it with me.
I will say we are in the process of re-platforming Certify.
Last year, the CIO and the CFO stopped the current development,
which was the number that you are referencing. It was custom
coded, so it meant that everything had to be written from
scratch, and the decision was made that that was not a path to
continue down. And what we have done since November, we have
spent $3.5 million to rewrite the WOSB Program and HUBZone
Program as the first two out on software as a service, which
simply means instead of writing every line of code to be a
database or to be that screen, we leverage the power of
preexisting software.
So, we just launched the new WOSB version last week, using
that software as a service. It is a platform that we are using
across SBA to do our citizen reporting. The ODA team is using
it for their disaster portal.
So instead of being a standalone, custom-built application,
we are moving Certify to a common platform that will give us a
360-degree view of all of our interactions with customers. So,
we are in the middle of that rewrite.
Mr. SPANO. Okay. Prior to the Certify system, there was
another system that kind of went south, from what I have heard.
Mr. CAVALLO. Yeah.
Mr. SPANO. And now, it seems like this one, we were using
it for a while, and now we are doing main wholesale changes to
it, it seems, based on your explanation there. Is that usual to
have changes and move to different programs and for them not to
be effective and just to move from one to the next? Help me
understand because, you know, I am not a techie, but it just
seems like that is very inefficient.
Mr. CAVALLO. That is a great question. It is all a factor
of time. Today, my opinion is if you can have a vendor supply
the platform so that they are responsible for doing updates,
they are doing the code things, like with Office 365, Microsoft
is updating Word and Outlook and all of those programs, and
then you just write your code on top of that, then you have the
power of a major vendor providing your cybersecurity, making
sure everything is patched, that any potential breaches or
attacks from foreign adversaries are covered. Moving away from
custom code to that is absolutely something I would do a
hundred times out of a hundred times.
Mr. SPANO. But that is not what we are operating under
currently. We are doing it in-house?
Mr. CAVALLO. Yeah. The new Certify program that we just
launched last week----
Mr. SPANO. Okay. It is moving?
Mr. CAVALLO. That is on this new platform.
Mr. SPANO. I see.
Mr. CAVALLO. Like I said, we have WOSB as the first one out
of the gate, HUBZone will be next. But, yeah, the rest of the
program has a long legacy.
Mr. SPANO. Okay. So let me get your assurances, as much as
you can give it to me sitting here, based on the fact that we
have kind of failed here a couple of times now at this. Do you
feel confident that this new way forward is actually going to
work like we intend it to work? It is going to be an
appropriate, responsible investment for the American taxpayer?
Mr. CAVALLO. Like I said, from a technology standpoint,
getting out of custom code, whether you put it in the cloud or
whether you kept it on premise, absolutely is the right
direction to go today. You know, the legacy systems that are
all custom code are what is keeping agencies up at night. So, I
think we have made the right choice and we are headed in the
right direction.
The Office of Disaster Assistance has 2,500 users already
in the new system, so I think what we are seeing differently,
instead of being its own standalone system run by just the GCBD
office, we are seeing more buy-in to a platform across the SBA
offices, which helps us break out of silos of dataware. If you
asked our offices can you give me data for my district, we
actually have to go to different systems to give you that data.
Where we are headed to is that will all be very simple common,
so that one office knows what your citizen did versus another
visiting another office.
Mr. SPANO. I see. Thank you.
Madam Chair, I yield back.
Chairwoman CHU. Okay. The gentleman's time has expired.
And now, the gentleman from Pennsylvania, Mr. Evans, is
recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. EVANS. Thank you, Madam Chair.
My understanding, this is the first year that the SBA has
had the ability to transfer funds to its working capital to
upgrade IT equipment?
Mr. CAVALLO. Yes.
Mr. EVANS. Okay. What are the priorities moving forward
then?
Mr. CAVALLO. Yes, thank you for asking that. Yes, last
year, was the first year that SBA was able to implement a
working capital fund. So, we have had less than a year of
having that fund available. And at the end of last fiscal year,
we were able to seed that with $6 million.
We have set up a governance model at SBA where the CIO and
the CFO manage that working capital fund. The offices may
propose----
Mr. EVANS. While you are at it then, can you tell me, in
addition, what has SBA done with the $6 million then?
Mr. CAVALLO. Yes. We have made priorities to--most of it is
going towards modernizing systems. Part of it went to modify
the Certify system. We have also put part of it into updating
and modernizing the EDMIS system. So, there are about four or
five different areas.
Sir, we did not use it to buy any hardware. Everything that
was put into that fund we have dedicated to modernizing new
systems.
I don't know how the end of the fiscal year will end up, if
we get to supplement that with another influx of money, but
right now, that is 2-year money. So. the programs that we
started this year, if they need to go past the fiscal year, we
were counting spending some of that $6 million to keep them
going until they are finished, like the EDMIS program. But, as
I said, this was the first year of the agency having that fund.
Mr. EVANS. My understanding when the paycheck protection
portal was launched, the E-Transfer system where lenders
submitted borrower applications went offline for as long as 4
hours. On April 27, upon reopening, the PP portal crashed
again. I heard from many lenders, you can imagine, in my home
city of Philadelphia about the frustration in using this
system, which caused them much stress.
How did the office of the CIO work with the Office of
Capital Access to recidivise the issues and relaunch the
system?
Mr. CAVALLO. Sure, yeah. What I mentioned earlier is that
one thing that we saw was that the amount of users hitting the
traffic from outside was growing tremendously, so we increased
the bandwidth connectivity to it so that that would not be a
limiting factor. And we put in a new front end to make it
easier to access the system, like the Lender Gateway. There
were hiccups along the way because you have a very legacy
system and you have a brand-new system. I believe we figured it
out through this time, and it should be much easier and better
now. But there definitely were hiccups in the early days with
the tremendous volume that we were facing.
Mr. EVANS. So how successful do you think you have been, if
you had to kind of rate it in terms as a result of you
revisiting it?
Mr. CAVALLO. I think for an agency the size of SBA to
respond to all that we have responded to, that I can't commend
higher my staff and the other program offices' staffs for
stepping in. We know that--we have talked about it throughout
this meeting--in the early days, the first week or two or
three, there were significant problems, but everybody jumped
into it. So I would give us a pretty high rating today.
Mr. EVANS. Okay. I thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair. And I yield back the balance of my
time.
Chairwoman CHU. Well, thank you.
[Inaudible] now all of the members have asked their
questions, so I would now like to close.
And I thank you, Mr. Cavallo, for your testimony today on
SBA's technology systems, IT modernization efforts, and help
addressing its cybersecurity issues.
While I understand that the demands on these technology
systems is unprecedented, several of these issues were
preventable. SBA needs to have an IT infrastructure in place
moving forward that can scale and respond to the high volume of
applicants in need of support during COVID-19.
Several of the technical issues that arose affected the
ability of small businesses to access loans, and the
complicated and difficult process of applying placed another
unnecessary burden on small businesses that were already
struggling to stay open.
The Committee looks forward to working with you in the
coming months to address these technical issues and make sure
they are working effectively so SBA can implement its programs
effectively and meet the needs of millions of small businesses
that are relying on you to help them stay afloat.
I ask unanimous consent that members have 5 legislative
days to submit statements and supporting materials for the
record.
Without objection, so ordered.
And if there is no further business before the committee,
we are adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 1:58 p.m., the Subcommittee was adjourned.]

A P P E N D I X

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
