- DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE APPROPRIATIONS FOR 2025

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE APPROPRIATIONS
FOR 2025
_______________________________________________________________________

HEARINGS

BEFORE A

SUBCOMMITTEE OF THE

COMMITTEE ON APPROPRIATIONS

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

_____________________

SUBCOMMITTEE ON DEFENSE

KEN CALVERT, California, Chairman

HAROLD ROGERS, Kentucky BETTY McCOLLUM, Minnesota,
STEVE WOMACK, Arkansas C. A. DUTCH RUPPERSBERGER, Maryland
ROBERT B. ADERHOLT, Alabama MARCY KAPTUR, Ohio
JOHN R. CARTER, Texas HENRY CUELLAR, Texas
MARIO DIAZ-BALART, Florida DEREK KILMER, Washington
DAVID P. JOYCE, Ohio PETE AGUILAR, California
MIKE GARCIA, California ED CASE, Hawaii
JAKE ELLZEY, Texas
CHARLES J. ``CHUCK'' FLEISCHMANN,
Tennessee

NOTE: Under committee rules, Mr. Cole, as chairman of the full
committee, and Ms. DeLauro, as ranking minority member of the full
committee, are authorized to sit as members of all subcommittees.

Johnnie Kaberle, Ariana Sarar, Jacquelynn Ripke, David Bortnick,
Kiyalan Batmanglidj, Matthew Bower, William Adkins,
Hayden Milberg, John Forbes, Kyle McFarland,
Maxwell Morgan, and Alec Estaban
Subcommittee Staff

______________
Page
United States Navy and Marine Corps...                              1

United States Army....................                            147

Department of Defense.................                            201

National Guard and Reserve Forces.....                            277

United States Air Force and Space  Force....                      391

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Appropriations

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
57-432                     WASHINGTON : 2024

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

COMMITTEE ON APPROPRIATIONS

----------
TOM COLE, Oklahoma, Chairman

HAROLD ROGERS, Kentucky,
Chair Emeritus
KAY GRANGER, Texas,
Chair Emeritus
ROBERT B. ADERHOLT, Alabama
MICHAEL K. SIMPSON, Idaho
JOHN R. CARTER, Texas
KEN CALVERT, California
MARIO DIAZ-BALART, Florida
STEVE WOMACK, Arkansas
CHARLES J. ``CHUCK'' FLEISCHMANN,
Tennessee
DAVID P. JOYCE, Ohio
ANDY HARRIS, Maryland
MARK E. AMODEI, Nevada
DAVID G. VALADAO, California
DAN NEWHOUSE, Washington
JOHN R. MOOLENAAR, Michigan
JOHN H. RUTHERFORD, Florida
BEN CLINE, Virginia
GUY RESCHENTHALER, Pennsylvania
MIKE GARCIA, California
ASHLEY HINSON, Iowa
TONY GONZALES, Texas
JULIA LETLOW, Louisiana
MICHAEL CLOUD, Texas
MICHAEL GUEST, Mississippi
RYAN K. ZINKE, Montana
ANDREW S. CLYDE, Georgia
JAKE LaTURNER, Kansas
JERRY L. CARL, Alabama
STEPHANIE I. BICE, Oklahoma
SCOTT FRANKLIN, Florida
JAKE ELLZEY, Texas
JUAN CISCOMANI, Arizona
CHUCK EDWARDS, North Carolina

ROSA L. DeLAURO, Connecticut
STENY H. HOYER, Maryland
MARCY KAPTUR, Ohio
SANFORD D. BISHOP, Jr., Georgia
BARBARA LEE, California
BETTY McCOLLUM, Minnesota
C. A. DUTCH RUPPERSBERGER,
Maryland
DEBBIE WASSERMAN SCHULTZ, Florida
HENRY CUELLAR, Texas
CHELLIE PINGREE, Maine
MIKE QUIGLEY, Illinois
DEREK KILMER, Washington
MATT CARTWRIGHT, Pennsylvania
GRACE MENG, New York
MARK POCAN, Wisconsin
PETE AGUILAR, California
LOIS FRANKEL, Florida
BONNIE WATSON COLEMAN, New Jersey
NORMA J. TORRES, California
ED CASE, Hawaii
ADRIANO ESPAILLAT, New York
JOSH HARDER, California
JENNIFER WEXTON, Virginia
DAVID J. TRONE, Maryland
LAUREN UNDERWOOD, Illinois
SUSIE LEE, Nevada
JOSEPH D. MORELLE, New York

Susan Ross, Clerk and Staff Director

(ii)

DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE APPROPRIATIONS FOR 2025

----------
Wednesday, April 10, 2024.

FISCAL YEAR 2025 REQUEST FOR THE UNITED STATES NAVY AND MARINE CORPS

WITNESSES

HON. CARLOS DEL TORO, SECRETARY, DEPARTMENT OF THE NAVY
ADMIRAL LISA FRANCHETTI, CHIEF OF NAVAL OPERATIONS, DEPARTMENT OF THE
NAVY
GENERAL ERIC M. SMITH, COMMANDANT OF THE MARINE CORPS, DEPARTMENT OF
THE NAVY

Opening Statement of Chairman Calvert

Mr. Calvert. Good morning. The Defense subcommittee will
come to order. Today the subcommittee will receive testimony
from the Honorable Carlos Del Toro, the Secretary of the Navy,
Admiral Lisa Franchetti, Chief of Naval Operations, General
Eric Smith, Commandant of the United States Marine Corps. Thank
you all for joining us.
I want to start by welcoming Admiral Franchetti. You have
the distinction of the being the first woman Chief of Naval
Operations, the first women in the Joint Chiefs of Staff. And
today is your first time testifying before the committee, we
are happy to have you here today.
General Smith, this is also your first time testifying
before our committee. You lost your chance last year, but we
are glad that you are back. And we appreciate your service. And
we were all worried about you for a while there. But God bless
you and thank you for leading the Marine Corps, and thank you
for being here.
Finally, Secretary Del Toro, welcome back. It is always
good to have you. Today, our Nation faces global all-domain
threats. Conflict in the Middle East has sent our sailors to
the Red Sea. And our strongest regional ally, Israel, is at
war. The ongoing war waged by Russia and Ukraine continues to
demand our attention and support. Despite these ongoing
conflicts, capturing our time and resources, China remains, as
you refer to it, the pacing threat. In a China scenario, the
Navy is the cornerstone of our military's ability to project
power. The tyranny of distance cannot be surmounted without a
robust fleet. And I am concerned that the Navy is falling
behind, it is behind.
The Navy continues to retire ships faster than it builds
them. And I am troubled by the Navy's request to decommission
10 ships before the end of their service life and build only
six. The budget also proposes to buy fewer strike fighter
aircraft than we previously planned, and delays production of
critical next generation platforms in all domains.
I understand the need to make tradeoffs, but these are
pivotal years, and we must meet the challenges facing us today
with credible capability. I am especially concerned about the
delays in the construction of the lead Columbia-class
submarine. This program is the Navy's top priority and
fundamental to our nuclear triad. Congress has funded every
dollar requested for this program; now it is delayed by at
least 1 year, leaving no more margin for failure for the rest
of the decade's long procurement and delivery schedule.
I want to know how the Navy lost sight of the critical path
to delivering this vital platform to the fleet. It is simply
unacceptable.
What is more, the budget proposes to buy only one Virgina-
class submarine, production remains at a 1.2 submarine cadence
per year versus the necessary cadence of two per year, further
undermining our ship count and sending a bad signal to our
AUKUS allies.
I hope to learn more about how the Navy will get our
submarine production back on track. Following three consecutive
failed or no test events in the development of a Navy
hypersonic weapon, the Navy is requesting deferral of its plan
procurement by 2 years. I am concerned that after $4.3 billion
invested in development we have not had yet a successful test.
I want to hear the Navy's plan to get a hypersonic weapon
fielded to the fleet in the near term.
I also want to note my concern regarding the nearly $2
billion requested for completing ship construction that was
previously funded, this is historic level of additional funding
that represents cost overruns driven by scheduled delays and
poor program execution.
In a time of constrained budgets, this reflects the gross
inefficiencies and problems in our shipbuilding program. I hope
to learn more about what actions the Navy plans to implement to
get these programs back on track. Informed by the 45-day
shipbuilding program review, I understand was recently
completed.
I note that the Navy intends to conduct a second review of
challenges in the shipbuilding enterprise. I look forward to a
robust discussion on the results of the review that you just
concluded so we may be aware of the issues and challenges that
were illuminated.
The Department of the Navy's capability and capacity is
further eroded by the maintenance delays that plague the fleet.
The issues range from lack of experienced manpower at our
public shipyards to inconsistent demand signal and government
paperwork delays at the private yards.
The committee continues to see the Navy spend every cent
appropriated for ship maintenance, but complete fewer
maintenance availabilities than forecasted. This creates both
near-term risk to the fleet readiness, and a bio wave of costly
future maintenance requirements. Repeated extensions of the
baton's recent Middle East deployment and subsequent gap in the
Marine Corps afloat in that region all because the baton's
replacement was delayed in maintenance is the latest example of
the significant impact to global operation.
The conflict in Ukraine is teaching us how drones can have
an asymmetric impact on the battlefield as chief platforms can
inflict damage on multimillion dollar platforms. I am
encouraged by programs like Replicator and Hellscape that are
using these lessons to scale treatable kinetic solutions to
deter and ultimately defeat a cross-strait invasion by the
Chinese.
Our progress in leveraging emerging technologies is defined
by the successes we have when we partner with the private
sector. If we are to succeed in a rapidly changing threat
environment, the Navy must continue to experiment with
incorporating commercial technology to address our evolving
operation needs.
Finally, I would like to hear General Smith's thoughts on
the continued evolution of force design and how this budget
advances the strategy to shape the Marine Corps of the future.
Before we hear from our witnesses, I would like to
recognize the distinguished ranking member, Ms. McCollum, for
any opening comments.

Opening Remarks of Ms. McCollum

Ms. McCollum. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Secretary, Admiral, General, thank you for being here
today. Admiral and General, as was pointed out, we welcome you
to your first appearance before the committee.
The Department of the Navy's budget request reflects the
enormity of your mission to defend freedom, and to preserve
economic prosperity, and to keep the seas open and to keep them
free. The $258 billion, including military construction, is the
largest request we have seen. I would like to point out what
happens in MILCON affects your ability to maintain and to
deliver ships and boats on time.
It is fitting that the Navy and the Marine Corps work
together to solve and address some of our most pressing
challenges. You were at the forefront of all we do to compete
with China and counter threats from Russia, Iran, and North
Korea. As we know, the Navy is fighting daily in the Red Sea
defending our ships and our sailors, while ensuring freedom of
navigation.
We thank all of our servicemembers involved in the
operations there for their service, and wish them a successful
mission and a safe return home when their tour is done.
While the hearing today will cover a range of topics, I
want to highlight a few that are important to me that often get
buried under some of the other topics that the chair brought up
that I also totally agree with his remarks on.
First, I would like to talk about the Great Power
competition that has expanded into a region that you have heard
me talk about a lot--the Arctic. I would like an update on our
training activities in that region and the Navy force planning
with respect to the Arctic.
Second, the recent legislation was enacted updating the
compacts of the free association. I feel that having this
compact work successfully is vital to our success in the Indo-
Pacific region.
I would like to know the Navy's interactions with our
allies in that region, and how this budget request supports
that and if there is more that needs to be done.
And finally, the committee's concerned about the
recruitment and retention across the services, and I would like
to hear how the Navy is addressing this. And what plans in
funding proposals are included in the fiscal year 2025 budget
to achieve your fiscal year 2025 recruiting goals.
But before I yield back, Mr. Chair, we do not get to say
this very often, but I am excited and I am here to commend the
Marine Corps on achieving an unmodified audit option. Thank you
for doing that. You have become--yeah, you deserve a round of
applause. We have been asking for audits forever.
So General Smith, this is a tremendous achievement, you are
now the North Star for how the rest of the services should be
getting their audits done. You have set an example, and we
sincerely applaud your efforts.
I want to thank again our witnesses for appearing today. We
appreciate your testimony. We look forward to hearing the
answers to your questions in a follow-up.
With that, Mr. Chair, I yield back.
Mr. Calvert. Thank you. I am sure the Navy is next with
clean audit.
Now it is my real pleasure to turn to the new chairman of
the full committee, and my good friend and now chairman Tom
Cole. Congratulations, Mr. Chairman. The floor is yours.

Opening Remarks of Chairman Cole

The Chairman. Thank you very much.
As my good friend, Chairman Calvert, mentioned this is your
first rodeo. It is my first rodeo in this slot too, but
fortunately not on this committee where I have had the honor to
serve, thanks to my good friend Chairman Rogers for many, many
years. He put me here in more ways than one.
So good morning to our witnesses. Thank you for being here
with us today. Our adversaries continue to challenge us across
multiple fronts and all domains. Now more than ever, it is
critical that we maintain a strong and capable Navy. Ship count
remains a significant factor of our military readiness.
However, the Navy's proposed shipbuilding budget fails to grow
the fleet in response to China's pacing threat. Modern Naval
warfare relies on mass dispersion. And I am concerned by the
lack of a defined plan for growing our fleet. We cannot
continue to divest ships without investing adequately in ship
construction.
I am particularly troubled with the Navy's recent report
finding four of our most important shipbuilding programs are
years behind schedule. These programs Columbia and Virginia-
class submarines, constellation class frigates, and forward-
class carriers are vital to countering China in the Pacific. I
look forward to hearing more about the Navy's plans to address
these delays.
I am also concerned about the Navy's decision to delay
several significant modernization programs, including the
Navy's next generation submarine, destroyer and strike fighter.
We must maintain technological superiority, particularly as
China continues to advance its military capability.
Finally, as the Marine Corps continues to modernize as part
of force design, I am eager to learn more about your efforts to
project power as an expeditionary force in the Indo-Pacific. It
is critical that we maintain our forward posture to bolster
deterrence and strengthen defense relationships with our allies
and partners.
I look forward to hearing from you all about a range of
issues that continue to face the Navy and Marine Corps today.
These include fleet readiness, Navy recruitment, improving
quality of life for our servicemembers and their families,
establishing stable and predictable plans, and for shipbuilding
programs and strengthening our defense industrial base.
Thank you very much. And with that, I yield back. And again
thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Calvert. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman. That is great
to say that. Great to have you on board.
Now, gentlemen and Admiral, your written testimony will be
placed in the record. I would like to please have you all give
a brief summary of your statements.
Secretary Del Toro, the floor is yours.

Summary Statement of Secretary Del Toro

Secretary Del Toro. Chairman Calvert, Ranking Member
McCollum, Chairman Cole, distinguished members of the
committee. It is an honor to appear before you this morning to
discuss the posture of the Department of the Navy.
First and foremost, as you have done, I would like to thank
General Smith and Admiral Franchetti for answering, again, the
call of our Nation time and time again. They, like all who
devote their careers, and in some cases, sacrifice their lives
in defense of their fellow Americans represent everything that
makes these United States a beacon of hope and freedom around
the world. Together our combined years of service to our
country totals over a century; a century marked by multiple
deployments, time away from home and sacrifices that have been
made by our families.
And as we gather here this morning, thousands of our
sailors, marines, civilians and their families are either
stationed or deployed all over the globe. Making the same
sacrifices and enduring the same trials that myself, General
Smith and Admiral Franchetti have faced throughout our careers.
In the Indo-Pacific, our Navy and Marine Corps sailing and
operating alongside of our international allies and partners in
support of a free and open maritime commons, one where nations
are secure in their access to the seas, and where their rights
within their exclusive economic zones are respected and upheld.
Across Europe, we, in cooperation with our Navy allies, are
supporting our Ukrainian partners as they continue their fight
to restore their territorial national sovereignty as Russia's
illegal full-scale invasion now enters its third year. And I
urge Congress to pass the National Security Supplemental in
support of our Ukrainian partners as they fight to restore
peace in their homeland and more importantly perhaps defend
democracy for all free nations.
In the Middle East, our sailors and marines have countered
hundreds of missiles and drones launched by the Houthis. Our
Iranian partner and a specially designated global terrorist
group targeting merchant shipping in the warships of both the
United States and our international allies and partners. We are
confronting an adversary that has no respect for innocent lives
of civil merchant mariners, and one that is actively targeting
our ships attempting to harm our sailors and marines because we
dare, we dare to defend the defenseless.
For any who may question why the American taxpayer should
provide for and maintain a Navy and Marine Corps, look at what
is happening today in the Red Sea, where we are defending the
free flow of international commerce in support of the economic
and national security of our Nation, our allies, and our
partners around the global.
Members of the committee, we appear before you today to ask
for your continued support, your partnership and your
commitment ensuring that the nearly 1 million sailors, marines
and civilians to the Department that we lead are ready on all
fronts.
While the Fiscal Responsibility Act of 2023 forces us to
make very hard choices, the $257.6 billion in the President's
budget request for fiscal year 2025 for our Department
definitely balances maintaining and modernizing the fleet and
our force today against the planning of the future force, while
also taking care of our people, which is so critically
important to all of us.
This budget directly supports our Department's three
enduring priorities, strengthening our maritime dominance,
creating a culture of warfighting excellence, and enhancing
strategic partnerships around the globe. We are requiring the
most lethal, agile and capable warships, submarines, aircraft,
weapons and systems that our world has ever seen. And they will
replace the legacy systems that, perhaps, it is time to
decommission.
We are also funding the research and development of
transformational technologies and fielding them as quickly as
possible to make our fleet more lethal and persistent within
our current FYDP. We are also investing billions of dollars
into the industrial base that supports us while encouraging
them to also invest more in themselves as they should be. And
as responsible stewards of taxpayer funds, we will enforce
accountability to ensure our sailors and marines have the
platforms and capabilities that they need on time, and on
budget as well.
Above all else, we are taking care of our personnel and
their families by focusing on improving housing, expanding
childcare capacity and increasing access to mental health
resources, amongst other critical areas. We are clear-eyed
about the challenges that our Nation faces today in the
maritime domain, both commercial and naval. And as a maritime
Nation, we must confront the challenges of today and prepare
for the potential conflicts of tomorrow by investing in a
strong Navy and Marine Corps.
Again, it is an honor to appear before you this morning.
And we look forward to discussing with you how best to deliver
the Navy and the Marine Corps that our Nation requires. It is
an honor and a privilege for me to serve as the seventy-eighth
Secretary. And I am proud that our Navy and Marine Corps is the
most powerful, capable, lethal and flexible Navy and Marine
Corps in the world, and we are committed to keeping it so.
Thank you.
[The information follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Calvert. Thank you, Mr. Secretary.
Now I recognize the Chief of Naval Operations, Admiral
Franchetti, for her remarks.

Summary Statement of Admiral Franchetti

Admiral Franchetti. Chairman Calvert, Ranking Member
McCollum, Chairman Cole, distinguished members of the
committee, good morning and thank you for the opportunity to
testify on the posture of the United States Navy.
On behalf of the sailors, Navy civilians and their families
deployed and stationed all around the world, thank you for your
leadership and your continued support in providing and
maintaining the Navy the Nation needs.
I would also like to thank my teammate, General Smith, for
his exceptional partnership and collaboration as we guide our
services under the leadership of Secretary Del Toro.
Flanked by two oceans the United States is and always has
been a maritime Nation whose security and prosperity rely on
access to the sea. And for over 248 years the United States
Navy has guaranteed that access, operating forward, defending
our homeland, and keeping open the sea lines of communication
that fuel our economy and underwrite our Nation's security.
The events of this past year and the actions taken by your
Navy and Marine Corps team in the Indo-Pacific, in the
Mediterranean, Red Sea and beyond, underscore the enduring
importance of American Naval power. With an average of 110
ships and 70,000 sailors and marines deployed on any given day,
the Navy and Marine Corps team is delivering power for peace,
deterring potential adversaries, and standing ready to fight
and win our Nation's wars if called and deterrence fails.
I could not be more proud of this Navy team. No other Navy
in the world can train, deploy and sustain such a lethal combat
credible force that operates from the seabed to space at the
scope, scale and tempo that we do.
This year's budget request supports the national defense
strategy and my priorities of warfighting, warfighters and the
foundation that supports them. It enables the Navy to continue
to meet our congressionally mandated mission, both in peace and
war. It is strategy-driven, maintaining our focus on the
People's Republic of China as the pacing challenge, and the
acute threat of Russia. And other persistent threats like the
Democratic People's Republic Korea, Iran and violent extremist
organizations.
Given this discretionary spending cap prescribed by the
Fiscal Responsibility Act and a top line increase of .7
percent, the Navy had to make tough choices, favoring near-term
readiness, investing in our industrial base, and prioritizing
our people while assuming risk in future capabilities.
Within this physically constrained environment, the budget
request fully funds the Nation's top acquisition priority, and
the most survivable leg of our strategic deterrence the
Columbia-class submarine. It provides funds for six battle
force ships, and incremental funding for two forward-class
aircraft carriers in fiscal year 2025 and continues our support
to Marine Corps force design by maintaining 31 amphibious
ships, procuring three LPDs, one LHA and eight medium landing
ships. In total, the budget request prioritizes procures 57
ships across the FYDP. This budget request prioritizes
warfighting by funding our operations, training and readiness
accounts. It continues our strong commitment to our warfighters
and our families through pay raises, for our sailors, and Navy
civilians and investments in quality of service initiatives
such as unaccompanied housing, education, childcare, and sailor
resiliency. And it invests in our foundation with funding for
our installations, for our Shipyard Infrastructure Optimization
Program, and for the broader defense industrial base, sending a
strong signal to our industry partners on the need to increase
our capacity to meet the growing demands of the present and of
the future.
As Chief of Naval Operations I am committed to pulling
every level available to me to put more ready players on the
field. Those are platforms that are ready to go with the right
capabilities, weapons and sustainment, and people who are ready
with the right skills, tools, training and mindset to defend
our Nation's security and prosperity wherever and whenever it
is threatened.
I thank the committee for your leadership and partnership
in ensuring the world's premier warfighting force remains ready
to preserve the peace, respond in crisis and win decisively in
war if called.
I look forward to your questions.
[The information follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Calvert. Thank you, Admiral.
I now recognize General Smith to comment on the Marine
Corps, for his remarks.

Summary Statement of General Smith

General Smith. Good morning. Chairman Calvert, Ranking
Member McCollum, Chairman Cole, ladies and gentleman, thank you
for the opportunity to represent your Marines today. I would
like to start by sincerely thanking this committee for its
enduring support and your advocacy for a timely predictable and
sufficient budget that enables the Marine Corps to remain first
to fight.
I would also like to express my deep gratitude for the
partnership between Admiral Franchetti and me as we lead our
respective services under the leadership of Secretary Del Toro.
Whether deterring, responding to crisis, or in conflict, it
will be the Navy and Marine Corps expeditionary forces who make
first contact with partners seeking help or adversaries seeking
a fight. Our partnership collaboration and integration is a
decisive advantage.
Last week, I published updated guidance to the force
entitled maintain momentum. I chose this title as I firmly
believe the Corps is on the right path under force design.
A few points from that document. First, I believe the Corps
must continue to strike a balance between high end
modernization and our commitment to persistent forward deployed
Naval expeditionary forces that campaign and respond to crisis
globally. This effort is represented by our Marine
expeditionary units, the crown jewel of the Marine Corps.
Second, we must prioritize our operation with the Navy and
its amphibious ships, and we must provide Marines with the
organic mobility to rapidly maneuver from shore to shore, ship
to shore and back again.
Third, on recruiting. Our performance speaks for itself. We
will continue to make mission without ever diminishing our
standards. Additionally, our top performing marines are
reenlisting at record rates and we must sustain this trend.
Fourth, we must maximize the capabilities of our Reserves
to ensure that our Nation has the ready bench of warriors that
they have relied on since the founding of Marine Corps Forces
Reserve in 1916.
And fifth, I am dedicated to ensuring a quality of life for
our Marines that matches the high demands we place on them
every day. That means nutritious food, high-quality and
accessible gyms, and a safe quiet place to recover from a hard
day's work. Our barracks 2030 initiative is our most
consequential barracks investment ever, and it is sorely
needed. While aggressively pursuing these priorities I commit
to you that our core will always be frugal and accountable with
the resources you and the American people provide. I am proud
of my marines and civilian marines who enable the Marine Corps
to receive an unmodified audit opinion earlier this year, first
of any service to do so. They told us what we had long known,
when you entrust us with the taxpayers' money it is money well
spent and fully accounted for. All of these things are critical
to maintain the strength and dominance of your Marine Corps.
This year marks 249 years since the founding of our Corps,
that is 249 years of battles won and peace upheld in the name
of democracy and prosperity for our Nation and for all nations
who abide by the international rules-based order. But
increasingly world events demonstrate this order is being
challenged. Free trade, unrestricted access to the seas,
peaceful cooperation between nations big and small are under
assault. Our Nation's prosperity is underwritten by a strong
Navy and Marine Corps who maintain a global presence and keep
maligned actors at bay.
Thank you for the opportunity to represent your Marines
today. I pledge to continue to work closely with each of you to
ensure that your Marine Corps remains the most lethal fighting
force on the planet. And I look forward to your questions.
[The information follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

ASSESSMENT OF THE DOMESTIC SHIPBUILDING INDUSTRIAL BASE

Mr. Calvert. Thank you, Commandant.
I want to make sure that each member has a chance to ask
questions. So 5 minutes, including myself. So when the timer
turns yellow, you have 1 minute remaining. First, I will
recognize myself for 5 minutes.
You have obviously heard, Mr. Secretary, of our problem
with a number of ships that we have right now and the future of
the shipbuilding program. The Navy's proposing to buy only six
ships in fiscal year 2025 and decommission 10 ships before we
end their planned service life. The fleet would decline to 287
ships in fiscal year 2025, compared to 293 ships we have today.
This is a far cry from the Navy's 30-year force structure plan
of 355 ships. Meanwhile, China's Navy is projected to have 395
ships by the end of 2025. And 435 ships by 2030.
Mr. Secretary, what is your assessment of the domestic
shipbuilding industrial base including its suppliers, its
capacity to handle increases in shipbuilding? Does industry
need a demand signal to ramp up its production capability?
Secretary Del Toro. Sure, and I think it's a valid concern,
obviously, actually the investments that are being made by the
President's budget 2025, we are looking at $15 billion of
American taxpayer investment in the submarine industrial base
loan to be able to get the production rates up where they
should is--for example 1.2 should be at 2.0 I believe, focusing
on these major submarine industrial base investment and
$7,507,348 invested in the service ship base the right tactic
to take to help industry get to a higher production rate. Let
me also add, this is a team effort, it involves all the team
players on the team to do their part as well too.
We need industry to develop more to the recapitalization of
shipyard in this country so we can be more successful in the
fleet. I think that there are opportunities and it is part of
my Maritime Statecraft strategy basically to reach out to other
investments, domestic and international, to come here to the
United States an make investments here in the U.S., create even
more American jobs throughout the country and help smaller and
medium-size shipyards as well become that much more robust, and
they contribute as subcontractors major crime to get those
production rates up to where they should about be.
Mr. Calvert. Admiral. How, additional requests. Manpower.
Admiral Franchetti. As the Secretary said, we definitely
need a larger Navy and we continue to invest all those
resources in the industrial base this year's budget to be able
to set the conditions to increase that throughput to be able to
meet the demands that we need.
As far as the manning goes, as you know, we are about
18,000 billets short at sea right now. This is a full-court
press for us to be able to increase our recruiting. While we
continue to maintain our very historically high retention of
our sailors. So we are taking a lot of initiatives right now to
reach out to every ZIP Code in America where all of that talent
is, to be able to bring more people on to our Navy team.
I will just quickly say we are doing that in probably two
key ways, first is improving our actual recruiting enterprise
by appointing a two-star admiral to be in charge of that
enterprise, to fully manning all of our recruiting stations and
centers. By the end of May, we will be fully manned at those
centers. We have taken people out of those centers to be able
to man our ships at sea.
So again, we are going to have the full manning so we can
get out and make all those investments in all of the places we
get to go in high schools, and coaches, and talking to all the
different influencers.
The other part of the recruiting equation is expanding the
pool of folks that are able to join our team. We have increased
the age of folks that can join to be able to join us to their
42nd birthday. We have put in place a future sailor preparatory
classes for academics and for physical fitness, again, to be
able to provide people more opportunities to join the Navy team
and increase the number of specialties that they are eligible
for. We are also enabling folks who don't have a GED or a high
school diploma to be able to join the team if they have a very
AFQT score of 50, which will enable them to be in very many
specialties across our force.
So again, we are really optimistic that the investments
that we are making and the investments and changes we are
making in marketing and using data analytics to make sure that
we are actually getting out to the population that we want to
recruit. We are going to see promise and progress in
recruiting. So that will help us man those stations.
Mr. Calvert. Thank you. Ranking member McCollum.

EDUCATIONAL BENEFITS

Ms. McCollum. Thank you. I am going to follow up on a
little bit of the shipbuilding for a second. But what you said
about waiving the GED and the high school diploma. So for those
young adults who maybe didn't pay attention--I used to teach
high school, we had bright kids who didn't pay attention
sometimes. Are you going to work with them so at the end of
their service contract, that they will have either a GED or a
high school diploma?
Admiral Franchetti. Certainly. You know, we do provide a
lot of educational benefits in the Navy, and we actually have a
lot of senior enlisted that started out without a GED or a high
school diploma and now have bachelors and master's degrees. We
are committed, again, through this academic prep course as well
as continuing to support----
Ms. McCollum. I assumed that, but I didn't want to just do
that and not have that be accurate so that they can take
advantage of advanced career opportunities after they leave the
Navy.

``COLUMBIA''-CLASS DELAYS

I am going to follow up a little more on some questions,
and I am going to package them together and whoever wants to
respond can. A little more in-depth about what you feel is
happening with the Columbia-class submarine delays. And what
can the committee--we have things that we could do in
discussions that we have with business leaders in that. What
more should this committee maybe be looking to do to assist you
in changing that around? Could you tell us a little more about
the proposed repair activities in Japan, and one of our
important allies. We have the prime minister speaking to a
joint session tomorrow. And then, you know, how that could
impact and free up some things in maintenance as you work
through your other maintenance plan. And then last but not
least, what is the plan for not the Coast Guard, but for the
Navy to have a heavy ice cutter in its near future, not the
distant future? Thank you.
Secretary Del Toro. Thank you, Member. Let me take on the
question of Columbia specifically. So one of the most
significant challenges that we have with Columbia that is
specific to Columbia is actually the late delivery of the
turbine generator to Columbia by subcontractor Northrop
Grumman. That has had a major impact on the delay of the
Columbia.
Now there are other issues that actually transcend all of
these platforms that are causing some of the delays. We have a
shortage in blue-collar workforce in this country that is
significantly impacting our shipyards and it is making it
difficult for them to actually be able to recruit. I believe
the shipyards need to do more in terms of retaining their own
people as well, too. So industry has to do a bit more, bump it
up basically when it comes to retaining the people that they do
recruit. We have one shipyard in particular who has an
extremely low retention rate. So we are trying to work with
that shipyard to improve the retention rate, actually by even
giving bonuses to potential workers; $5,000 for the first year,
$5,000 if they stay at the shipyard by the delivery of the
first ship for example.
So we are trying to be as creative and innovative and
supportive of industry as we can be, but ultimately, it is a
response of the industry to recruit and retain their own
people. There have been shortages in the supply chain that have
been impacted by COVID across the board that has also caused
the late delivery of a lot of materials to the shipyards, and
that itself has caused problems, which by the way of moving
forward, advanced procurement for a shipyard is a strategy that
makes a lot of sense, whether it is for Virginia or for the
aircraft carriers themselves. So those are the significant
contributing factors to the delay of the Columbia submarine
itself.
With regards to Virginia, it is compounded by the shift
from block 4 to block 5, for example. The Virginia payload
module is a far more complicated submarine, it is significantly
larger. And the design teams, both at the shipyard, and I would
argue also----
Ms. McCollum. Mr. Secretary, I have 50 seconds left. Can
you touch on the other two please?

REPAIR ACTIVITIES IN JAPAN

Secretary Del Toro. Yes, ma'am. With regards to repair
activities in Japan we look forward to working with the
Japanese shipbuilders, and other shipbuilders around the globe,
including the Indians for example and the South Koreans to take
a look at which shipyards we could actually conduct voyage
repairs. Because this is something that we should explore now
so that when we do, if by chance find ourselves in times of
conflict, and we have damage to our ships in repairs that have
to be conducted underway that we don't have the need to bring
them back, all the way back to the United States but we can
conduct these forward as we should expect to do so. And seeing
that would you like to comment on the ice breaker issue.

ARTIC PARTNERSHIPS

Admiral Franchetti. Ranking member McCollum, the Arctic is
an incredibly strategic terrain. We know we need to operate up
there. We are fully supporting the Coast Guard and their design
of the ice breaker and support funding for their Department of
Homeland Security for additional ice breakers. I think we have
great opportunities to partner with our Arctic friends like
Norway, now Finland and Sweden joining NATO to find
opportunities to work together to develop that capability
broadly with like-minded nations.
Mr. Calvert. I thank the gentlelady.
I want to make a point that my father joined the Navy, a
lot of young people did before he finished high school in World
War II. And got his GED while he was serving in the United
States Navy. And he did okay after he got out of the Navy.
So with that, I am happy to recognize the chairman of the
full committee, Mr. Cole.

SHIPBUILDING BASE CHALLENGE

The Chairman. Thank you very much. Again, I thank all three
of you for being here. Thank you very much for your service.
You will probably hear a common theme in what Chairman Calvert
and Ranking Member McCollum had to say in my questions. Because
I am very concerned, I will tell you bluntly I think this
budget is too low. I think that has been consistently true this
administration. But I also recognize we are under the
constraints of the Fiscal Responsibility Act, and that is going
to make it difficult for us to do some things that I think we
need to do.
But I am particularly concerned about this shipbuilding
problem, I mean, the trim lines in terms of the size of the
Chinese navy and ours and they are able to concentrate a lot
more of their forces in a single region than we are in ours and
we are a global power. Those things are concerning. Even more
concerning to me is just lack of capacity, you know. We can
give you a lot of money, but we clearly don't have the capacity
to produce as quickly as we would like to, as much as I think
we need to.
So I would ask you, again, on your investments in the
shipbuilding base, but I also, Mr. Secretary, would ask you to
tell us a little bit. I mean, we are not building very many--
our private shipyards don't produce commercial shipping
anymore. We don't have the kind of capacity. Actually, you are
the biggest part of the shipbuilding that we do do in the
country. So we don't have the kind of base that we had in 1941
or the 1930s or well into the fifties and sixties. So how big
is that challenge and with can we do to increase capacity to
produce?
Secretary Del Toro. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. It is a great
question and something I have been focused on very aggressively
over the past 2\1/2\ years launching this concept for the
National Maritime Statecraft. That just doesn't look at Naval
shipbuilding but looks at commercial shipbuilding, which has
been devastated in this country since about the 1980s after the
Cold War as well, too. But we started--we stopped, actually,
incentivizing and subsidizing the commercial shipbuilding
industry, and it is because of that that actually our shipyards
went from 30 down to eight shipyards today that basically work
the Navy to produce ships. And that is a real challenge. It
also results in our ships being far more expensive than they
would be if we had a robust commercial industrial base in this
country as well, too. That is where we need to get after.
As part of my discovery, for example, we have discussed
authorities that are already on the books to just Title 46 that
allows the Secretary of the Department of Homeland Security and
myself, the Secretary of Transportation, to deem a ship that
has dual military use for both commercial and for military use
for example, to be able to receive subsidies.
So if the ship costs, say, $100 million to build here in
the United States, but actually cost $80 million to build it
overseas, we could actually subsidize that shipbuilder with $20
million to support the construction of that ship. We need to
get innovative of how we actually grow the commercial
shipbuilding industry. And I have stood up actually a
government shipbuilding council to try to look across
government for all of the key agencies to work together to try
to achieve this. And there has also been increasing interest on
the part of Congress as well, too, and a request made for
maritime coordinator, for example, for the White House to be
designated to take a look at all these issues to try to get us
to a better place.
The Chairman. Are there things that Congress could be and
should be doing to incentivize capacity building, frankly in
the north military field. You kind of touched on that. Do you
have any specific recommendations, because that is one of the
things actually looking at the Tax Code and some other things
we could do.
Secretary Del Toro. Yes, Mr. Chairman. I think one perfect
example is that is the LNG situation. And we can't build our
own LNG ships.You know, if we could actually encourage domestic
shipbuilders to invest in building LNG ships here we could
actually have the ships that transport LNG around the United
States and the Territories as well, too. And there might be
international investors that are willing to, again, invest in
shipyards here. The South Koreans and the Japanese are some of
the best LNG shipbuilders in the world. If they could actually
invest in smaller shipyards here, then we can start building
our LNG ships domestically and that would be a big boon for the
economy.

JAPANESE SHIPYARDS

The Chairman. Great. Last question because I don't have a
lot of time and you touched on this, but a lot of us around
this room served with our former colleague, our current
ambassador to Japan, Ambassador Emanuel. Any time we go, he
will rail at us about why aren't we doing more to use Japanese
shipyards and cut the amount of time now. So you talked about
planning it, but what would it take to actually do that? And
how quickly could that be done? And, you know, how big of an
asset would that be to you and the Admiral?
Secretary Del Toro. Yes, sir, there is a legislative
proposal right now before the Congress in fiscal year 2025
basically allows us to do up to six, not CNO availabilities but
voyage repair availabilities, basically, that would allow us
for approximately 15 days to 30 days, to be able to bring a
ship into an international shipyard and have them actually do
the work. That, of course, would ease up the load on the
domestic shipyards in one manner. But more importantly, it will
actually allow us to be able to certify these shipyards to be
able to work with us so that in a time of conflict, we would
actually be able to rely on these shipyards to do that type of
work. And it could be done on MSG ships, but also done on Naval
ships as well.
The Chairman. Thank you very much. I yield back, Mr.
Chairman.
Mr. Calvert. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I think we are all
hearing from our good friend, Mr. Rahm Emanuel, lately.
Let's see, who is next? Dutch.

NAVAL ACADEMY INFRASTRUCTURE

Mr. Ruppersberger. Secretary Del Toro, as you know, I am
chairman of the Naval Academy Board. I work a lot of with the
Naval Academy.
We also work very closely with the Army, too. Mr. Womack is
chair of that board, by the way.
The big issue the Academy leadership has is increasing
number of flooding events on the yard. I mean, you went to the
Naval Academy, you know that, and it is getting worse and
worse. And we are just falling behind in infrastructure, and it
is getting worse. Even where the midshipmen and whatever live,
it is not good. And yet the Naval Academy, just last year, I am
not sure this year, it was rated the No. 1 public 4-year
institution in the country. So we are doing okay there.
Now as you know, the Academy has put together a
comprehensive installation residency plan to get after the
problem. And now, before it is too late, we need to move
forward. The plan includes several project needed over the next
40 years. However, I don't see any of those projects in the
project pipeline for program FSRM and MILCON funding, and that
really concerns me. It always seems the Naval Academy is always
left over, if there is anything left over after everything else
is taken care of, and we have a lot to take care of, as you
know.
Now are there any shovel-ready resilience projects at the
Academy that have been identified as a priority for FSRM and
MILCON funding?
Secretary Del Toro. Congressman, let me first thank you for
your leadership on this issue, and for Congressman Womack's
leadership at West Point as well, too, because these academic
institutions are the very best in our military and we need to
be sending our best and our brightest to these institutions,
and they deserve to have the material readiness so those
installations could be the very best that they can be. I have
been extremely devoted to this for the last 2\1/2\ years
working very closely with you. We have increased FSRM funding
over the last 2 consecutive years to fix things like the
utility bridge. And again, I thank you for your investment in
the seawall, for example. There are FSRM projects that are
ready to go. In fact, they have a 15-year installation
resiliency plan in place with numerous projects and we can
certainly make that information available to your staff for
additional investment as well.
But we are committed, I can't speak to why my predecessors
did not make this a priority, but it is a priority, including
the renovation of Bancroft Hall, for example, that has water
leakage on the fifth floor, the roof needs to be replaced. So
we are going to----
Mr. Ruppersberger. It is the infrastructure and it's water.
Secretary Del Toro. Yes, sir.
Mr. Ruppersberger. The West Point doesn't have water, and
water is getting worse. We had one major project, and that
has--well, but I am really concerned.
And more broadly, how does the big Navy plan to fund and
implement the resiliency plan laid out in the long-range plan
to capture the effects of rising sea levels on the campus'
infrastructure and safeguard it for future generations of
midshipmen?
Secretary Del Toro. Congressman, we are obviously extremely
concerned about the rising sea levels and the impact that it
has on all of our naval bases on the coastline for both the
Navy and the Marine Corps. We have already made major
investments at Camp Lejeune and Parris Island and numerous
other places. But last year, we need to really coordinate this
as one department. And last year, I directed both the Navy and
Marine Corps and my own department, put together a 30-year
infrastructure plan. And we are committed to doing that.
We are about, in the planning stage about year 15 right
now, and we are extending it out to 30 years, so that we can
actually have all the different installation plans for all the
different bases in place, and then we can prioritize with the
focus on which projects are going to actually provide the
biggest return on investment to develop the--I always say that
installation-readiness is combat-readiness, and we have to work
together in one department.
Mr. Ruppersberger. I see this, but I don't see it in the
budget. That is what bothers me, and I want to get your
commitment, because you have given me that commitment for 2\1/
2\ years and you have been producing.
Secretary Del Toro. Yes, sir.
Mr. Ruppersberger. To do this, but this is serious now,
because water doesn't stop.
Secretary Del Toro. We would be happy to come to your staff
and show you the great lengths that we have made in the
Presidential budget for 2025. But I will also add that the
Fiscal Responsibility Act has actually also made it difficult
for us to be able to grow that list of projects as well, too.
And so, in some cases, we actually had to reduce MILCON in 2025
from what it was in 2024, which was a very productive year to
make progress on the installation front.
Mr. Ruppersberger. And one quick question on how would
resilience work if identified as a priority when stacked
against the Navy's range of other infrastructure requirements?
That is a big question. You have talked about it a lot, but it
seems that the Naval Academy is always at the end.
Secretary Del Toro. For the past 3\1/2\ years, sir, you
have had a Secretary of the Navy who graduated from the Naval
Academy, has made more investments in infrastructure at the
Naval Academy than any past secretary probably in decades. So
we are focused on this as an important mission requirement
basically for the combat readiness and training of those
midshipman.
Mr. Calvert. Thank you, Dutch.
Mr. Ruppersberger [continuing]. The Army Navy game too.
Secretary Del Toro. I am always willing to take an earmark
for the Navy football team so----
Mr. Calvert. With that, Mr. Rogers, you are recognized.

PACING CHALLENGES OF CHINA

Mr. Rogers. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. We share your concerns
about the advancement of China's military and the risk it poses
to our assets in the Indo-Pacific theater. Mr. Secretary, could
you quickly highlight one area especially in which you have
changed your 2025 budget request to reflect the pacing
challenges associated with China in the Indo-Pacific.
Secretary Del Toro. Yes, sir. Of course, as you know, there
are many challenges in the Pacific, but let me just highlight
one, and I thank the support of the Congress on this issue as
well, too. When we look at the important role that the Marine
Corps, and I will let the Commandant to comment after I finish.
When we look at the very important role that the Marine Corps
will play in the Pacific with regard to the force design
providing expeditionary advance basing operations stand in
forces, maneuver reconnaissance and counter reconnaissance, for
example, they need heavy lift to transport marines into the
Pacific, and then once in the theater, they are going to also
need the lift necessary to do inter theater transport as well,
too. So in--one of the things I am most proud about is that we
have three LPDs that are baked in now, into the FYDP basically.
We have one in 2025, 2027, 2029 and we also have the first LSM
that is also baked in for 2026 with additional LSMs in the FYDP
as well too.
That is one example of adjustments that we have made to be
able to provide the Marine Corps, in this case, the ability to
do their job in the Pacific. And perhaps I can have the
commandant talk about that a bit more.
General Smith. I can, Mr. Secretary.
Force design we are committed to it. It is a balance
against crisis response and readiness, and invest in key
capabilities, like strike unmanned systems, long-range fires,
medium range intercept capability. And it enables modernization
while retaining our capacity for competition and crisis
response, meaning our muse, our crown jewels. The force-design
effort continues a pace, and it requires a landing ship medium,
which the request for proposal is out to industry now, so I
will be mindful not to get ahead of myself.
But as the Secretary said, the acquisition plan is the
first LSM purchased in fiscal year 2025, and I am pleased with
the fiscal year 2025 SCM plan that produces 11222. We just need
a ship that meets our key performance parameters to go inter
island and to be able to beach itself and to come off a beach,
in order to carry these capabilities of long-range fires and
sensing and making sense and passing to the Joint Force what
the PRC is doing throughout the first island chain.

MARK 48S

Mr. Rogers. Mr. Secretary, let me ask you, last year we
provided funding for 79 Mark 48 torpedoes. And you requested 79
more. Is that enough, is that too much? How important is that
stock?
Secretary Del Toro. Yes, sir. The Navy could always use
more. There is no question about that. I think that the 79 that
we have requested is in line with what industry can properly
produce at this time. And so, without creating opportunity
costs in the future, I think it is the right number for now.
But I think that continued investments in the submarine
industrial base to be able to help increase the production of
Mark 48s. In addition to many other missile systems as well,
too, that we need in greater numbers is the right approach in
2025.
Mr. Rogers. I thank you. Thanks for your service to your
country. I yield back.
Mr. Calvert. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Kilmer.

SIOP BANDWIDTH

Mr. Kilmer. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and thanks for being
with us, Secretary Del Toro and Admiral Franchetti.
As you know, our public shipyards are incredibly important
for readiness, including Puget in my neck of the woods. And
thank you for visiting. We have discussed the importance of the
Shipyard Infrastructure Optimization Program, which is
multiyear, multibillion dollar effort to modernize our
shipyards.
In my neck of the woods we have been dealing both with SIOP
bandwidth, some seismic challenges, which frankly, you know,
due to some fast-action hundreds of millions of dollars from
Navy's O&M accounts were deployed to repair three of the
highest priority dry docks.
So I have a few questions on this front. First how do we
ensure that SIOP remains on track while also addressing the
seismic mitigation efforts? And is the $2.8 billion requested
for fiscal year 2025 sufficient?
Secretary Del Toro. Congressman, I do believe it is
sufficient for this year. We have made progress on the multiple
projects that we have across all the four public shipyards. I
am particularly pleased with the collaboration that existed
between the local community and the Navy and being able to
execute the seismic repairs that we had to conduct last year.
We have done most professionally, most expeditiously in order
to preserve the operation of that particular dry dock.
As you know, the dry dock programs are all phased in. There
will be more money that will be needed outside the FYDP for
SIOP investment. There is no question in my mind about that.
But I want to make sure that those projects are properly costed
early on, so that we have a full understanding of how much
resources will be needed before we actually make those requests
of Congress, and perhaps I could ask the CNO to also comment.
Admiral Franchetti. Thank you. I just wanted to add I was
just out last week in Pearl Harbor Naval Shipyard and, you
know, it is really good to see that Pearl Harbor Naval Shipyard
has learned from Portsmouth Naval Shipyard. So there are a lot
of lessons learned through that first SIOP project are actually
being transferred over there. And I know as we continue to
design the two other SIOP projects that that continued lessons
learned sharing will occur. I think the other pieces all the
new dry docks are designed for all the seismic standards that
we can anticipate. So again, I think that is already being
planned in the design.

PUGET SOUND MULTI-MISSION DRY DECK

Mr. Kilmer. Probably the big decision that needs to be made
for Puget is the multi-mission dry dock. Do you have a sense of
the timing, how close is the Navy to making a decision
regarding the construction of the MVT2? And how will that
impact programming and planning for the necessary work?
Secretary Del Toro. I have to get back to you with
specifics on the timing. I don't want to misspeak.

CHILD DEVELOPMENT CENTERS

Mr. Kilmer. All right. The other thing I wanted to ask you
about was a workforce issue, the demand for additional child
development centers with supporting staff has really exceeded
the supply and installations in my State. Childcare in
Washington State costs, on average, $1,000 per kid per month. I
have heard real concerns from the workers at the shipyard, you
know, the combination of relatively lower wages, high cost of
housing the cost and lack of availability of childcare is
really creating concerns, both with regard to recruitment into
the shipyard workforce, but also being able to hang on to the
folks that work there. So what do we do? How do we plan to
assist in terms of addressing this need, both for
servicemembers and for employees, who are looking for something
to do with their kids? And are there plans to increase CDC's
nationwide? Should we be looking at community partnerships? How
do we handle this?
Secretary Del Toro. Congressman, I am aware of the
difficulties actually that exist in the Pacific Northwest on
this particular issue. I am very proud that over the course of
the last year, the Navy and Marine Corps have made enormous
progress on this. The 2025 budget actually has four CDCs in the
Marine Corps, and four additional CDCs in the Navy. There are
also an additional 12 that are actually baked into the FYDP
across the board, but just in the last year alone, we have gone
from a combined shortfall of 11,000 families that have been
needing seats and CDCs basically spots in CDCs to 3,400 in the
Navy, and 900 in the Marine Corps.
That is an enormous change and it has also been fostered by
the support that we have gotten for Congress, for example, in
being able to provide families with additional moneys so that
they could subsidize private CDC care as well, too. So I think
we are making a marked difference from where we were just even
a year ago, but we will need to continue to make more
investments, particularly in the Pacific Northwest to
accommodate this challenge. Do you want to comment further?
Admiral Franchetti. I was just going to add in addition to
the creating new spaces by MILCON, or building now centers or
renovating old ones, part of the challenges, the workforce.
Mr. Kilmer. Staff.
Admiral Franchetti. The staff itself. We are about 88
percent manned right now, and that is improvement from where we
were, but that's about making sure that we are paying people
the amount that is commensurate with what they could make out
in town for that same thing. So we are incentivizing them by
having a discount for their own kids to be able to be able to
go to that childcare as well as providing more like a career
path, so they can have retention bonuses, they can move the
different CDCs if their spouse moves to another duty station.
Mr. Kilmer. Thank you.
Mr. Calvert. Thank you. Mr. Womack.

MEDIUM RANGE INTERCEPT CAPABILITY

Mr. Womack. I have to respond to my friend Dutch's comments
about no water around West Point. Obviously, you were not there
on Sunday, July 9 when 500-year storm flooded virtually that
entire campus, lots of damage.
Mr. Ruppersberger. That is just one storm.
Mr. Womack. Of note, Dutch, I have to commend the West
Point leadership for doing some resiliency stuff. They have now
protected the area on which the commander in chief's trophy
which sit so that any future 500-year storms will not----
Mr. Ruppersberger. What about the scholastic----
Mr. Womack. I am not going to yield any time to you.
I also add my thanks to the panel here this morning in what
terrific service you render this country. We are eternally
grateful.
Mr. Commandant, I want to jump down in the weeds on one
program if I have time with the CNO. I want to talk a little
bit about that Medium Range Intercept Capability, MRIC, we have
put money into that program. And I know it is a vital piece of
your force design. I want to give you an opportunity to talk
about it in the innovative strategy Marine Corps has to
implement and partner with Israel and bring this capability to
the Corps.
General Smith. Mr. Womack, thank you for the question. We
are using an Israeli Tamir missile paired with a TPS-80 G/ATOR
radar to sense and make sense of inbound threats and take
actions at great ranges. So the relationship is good with this
Tamir missile. It fits our needs. It is light enough to be
transported, and it has the range we require to protect our
forces when paired with the TPS-80 G/ATOR radar.
And I can come back to you in a classified setting and tell
you the size of the targets that the TPS-80 radar can detect.
But in an unclassified setting, I can say that--well, I'll be
mindful in the unclassified setting, but it is an incredibly
powerful radar, and the Tamir missile is an incredibly good
partner to that TPS-80 radar.
Mr. Womack. Yeah. And look, I appreciate the fact that you
were willing to take a proven capability, and to us here that
sit on this committee, that is very important.

TOMAHAWK MISSILE CAPACITY

Admiral Franchetti, I want to ask a Tomahawk question. We
all know the Tomahawk missile has demonstrated its continued
utility in recent strikes against Houthi targets. I understand
you expended a significant amount of Tomahawks in those
strikes. Glad to see we are trying to degrade Houthi
capabilities even in a limited way. The Houthis and all of the
Iranian proxies are like that old schoolyard bully. They only
understand strength, and they need to be--we need to punch
back. I hope we see increased strikes to destroy their
capability.
To that end, I have noticed that while the Navy's 2025
budget request includes Tomahawk modifications and research, it
does not include any new production Tomahawks. Army, Marine
Corps, on the other hand, are buying new production missiles. I
understand the Navy does not believe it can buy any new
production Tomahawks given the Army, Marine Corps, and
recertification efforts. To that end, what investments do we
need to make to expand our Tomahawk capacity?
Admiral Franchetti. Well, thank you. And, again, the
Tomahawk really is the premiere strike, land strike weapon. And
we continue to really be impressed by its capability. And in
our budget, we actually are buying new--in the fiscal year--in
the PB 2025 we are actually procuring about 181 new Tomahawks,
as well as doing recertifications for about 1,800 of those
Tomahawks, and that will also include 306 maritime strike
Tomahawks. So again, we believe this is a weapon that we need
to continue to invest in.
I think, more broadly, you know, as we talked about
infrastructure investments, we also have made significant
investments in things like munitions over the last few years,
and we appreciate the multiyear authorities that we have to do
that. And again, when you talk about what do we need to do to
get after the pacing threat of China, having ready players
means having munitions and enough munitions to be able to
prevent--to provide a credible combat deterrent. And, again, we
really appreciate the support for all the munitions
investments, including Tomahawk.
Mr. Womack. Yeah. I thank you.
With 30 seconds, I will yield back to my chairman.
Mr. Calvert. I thank the gentleman.
Mr. Case, you are recognized.

RED HILL

Mr. Case. Thank you very much.
Good to see you all.
Admiral, good to see you again. Hope you had a good trip to
Hawaii.
Mr. Secretary. Let me focus a little bit on Red Hill, Mr.
Secretary, if I could. We have had a momentous change recently
from the Joint Task Force Pearl Harbor, or Red Hill, I should
say. It is now exclusively, again, in the Navy's kuleana as we
say in Hawaii, jurisdiction, and that is a development that we
all have to be very careful about because, of course, it was on
the Navy's watch that it happened to start with. I think we
would all agree the Joint Task Force Red Hill was very
successful, at least that is my view, and I think it is most
people's views.
We are now back to the Navy itself. Good, solid start, but
a lot of things to watch for. And one of the things that has
been concerning to me is that we had actually gotten Red Hill
into a very focused line item in our budgets, and that is no
longer the case in the current budgets. It is now split up,
again, among the various components. And so, it is hard to
track what is actually being put into Pearl Harbor. And I
suspect it is very hard to supervise as well, and that is why
we went there to start with during the original decision to
focus everything into one line item.
How are we going to be sure that your efforts on Joint Task
Force Navy in the next steps of Red Hill are, in fact,
coordinated, synchronized across numerous budget lines?
Secretary Del Toro. Well, Congressman, first of all, let me
thank you for your leadership ensuring that the Department of
Defense and the Department of the Navy have the necessary funds
through the supplemental that was enacted for us to be able to
accomplish the very important mission at Red Hill.
But let me also reassure you, Congressman, the Navy has
never been absent from Red Hill. We have been there from the
very beginning as part of the Joint Task Force, making up most
of the Joint Task Force, and most of the leadership of the
Joint Task Force, whether it be Admiral Aquilino, Admiral
Paparo, now Admiral Koehler, Vice Admiral Wade, Rear Admiral
Barnett, they have all been engaged, as have I, as well, too,
from the very beginning. And you have my strong commitment to
continue to be as engaged today as I was in the very beginning
to ensure that we safely take care of the servicemembers in
Hawaii and the people of Hawaii, which is our number one
responsibility, to act with caution and safety always first and
foremost in their mind.
We have made major changes to the C2 structure at Red Hill
and all our fuel depots and installations across the Navy, in
fact, as a result of some of the lessons that we learned at Red
Hill. The funding is sound to be able to fulfill the remaining
mission there. We have 35,000 gallons of sludge that still
needs to be removed from the bottom of the tanks. We need to
clean the tanks, decommission the tanks. We need to disable the
10 miles of pipeline actually between the tanks and Pearl
Harbor itself, and then we need to remediate the ground around
Red Hill in order to make it completely safe for the people of
Hawaii and our servicemembers.
We are tracking every issue at Red Hill extremely
cautiously, from the very top of the Department of the Navy,
down to the lowest person who is working there at Red Hill
itself, and has the ultimate attention of both the CNO, myself,
and the continued leadership out at Red Hill. And I was very
proud to go to--and visit during the transfer of authorities at
Red Hill and meet with the community while I was there as well.
And so, the challenge continues, and we will be there on the
ground doing everything that we can responsibly to remediate
what needs to be done at Red Hill.
Mr. Case. I didn't mean to leave the Navy out of my
reference to the Joint Task Force Red Hill. I do commend the
Navy for your actions in Joint Task Force in Red Hill, and I do
realize that you had a leadership role. You personally have
always been very transparent, very dedicated to this, so I
didn't want to leave that point unresponded to.
Secretary Del Toro. Yes, sir.
Mr. Case. I get that. What about my basic question though,
is how are you actually going to coordinate the budget
authorities that you need? How are you going to be able to
track what--who needs what and prioritize it across a number of
line items again as opposed to one single line item where we
can track it and you can track it?
Secretary Del Toro. No, sir, we are tracking it very
closely. And, of course, the supplemental had one line item
associated with it, but all the underlying activities that
continued at Red Hill still had multiple line items. And both
myself through the Assistant Secretary of the Navy, Meredith
Berger for EI&E are tracking those line items ensuring that
they are fully funded, there is not going to be any withdrawal
from full funding to do everything that we need to do there, as
well as the CNO, who is also tracking it on the uniform side as
well, too, and the leadership there on the ground and Admiral
Barnett as well.
Mr. Case. Okay. Thank you very much. I yield back.
Secretary Del Toro. Yes, sir.
Mr. Calvert. Judge Carter, you are recognized.

FRIGATE COMMITMENTS

Mr. Carter. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Welcome, and thank you very much. We are all concerned
about the shipbuilding with the submarines and other things,
but you are also starting to build frigates. Is that correct?
And you did away with all your frigates and now you are
bringing back frigates.
I chaired MILCON--I mean, I chaired Homeland for a while,
and we built what everybody told me in the National Defense
Cutter, basically a frigate, just outfitted for--basically it
was outfitted for the Coast Guard not the Navy. Is there
anything--do you believe--do you agree that that largest ship
that they built is basically a frigate? And if so, are you
looking to people that have that kind of experience that maybe
they could build up the--speed up the--and be geared up to
build frigates in the future? Is there any--anything that I--am
I just speaking out of my--out of stupidity, or is that a
reality that that ship that they built for the National Defense
Cutter was basically a frigate?
Secretary Del Toro. Congressman, if you are referring to
the Constellation-class frigate that we have committed to,
absolutely so. It is absolutely the right decision to build
that ship. My very first ship in the Navy was a Garcia-class
frigate, and I will tell you that this frigate is 10 times more
capable than my old Garcia-class frigate was. And so, we are
committed to the frigate.
I think the Congress and the Navy made the right decision
when we actually decided to also add additional SM-6 capability
to the frigate as well, too, which will make it even that more
capable as a multimission platform. It is what the Navy should
have committed to actually 20 years ago. We are late to the
game, but moving forward, it is absolutely the right
investment.
CNO, would you like to further comment?
Admiral Franchetti. Just, you know, the frigate really has,
for a long time, been the workhorse of our fleet. We are really
excited about getting that capability in there. You know, we
are--have been able to work with the allied frigates all around
the world, especially the FREMM-class frigate, and, again,
incorporating a lot of those technologies that they will be
building into our frigate up in Marinette. It is very exciting
to get that ship under construction.
Mr. Carter. Thank you.

3D PRINTING

General, I have got a question for you. In the Pacific, we
are basically going to be outfitting the islands with supplies
and rebuilding runways for--so that if the Marines have to come
quickly to a location, they could land a plane at a specific
location. And I have been out there once looking at this stuff,
and I will be out there again in about a month and a half, or 2
months. Have you ever considered using 3D printing for building
runways? They can build a house in like 2 days.
Have you ever looked at 3D printing for the building of
runways and load dwellings on these islands where basically you
don't need it until you need it, and then is the Marines going
to need to be moving both by sea and by air to respond to
issues that are out there?
General Smith. Congressman, thanks for that question. We
have considered the expanse of the Pacific, and we have
surveyed all of the runways and potential runways that we can
use, which is why we have--I won't say we have begun to print
runways, but we have begun to do additive manufacturing and
digital printing of parts of aircraft and we have--we call it
mobile matting, which is a replaceable, nonpermanent runway
that we can lay down.
The additive manufacturing is more for parts for engines,
but the reason that we have our Harriers is precisely that they
can land in a basketball court. But we have surveyed the vast
amount of runways and we know where they are, and we have our
mobile construction battalions along with our CBs, where we can
repair them quickly to allow our aircraft to land.
Mr. Carter. So you just basically work with what you have
got?
General Smith. We do, sir.
Mr. Carter. All right. Well, I would like for you to at
least look at 3D printing for various things you are doing
because it is the future.
General Smith. Yes, sir.
Mr. Carter. It really is the future as far as quick
building with the very strong building materials, and the
building materials that are available on those islands fit
perfectly with what they do and they have portable units. I am
not pushing any company. I just watched multiple companies
build houses and dwellings in 2 days. That's pretty fast.
General Smith. Yes, sir. You have my commitment that we are
experimenting with and looking into all of those things because
we need runways that are--can take a hit, be repaired quickly,
and land our aircraft, to include our F-18 Hornets.
Mr. Carter. Thank you. Yield back.
Mr. Calvert. Thank you, Judge.
Marcy, you are just in time. You are recognized for 5
minutes.

GREAT LAKES NAVAL RECRUITING

Ms. Kaptur. I have got to remember which subcommittee I am
in. I am sorry. I have been running around. I think the
leadership, now that Chairman Cole will be in charge, could
plan the schedule in a way that we can give proper courtesy to
those that come before us. That is just an observation.
All right. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, very much.
The first question I have is of the Secretary. I kindly
gave some of your staff that are accompanying you maps of the
Great Lakes, and I need your help with some information. I am
looking at your recruitment numbers, both for the Navy and the
Corps, Marine Corps. I notice they are down significantly, and
I am sure others have asked this question, but I am interested
in drawing to your attention that in some places in the
country, such as the Great Lakes where you receive many, many,
many enlistments, the investments of the Navy are not very
stellar.
Maybe over in the Chicago area for the Great Lakes
investment of the Navy, you know, fine. But over where I come
from, where we join Canada in the Great Lakes system, we have
really been shortchanged by the Navy. I am just being very
honest. And we had a big armory years ago. They--it still sits
in the Bay. But I am just asking you to kindly look at the
places in the country where you have high recruitment levels,
and they could be better, but maybe the Navy could do something
as well.
And I have been working for 10 years with the Department of
Defense and failed to be able to bring home a program like
Starbase. And the excuse we are constantly given is, Well, you
know, we can't bring it there because you don't have a base. We
only work when you can be on base. Well, what if the Navy
hasn't given us any kind of base? How do we succeed? So if we
are trying to provide a pipeline, help us.
You don't have to answer that question. I am just giving
you a problem, and I'm really tired of it, because I think that
our people distinguish themselves with military service. In
fact, I am going to a big Marine Corps breakfast in about 2
weeks, and so, those who have served the Corps, you couldn't
find better Americans anywhere. But I just am asking you to
take a look at your assets.
Over in Lorain, Ohio, which I don't any longer represent,
we have facilities there that could--the Navy might use to
speed up your shipbuilding program. All I am asking is, look at
us. What can we offer? I think the Great Lakes have been
shortchanged. Maybe Ranking Member McCollum has a different
experience up in Minnesota. I don't know. But, you know,
California does real well, and I understand that they have got
the Pacific Ocean, but we have got another kind of ocean, and
it is going to become more important with what is happening
with climate change. So I just ask you to take a look at that.

CIVILIAN POWER PLANTS

And the other question you might be able to answer on the
record, I represent northwest Ohio, where one of the two
commercial nuclear power plants at the center of Ohio's largest
public corruption scandal is located. And this plant called
Davis-Besse has had a long and troubled history of safety
violations under the ownership of FirstEnergy and its
subsidiaries. It is tragic really.
Back in 1986, when a series of pumps and valves failed and
caused a temporary loss of coolant water to the Reactor Core,
retired U.S. Navy Admiral Joe Williams, former commander of the
U.S. Atlantic submarine fleet, and the NATO submarine fleet was
brought in at my request to reform the plant and its safety
culture. He is the only person I have known in 41 years that
did the right job there. The rest of them are corrupt. They are
going to jail. Horrible things are happening in Ohio now in the
Federal courts with the people that perpetrated these crimes.
But witnessing his leadership in the aftermath of this
egregious event has made me a lifelong admirer of the nuclear
Navy. If only his leadership could have continued at the plant,
perhaps my constituents would have been spared living through
the worst nuclear safety incidents since Three Mile Island,
when in 2002 a pineapple-size hole was found in Davis-Besse's
reactor head.
Given the preeminent expertise in the field, can you
describe how the nuclear Navy engages with civilian power
plants? If you can't do it today, provide it for the record.
And does it maintain relationships with such plants across our
country?
Secretary Del Toro. Congresswoman, I would be happy to come
back to you with a submission on the record, specifically how
we interact. However, most of the responsibilities for
operating the civilian power plants, as you know, fall under
the Department of Energy and the Nuclear Regulatory Commission.
But certainly, I will give you specifics as to where the
intersections actually lie, and perhaps what we can do to at
least bring awareness of how much we actually focus on safety
as the most important issue with regards to the operation of
our nuclear power plants and the high standards that we impose
on all our nuclear submarines and aircraft carriers as we
operate them safely around the globe.
Mr. Calvert. Appreciate the Secretary for getting back with
Ms. Kaptur with a written response on that.
And with that, I recognize Mr. Diaz-Balart.
Ms. Kaptur. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

PRIVATE SHIPYARD UTILIZATION

Mr. Diaz-Balart. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
And Mr. Secretary and Admiral and General, thank you.
Sincerely, thank you for your service to this amazing country
of ours.
You know, the 2 weeks that we were not here, one of the
things I did is I visited a number of private shipyards, and it
seems to me that the Navy is not fully utilizing our own
private shipyards. And since--as we all know, since 1993, the
number of public shipyards has actually shrank from eight to
four with, frankly, limited, you know, functional dry docks and
obviously we had the issues of delayed maintenance schedules
for our fleet.
Fortunately, that is augmented by 22 private shipyards, but
even there, three shipyards have left the industry and only one
new shipyard I think has been built since, I guess, since the
1960s, right, since 1960. And so it would seem to me that since
we are falling behind in maintenance, what is it now, we are
looking at 20 years behind maintenance, right, something like
that? I mean, whatever it is----
Secretary Del Toro. I wouldn't agree with that number, but
we are.
Mr. Diaz-Balart. Well, yeah, and it'd be great to get the
actual number, not right now, but just where we are. But I
think there is pretty much an agreement that we are not where
we need to be, right. And so I am just curious, why are we--or
am I wrong that we are not fully using our own, you know,
private shipyards? We keep hearing about the industrial base,
obviously, which is a real issue. But I think there is some
inconsistency in how we are using them, and I actually
witnessed some, you know, open areas there that they are kind
of waiting for a ship to come in and--so there seems to be some
inconsistency potentially in scheduling. So just if you could
help me kind of understand, what--how can we do a better job
utilizing those shipyards?
Secretary Del Toro. Yes, Congressman. First, let me say, we
are maximizing the use of our private shipyards. There may be
smaller shipyards that perhaps have not been able to
successfully compete for contracts and we would be more than
happy to work with your office to identify if any, for example,
in Florida who may have had challenges in competing for smaller
shipyard contracts. Obviously, all shipyards are not capable or
certified to work on nuclear submarines and aircraft carriers,
and this is part of the problem. We want to help as many small-
and medium-size shipyards become certified to be able to work
as subcontractors to the major primes so that they can more
fully engage in doing the shipyard work itself.
But just in the President's budget for 2025, we have $14
billion that have been invested in maintenance across these
shipyards, and we have 57 actual availability--excuse me, 58
availabilities for private shipyards, both for submarine work
and surface craft work, large and small. So we are making
maximum advantage of the capacity of our shipyards.
But again, as the Secretary of the Navy, my job is to keep
ships at sea, not to have them in shipyards all the time
either, and so I want to be able to minimize the amount of time
that they actually are in shipyards by making those shipyards
as efficient as humanly possible. And that is part of the
submarine investment in the industrial base of $14 billion over
the next 5 years and $750 million on the surface ship side.
So we are perfectly willing to work with your office,
Congressman, if there are shipyards in Florida or other
shipyards that you may be aware of, including Bartlett in Ohio,
Congresswoman. I am more than happy to work with Bartlett to
have them be more effective and actually integrating into the
supply chain for all shipyards to get them to a better place.
And I have been actively going around the country visiting
shipyards in Maryland and Philadelphia and all across the
country, so I am willing to continue those efforts to integrate
even more into our supply chain.

INCREASING TORPEDO CAPABILITY

Mr. Diaz-Balart. Great. Great. I have a minute left. Let me
just follow up with what the Dean of the House asked about
torpedoes and you answered. And, I believe, Mr. Secretary, you
talked about that is what we can do now with the current
capability out there, right. Is there anything that we can do
to increase that capability of--to increase our capability to
build torpedoes? It would seem to me obviously that, if we are
dealing with an issue in the Indo-Pacific, we are going to need
some large numbers, right? And anything that we need to be
doing on our side to increase that capability of manufacturing
of building of--of producing torpedoes.
Secretary Del Toro. Well, continued investment into the
supply chain is always welcome. I mean, I fully understand
that, again, we are restricted by the Fiscal Responsibility Act
this year in terms of the choices that we can make, but
additional investments on the civilian side and to those
companies is always welcome.
Perhaps the CNO could comment further on the torpedo issue.
Admiral Franchetti. Again, I think it is--for the suppliers
and the supplier base, it is really about increasing the
throughput. So, again, you know, it takes a long time to make a
torpedo. How can we make them more quickly, more effectively,
and that will help us get more munitions that we need out there
into our units.
Mr. Diaz-Balart. Mr. Chairman, I apologize for going 8
seconds over my time. I yield back.
Mr. Calvert. We will forgive you.
Mr. Garcia.

JUNIOR ENLISTED PAY

Mr. Garcia. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, all, for your service to this beautiful country.
I personally have no doubt that we would win a war against
China. I think it would be protracted, very bloody, extended,
probably not popular after time. But I do believe that because
of the Marines with the rifles and the sailors who launch and
project power overseas from carriers and vertical launch tubes
that we would win that war.
What I do have concerns about is our ability to deter that
war, and frankly the pivot to the Pacific has not been fully
realized, and I think that is, by any metric that you look at,
a reality. We are either falling behind or losing our lead
relative to China. The most important weapons system, in my
opinion, and frankly did not get enough attention today, is
that young Marine, that young sailor, the young Army soldier,
the junior enlisted E1 through E6.
In California, they just raised the minimum wage to $20 an
hour last week, okay. And so that means that a McDonald's
worker, right now, his starting salary is making almost double
what an E1 makes when they join the Navy. Now, that doesn't
account for housing, BAH, BAS, and all these things, but those
incentives are also lagging, right. BAH in San Diego is not
keeping up with the pace at home value.
So I would encourage you to--you have got on the
President's budget request a 4.5 percent increase in base pay.
I would encourage you to look at my RAISE Act, which takes the
starting salary of an E1 from $22,000 and brings it up to
$31,000, which at least gets it to that $15 equivalent per
hour, okay. It compresses the pay table, so that doesn't ripple
all the way up. General, you are not going to get that kind of
raise, but the E1s through E6s deserve that raise to get above
the poverty line to get off of food stamps. The request is that
you support that, and we are going to try to work that through
Congress.

MILITARY SPOUSE LICENSING RELIEF LAW

The other request I have is that you continue to remind the
young marines and sailors that the military spouse licensing
relief law is now law of the land. Spouses who have a
professional license should be able to get reciprocity across
State lines. As I visit units, they don't know that, so we need
to do a better job making sure that our troops know that the
spouses should be able to just cross-debt their licenses across
State lines, if they are a real estate agent, nurse, doctor,
teacher, whatever it is.
A lot of talk today about shipbuilding. I am more concerned
about ship readiness in the fleet. And, Secretary, you
mentioned, you know, getting as many ships to sea as we can.
That is the metric you look at. As my classmates start becoming
one- and two-star admirals, they start becoming skippers of
amphibs and aircraft carriers. I am hearing stories that are
frankly just blowing my mind, and we visited Seventh Fleet,
what, last year and the Seventh Fleet commander was talking
about cannibalizing cruisers to make destroyers whole or vice
versa. The metrics are bad.
So we are going to submit a series of questions for the
record that I would like to get a better understanding of what
our troop readiness issues are, specifically in the INDOPACOM
region, specifically around Japan and Seventh Fleet.
In the aviation community, we use the FMC versus, you know,
partial mission--full mission capability versus partial
mission. I think the metrics are not just bad, but I also think
that the metrics are not truly honest. And I am not accusing
anyone of gun decking their logs here, but our readiness
levels, when it comes to the ship availability numbers, is
below where it needs to be, so we are going to submit some
information--or some questions for the record for that.
The repair issue, Secretary, I agree. The only thing I
disagree with you is that the overseas ship repair capabilities
and the partnerships with other countries should not begin
today. It should have begun 10 years ago, to be honest. We need
to lower the classifications of sensitivity levels of some of
these repairs. I know that is not your fault, but we need to
accelerate that and make sure that we are doing that mindfully.
So just to sum up, a couple asks, support for higher pay
for junior enlisted, especially the RAISE Act. We are going to
be continuing to fight that fight. That was in the HAC-D bill
last year. The Senate stripped it out, and unfortunately, it
didn't come to the floor in the end, in the final version. We
have a lot of metrics that we are falling behind in, and
recruitment is probably one of the most scary metrics that we
are falling behind on.

STRIKE FIGHTER SHORTFALL

If I can ask a question here, Mr. Secretary, what is the
status of the strike fighter shortfall? This has been a well-
documented issue. I thank you for finally getting the prime on
contract for the Hornets. We lost three as a result of all that
churn. The American taxpayers are now getting 17 instead of 20,
but if you can comment on the status of the strike fighter
shortfall and what are the plans to mitigate that moving
forward?
Secretary Del Toro. Yes, Congressman. You covered a lot of
ground. I am not sure I can answer it all in a short period of
time, but I certainly would welcome submitting responses.
Mr. Garcia. I will submit all of the other QFRs and just
the strike fighter shortfall.
Secretary Del Toro. Yes, sir. Be happy to do that. But
thank you on your leadership on the strike fighter shortfall.
Actually, the strike fighter shortfall will be down to zero, I
think, by the end of 2025, and so that is a tremendous
accomplishment, and I attribute it so much to actually being
able to extend the service life of F-18, which has been an
extremely successful program in the Department of the Navy due
to the investments that Congress has made on depot-level
maintenance for on the aircraft side as well, too. So that is
very, very exciting.
I think the bigger challenge that we face on the aviation
side is actually getting to tech refresh three on the F-35 side
with Lockheed Martin, and I am hopeful that, of course, by the
end of this year that we will overcome those challenges so that
we can actually get those F-35s back into the fleet. But we
will actually have a zero fighter shortfall by the end of
fiscal year 2025, and it is a testimony to the aviation
community and Department of the Navy and Marine Corps actually
doing the things that they have done over these last several
years.
CNO, would you like to further comment?
Mr. Calvert. Well, when you get back with some of the
written responses to the gentleman, that would be great.
And, again, we appreciate getting those 17 Hornets under
contract finally.
Secretary Del Toro. Yes, sir. And by the way, there is a
huge advantage--forgive me, my mic wasn't on. There is a huge
advantage actually, because, well, the big success of the
Boeing negotiation--and I am thankful to Boeing for having
finally closed a deal with us--is the advantage that we get
from the data package actually, which is enormous. Protecting
the--getting the intellectual property rights to those jets so
that we can actually conduct emergency repairs on them in the
future should it be forward is a huge, huge advantage, and that
is the big return on investment that the taxpayers are getting
out of this as well, too. And hopefully, it will also serve as
an example for future negotiations on MQ-25, which will be
extremely important moving forward.
Mr. Calvert. Mr. Aguilar, you are recognized.

SUBMARINE INDUSTRIAL BASE

Mr. Aguilar. Thank you, Chairman Calvert. Apologies for
stepping away. I had a press conference to attend. And the
first question I got was about Mr. Cole, so I wanted to--I said
some nice things. In the spirit of our committee, I said some
very, very nice things about our colleague, Mr. Cole.
Congratulations to you. We all look forward to working with you
and your leadership here, as well, working with Chairman
Calvert and Ranking Members McCollum and DeLauro.
Mr. Secretary, I wanted to start where you started, which
is the national security supplemental we know included $3.4
billion to support the Submarine Industrial Base. What happens,
what is the impact if this doesn't pass, and can you talk to me
about how the funding would affect specifically our AUKUS
relationship and those commitments?
Secretary Del Toro. Thank you, Congressman. Our goal is to
get to 2.3 on Virginia-class submarines as just one example.
And so these Submarine Industrial Base investments are critical
in order to help the industry get there with--under our
oversight. So if we don't get the $3.3 billion in additional
supplemental money, that means that we will have to actually
slow down the workforce training programs, the advance
manufacturing programs that we hope to implement over the
course of the next year or so, and it will simply slow the
process of us being able to get there, and that is why it is so
critically important to have this supplemental pass in Congress
in addition to the support that we need to provide, the $60
billion or so that we need to provide our Ukrainian brothers
and sisters who are fighting for our freedom in Ukraine.

ADDITIVE MANUFACTURING CENTER

Mr. Aguilar. Thank you, Mr. Secretary, a critical component
that we have spent some time here, and I appreciate the
conversation talking about recruiting on retaining skilled
workforce.
Admiral, I did want to ask you if you have anything to
offer on the national security supplemental, please feel free.
But specific to the Additive Manufacturing Center for
Excellence, you know, are we beginning to see the results of
these efforts? What is the retention level of those recruited?
What does the future of that, you know, look like as well?
Admiral Franchetti. Thank you. And just on the
supplemental, you know, it is really important to maintain the
momentum. So, you know, we have made investments over the last
couple of years. This continues that momentum. And again, it
has taken a little bit of time for these investments really to
percolate through the system to be able to have the effects we
are trying to achieve to increase the throughput, both in the
Submarine Industrial Base and, as the Secretary mentioned
earlier, in our shipbuilding industrial base for surface ships.
On the Danville center, you know, this is one of the many
initiatives we have working with industry to create a pipeline,
you know, for the workforce to be able to come from wherever
they are, enter one of these training programs that is, you
know, it is a State industry Navy partnership to be able to
come out with a certification and a direct path into a job. So
we are really excited about both of these pathways, as well as
the promise of additive manufacturing and the different
opportunities that it is going to give us going forward. So,
again, these investments really help, I think, uplift the
entire workforce that will be able to help us in any one of our
shipyards going forward.
Mr. Aguilar. Can you talk about other partnerships that we
should know about, specifically as it involves our universities
and existing, you know, institutions that you guys are working
through and that you think could yield some benefit?
Admiral Franchetti. Well, I think we have a lot of good
relationships with different academia through different
laboratories that we use. I would even say, some that you might
not think about, which is partnering on getting out into the
high schools and into middle schools with STEM, because, again,
if we really want to grow our workforce, our engineering
designers that we need in the future, there are different
programs. RoboSub is a great example of one of those. You know,
we are really getting kids interested early on in technology
and really introducing themselves to the Navy, to academia, and
then really engineering and design.
So I think beyond just the ones that we are doing with
industry and with State to produce the workforce we need at the
more senior level, I think these are some good opportunities.
There is also a lot of partnering going on with community
colleges. And again, this is another place not just for
recruiting but for training the workforce we need in the
future.
Mr. Aguilar. Thank you. Thank you, Admiral.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Calvert. I thank the gentleman.
Mr. Ellzey.

RESUPPLY IN THE RED SEA

Mr. Ellzey. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I am very honored and
grateful to be on this subcommittee. And as a former Navy
pilot, with my friend Mike Garcia, I am grateful that we are
starting these budget hearings with the best service.
I appreciate the three of you being here, but I would also
like to point out someone who I have known since 1988 who I
knew was destined for greatness and when she was my upper
classman at the Academy. I don't remember too many of them, but
I remember her, and I'm really proud of her, and I am proud to
see her here, and that is Major General Shay. She is a great
person and a great leader, and I am really, really glad to see
you again.
Mr. Garcia. He is your fault.
Mr. Ellzey. From the top, bro.
Bases, boats, barracks, and airplanes. This service, unlike
most of them, has to leverage all those four things with the
current requirements plus future requirements in a way that no
other service has to. They really don't. And at some point,
with limited abilities to pay for that stuff, something gets
leveraged every once in a while, which is why we are seeing
what is going on with our bases and our barracks as compared to
our Air Force brethren that are just falling apart because we
have to build new ships. We have to go fight at war.
Every time we are in deployment we are on a wartime footing
in the sea service, and you are forced to think about EW
capabilities that we may or may not have but we need, contested
logistics that we are dealing with from time to time and is
going to be looming in the INDOPACOM, tanking which suddenly
rears its ugly head with new scenarios, magazine capacity
issues, construction of missiles, which aren't airplanes, but
everything that we shoot off out of our aircraft or drop off
of.
Now with the Chinese capacity to out build us 10-to-1,
those are issues that we always have concern. And admittedly,
on our side, CRs, not passing the budgets that you have asked
for, the FRA, and mandatory spending, which has eaten up more
and more of our capacity over time.
But you mentioned something, SecNav, about the competition
for your blue-collar workers. So what we have with the
shipbuilding and the industry versus what you are doing is the
two in uniform are competing for the very same people that we
need for that industrial complex. And when we are talking about
where are we getting these folks when the number one killer of
Americans at wartime numbers, similar to World War II, is
fentanyl killing 200 Americans, aged 18 to 49 every day. That
pool is getting thinner and thinner and thinner, so we have to
find other ways to build that industrial base that may not be
based on ours.
And the two in uniform are in competition with police, law
enforcement, welders, plumbers, trades, all across the country,
and suddenly we find ourselves at a crisis of manpower
capabilities for the blue-collar trades in our country. So it
is a difficult problem to over--you can't buy yourself new
people.
Secretary Del Toro, I appreciate your frank dialogue on the
industry and how to improve delivery in our shortfall.
CNO, thank you for the opportunity to join you and Mr. Case
on ICEX. It is a once-in-a-lifetime trip that I never intend to
take again, but it was fantastic. I also want to commend you on
getting more players on the field for autonomous platforms.
And General, your work on the Marine Corps transformation
is commendable. And even if you don't believe the warnings
coming out of INDOPACOM, one only needs to look at Europe and
the Middle East to see that we need to be approaching our
defense needs through an immediate wartime lens because we are
at war in the Red Sea with the Houthis. The Philippines is at
war with China. We are at war with the cartels, and that must
mean we must properly fund our force structure and deliver
ships and aircraft on time and on budget.
We also need to accelerate the fielding of new technology.
On that front, it is good to see the Navy advancing the work of
Disruptive Capabilities Office, and that is a game changer.
Admiral, in the short time I have got left, because I
tended to talk too much, are you pleased with the resupply in
the Red Sea, and are there some needs that have manifested
themselves in a way that we didn't foresee? Very quickly,
please.
Admiral Franchetti. Thank you. And I am really proud of our
team operating the Red Sea. It is really years of investment
that we have the equipment that is operating as it is designed.
We have the people that are trained and ready to use it. I
think on the capabilities that we think about for logistics and
contested logistics and that theater and other theaters, I am
really pleased with our logistics force as being able to
deliver. We had been developing some expeditionary reload
capabilities as well, and we have been able to put those in
practice. And again, a lot of lessons that we can take to use
in other theaters going forward.
Mr. Ellzey. Thank you, Admiral.
And, General, I am about out of time, but I did want to
talk about contested logistics, and I will get those questions
on the record. I didn't want to ignore you today, but I ran out
of time. So contested logistics and aerial refueling capability
in the Navy are questions I would like to see answered. I will
submit those for the record. And thank you, all, for being
here.
I yield back.
Mr. Calvert. I thank the gentleman.
I just have some last comments and I will turn it over to
the ranking member and then we will close it up.

DEFENSE INNOVATION UNIT

But one thing, Mr. Secretary, and as you know, I have been
talking about innovation for some time now, and certainly a
high priority for me since I have come to Congress and for both
of us, obviously. I think it is a collaborative effort on
innovation across the services, certainly across the
enterprise. And DIU, right now, is scaling manpower the support
increased appropriations in fiscal year 2024 and going forward.
Secretary, I would like to get your commitment you will
support the DIU with the manpower billets and detailees as
needed before we can get this program off to a robust start.
Secretary Del Toro. Mr. Chairman, absolutely. I mean, we
are really tied closely to DIU. In fact, when Replicator came
out, we were probably one of the biggest contributors to the
Replicator program with funding provided by DIU as well, too.
So our Disruptive Capabilities Office is simply working side by
side with DIU.
Mr. Calvert. Yeah. I am hopeful that they don't use the DIU
money that we just appropriated as a pay-for for all of this,
but I would like to find some other avenues to pay for that
with if we move forward on reprogramming.
With that, Ms. McCollum.

RECRUITMENT FUNDING

Ms. McCollum. Thank you, Mr. Chair. We had a robust
discussion in the office, and Mr. Garcia rightly points up the
competition for pay.
But I would like for you, Admiral and General, to kind of
touch on--you have been successful with recruitment, but it is
not--it is the barracks, it is the daycare, it is the
healthcare, it is everything that we also have to account in
our budget when we go to balance it at the end of the day. So
recognizing that we have done bonuses, we need to do more.
Could you maybe elaborate what you are hearing and what is
keeping with recruitment and how we have to keep moving forward
in making sure the funding is there for other those other
things that are touching those sailors' and marines' lives that
is making them stay. If you could just take a minute and do
that as you did in my office, I would appreciate it.
Admiral Franchetti. Well, thank you. I mean, I think, you
know, our most important resource is our people. We can have
great platforms. We can have all the good equipment. But if we
don't have the people that can operate that, I think they are
really our true secret weapon, and we really have to invest in
their quality of service. And, you know, we have been very
focused on making sure that we are a world-class employer, that
we can attract and retain those people that will do that
warfighting for us.
You know, we have focused on improving our barracks, making
sure they have a high-quality standard of living. We are
working hard to improve 24-hour access to gyms, making sure
that people have access to parking, making sure that we can put
our mental healthcare providers, make them embedded with our
units so people can quickly and easily access some of that
healthcare that they need at their time of need.
We are also working to make sure they have access to high-
quality food. We have just changed our policies so they can
cook food in their rooms in the barracks. Again, that is
something that is very meaningful for the younger generation
being able to take care of themselves and, again, we want them
to be able to have that standard of living.
I think for our families, of course, we are focused, as I
mentioned earlier, on childcare and making sure--access to
childcare.
And, again, I think the other thing we were looking hard is
quality of life while ships are in shipyards, making sure that
our sailors have an opportunity to serve at sea, that they
don't spend their entire first enlistment while they are in a
shipyard yard in the shipyard, that they get off and do what
they joined the Navy to do, and also that they don't have to
live on the ship when they are in an availability. So those
were just some of the things that we are looking at.
I would also--last one I would say is, younger people
really love to have WiFi, access to WiFi, setting up a lot of
pilots so we can make sure that people have access to free WiFi
and things that they need to get their jobs done and their life
taken care of.
Ms. McCollum. Thank you for your testimony.
And, Mr. Garcia, we will figure out a way to balance all
this out. I know we will. Thank you.
Mr. Calvert. Thank you.
And before we conclude, I would like to thank our
witnesses.
Mr. Secretary, as always, I appreciate your frankness and
coming to meet with us in this committee.
CNO, thank you again for your service, and Commandant. We
appreciate all of you. We appreciate your service.
If there is any questions for the--that you would like to
be submitted, I would encourage the members to do so, and
please respond in a reasonable amount of time.
And with that, the committee stands adjourned.
[Answers to submitted questions follow:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Wednesday, April 10, 2024.

FISCAL YEAR 2025 REQUEST FOR THE UNITED STATES ARMY

WITNESSES

HON. CHRISTINE E. WORMUTH, SECRETARY, DEPARTMENT OF THE ARMY
GENERAL RANDY A. GEORGE, CHIEF OF STAFF OF THE ARMY, DEPARTMENT OF THE
ARMY

Opening Statement of Chairman Calvert

Mr. Calvert. The subcommittee will come to order.
Today the subcommittee will receive testimony on the
posture of the United States Army.
First, I would like to welcome our two witnesses, Secretary
of the Army Christine Warmuth, and General Randy George, Chief
of Staff of the Army. Thank you for joining us. We look forward
to your testimony.
The U.S. Army provides our Nation with our best fighting
force in the world. We face a variety of threats from across
the globe, which require a well-trained and well-equipped Army.
As new threats evolve, it is imperative that we prioritize
investments that not only contribute to current readiness but
also provide us with a decisive advantage on any future
battlefield.
I am pleased to see your ongoing efforts to improve force
posture in INDOPACOM, the over 70,000 soldiers serving in the
region, your work with our regional allies and partners, and
investments in critical munitions will help secure greater
operational access to the region and provide a much needed
deterrence posture. I look forward to discussing more about how
your fiscal year 2025 budget request invests in the INDOPACOM
theater.
We are keenly aware of the need to modernize the Army of
today and to address the great power competition in the future.
And I appreciate this process began several years ago. I think
you will agree that the subcommittee worked with you to balance
supporting your strategy while ensuring that successful ongoing
programs continue to receive an appropriate level of resources.
However, I see a disturbing trend in the success rate of your
modernization programs, particularly the Army's big dollar
investments.
I am thinking of $2 billion for a helicopter program that
has now been canceled, a $3 billion long-range hypersonic
weapon that has not yet had a successful test flight and was
well past its fielding date, and $1 billion for a long-range
artillery cannon that was recently canceled due to engineering
challenges. That is $6 billion invested into three major
programs, no operational capability. Imagine the number of 155
rounds for other critical munitions we could have bought with
that funding.
I support innovation and modernization, but I would like to
have a higher level of confidence that the Army is investing
their limited budget appropriately. I am hoping you can tell us
how you are scoping modernization to identify non-feasible
programs earlier and working to incorporate successful
technologies more rapidly.
Threats from unmanned aerial systems are increasing, and
the technology for these systems is also maturing at a rapid
rate. We have watched this evolve during the past 2 years in
Ukraine, and have unfortunately suffered the consequences of
not addressing the threats of this technology as we continue to
mourn the three U.S. soldiers who were killed in January at
Tower 22.
That is why I am a supporter of the efforts to rapidly
prototype and field UAS and counter-UAS technologies.
Initiatives like the deputy secretary's Replicator program are
a step in the right direction. I understand that the Army is
already leaning forward by investing in these capabilities. I
am interested in learning more about your initiatives today.
Modernized capabilities are only as good as the soldiers
operating them.
I was pleased to see that the fiscal year 2025 request
includes significant funding for new and modernized barracks,
as well as a sustainment cost to ensure that our soldiers have
improved living conditions. I am interesting in hearing about
these efforts, including receiving assurances from you that you
are addressing important quality-of-life programs for all our
soldiers worldwide. The Army continues to face recruiting
challenges, and I would like to hear about your efforts to
address that issue.
Finally, I am pleased to see your recent investments in
production lines to boost monthly deliveries of key munitions.
The Army has overseen a significant transfer of equipment to
Ukraine, and I applaud your efforts; however, I continue to be
concerned about domestic stockpiles and therefore our readiness
rates. I hope you will discuss today how your fiscal year 2025
budget will improve the production of munitions and address any
shortfalls that we may have in inventory.
With that, I recognize the distinguished Ranking Member,
Ms. McCollum, for any opening remarks.

Opening Remarks of Ms. McCollum

Ms. McCollum. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you for the
courtesy.
Secretary Wormuth, General George, thank you for being here
to testify before us today.
General George, this is your first appearance before the
committee. Welcome.
The Department of Army's fiscal year 2025 budget request
reflects the priorities for personnel and for procurement. At
$182 billion the Army, again, is having to make difficult
choices and what is essentially a flat line budget when not
accounting for inflation. You are also managing personnel
deployments to EUCOM, CENTCOM, and INDOPACOM, keeping our
Nation safe in the face of threats from abroad all around the
world.
Well, the hearing today, we will cover a wide range of
topics, but I want to highlight a few topics that are
especially important to me: First is personnel. The Army
continues to strive to meet recruiting goals, and we must do
all that we can working together with you to assist you in this
effort. I would like to hear an update on what programs and
activities the request has included in it to address the
recruitment challenges that the Army faces.
Second, the Army has personnel deployed in Europe, in the
Middle East, performing activities in support of Ukraine and to
keep our troops safe in Iraq. But the funding for many of these
activities all reside in the supplemental. Everyone here knows,
and I think most of the committee, we strongly support a
supplemental moving forward, but the House, as you know,
continues to struggle with passing it.
I am concerned that in order to cover these deployments the
Army is now robbing Peter to pay Paul, or I could even say
Elizabeth to pay Beth. And unless the supplemental funds are
provided soon, the Army will have to restrict its activities
for fiscal year 2025.
Finally, the request for fiscal year 2025 includes
increased investments in counter-unmanned systems. I would like
to better understand how these investments will advance the
Army's position on the battlefield, that given drone technology
is constantly evolving at a rapid rate.
I want to let you know that we stand ready to work together
with you to give those who are on mission the equipment that
they need to achieve success and come home safely. Thank you
again to our witnesses for appearing here today. We appreciate
your testimony and answers to our questions.
Mr. Chair, I yield back.
Mr. Calvert. I thank the gentlelady.
I would like to now turn to the new chairman of the full
committee and my good friend, Chairman Tom Cole. Mr. Chairman,
again, congratulations, and the floor is yours.

Opening Remarks of Chairman Cole

The Chairman. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
China's military modernization efforts and increasing
assertiveness have raised concerns about the potential for
conflict with the United States. At the same time, Russia's
continued unprovoked attack on Ukraine underscores the range of
threats that we and our allies face. It is vital that the
United States Army maintain a robust and responsive force
posture to deter potential threats and ensure the safety and
security of U.S. interest.
The United States Army is faced with a variety of issues
that demand our attention and require us to ensure that our
soldiers are properly equipped and prepared to face the
challenges of the 21st century.
As chairman of the committee, I am committed to supporting
our soldiers and ensuring that they have the resources they
need to succeed. The Army must prioritize investment in modern
aircraft, strategic long-range fires, ammunition and missiles,
and trained personnel to support the force of today while also
working to modernize the force for tomorrow.
I look forward to your testimony, gentlemen, today, and the
Army's plans to maintain and improve its capacity and
capabilities, including the development of new technologies and
programs to support our soldiers.
With that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Calvert. I thank the gentleman.
I would now like to turn to the ranking member of the
Appropriations Committee, Ms. DeLauro, for any opening
comments.

Opening Remarks of Ms. DeLauro

Ms. DeLauro. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thanks to the ranking member.
And let me offer my congratulations to the chair of the
Appropriations Committee, a good and dear friend, Congressman
Tom Cole. Look forward to our opportunities to work together on
what is, in my view, the central committee at the center of the
Federal Government in its role in what it does with regard to
the American people. So, again, my congratulations.
I want to say a thank you to today's witnesses, Secretary
Wormuth and--General George, we had this conversation in the
past. I am sorry that Iowa won and defeated the women at UCONN,
but we will get another chance at this and so forth, so. But go
Huskies, is all I can just say, General, but welcome. Welcome
to you, my dear.
I want to thank you both for your dedicated service to our
Nation. You do keep our Nation safe. You keep our troops safe.
You ensure that our allies are supported wherever democracy and
freedom are threatened around the globe.
Through the fiscal year 2025 budget, Congress has the duty
to ensure the Army has the resources to be able to fulfill its
mission to keep our country secure, our troops protected, and
well equipped. The President's budget includes a $400 million
increase for the Army that will ensure we are doing all that we
can to support our soldiers and their families.
I will get parochial for a moment. I am proud that in my
district Sikorsky Aircraft manufactures the UH-60 Blackhawk, a
utility helicopter that has been used by the U.S. Army and
other military branches in numerous roles around the world
since its introduction in 1979. So I am especially pleased that
the President's budget includes $25 million for research and
development to upgrade the Blackhawk platform, keeping it in
service for many, many years to come.
While we are here to discuss the 2025 budget, I must
underscore how critical it is that Congress immediately pass a
supplemental funding bill to address multiple ongoing national
security concerns. It is as much for our national security
issues, it is as much to provide aid to Ukraine and others,
but, as well, it is the--what this means in terms of what is
spent domestically that ensures our national security.
Sometimes we lose track of that or maybe people don't know or
understand what is involved in that and what the benefits are
for national security for the U.S.
The U.S. Army is currently deployed spending hundreds of
millions of dollars in Europe and the Middle East, and the
longer we wait to buttress the Department of Defense resources
the more our military will have to dip into annual funding to
cover its rising costs. Every moment this funding is delayed
helps our adversaries, hurts our allies, and risks damage to
America's military readiness and reputation. We must ensure
that we are adequately backfilling our military equipment,
stockpiles that are being used in these theaters, and we must
ensure we are sufficiently restoring our own industrial base. I
look forward to discussing these items today.
Additionally, I want to hear about how the Army is
addressing the recruitment issue and the challenges that attend
to recruitment. The majority chose last go-around to inject
culture war debates into last year's Department of Defense
funding process. I am concerned with how that may further hurt
recruitment efforts, especially among women. We must do all
that we can to ensure that any American who wants to bravely
serve in the United States armed forces, defend our Nation,
feels that they belong and that they are not going to be drawn
into political warfare while confronting legitimate threats to
freedom, democracy, and our national security.
I thank you for being here, and I yield back. Thank you,
Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Calvert. Thank you.
Secretary Wormuth, please take 5 minutes for your opening
remarks.

Summary Statement of Secretary Wormuth

Secretary Wormuth. Thank you, Chairman Calvert, Ranking
Member McCollum, Ranking Member DeLauro.
And congratulations, Chairman Cole, to your new
responsibilities leading the full committee.
Thank you all, distinguished members of the subcommittee,
for your continued support for our soldiers, our Army
civilians, and their families.
General George and I appear before you today at a moment of
profound transformation for the United States Army. We are
transforming our capabilities, our force structure, and our
recruiting enterprise to ensure that the Army is ready and able
to defeat evolving threats, keep pace with technology, and
attract the best talent so that we remain the world's best land
fighting force.
As we pursue this transformation, we must also take care of
our people, ensuring that our soldiers and families have the
quality of life they deserve to sustain our readiness now and
into the future.
This year, like last year, the Army's fiscal year 2025
budget continues to support the most ambitious modernization
program the Army has undertaken in the last 40 years. We are
making significant progress in transforming our capabilities by
staying consistent in our goals and meeting most major
milestones for development and fielding. The Next Generation
Squad Weapon, the Integrated Battle Command System, our
midrange capability, and the precision strike missile are just
some examples of the critical new systems we have recently
delivered.
As we bring these new systems into our inventory, we are
also transforming our force structure to meet the priorities of
the National Defense Strategy. We are building out new
formations, such as our five multi-domain task forces, and
making sure they are equipped with the capabilities we need to
conduct large-scale combat operations against advanced military
peers. And we are shrinking excess force structure so that the
units we have are manned and ready.
While these force structure decisions bring down our
authorized troop levels by about 24,000 spaces, our goal is to
increase the Army's authorized end strength from 450,000 active
soldiers to 470,000 active soldiers by fiscal year 2029. To
meet that goal we are working around the clock to overcome our
recruiting challenges, and I am pleased to say that we are
making very solid progress this year. Building on successful
initiatives like the future soldier prep course, we are
fundamentally transforming our recruiting enterprise to better
compete in the 21st century job market.
Most significantly, we are professionalizing our recruiting
workforce by creating new, permanent talent acquisition
specialties for both enlisted soldiers and warrant officers.
The assessment and selection of the first cohort of our new
warrant officers is complete, and this group will be out in the
field by the end of the summer.
As we transform, we also have to take care of our soldiers
and families. A key part of that responsibility is providing
safe, high-quality housing and barracks. And, Chairman, as you
noted, over the next 5 years, the Army will invest an average
of $2.1 billion each year in the construction, sustainment,
restoration, and modernization of barracks for unaccompanied
soldiers.
This investment will also fund sustainment at 100 percent,
something we haven't done in several years. We are also
leveraging the expertise of the Corps of Engineers to stabilize
our project costs, and we will hire civilian barracks managers
to oversee our barracks so that our soldiers can focus on their
warfighting responsibilities.
Physically and emotionally healthy soldiers are more
resilient, they are higher performing, and they are less likely
to engage in harmful behaviors. To build resilient soldiers we
are expanding our holistic health and fitness programs to 71
active brigades, we are investing in financial management
services so that our soldiers know how to budget, and we are
encouraging programs in our divisions that focus on soldier
well-being. Our goal is building cohesive teams and proactively
working to reduce harmful behaviors from a soldier's first day
in the Army.
Even as we transform, and we have to because it is a very
dangerous world out there, we are continuing to provide
combatant commands with trained and ready formations. This
year's budget seeks $1.5 billion for activities associated with
the Pacific Deterrence Initiative, and we have asked for
hundreds of millions of dollars for Operation Pathways, our
exercises in the region that strengthen deterrence and build
interoperability with our allies and partners.
In Europe, our troops are demonstrating our commitment to
deterring Russian aggression. The Army has been leading the
effort to support Ukraine from training over 17,000 Ukrainian
troops to providing hundreds of vehicles, different kinds of
equipments, and millions of munitions. The chief and I strongly
urge the passing of a supplemental appropriations bill that
will maintain this critical support for Ukraine, invest in our
own readiness, and create jobs for Americans all around the
country.
With your support, we will continue to take care of our
people and sustain the transformation that will keep the Army
the world's best Army. I am proud of all that our soldiers and
civilians are doing, and I look forward to your questions.
[The information follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Calvert. Thank you for your comments.
Now, General George, please take 5 minutes for your opening
remarks.

Summary Statement of General George

General George. Okay. Thank you. Chairman Calvert, Ranking
Member McCollum, Chairman Cole, Ranking Member DeLauro, thank
you for the opportunity to talk with you today about our Army.
The world is more volatile today that I have seen it in my
36-year career, and there is clear cooperations between
adversaries than I have seen in a while. A spark in any region
could have global impacts. Meanwhile, the character of war is
changing rapidly, which we see from what is happening on
battlefields in Ukraine and in the Middle East.
Our Army is as important as ever to the Joint Force. We
must deter war everywhere and be ready to respond anywhere, so
we are focused on providing the best Army with the budget we
are given. Our soldiers deserve it, the joint team deserves it,
and our Nation deserves it. That means making some tough
decisions and finding ways to get better every day.
As the Secretary already highlighted, our planned
investments reflected in our fiscal year 2025 budget will help
our Army win the future fight and ensure that our soldiers and
their families remain ready and resilient.
Across the Army, we are learning from global events and
continuously transforming how we operate, how we train, and how
we equip, and I would like to highlight a handful of things. We
are learning that designs for things like unmanned systems must
be modular, adaptable, and software defined. We are working to
get relevant technology in the hands of our soldiers
immediately.
We are learning that counter-unmanned systems must evolve
as the threat does to protect our formations and critical
infrastructure. We are also moving out on that while being
mindful of the cost curve. We need cheaper solutions.
We are learning that, in some cases, the right tech already
exists to support transformation. For instance, the tech exists
to make our command-and-control modes more mobile, low
signature, and more effective right now, and we are fixing our
network. And we are building our magazine depth and modernizing
our organic industrial base, because we know that wars never
end quickly as we hope. They take a lot of ammo.
We are also transforming how we recruit, ensuring that we
have the right talent and the right tech and that we are
getting the word out about how our Army is a great place to
serve because of our mission and our people.
Finally, we are also looking at where we need to reimagine
our processes and where we can afford to stop doing things that
don't support warfighting or building cohesive teams.
I am proud of what our soldiers are doing around the world
to help defend our country. We appreciate your support, and I
look forward to your questions.

COUNTER UAS INVESTMENTS

Mr. Calvert. Thank you, General. I want to make sure all
the members have a chance to ask questions so we will have a 5-
minute clock on, even for myself, and we will go around and get
as many questions in as possible.
Obviously we spent some time in my comments and the ranking
member's comments and your comments about UAS and counter-UAS
strategy and what we are going to do to defeat that. The threat
from kamikaze drones and unmanned aerial systems has
intensified, and it changes almost daily. I see that your
budget request includes $400 million for systems to counter
small drones. I would like to talk more about your approach to
countering UAS threats.
So, Secretary, how are you ensuring that the Army
investments in counter UAS flip this cost curve so we are not
just shooting down $500 drones with $1 million missiles?
Secretary Wormuth. Thank you, Chairman. We are trying to do
that in a couple of different ways. As you noted--first of all,
I would say, since 2020, we have had $3 billion that we have
invested in counter-UAS and UAS systems, and there is several
hundred million dollars in this year's budget request for that,
and there are also some on the chief's unfunded priorities list
as well. I think, you know, we all are very focused on growing
our investment here.
One, we are very much looking at how can we find lower cost
attributable systems, and we are working with companies like
Aderol, for example, to try to invest in smaller, very
effective but less expensive types of UAS and counter-UAS
systems. Another thing I would highlight, Chairman, is our
investments in directed energy. So, for example, we have
directed energy M-SHORAD. There are four prototypes for that
system out in CENTCOM right now. We also have a couple of high-
powered microwave programs.
And one of the things that--I highlight DE M-SHORAD, for
example, because we are still working on the costing, but in
theory, you know, the laser is essentially unlimited
ammunition, so it offers the possibility of us being able to
shoot down hundreds and hundreds of UASes and have a very quick
reload rate. So I think there is a lot of potential in that
kind of a platform.
Chief, I am sure you want to add.
General George. Yeah, I just would add, Chairman, that--and
what the Secretary talked about, what we are trying to do in
the Middle East by sending over the user, the developer, and
the tester, and them all being together, I think what we are
learning from the battlefield, for example, what is happening
in Ukraine is things are changing in weeks and months, and we
are going to have to be able to adapt and so that is what we
are doing.
So we are sending everything that we possibly can into
tougher environments and putting all of those people together,
and it is--a lot of the--there is a lot of small companies out
there that are doing a lot of great things. We just got done
with a big experimentation with Project Convergence that was
out at our national training center, inviting them in.
The Army is also--is the executive agent for the joint
counter-UAS office and is getting a lot of R&D to make sure
that we are--there is a lot of great ideas out there, but we
are getting all of those from American industry in addition to
what we are developing.

IRON BEAM

Mr. Calvert. Obviously, you know, Israel, in this
supplemental that hopefully we will be able to figure out how
we are going to pass, has some money in it for Iron Beam. And
Rafael has made significant progress in this, and I know that
our contractors have been working with them. I am curious if we
have personnel in Israel that are working with the Israelis as
they test in realtime Iron Beam. Is any of that going on?
General George. I am not--I can tell you, Chairman, is that
we are--I just had met the IDF ground commander and several of
his staff and we were just together, so we are exchanging
lessons and having that kind of interchange and we are looking
at sending some people over there, so--and I have also had some
discussions with Rafael. So for our part, what we want to do is
whatever is working out there and is adapting we are looking to
bring that into the system.
Mr. Calvert. And the systems that you have already put on
some of our equipment and the testing you are doing, are you
satisfied that it is moving in the right direction?
General George. I mean, I think we have more work to do,
and this is one--there is probably three areas, Chairman, where
I think that we need to be more flexible in our funding
approach: Counter UAS is one of them, unmanned systems is the
other, and then EW, which is related to both of those efforts.
And our challenge was with the continuing resolution, if we
wanted to spend more money we could not reprogram and put other
money in there to make adjustments.
And so, again, that was a big--that was a problem for us. I
think we lost time with that. So that is one area that I would
recommend--those are three areas that I would recommend that we
would have more flexibility in our funding so that we could--
when something is working in prototype that we could
immediately--if those systems are working that we could procure
it.
Mr. Calvert. Okay. Ranking Member.

RECRUITMENT AND RETENTION ABILITIES

Ms. McCollum. Thank you.
And the chairman and I and this committee have been working
on trying to adapt and respond quickly to some of the
situations we find ourselves in, and so I know that we want to
work together to put into place what you were talking about
with getting things tested and out and then in production. But
behind all the equipment is personnel, and so I am going to
back into personnel for a few minutes.
Madam Secretary, General, the committee knows that
recruitment was a problem for the Army last year, and it was
true for most of the other services, too. You have requested an
increase for recruiting activities, and I would like an update
on where the Army currently stands with both recruiting and
retention. We heard just a couple hours ago from the Navy that
they had the recruiting offices empty because they had people
out to sea, and now they are starting to staff them up again,
so if you could enlighten us a little more about what you are
doing.
And so I know that you had mentioned when we talked that
you were making some progress, if you could share with the
committee what you think that--what caused that shift. And then
we talked about retention as well. So part of the package for
recruitment and retention are a lot of things, pays plays a big
part of that, but there is other things that are part of that
too.
So if you could maybe help the committee, because we are
trying to find that sweet spot, because for some people it is
more than just pay, it is childcare centers, it is access to
gyms, it is barracks and the other things that you talked
about. So could you tell us what you think has been successful
in your recruitment abilities moving forward, and what has been
successful and made people stay in when you are doing the
retention? Thank you.
Secretary Wormuth. Thank you, Congresswoman. I am pleased
to report, as I said, I think we are making very good progress
this year on our recruiting goal. The chief and I have set a
goal of recruiting 55,000 new soldiers and putting another
5,000 into our delayed entry program, so that is sort of the
bank account. And we still have 6 months to go in this fiscal
year. So I don't want to be over confident, but I think we both
feel that we have a good shot at making that goal this year,
which I think would be very, very important.
Part of the reason that I think we are doing better this
year is we continue to have great success with our future
soldier prep course. We have actually expanded that. We now are
running that program at Fort Jackson and at Fort Moore. We
continue to see a lot of interest in that effort. We are also
selecting our recruiters differently. We are doing more of an
attribute-based selection, and I think that means we are
picking soldiers that are a little bit more inclined to be good
salespeople for the United States Army. We have evolved our
recruiting college curriculum by about 40 percent, so we have
really updated that, and, again, I think that has helped our
recruiters be more effective in the field.
The soldier referral program, where soldiers can, you know,
bring a friend from high school or something, if that person
actually signs a contract, you can get promoted more quickly
and that program is also bringing good success.
So there is a lot that is kind of--you know, we have had
multiple pieces to our efforts and to our broader
transformation that I think are now starting to bear fruit. We
have also put--we have surged some medical folks into our MEPS
stations to be able to work through all of the different
waivers that kids sometimes need for different health
conditions, and that has allowed us to get more contracts
through the pipeline.
So I think that is a lot of what is behind why we are doing
better this year. Retention remains historically high. We are,
I think, already on track to exceed our retention goals for
this year. You know, I think the fundamental reason we are
retaining well is that when people join the Army, they like it.
They are a part of something bigger than themselves. There is a
sense of family, a sense of community, and a real purpose to
defending the country. But, of course, we have targeted
retention bonuses and things like that that also help us keep
key specialties. But I think we are feeling a lot better about
recruiting this year.
I don't know, Chief, if you want to add.
General George. I would add--and the Secretary did a great
job running that down. And we spend--there is probably not a
day that goes by actually that we are not having some
conversation about what we are doing. It is critically
important to us and to our whole formation.
We are also trying to get the right tech into the hands of
our recruiters. You know, there is a lot of things that happen
on--I look at Indeed or some of the other--so we are getting
commercial off-the-shelf stuff. We have had a couple of
innovation companies that are actually trying to go out there
and innovate a little bit, which I think is helping.
And then the other thing is, what we also want to approve
is have good analysis on what actually is working and what
isn't. For example, we are finding that a lot of people are
choosing location, is very important to people. There is
different things that are important to people, a job specialty.
Twenty-five percent are picking location, so that is--I think
we are trying to get better at understanding the dynamics of
recruiting as well.
Ms. McCollum. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Calvert. Thank you.
Chairman Cole.

PALADIN INTEGRATED MANAGEMENT PROGRAM

The Chairman. Thank you very much.
And good to see both of you again. Again, I enjoyed our
personal visit. Thank you for taking the time to do that.
Let me ask you one parochial question. I am disappointed to
once again see in the President's budget a reduction on the
Paladin Integrated Management program down. This is the fourth
year in the row that number keeps coming down. We raise it
every year here, because you are asking for 20, it takes 36 to
maintain the production line minimum. Is there a problem here,
or is your budget just stretched that far?
Secretary Wormuth. Thank you, Chairman. I think the
investment in Paladin is a good example of where we are having
to make hard choices given our relatively flat top line, and
there are--you know, you can see that whether it is equipment
for our armored brigade combat teams, you know, things like
Bradley, things like Striker, you know, we have not been able
to invest as much as ideally we would and continue to modernize
the new systems.
I would add though that, again, this is another place where
if we get the supplemental we are planning to invest in 18
additional Paladin systems. So between what we have gotten in
our base budget, and hopefully if the supplemental comes
through, we should be above the minimum sustainable rate for
the foreseeable future.
The Chairman. That is good to hear.

INDUSTRIAL BASE MUNITIONS PRODUCTION

General George, you mentioned in your testimony, you talked
about the magazine depth, and that is something I think that
concerns us all, relates back to our own industrial base. And
so could you just give us an overview on, you know, how much
have things improved, what--I would assume this is another
place where the supplemental would help us a great deal if we
were able to get that done, and just thoughts in general on--I
mean, it is pretty bad when you are worried about, you know,
155-millimeter shells and things that are pretty basic things
that we ought to have an abundant supply.
General George. Chairman, it is--obviously we want to--we
are putting a lot of energy in the Organic Industrial Base. I
think it is important not only just for the Army but for the
Joint Force in what we are doing. So we have invested, I think,
more than $3 billion ourselves. We are--the supplemental has, I
think, $4.5 billion that is in there that, you know, would go
into improving the industrial base and buying the munitions
that we need, you know, back to the magazine depth.
So I think what is important, and I have been to several of
these, is that we are, you know, trying to automate a lot of
these places so that we could scale and increase production
that we have with the workforce. 155 is a perfect example; we
started off at about 14,000 rounds a month in 155-millimeter.
We are up to a little over 30 right now, and we are ready to
scale to 70.
With the money that goes in the supplemental we can go up
to 100, and I think we need that capability again. I think one
of the lessons a lot of people have learned over the last year
is just how good U.S. equipment is, and there is a lot of
people buying, you know, those same systems, so the magazine
depth is critically important for us.

LESSONS FROM THE WAR IN UKRAINE

The Chairman. I am going to ask you one other question
because--and you don't have enough time to do this, but I know
obviously you are very keenly, and the Secretary is as well,
looking at what is happening in Ukraine, so I am just--if you
can give us lessons learned, what do you think a year into
this--2 years into this but that you might not have thought
about before, and how is that changing the way you think and
what you need?
Secretary Wormuth. I would highlight a couple things, and I
know the chief and I--there are a lot of lessons that are
coming out of Ukraine. You know, one obviously is the
importance of unmanned aerial systems and counter-UAS systems.
You know, I was just in Germany seeing some of the training we
are doing to--with the Ukrainians and was fascinated to talk to
one of the Ukrainian BTG leaders but also see what our forces
were doing in terms of actually welding little sort of droppers
on the bottoms of drones to be able to drop small kinetic
payloads. We are learning as much from them, I think, as they
are learning from us, and so that is a huge lesson and I think
is reflected in our budget.
The importance of long-range fires, obviously, which,
again, I think speaks to the importance of continuing to invest
in things like precision strike missile or the long-range
hypersonic, which, you know, we have had some challenges with
but we are working quickly on that.
And the last thing I would highlight, Chairman, is in
contested logistics, you know, how--we are going to have to
disperse in a future battlefield where everything is
transparent. We can't have these big sort of supply bases, and
we are starting to really bring those lessons into our combat
training center rotations. I have seen that myself at Fort
Johnson where we are doing a lot to change how we are
approaching logistics, recognizing how contested the
environment will be.
General George. Oh, I will be really quick here, Chairman,
and we could go on a long time about what we are doing. And we
talked the difference between observing a lesson and actually
learning it, and the learning it is changing how we are going
to train and fight, how we are training our people at the--like
at Fort Sill and the places that are going--all our
professional military education and how we buy things.
I think on the--you can't hide on the modern battlefield
anymore is the big thing, and so it has--that has really
changed, you know, signature management, network. We have to be
more mobile. We are going to have to be more dispersed, and it
is really going to impact every potential system.
I will tell you, there is three big things that are
happening at Fort Sill that are--we have a lot of lessons in,
long-range fires, how effective ground-based, long-range fires
that are very hard to find in the clutter and to kill, and we
have seen that. They are very effective on the battlefield.
Integrated air and missile defense, another thing that we do a
lot at down at Fort Sill is very, very important to the Joint
Force and what we are doing for protection. And then the
counter-UAS, which we are doing--also doing down at Fort Sill,
is something that we were talking about earlier that we are
going to have to, you know, continue. That is going to be a
growth industry, I think, for all of us.
The Chairman. Thank you very much.
Yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Calvert. I think we are all going to have to get out to
Fort Sill.
Ms. DeLauro.

BLACKHAWK HELICOPTER

Ms. DeLauro. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
And, again, thank you both for being here today.
I am going to follow up with a parochial issue as well. I
think it is something that you are well aware of, it is
important to the district, and that is the Blackhawk
helicopter. Sikorsky makes the finest helicopter in the world,
and Connecticut is their district.
So let me direct my first question to you, Madam Secretary.
I understand the Army is going to be focusing on purchasing the
Mike models of the Blackhawk. I am concerned though that since
the multi-year contract expires in 2026 there could be a gap in
the contract with the industry. Can you tell me how you and the
team will work to shrink or eliminate that gap so production
can continue without interruption?
Secretary Wormuth. Absolutely, Congresswoman. When the
current multiyear contract expires it is our plan to have
essentially a heel-to-toe arrangement so that the next 5-year
multiyear contract will start immediately. We will buy 24
helicopters annually for 5 years for a total of 120. That is
the plan. So we will work closely with the company to make sure
that the negotiations are worked out so that we can have no
break between the two multiyear contracts.
Ms. DeLauro. Thank you very, very much.
And just in terms of the Army's commitment to the
Blackhawk, how many Blackhawk helicopters will remain in the
force, for how long? What will the Army do to ensure an
adequate number of Blackhawks for the Army National Guard?
Secretary Wormuth. Let me take that a couple pieces at a
time. We expect the Blackhawk to remain a very important part
of our overall aviation portfolio for years to come. The Mike
model is a 20-year airframe, and those are the ones that we
will be buying with the new 5-year multiyear. So they will be
in the fleet for a very long time.
I am sure you are also aware, you know, there are--
reflecting on the quality of American equipment, there are a
lot of allies who would like to buy Blackhawks, and so I expect
we will continue to see quite a bit in foreign military sales.
So I think those will go on for quite a while.
And we will be--in terms of the Army Guard, who had
originally been intended to get the Victor model, which only
has a 10-year lifespan for the airframe, we will be providing
the Army Guard over time with the Mike models, so I think they
are quite pleased about that.
Ms. DeLauro. What is the focus of the Army's Blackhawk
modernization plan, characteristics, and performance needed to
improve the Blackhawk to keep pace with the rest of the force
during its remaining decades of service? And has the Army
identified funding for 2025 over the future year's defense
program to execute the planned modernization?
Secretary Wormuth. Let me say a few things and then, Chief,
if you want to add anything.
We do have R&D in the budget as we did the rebalancing of
the overall aviation portfolio for continued upgrades to
Blackhawk. Some of that is looking at open system
architectures. Some of that is also going to be doing the
integration work to bring the ITEP engine, the new engine
eventually into Blackhawk as well as the Apache, so those are
some of the things that we will be doing with the Blackhawk
going forward.
General George. I guess, the only thing that I would add,
Congresswoman, is--and I have spent a lot of time in the back
of Blackhawks, and it is a great aircraft--is we are also
looking at sensors, we are also looking at how you would match
launch effects that come with these aircraft. So kind of what
we said upfront, we are look--these are areas we are going to
have to continuously transform, and the Blackhawk is going to
be a part of our formation, a very important part of it, and we
will have to continue to transform as we move forward.
Ms. DeLauro. Great.
I appreciate your indulging me in these questions. As you
can tell, it really is a top priority for me. It is a top
priority for my community, as you have known, for a long time.

ADDITIONAL SECURITY SUPPLEMENTAL FUNDING

If I could just ask about the security supplemental. The
Army has requested approximately $10 billion to support
activities in and for Ukraine and for additional activities in
the Middle East. How are you funding activities to support
Ukraine and the Middle East, and what will happen if these
activities are not funded with additional supplemental funds?
What will suffer without these additional funds?
Secretary Wormuth. Thank you, Congresswoman, for that.
There is really--I think there is three pieces of the
supplemental that are really important to the Army. You know,
first of all, we have given the Ukrainians $10 billion worth of
equipment and material, and we have been essentially planning
on the supplemental coming through so that we can replenish
that equipment that we have given to the Ukrainians. So we
intend to, you know, use that money to buy AMPVs, to buy some
of the Paladins that I talked about earlier, to buy more JLTVs.
So that replenishment is really important. The second piece is
the investment in munitions, particularly the 155-millimeter
shells and getting up to 100,000 rounds a month that General
George spoke about.
And the last piece I would highlight in the supplemental
that is really hitting us right now is we have cash flowed
about $800 million to train the Ukrainians and also to do some
support in CENTCOM. So if we don't get that supplemental, we
are going to not have money, basically by the end of May, to be
able to get the current units who are over there in Europe
doing the reassurance mission. We don't have the transportation
money to have them redeploy. We don't have the transportation
money to send units to backfill them. We won't be able to
support our participation in things like K4 or exercises in
European Command in the third and fourth quarter. So there is
some real problems for us that are going to come out if we
don't have that supplemental.
Ms. DeLauro. I will yield back in just a second, but I just
want to make the point on the replenishment. I am not sure how
well widely understood it is the that we are paying a price for
not moving forward on a supplemental. And obviously continue
that Ukraine will pay a very, very big price if we are not
there, and our own ability to be able to keep our word and let
our allies know that we--our commitment--our word is our bond
in these areas. But above all, we cannot replenish unless we
have the supplemental. That hurts the industrial base here.
Thank you so much. I yield back.
Mr. Calvert. All right. Probably need to get out to
Stratford, Connecticut, too.
Ms. DeLauro. Amen. You are welcome. It really is a
wonderful experience, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Calvert. There you go.
Mr. Rogers.

FURTHER AID TO UKRAINE

Mr. Rogers. President Zelenskyy says that without the
further aid from the U.S. the Ukraine will assuredly succumb to
the rapturous war of Putin. Can either of you confirm President
Zelenskyy's characterization of where we are?
Secretary Wormuth. Congressman, I think, you know, General
Cavoli, our head of U.S. European Command, was on the Hill
earlier today, and I think he said if you can't--the side that
can't shoot back loses. And at this point, Ukraine is really
starting to be pressed to be able to shoot back. So I am very
concerned, you know. We saw Ukraine lose some territory, you
know, a couple of months ago, and I think, you know, there is a
real danger that they could have--that the Russians could have
a breakthrough somewhere in the line.
So I am sure Chief would want to say more about that.
General George. I think that was well stated. I would agree
with that. I mean, they need the ability to have, you know,
return fire, long-range fires. I would be concerned about what
they have for air defense and the ability to defend their
critical infrastructure and their formations, all of those, so
I would agree with that.
Mr. Rogers. Do you worry about the image that we are
throwing out there, particularly to the Eastern European former
SSRs who see us not defending them? Is that a problem for us to
worry about?
General George. I will just comment, Congressman, that I
think every Chad or Army chief that comes to see me is very
concerned about that. They, you know, looking at that as
commitment and, you know, where is our commitment. And what I
have found interesting is it is not just in Eastern Europe,
there is a lot of countries that ask the same question around
the world, so same thing in the Pacific that are watching what
our support is.

LAND MINES IN UKRAINE

Mr. Rogers. One of the main problems in Ukraine are land
mines, which apparently are being sold throughout the country
by the Russians. What can you say about that, and what can we
do about it?
General George. Again, I think that comes down to, you
know, what you are providing. It is a perplexing problem with
all the obstacles and everything that has been placed over
there. It is not only danger to a force, it is danger to
anybody who is around in that environment. So I think it
would--it is going to take a lot of engineering assets to clear
that, and I think it would also take a lot of time whenever we
have seen that with mines.
Mr. Rogers. Thank you for your service, both of you. Yield.
Mr. Calvert. Thank you. And I thank the chairman for the
quick time, because we need to finish this hearing by 3:55
because we have a special meeting we need to attend to.
So with that, Ms. Kaptur, you are recognized.

HYPERSONICS, PERSONNEL, AND ABRAMS TANKS

Ms. Kaptur. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you for your testimonies today.
I regret the inability of this current House of
Representatives to pass legislation so essential to the defense
of liberty and do not count myself among those who are holding
up the process. And it makes your life exceedingly difficult,
and all of this is completely unnecessary.
Now, I have four topics real quickly. I am going to ask
about hypersonics and advancements there. I am going to ask
about personnel and your ability to staff with mechanics and
people who are technicians, any shortages there. I am going to
mention Abrams tanks and Ukraine, and then, finally, Iran and
its capabilities.
So on the first one, just a quick update on the progress
you are making on hypersonics, both offensive and defensive.
Number two, in terms of your staffing, are you having any
difficulty in Army in having enough mechanics and people who
are trained technicians to work on equipment, and if you are,
are you working with your Reserve units around the country that
do have excess equipment and could be doing training on some of
the Reserve bases?
Number three, Abrams tanks have their capabilities, those
are made in Ohio, we are proud of them. Congressman Joyce and I
support them. And have they made a difference in Ukraine, and
what more could we do if they are being effective?
And then, finally, on Iran, give us your assessment of
Iran's intent in the region that she is having a tremendous
influence on. Is her capacity growing? Is she receding in some
of her capabilities? I don't have a real sense of that, but I
think it is a really important question. Thank you.
Secretary Wormuth. Okay. Lightning round. I will start with
Ukraine--start with Iran and say, you know, I think we are all
in the Defense Department quite concerned about Iran and its
capabilities. I think it is--you know, one of the things it
seeks to do in the region is to be destabilizing, both directly
but also through its use of proxies in Iraq and Syria. I think
the relationship that seems to be growing between Iran and
Russia is concerning, so that is just a snapshot of, I think,
how I would see Iran.
The Ukrainians, you know, I think have--very much value the
tanks that we provided to them and find them very effective. I
can't comment extensively on how much they have used them, but
I know when I talked to the Ukrainian leader in Germany, he
said they have a lot of--the soldiers feel more confident going
on offense when they are in the tanks or in our Bradleys
because they feel protected and they have that additional
protection while they are, you know, having mobility at the
same time.
On personnel, I think the challenge we have with mechanics
in my experience, what I hear from soldiers, is because of the
recruiting challenges we just--our soldiers who are mechanics
have more work to do because we don't have as many soldiers
generally as we need. So that is what I have heard and, you
know, we are working very hard on recruiting to try to make
sure that we increase the number of soldiers overall.
Long-range hypersonic weapon, we are working on that
diligently with the Navy. We will have another test later this
year. As I said to Chairman Calvert, you know, this is a 10-
year program that we have sort of compressed into 4 years, so
we are going very, very fast. And I think some of the testing
we have done in parallel is part of--you know, it is harder to
determine where the problem areas are when you are doing--
testing multiple things all at the same time. So we are moving
to trying to have a more sequential approach to our testing so
that we can really nail down where we have issues. And I think,
you know, we are hopeful that we will have a good test later
this year.
I don't know, Chief, if you want to add.
General George. I am just going to add a couple things. I
just was out at Joint Base LewisMcChord. We have a hypersonics
battery that is out there, and I will tell you, once we get
this round, which I think is coming, that battery is training,
testing, you know, ready to go, and so I think that will be a
capability we are coming out.
On the mechanics, the other thing that we are looking at
and there is broadly--we are down on some of that. We need to,
you know, recruit more mechanics and people with technical
expertise. We do use the Guard and Reserve and we try to plan
this out for exercises, Guard and Reserve----
Ms. Kaptur. General, I want to help you on this, just know
that, on the mechanics side.
General George. Okay. To get them into, you know, into
exercises and where they can help us and our ordnance
companies. We are also trying to get rid of excess inside of
our formation so that we don't have--we are not maintaining
things that we don't need to maintain. We are in the process of
doing that.
On the Abrams tank, I will--it is the best tank in the
world. And if--in all of these, for success on the battlefield
and being out there, it requires combined arms, so it is with
everything else. And I have heard the same thing that the
Secretary has heard, and that you get a certain level of
confidence though when you have an M1 tank inside of your
formation.
Mr. Calvert. Thank you, General.
Next, Judge Carter.
Mr. Carter. Me?
Mr. Calvert. Yep.
Mr. Carter. Oh.
Mr. Calvert. You got here earlier.

CREDENTIALING AND TUITION ASSISTANCE

Mr. Carter. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And thank you both for being here. Let me apologize for not
being able to meet with you the other day. It wasn't my fault.
It was an air controller who wouldn't let us take off.
I want to first ask about something that is near and dear
to my heart. I would like to ask about the credentialing and
tuition assistance. I have heard reports that the Army may be
looking to reduce these programs. As you may know, the program
for credentialing assistance was at Fort Cavazos. I am deeply
concerned that cuts in these programs will not only hurt
recruiting and retention but also hurt the soldiers' ability to
transition out of the military and be prepared for civilian
life after they served our Nation for a long time.
Can you understand--can you let me--help me understand what
the Army is reviewing in these programs and that no decision--I
understand that no decision has been made yet, but I would like
to know what you are looking at specifically cutting these
programs and what analysis you have done as to how this will
impact recruiting and retention?
Secretary Wormuth. Thank you, Congressman Carter. Good to
see you. You are correct, we have not made any decisions about
the credentialing assistance program or the tuition assistance
program. We have been looking at the credentialing program. It
is a great program. We support it. You know, we know our
soldiers value certifications that they can then use when they
leave the Army. That was a pilot program essentially that has
met with catastrophic success, and the challenge we have is we
didn't frankly really put any guardrails around the program to
help us scope it.
So what we are looking at, we haven't made any decisions
yet, but what we are looking at is, you know, rather than
having soldiers be able to pursue an unlimited number of
credentials every year in perpetuity, we may look at saying
soldiers could do, you know, one certification a year, maybe
have sort of a cap on the number of certifications they can get
over the duration of their time in the Army, really just to try
to manage the costs of the program a little bit better. But
that is sort of how we are thinking right now, and those kinds
of guardrails are very similar to what our sister services have
done in the Air Force and the Navy.
Mr. Carter. General.
General George. Yeah. Only thing I would add, Congressman,
is how we transition our soldiers. We obviously want to keep
them. That is our number one goal is to keep everybody, but how
we transition them is critically important to us in doing that
and making sure, and that is important to us also for our
recruiting mission because we know that when people come into
the Army they are going to get a skill, they are going to enjoy
what they are doing, and then we want to send them back out
there. So we are looking at all of this in total.
Mr. Carter. Well, thank you.

APACHE MODERNIZATION FUNDING

The Apache helicopter is in my district. With the
cancellation of the FARA, I have yet to hear what the Army's
plan is for funding modernization of the Apache. Could you
speak to what plan you have and where the funding might come
from?
Secretary Wormuth. Certainly. We are very much--you know,
the Apache is another great helicopter. My XO sitting behind me
is an Apache pilot as well as a Blackhawk pilot. We are going
to continue to modernize the Apache over time, and there is
money in the budget to do that. You know, really what we are
looking at with Apache is, again, how to have more open system
architecture so that we can do upgrades over time more quickly
and more easily than we have in the past.
The other thing that we are looking with Apache is taking a
little bit more time to figure out exactly how we are going to
integrate the new ITEP engine into both Apache and Blackhawk.
Mr. Carter. I have got some more time. I understand the
Army is considering looking at privatization of barracks. Out
of curiosity, have you looked at allowing the E-5s to move out
of the barracks. They could potentially reduce the number of
barracks we need to build and help reduce cause for
maintenance. I don't know the math on how this cause would
work, but I would be interested in hearing this.
And I also understand you are looking to recruit older
people to be brought into the military and they are not going
to be wanting to live in the barracks, especially if they are
given special duties where they are not going to have a lot of
promotion and they might spend 10 years in a barrack and the
guy that you a 25-year-old is not going to be interested in
being in a barrack until 35. Would you like to answer that?
Secretary Wormuth. Sure, I will start and then Chief if you
want to add. We are looking at a couple----
Mr. Calvert. Also if you want to do that for the record, we
can get that back to you, Judge. And then that way we can----
Mr. Carter. Yeah, maybe so.
Secretary Wormuth. Okay. Happy to do that.
Mr. Calvert. We will do that, and keep things going.
Mr. Case.

PACIFIC DETERRENCE INITIATIVE

Mr. Case. Thank you.
Madam Secretary, I just wanted to take off on your brief
comments opening on the Pacific deterrence initiative and I
think we would all obviously agree that our challenge is in the
Indo-Pacific and that we need to focus on that and we need to
plan for it from budgetary perspective. But to be really honest
with you I am trying to figure out what Pacific deterrence
initiative actually means nowadays and whether it has the
purpose that I think Congress envisioned which was to quantify
our efforts in a joint coordinated way so that we were sure we
are on the right path in terms of doing what we need to do in
the Indo-Pacific and funding for it also, so the EDI model. And
I understand there are questions about OCO, et cetera, et
cetera. But I am just talking about the use of a mechanism
inside the DOD and that we, in Congress, can use to quantify
whether we are on the right track. I have a couple of concerns
in that department.
I think first of all as I look at the fiscal year 2025
overall PDI summary from DOD, including the Department of the
Army, you cited $1.5 billion to PDI. If I look at the
categories of things that you have stuck in PDI, frankly some
of them are exclusively INDOPACOM so that is fair game. But
some of them seem to be usable anywhere in the world. So then I
ask myself, well, what is the good at that. That wasn't what
PDI was supposed to be about. PDI was not supposed to be about
things that are designed--and I am quoting from your thing,
design to address or deter broader strategic threats easily
transferable between theaters, routine activities and
exercises. Some of that seems to fit in that category so I am
wondering how they were categorized there. Number one.
And then number two, if I look at your FYDP over time the
overall PDI is declining precipitously over the next 5 years,
including the Army which is going down something like 60
percent. I think the figure I have got here is $1.5 billion
requested down to .9 billion by fiscal year 2029.
So I guess my real question here is again I want something
that I can look at and go, okay, yeah, we have got everything
in that box and we know what we have to do in the Indo-Pacific.
We know what we have to do for the geopolitical challenge of
China and all services, this is what you need to be doing, and
this is how much it is going to cost, and this is what we have
to do over the next 5 years plus. And I don't think I am
getting that in the PDI.
So I am thinking to myself well, do we have to fix PDI
somehow in Congress or somehow in another way to get what we
are after here. Do you have any comments on what PDI means to
you nowadays? Why are we seeing such a loose bunch of stuff in
PDI in my estimation? And why do we see it going down so
precipitously over 5 years?
Secretary Wormuth. Let me take a shot at that, Congressman.
I think what I would say and I can understand your frustration,
I think as someone who was in the Defense Department, when the
European Deterrence Initiative was created, there is I think a
pretty significant difference between EDI and PDI, which is
that the European Deterrence Initiative came with a pot of
money from Congress that was sort of firewalled. Whereas when
Pacific Deterrence Initiative was created, it didn't have that.
It was sort of the same concept, but very importantly without
the money.
And so now I do think you have a situation where we in
Congress--one thing I can assure you is the Army is very, very
focused on INDOPACOM as the priority theater and our whole
strategy as a Department is very, very focused on INDOPACOM as
the priority theater. That is how Secretary Austin and the
deputy worked with us and the services to try to align our
investments. They grade our POMs very much on whether they
think it is meeting the challenge there.
So I think I feel confident that our budget is putting the
money that we need to put towards that theater. But I certainly
can understand that from an accounting perspective it can be
hard sometimes to get a real sense of whether you have
everything. And there is also I think the report that INDOPACOM
generates as well I think which is a very large list of
requirements.
Mr. Case. Probably because and I am just guessing at this,
because some of the PDI--it is not in PDI.
They have to find it somewhere. They have to emphasize what
is necessary in the Indo-Pacific. Do you think it is possible
to have a PDI without an OCO style dedicated source of funding
as in the EDI? Does it just at that point just become, as
somebody actually referenced an accounting mechanism inside
DOD? And an imperfect one at that, because obviously we are not
just spending $9.9 billion on the Indo-Pacific.
Secretary Wormuth. We certainly feel the loss of OCO. I
think that is fair to say. And I would say that within the top
line that we have, it would be hard for us to put more money
than we have in our base budget towards INDOPACOM.
Mr. Calvert. Thank you.
Next Mr. Garcia.

JUNIOR ENLISTED PAY

Mr. Garcia. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
First of all, I want to thank you both for your service to
our country. I want to focus on the troops here. In California
last week, and we brought this up in an earlier hearing with
SECNAV as well, and we have had discussions with SecDef about
it as well. California last week raised its minimum wage to $20
an hour. Okay so you have got 18, 19-year olds working at
McDonald's who are making almost double what an E-1 makes when
they come into the service. An E-1 right now even with the 5
percent raise last year and the 4.5 percent increase in this
President's budget request is still $22,000, $23,000 a year.
And so we are competing from a recruitment perspective with
fast food workers, right? And those guys aren't putting their
lives on the line everyday like our soldiers are. This isn't
just a problem in California, it is a problem in multiple
States Virginia, Florida where the cost of living is higher and
the pay is still low.
I have been pushing and this committee's done great job
this subcommittee has done a great job, unfortunately the
Senate stripped out our Pay Raise Act which would have started
base pay of an E-1 from taking it from $22,000 a year to
$31,000 a year. And that increase about a 35, 38 percent
increase would have actually rippled up through the E-6 ranks,
okay.
So it takes E-1 through E-6 where we are recognizing not
only the recruiting challenges but also the retention
challenges at about the year 4, year 5 mark on the enlistment
side. And at least from a salary perspective gets more
competitive with their peer groups and the civilian sector.
And ranking member McCollum has been very clear about this
as well and this isn't just a money pay salary issue. It is a
quality of life, it is daycare on the base. It is quality of
the barracks. It is not having to live in squalor where your
civilian counterparts aren't.
But we need help on this, we need more pull from the
Secretary, we need more pull frankly from the President and
prioritizing this pay gap right now that is very significant
and is a forcing function. There are other things driving the
recruitment problems. There are other things driving the
retention problems, but the pay is significant.
To enact that Raise Act and it is my bill it is called the
Raise Act it is takes it from $22,000 to $31,000 a year, that
ripples up through the E-6 and compresses it, so generally you
wouldn't be getting that 30 percent pay raise but you do not
need that 30 percent pay raise. Your soldiers need that, the
junior enlisted do. But it basically gets them above that $15
minimum wage sort of Federal recognized minimum wage number,
right? And it gets them off of food stamps frankly. It gets
them above the poverty line. The cost of that is roughly
anywhere from half to 1 percent of the total DOD's budget to
implement it.
So we are not--we are talking, you know, $7 to $8 billion
to implement this junior enlisted Pay Raise Act. So the 4.5
percent in the President's budget request is barely going to
keep pace with inflation. The last I think 5 years we have seen
a cumulative of roughly 25 percent to 27 percent inflation
while the sum of the pay raises that we have given our troops
and especially the junior enlisted is something like 14 to 15
percent. So we are putting them further and further behind the
power curve.
So the ask is that we support higher pay and I know that
that is not in the President's budget request. We are going to
try to legislate our way through that and create a new pay
table that increases that E-1 through E-6 pay. But I think that
goes a long way.
And right now if you ask an 18-year-old if he wants to go
work at In-N-Out for $22 an hour or join the Army for the
equivalent of $12 an hour you are going to get 95 percent of
them going to In-N-Out even if they love the country, even if
they want to serve, they just cant afford to go join the Army
right now and that is a fundamental problem.
So we would respectfully request support for that. We can
look at all the other elements that go to the quality of life
and holistic pay and whatnot.
I will submit for the record a question around the FARA
cancelation.
Mr. Garcia. We sunk about $2 billion in an acquisition
program, industry put in about $500 million of IRATA of their
own money getting to a point where we did. It did kind of
surprise a lot of us. I know you were communicating with some
folks but I would like to get a deeper dive on the explanation
of the sudden cancelation. I know Congress didn't help, the CR
didn't help, but if we can get all the details.
And the last thing I would recommend is beyond high energy
lasers and high energy microwaves that I know are very useful
in counter UAS, counter drone. There is new technology out
there that I have gotten to do classified briefs on for high
energy RF where it is basically an AUSA radar that uses larger
brick size rays instead of little TR modules like you find in a
fire control radar, the beam steering basically uses high
energy RF capability and is a little more stable than high
energy lasers for instance.
Mr. Calvert. You will get back to them.
Mr. Garcia. And I yield back.
Mr. Calvert. If you could get back to them for the record
that would be great.
Mr. Calvert. Dutch.

IMPACT OF SHORT-TERM SPENDING MEASURES

Mr. Ruppersberger. I can't even sit down?
Secretary, congratulations on what you have done. You have
done a good job. General, you too. You have got a good team and
that is what counts.
Secretary Wormuth and General, you can answer some
questions here too, the question I am going to ask, not many.
I don't know what this year holds in store, but I do know
that the last time that the Department went a fiscal year
without operating under a continuing resolution was back in
1997. Now could you provide a brief overview of how short-term
spending measures impact the Army? What do we put at risk when
we don't pass funding bills on time, especially when it comes
to competing with China?
Secretary Wormuth. Absolutely----
Mr. Ruppersberger. Or other adversaries too but basically
China.
Secretary Wormuth. Thank you, Congressman. And I am sure
the chief will want to add to this. I think of when we are
operating under a continuing resolution, which you all know we
were in the first 6 months of this year under CRs, we are
basically trying to compete with China with one hand tied
behind our back, you know. We are not able to spend the money
that we have in the most efficient way. We are not able to do
reprogramming. We can't do new starts on some of the, you know,
very important modernization programs that we have. Sometimes
it can delay our military construction. So at a time where we
don't have a moment to lose in terms of all of the new
modernization we are doing, operating under CRs can be very
challenging.
General George. Yeah, Congressman. I will just give you one
example, the battlefield is changing, what our troops were over
there in the Middle East and if we wanted to make some
adjustment and bring something to counter UAS system for
example and we can't start something new, we can't increase
production on the missiles that we need. So it has a real
impact.
And then the other thing I will just say is then when you
get the money you have a very limited time to spend it and that
is also a challenge for us and has been.
Mr. Ruppersberger. All right. Well thank you. In the past
few decades is there any indication at all, it seems that the
Department keeps getting put in these intractable solutions.
And I will be honest I don't know what the solution is. So do
you have any ideas about other authorities and spending
flexibilities that would enable the Army to overcome the
challenges that continuing resolutions represent? Both of you.
Secretary Wormuth. Well, Congressman, the last thing I
would want to do is to try to tell Congress how to do its
business.
Mr. Ruppersberger. It is a good idea.
Secretary Wormuth. I think the PPBES Commission that
recently I think put out its final report had some good
recommendations in a lot of areas for sort of how we in the
Department can work more effectively with you all in Congress
to have a more agile budgeting system. You know, there might be
some good ideas there. But beyond that--the only other thing I
would say, and this is something the chief feels very strongly
about, it is not CR specific, but is it possible in some very
targeted ways for us have more flexibility in where we invest
the programs, you know, inside of a particular portfolio for
example to allow us to be more agile in terms of going after
new technology but that is not really CR specific.
General George. Congressman, I mentioned this up front.
There are three areas where I think we have to be more flexible
and that is counter UAS, counter unmanned systems, unmanned
systems ourselves, so that we can detect and do all the things
that we need do on the modern battlefield and then the
electronic warfare. All of that is changing really quick.
So I think internal to the Army what we are looking at
doing is not having a specific program but we need to have a
portfolio where--because the industry is changing really fast,
there is a lot of small companies out there. American ingenuity
is the best in the world and we need to have the flexibility do
that.
What I think would be helpful is because of the continuing
resolutions if in those three areas that we had flexibility
between research and development and then we would come over
obviously for the oversight and say, hey, this is something,
you know, we need this system, we want to procure it and it
would be a notification. I think that would help us with the
continuing resolutions.
Mr. Ruppersberger. That is a good idea. Because we have got
to do something. Because we are changing so much and the whole
world is changing. And we have to stay dominant as a democracy.
We have to start doing more of this and think out of the box
for the future.
Thank you for your answers. And I yield back.
Mr. Calvert. I thank the gentleman.
Mr. Womack.

COMBAT TRAINING CENTER ROTATIONS

Mr. Womack. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thanks to the two
witnesses we have here today. Madam Secretary, Chief, great to
have both of you here today.
Before I get to my questions, a couple of things, I want to
take a moment of personal privilege to recognize that gentleman
sitting over by the camera in the very back of the room wearing
that Navy shirt. To my colleagues this is Harrison Henry. He is
soon to become part of the class of 2028 at the U.S. Naval
Academy in Annapolis, Maryland. He is a Fayetteville High
School kid in Arkansas. He and his dad Mark are here. They are
headed over to Annapolis this weekend. They missed the hearing
this morning. Actually, I think that was on purpose. I think
they are here spying on the Army. But Harrison we are really
proud of you. And I know this committee is proud of you and
your classmates that will join you at the Naval Academy.
Congratulations.
One of a note, I want to mention this as well because this
could involve action of our leadership team here in the House
and that is that 2 days ago the last surviving medal of honor
recipient from the Korean War Colonel Ralph Puckett passed away
down in Columbus, Georgia.
My oh my, medal of honor, DSC, couple of silver stars, five
purple hearts, probably the most--I develop know he was the
most decorated in Korea, but he was one of for sure. And I know
there will be a request forthcoming from people very close to
that family about the potential for him to lie in state as I
think we did with Woody Williams from World War II. And I hope
our leadership team will give that some serious thought. We are
losing a lot of our heroes these days and we should be mindful
of the sacrifices that they have made for all of us.
Madam Secretary, General George, I want to go back to
comments made about the supplemental. I don't want to beat this
dead horse, but I am going to join the chorus of people that
think that we need to act posthaste on a supplemental.
What concerns me as much as anything, General George, is
the potential for us to be canceling combat training center
rotations as a result of the our inability to move forces and
train them appropriately. I personally think it is the secret
sauce in readiness that be gets our warfighters prepared and
ready to fight and win.
So I want to give you an opportunity to comment on that.
That is a real threat right now. I suppose that we could see
some of these training center rotations go by the wayside.
General George. I would just tell you, Congressman, we are
going to have to make, based on what Secretary said earlier, we
are going to have to make some tough choices that we are going
to look, you know, look all around. CTCs will be very tough for
us. I have been to I think four times already this year, it is
kind of our crown jewel of where we are going to train and
adapt for the future. So we don't want to have to make those
kind of tough choices and we need that for our readiness.
Mr. Womack. Madam Secretary?
Secretary Wormuth. That is exactly right. I mean, I think
we would really try to protect the 22, I think, CTC rotations
that we have. You know, we could look at reducing
participation, you know, skinnying it down a little bit, but I
think we would really avoid canceling it all together. But
those are the kinds of hard choices we are looking at if we
don't see the supplemental come across the finish line.
Mr. Womack. I think we have a role in that and hopefully we
can get to it.
I want to go back to counter UAS. I note that in the budget
nearly $450 million for counter UAS capability in your unfunded
priority list. Now there is money for counter UAS but there is
additional money in the unfunded list. Is it fair to assume
that that is just something that you need but because of all of
the other requirements you are just unable to get the full
amount in the base budget?
General George. We have, Congressman, we have some--we have
a good amount in our base budget. We have some that we
requested in the supplemental. And then when I was asked for
unfunded priority list the world has changed a lot since we put
in our budget and what happened last October 7th. And I know
there are things on there that we would like to do like
increase production for Coyote missiles that have been very
effective. There are other systems from Andril for example so
we would like to spend on that.
So there is really two things in that unfunded priority
list that is ramping up production for the things that we
couldn't quite get to and then a lot of it is how the
battlefield is changing.
Mr. Womack. I want to thank you both for your service and
for your ascension to the chief's role General George we are
honored to have you here today. I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Calvert. Thank you.
Mr. Cuellar.

APACHE MODERNIZATION

Mr. Cuellar. Thank you Mr. Chairman and ranking member for
having this meeting. I want to thank both of you very much for
your service to the country.
Madam Secretary, you are from College Station. What
happened to Texas A&M? I am just kidding.
Secretary Wormuth. The last time I went back it has gotten
enormous. Oh, my goodness. The new Kyle Field, like, blocks the
sun.
Mr. Cuellar. And it has grown. I think John Carter and I
know this.
I want to follow up on something that the judge mentioned.
My understanding it is $81 million for we are talking about
Apaches, $81 million for modifications and $8 million to
modernize the whole fleet. That certainly is not enough right?
If those numbers are correct.
Secretary Wormuth. What I can tell you, Congressman, is you
know, we are committed to Apache. It is going to stay in the
fleet for a long time. I was just talking to the folks who
build Apache and they felt I think pretty comfortable with
where we are. So we do plan on continually upgrading it. It is
not at any risk.
Mr. Cuellar. Okay. We certainly want to work with you on
that Judge and I----

HUMAN PERFORMANCE OPTIMIZATION

Let me talk about one item that I am really proud of what
you all are doing, the Army. I think the Army is leading all
services in human performance optimization. And as you know, it
is important to make sure that we get elite soldiers, mind,
body, everything. And I certainly want to say thank you so much
for the efforts that you all are doing. I know that through the
help of the chairman and the ranking we are able at $15 million
there for the UT Health Science Center in San Antonio working
on optimization and we are working with your Department.
But if you can tell us, right now my understanding is that
the Army's using that for active soldiers. Any plans for the
Reserves or the guards or is it just for active soldiers right
now?
And again, I really want to--I have talked to your folks,
my military fellow we spent a lot of time past military fellows
have been--and the Army is doing a wonderful job and I hope
that the other departments do the same thing. Human
optimization, human performance optimization is to make sure we
get the best soldiers.
Secretary Wormuth. Thank you, Congressman.
Yeah, we have found the health and holistic fitness program
to be really, really effective. It is both helping our soldiers
get more fit, but it is also helping them become more
resilient. We have been accelerating the buy of those sets to
brigades by about 15 to 20 a year.
For the guard and Reserves our plan is to try to start
bringing those types of capabilities to the guard and Reserves,
sort of starting in fiscal year 2026, 2027 and going out to
fiscal year 2030. Particularly with the Reserves and how
distributed they are we are going to have to take a somewhat
different approach, but we do plan to eventually get that kind
of capability to the COMPO 2 and 3.
Mr. Cuellar. Sir.
General George. Yeah, I think the other thing that we had
discussions with the guard and I have gotten together with a
lot of the tags is how do we--you look at Peloton app or Nike
fit app, what are ways that we can do this a little bit
different. Every time I go to an installation we are going 15
more health and holistic fitness. It is making our warriors
better. And it is not surprising to me, I mean, you feel better
about yourself and you are more fit. You are just going to be
more resilient on the battlefield and everywhere else. So we
are going to continue to invest in that.
The challenge that we have is obviously we are competing
with everybody else to hire nutritionists, strength coaches,
performance coaches and all of those things. And so some areas
we are growing as quickly as we want and others we have to push
a little more.
Mr. Cuellar. And again, we thank you. We just want to make
sure we are very supportive. Because this work especially it
does prevent a lot of the military injuries that can be
prevented. And it is not only just what you eat and what you
exercise, it is really your mind.
Studies have shown that you could use that especially when
you have soldiers working under pressure situations and they
have to make a decision there is a lot of things. And, as you
know, a lot of the research the Department of Defense does goes
on to the general population and it is also on aging, you know,
how do you age better? I mean just because you got old doesn't
mean that you have to be in a difficult situation. So it has
not only good for our soldiers but certainly for our general
population.
So I want to thank you, my time is up. But I certainly want
to thank you for leading the services on human performance
optimization. Thank you.
Mr. Calvert. I thank the gentleman.
Mr. Joyce.

LONG RANGE MILITARY PLATFORMS

Mr. Joyce. Given that the Army's tactical fire study
revalidated the need for longer range military platform, what
is the Army's plan and timeline to get IRKA into the production
phase with the proposed cut in fiscal year 2025?
General George. I think our challenge was--is basically was
the technology, you know, not being ready which is why it was
extended. The requirement to have long range fires,
Congressman, has not changed. I do think that the battlefield
is changing. I do think that technology is changing.
One of the things that we need to really focus on, this
gets back to cost curve as well, is how do we adjust the round,
how do we adjust the missile? What are the things that we can
do I think to increase performance? But long range fires is
critically important. It is ground based long range fires. So
we are definitely focused on that particular aspect.
Secretary Wormuth. Congressman, if I could add to what the
chief said, he mentioned the engineering challenges we had with
the barrel. What we are planning to do because as the chief
said we need--the requirement remains, we are going to do a
performance demo this summer with industry.
There are other platforms that we think could potentially
meet our needs so we are going to have a bunch of folks who
have capabilities that they think might be useful and we expect
we will probably select one of those for production in fiscal
year 2025.
Mr. Joyce. You have spent a fair amount of money to date,
though, in testing this equipment, correct?
Secretary Wormuth. Yes, that is true. And I think, you
know, what we have found you all in Congress have been great
about giving us some new authorities to allow us to develop and
acquire systems more quickly than we have had in the past. We
have been making good use of those.
And I think one of the lessons coming out of our experience
with IRKA, is that which we will apply going forward to all of
our modernization programs is we need to have more points where
we can have off ramps if we see that a system isn't working.
Because I think we probably if we had to do it over again
would have off ramped away from IRKA a little bit sooner. So we
will build that into our acquisition plans as we go forward.
Mr. Joyce. So that is something you would need on your end,
not so much we would have to put it in.
Secretary Wormuth. That is right. You have given us the
authority, you know, we are making use of them and I think we
are learning quite a bit as we go. We have been doing much more
this kind of--and the chief alluded to it earlier bringing
industry soldiers and our acquisition professionals together to
do touch points as we go.
So we have had a lot of learning in the last several years
in terms of how we are using these new authorities. And I think
we did learn some process lessons from the experience with
IRKA.
Mr. Joyce. Fair enough.

REENLISTMENT BONUSES

Madam Secretary, on March 1st 2024 the Army National Guard
issued a memo suspending reenlistment bonuses effective
immediately. The sudden suspension was due to a miscalculation
by Army National Guards planners who forecasted the amount of
funds needed and anticipated a volume of troops planning to
continue their service.
A week later, the National Guard restarted issuing
reenlistment bonuses on March 8. However, the updated policy
cannot be applied retroactively, meaning that those who signed
reenlistment packages between March 1st and March 7th will not
be eligible for those bonuses.
A, how did this miscalculation first occur? And what
actions are made to ensure that it doesn't occur again. And
secondly, what are we going to do with the people in the March
1 to March 7th space?
Secretary Wormuth. Well, Congressman, I think a couple of
things. Obviously with all of the different tags and all of the
different States it is a little harder I think sometimes to
manage our pay, bonuses, reenlistment bonuses, than it is for
us in the active--for the active part of the force. So I think
there are some lessons learned for the Army guard in terms of
managing these types of programs and putting in cost controls.
And this is not the first time frankly we have had some
times these kind of issues. So my understanding is the Army
guard rate now is putting in those kinds of cost controls so
that we don't have the kind of situation where they find oops,
we have got to stop giving these reenlistment or retention
bonuses. And we, I think chief and I, can talk to General
Jensen about whether there is something to be done with the
individuals in that week period. We can certainly look it.
General George. I will look into the--what I was talking to
General Jensen was part of that was coming up against the
continuing resolution and they were--you know, they had to go
back and look at money.
So I do think we have something to learn that would put the
guardrails in place, but we will look and find out if there--I
was not tracking anybody that didn't get that, but we will go
back and confirm. Close the loop with you.
Mr. Joyce. I yield back.
Mr. Calvert. Appreciate it.
Mr. Ellzey.

GAZA PORT

Mr. Ellzey. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you all for
being here.
A couple of quick questions. Somehow you all got stuck with
establishing a port in Gaza. That is a big headache. How do you
anticipate doing that with adequate force protection. What
happens if things go haywire and you get shot at? And ma'am who
is going to be building this temporary port?
Secretary Wormuth. Sure, happy to talk about that,
Congressman. I actually had the opportunity to see the joint
logistics over the shore capability in Australia this summer
when it was out and it is a remarkable capability.
Could say more in a closed session, but we are extremely
focused on force protection for our Army soldiers who are going
to be both on the floating peer and the Trident peer that will
actually touch the beach. There is going to be a very robust
and layered security approach that General Kurilla in CENTCOM
has been working very hard with our general--at our Army
CENTCOM.
It is going to be a team effort, Army, Navy, Israeli
defense forces will all be part of making sure that we have a
layered system to deal with air threats, maritime threats,
undersea threats, ground threats. We can give you more detail I
think in a closed session because we want to make sure our
soldiers are protected.
Mr. Ellzey. Thank you.
General George. Yeah, I think as you know, Congressman,
these are joint efforts so that is what we will need to take
place. And that is why we have talked to General Kurilla on
down. We have taken a pretty extensive brief on what that is
and I feel like they have the right force protection measures
in place.

A-10

Mr. Ellzey. Another question is with the demise of the A-10
which I know that the Army fought against for many, many years.
How do you fill the gap caused by the loss of the A-10 in the
close air support region?
Secretary Wormuth. Chief, you are probably better.
General George. Yes, I think yes did enjoy the support of
the A-10. I think it was also a different environment that we
were in. And I know that the Air Force just like us has to make
decisions to advance technology and a lot of that technology
would not survive on the modern battlefield.
So I think there are a lot of different ways that we are
giving the sidebar our own internal support that we have. And
we have a lot of systems that are coming online right now with
long range precision fighters that have significant capability
to be provide long range fires.
Same thing we are still going to rely on the Air Force and
the Navy. We have mid-range capability, which I know you are
familiar with. So I think again it is a joint battlefield.

GUAM DEFENSE

Mr. Ellzey. Okay. As long as they fill the gap. I mean, the
A-10 it was time for it to go. I just had not heard recently,
if you guys feel like that was being filled.
Finally, with the remaining time one quick question, you
guys are responsible for again a joint way but the defense of
Guam is that going along as planned? You have got it covered on
the budget and execution.
Secretary Wormuth. I think we have a good approach
Congressman. First of all, that is another place joint mission.
No, it is not just the Army, it is going to be the Navy, the
Marines, and the Air Force, we all have a role to play. Our
responsibility is to come up with the architecture for the
acquisition system. We are going to go have that strategy by
the end of May. And the plan is still to have a capability by
fiscal year 2027.
One thing I think that has been helpful is the deputy
secretary established what we are calling the Guam Oversight
Council, it is chaired by Erik Raven the undersecretary for the
Navy. That brings all of us services in the MBA together to
make sure that we are synchronizing. I mean, one thing for
example and I was in Guam last summer, they have finite
construction capability. So we have got to all work together to
make sure that we are prioritizing the projects so that we are
all kind of moving together as a group.
Mr. Ellzey. Great. Thank you very much. I yield back.
Mr. Calvert. Thank you.
And before we conclude, I want to thank the witnesses for
their testimony today. The subcommittee members are welcome to
submit questions for the record. I would hope that the
witnesses would respond in a reasonable amount of time.
And with that, we are adjourned.
[Answers to submitted questions follow:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Wednesday, April 17, 2024.

DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE

WITNESSES

HON. LLOYD J. AUSTIN III, SECRETARY OF DEFENSE, DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
GENERAL CHARLES Q. BROWN, JR., CHAIRMAN, JOINT CHIEFS OF STAFF
HON. MICHAEL McCORD, UNDER SECRETARY OF DEFENSE (COMPTROLLER)/CHIEF
FINANCIAL OFFICER, DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE

Opening Statement of Chairman Calvert

Mr. Calvert. The Defense Subcommittee will come to order.
Today the subcommittee will receive testimony from Lloyd
Austin, the Secretary of Defense; General CQ Brown, the
Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff; Mike McCord, the Under
Secretary of Defense for Comptroller.
The Department of Defense is requesting $833 billion within
this subcommittee's jurisdiction for fiscal year 2025. This is
1 percent higher than fiscal year 2024 enacted level and would
keep defense spending within the cap imposed by the Fiscal
Responsibility Act, which is an interesting number considering
the nondefense discretionary request is about $23 billion over
the same cap.
President Biden frequently reports a quote from his father:
Don't tell me what you value, show me what your budget--show me
your budget, and I will tell you what you value.
It seems this administration will continue to value its
domestic agenda over national security. I, on the other hand,
agree with the former secretary, Jim Mattis, who advocated for
annual 3 to 5 percent real growth in defense top line to both
fight tonight and adequately invest in capability to deter and
win in tomorrow's wars.
That said, this subcommittee will closely scrutinize a
request to ensure that we provide a strong military as we
develop fiscal year 2025 defense appropriation bill. Our job is
made more difficult when our enemies are emboldened to act with
impunity.
Secretary Austin, with the deteriorating global security
environment as a scorecard, I assess that your emphasis on
integrated deterrence is failing.
China is positioning itself to realize Xi's vision of
building a force capable of taking Taiwan by 2027, reducing
capability at scale and bullying our allies and partners across
the Indo-Pacific. Xi is not deterred.
Russia is in the third year of an unjust war of aggression
against Ukraine, with no signs of stopping its ongoing invasion
attempt. Putin is not deterred.
China is waging asymmetric warfare against the American
people by providing base fentanyl components to Mexican drug
cartels. The fentanyl products flowing across the porous
southern border killed 112,000 Americans last year and
devastating communities across the Nation. The Chinese
suppliers and the Mexican drug cartels are not deterred.
And over the weekend, Iran, for the first time, launched a
direct attack on the state of Israel. The Iranian barrage
included over 100 ballistic missiles, 30 cruise missiles, 150
attack drones launched from Lebanon, Yemen, and, for the first
time, Iran itself. Ninety-nine percent of their missiles and
drones were intercepted. But make no mistake, Iran is not
deterred.
Unfortunately, the Department is plagued by bureaucracy
that impedes the actions necessary to restore deterrence. This
is most notable over cost and significantly delayed weapon
system acquisition. Pick a service. I can point you to systems
that fit this mold.
The Navy's Columbia and Virginia submarines are both
delayed despite being dubbed the service's number one priority.
Air Force Sentinel experienced a Nunn-McCurdy breach. The Army
spent over $2 billion developing FARA, only to cancel the
program. The Space Force GPS ground system is more than $3
billion over budget, more than 7 years late, and is still not
delivered. And, of course, there is the Department's entire
hypersonic program, which has cost over $10.5 billion so far
and produced not a single fielded system.
Our warfighters need modern technology now. A part of the
solution must be a true commitment by the Department to embrace
and adopt an agile and innovative approach to acquisition.
In Fiscal Year 2024 Defense Appropriations Act, I invested
in this solution by ensuring that defense innovation unit
received $1 billion, along with the flexible authorities
necessary to rapidly identify, contract, and deliver innovative
technologies to the warfighter.
Included in this funding is $220 million for combatant
commanders to procure and rapidly field their capabilities they
need most urgently. The hedge portfolio investment is critical
to addressing the emerging dynamic and materializing threats I
discussed earlier.
This funding is separate and distinct from the Replicator
effort. Fiscal year 2024 appropriations reinforced this fact,
providing $1 billion for DIU and more than $200 million for
Replicator tranche one.
Additionally, to achieve an effective and efficient
military, the Department must also reoptimize its workforce. I
am pleased to see the fiscal year 2025 request includes a net
reduction in civilian full-time equivalence, and I am
encouraged by the progress the Department is making to
incorporate artificial intelligence and process automation to
eliminate manual business processes. More must be done here.
And finally, our people are an asymmetric advantage that
our adversaries could never replicate. They deserve the best
from barracks to business systems and from livable wages to
robust family support.
We as a committee have long championed significant boosts
in pay for our junior enlisted servicemembers, and I am happy
to note this seems to be a popular initiative in Congress this
year.
Together with their families, our servicemembers are the
foundation upon which our Nation's strength is derived.
Supporting and investing in them is a priority, and I know we
can all agree on that.
Before we hear from our witnesses, I would like to
recognize the distinguished ranking member, Ms. McCollum, for
any opening comments.

Opening Remarks of Ms. McCollum

Ms. McCollum. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Secretary, General Brown, and Under Secretary McCord,
thank you for testifying before us today.
General, we welcome your first appearance before the
committee as the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs.
For fiscal year 2025, the President has proposed $823
billion within our subcommittee's jurisdiction. It conforms
with the enacted level in the Fiscal Responsibility Act, which
passed the House by a vote of 314 to 117. This allowed for a $7
billion increase above fiscal year 2024 enacted levels, even
though it is below the rate of inflation.
I voted for the Fiscal Responsibility Act, not because I
agreed with the spending levels in the deal, but because this
country could not afford to default on its debts.
Mr. Secretary, as you know, the Department has received
criticisms from its authorizers for the top line budget
requested. I think that criticism is unfair and unjust,
especially from authorizers who do not have the responsibility
for allocating the funding.
Mr. Secretary, you personally did not impose a Fiscal
Responsibility Act on the Department of Defense. Congress did.
And I think those of us who voted for that law, we need to
remember that when talking with you.
I hope Congress has learned a hard lesson: that we should
not hold our national debt limit hostage over arbitrary
spending caps.
The Department and the administration are conforming to
what the law of the land is. Asking the Department to ignore
the law is not advisable.
I note each of you and the service chiefs have made
difficult choices this year to follow the law. As I said last
year, Congress must be better about making hard choices when it
comes to the defense budget. We need to continue to train,
equip our servicemen and women, and to support them and their
families here at home. We must prioritize modernization of our
force and support investments, which will support future modern
combat. And most of all, we need to meet the requirements
included in the National Defense Strategy. Every dollar
allocated in your budget request represents an increased effort
to defend our Nation and to deter threats.
As you know, we finally enacted fiscal year 2024 bill on
March 23, 6 months after it was supposed to be completed. This
delay triggered multiple continuing resolutions and impeded
your ability to start new programs. None of this should have
happened.
Now turning to the security supplemental. The Senate passed
it over 2 months ago, and it is deeply unfortunate that it has
not been brought directly to the floor of the House for a vote.
Funding that bill would provide much needed support for
Ukraine, Taiwan, Israel. And it will make sure that we have the
critical munitions we need here at home to protect the United
States.
The supplemental will support our military and provide them
with the ammunition necessary to defend us here at home and
support our allies abroad. And it also includes much needed
humanitarian assistance, which is long overdue to the people
who need it.
As the chair mentioned, evidenced by Iran's actions this
weekend, Israel will require more interceptors to defend itself
from Iranian missile attacks.
Last week, our subcommittee was briefed by U.S. European
Command on the prognosis for Ukraine without American support.
As you know, it was chilling. Without the United States'
assistance, Ukraine will literally run out of ammunition and
more civilians in Ukraine will be murdered by Russia. For these
reasons, the supplemental must be enacted as soon as possible.
While the hearing today will cover a range of topics, I
want to highlight a few that are very important to me.
First, I am concerned about our Nation's ability to address
emerging threats. Many of the major systems that we rely on
from each of the services are delayed and require additional
funds from their original stated contracts. This needs to stop.
Our industrial partners seem to be losing workers right and
left after they have been trained, particularly in the
shipbuilding industrial base. This is unacceptable, and it is
extremely concerning to me.
The Department, Congress, and industry must work together
to ensure that there is consistency because of those jobs and
the people in them are important to the national security of
our Nation.
Second, the subcommittee has heard from the Army and the
Navy about how they are addressing recruitment and retention
issues. I would like to know what you think the progress is
that the services have made in recruitment goals in the past
year, and do you believe this will get us back on track on the
near term future.
And finally, given the focus on the Pacific, which is
important, and the recent visit of Washington by the Japanese
Prime Minister, I would like to hear your thoughts on our
relationship with Japan. How can the Department work with Japan
to better utilize maintenance and repair facilities in Japanese
territory that our forces can execute their missions more
effectively and efficiently? And what are some of the ways that
the Department has worked to strengthen our relationship with
allies, such as the Philippines, Australia, and South Korea?
Again, thank you to the service for our witnesses who are
appearing before us today and all those who serve and work
under you. We appreciate your testimony and answers to our
questions.
Mr. Chairman, thank you for the courtesy, and I yield back.
Mr. Calvert. Thank you, Ms. McCollum.
And now I would like to turn to the chairman of the full
committee, my good friend, Chairman Tom Cole, the floor is
yours.

Opening Remarks of Chairman Cole

The Chairman. Thank you very much, Chairman Calvert.
And good morning to our witnesses. Certainly, Mr.
Secretary, General Brown, Under Secretary McCord, it is great
to have you here this morning.
Iran's missile and drone attacks on Israel and the
persistent and aggressive actions of China and Russia are
reminders that we need a strong military to deter war, protect
U.S. interests and, when necessary, win in conflict.
We are witnessing an evolution in warfighting through the
proliferation of technology. Small, cheap, and autonomous
systems provide regional actors with the ability to threaten
their neighbors and endanger the global order.
With that backdrop, the Department's fiscal year 2025
request makes tough choices to stay under the Fiscal
Responsibility Act cap. It trades long-term modernization of
capabilities to preserve near-term readiness of force.
Frankly, like my friend Chairman Calvert, I would like to
see an increase in defense spending to more completely address
these threats. I certainly, as my good friend, Ranking Member
McCollum said, support the supplemental, both for its immediate
impact and its long-term, you know, assistance in developing
and sustaining our own industrial base.
However, additional funding would not absolve the
Department of its responsibility to deliver capabilities on
time and on budget. In that regard, I certainly associate
myself with the remarks of my good friend Chairman Calvert.
From hypersonic programs to shipbuilding to aircraft like
the E-7, I continue to be concerned by the Department's
inability to deliver weapons to the warfighter in a reasonable
timeframe.
Successful weapon system acquisition requires clear
standards, adequate funding, competent program management, and
a trusting partnership between the Department and industry. It
also requires constant communication and transparency with the
Congress.
These are some of the areas--excuse me. There are some
areas, such as munitions, where the Department is working
directly with this committee in providing the funding and
demand signal necessary to ramp industrial base production.
I am interested in your thoughts, Mr. Secretary, on how to
go a step further and develop surge capacity across the
industrial base. This would increase our readiness for whatever
the global security environment throws at us.
I want to note that the Department is enduring the most
challenging recruiting crisis since the creation of the all-
volunteer force. The junior enlisted force is the lifeblood of
the military, and this committee is committed to recruiting and
retaining the best America has to offer.
There is no shortage of challenges for this Department, and
I look forward to hearing how the fiscal year 2025 budget
request addresses those issues.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Calvert. I thank the chairman.
Gentlemen, your full written testimony will be placed on
the record. Please give a brief summary of your statements.
So, Secretary Austin, the floor is yours.

Summary Statement of Secretary Austin

Secretary Austin. Chairman Calvert, Ranking Member
McCollum, distinguished members of the committee, thanks for
the opportunity to testify in support of President Biden's
proposed fiscal year 2025 budget for the Department of Defense.
And, Chairman Cole, I look forward to continuing to work
closely together as you take the gavel of the full committee.
I am pleased to be joined by our outstanding Chairman of
the Joint Chiefs of Staff, General CQ Brown, and by Under
Secretary Mike McCord, the Department's comptroller.
Let me start by thanking this committee for all that you do
to support the U.S. military, our troops, and our military
families.
We began seeing the exceptional skill and professionalism
of our forces after Iran's unprecedented and reckless assault
on Israel. Alongside Israel and our allies, we had enormous
success in defeating Iran's attack, and we will continue to
stand ready to protect our troops in the region and to support
the defense of Israel from attacks by Iran or its proxies. And
our commitment to Israel's security is ironclad.
And let me be clear, while we have not seen renewed attacks
on U.S. Forces or facilities, as President Biden has said, we
will not hesitate to take all necessary actions to protect our
people.
Now, let me turn to this year's budget request.
[Disturbance in hearing room.]
Mr. Calvert. The meeting will be suspended.
The committee will be in order.
The chair notes a disturbance of the committee proceedings.
The chair reminds our guests that disruptive demonstrations in
the audience is in violation of the House rules. Any additional
disruptions to the hearing will require law enforcement to
remove protestors from the room and restore order. And I will
do that.
Mr. Secretary, please continue.
Secretary Austin. Thanks, Chairman.
As Secretary, I have always been guided by three
priorities: defending our Nation, taking care of our people,
and succeeding through teamwork. Our budget request for fiscal
year 2025 will advance all three of these priorities.
[Disturbance in hearing room.]
Mr. Calvert. The committee will stand in recess until the
Capitol Police can restore order.
Capitol Police, please remove the demonstrators from the
room.
The committee is in recess.
[Recess.]
Mr. Calvert. The committee will come back to order.
Mr. Secretary, please proceed.
Secretary Austin. As I said, Chairman, our budget request
for fiscal year 2025 will advance all three of the priorities
that I mentioned.
First, the President's request will invest in cutting-edge
capabilities across all domains. This includes $48.1 billion
for naval and shipbuilding capabilities, $61.2 billion to
reinforce U.S. air dominance, and $13 billion to bolster Army
and Marine Corps combat capabilities. Our request will also
provide $33.7 billion to strengthen our space architecture and
$14.5 billion to develop and field advance cybersecurity tools.
It will direct $49.2 billion to modernize and recapitalize all
three legs of our nuclear triad, and it will sharpen our tech
edge through a $167.5 billion investment in procurement and a
$143.2 billion investment in R&D.
Second, this budget request will support our outstanding
troops and their families. That includes raising base pay and
housing allowances, investing in better housing, making
childcare more affordable, and funding vital work to prevent
sexual assault and suicide in the military.
And third, this request will help the Department further
deepen our teamwork worldwide. Our network of allies and
partners remains a strategic advantage that no competitor can
match. And you can see its power in our strengthening ties
across the Indo-Pacific, in today's expanded and united NATO,
and in the 50-country Ukraine defense contact group that I
convene.
Our budget remains rooted in our 2022 National Defense
Strategy. Our request positions the United States to tackle the
Department's pacing challenge--the People's Republic of China--
with confidence and urgency. It will help meet the acute threat
of Putin's increasingly aggressive Russia. It will help us
tackle the persistent dangers that we have just seen from Iran
and its proxies in their attack on Israel. It will help us take
on the threats from North Korea, global terrorist
organizations, and other malign actors. And it will help us
continue to deter aggression against the United States and our
allies and partners and to prevail in conflict, if necessary.
Now, today I want to underscore three key messages. First,
even as our budget request abides by the mandatory cap set by
the Fiscal Responsibility Act, it is aligned to our strategy.
We made tough but responsible decisions that prioritize near-
term readiness, modernization of the joint force, and support
for our troops and their families. Our approach dials back some
near-term modernization for programs not set to come online
until the 2030s.
Second, we can only fully reach the goals of our strategy
with your help, and I am grateful that Congress passed the
fiscal year 2024 appropriations in March. The single greatest
way that Congress can support the Department is to pass
predictable, sustained, and timely appropriations.
My third and final message is that the price of U.S.
leadership is real, but it is far lower than the price of U.S.
Abdication.
As the President has said, we are in a global struggle
between democracy and autocracy, and our security relies on
American strength of purpose. And that is why our budget
request seeks to invest in American security and in America's
defense industrial base.
It is also why the administration has requested nearly $60
billion in the National Security Supplemental for the
Department, and that supplemental would support our partners in
Israel, Ukraine, and Taiwan, and it would make key investments
to increase submarine production. In fact, about $50 billion of
this supplemental would flow through our defense industrial
base, creating good American jobs in more than 30 States.
Now, we are more than 2 years into the Kremlin's war of
aggression against Ukraine, and Putin is betting that the
United States will falter, abandon our friends, and leave
Ukraine in mortal danger. If the Kremlin prevails in Ukraine,
it would embolden would-be aggressors around the globe. And we
know that China, Iran, and others are watching what Putin does
and how we respond.
So we look to our partners in Congress to help us make the
investments needed to strengthen America's security through
both the supplemental and the President's budget request.
The United States military is the most lethal fighting
force on Earth, and with your help, we are going to keep it
that way.
I am truly grateful for your support for our mission and
for our troops, and I look forward to your questions.
Thank you.
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Calvert. Thank you, Mr. Secretary.
General Brown, you are recognized.

Summary Statement of General Brown

General Brown. Chairman Calvert, Ranking Member McCollum,
Chairman Cole, and distinguished members of the committee, I am
honored to join Secretary Austin and Honorable Mike McCord to
appear before you today.
On behalf of the joint force, the Department of Defense
civilians, and our families, I want to thank Congress for your
steadfast support and the opportunity to testify on the fiscal
year 2025 defense budget request which reflects our shared
commitment to national security.
The global security environment is increasingly complex.
The 2022 National Defense Strategy identifies five key
challenges: the People's Republic of China, our pacing
challenge, continues its risky behavior around the globe. The
newly aggressive Russia with its unprovoked war against
Ukraine. A reckless Iran, who as we saw just this past weekend,
attempts to escalate regional conflict with unprecedented
attacks in support of proxy forces. A destabilizing North Korea
which threatens regional security. And violent extremist
organizations which leverage instability to advance their
cause.
These challenges are interconnected, which demands a
strategic approach addressing the immediate threats while also
preparing for future contingencies.
Days after becoming the chairman, I laid out three
expectations in my message to the joint force: honing our
warfighting skills has primacy in all we do, modernizing and
aggressively leading with new concepts and approaches, and
trust is the foundation of our profession.
Our military exists to fight and win our Nation's wars. We
train every day to ensure we are so good at what we do that we
deter any adversary from engaging the U.S. in conflict.
This budget requests $147 billion to sustain readiness and
ensure the Department can counter near-term threats. We are
also focused on better integrating our allies and partners in
our planning and operations by investing in critical programs
and capability, expanding security cooperation, exercises,
training, interoperability. Our investments in readiness ensure
the joint force can respond when the Nation calls.
While we are focused on our readiness for today, it is
critical to modernize and lead with new concepts to prepare for
tomorrow. The Department continues to invest in capability and
capacity to outpace our competitors, while transforming from
costly legacy platforms that are no longer relevant to the
threat.
This budget strategically invests in $167.5 billion in
procurement, underscoring our commitment to equip the joint
force with unparalleled combat capabilities across every
domain. This budget also invests $143.2 billion in research,
development, tests, and evaluation of future capabilities that
will retain our strategic edge.
Finally, this budget invests significantly into nuclear
modernization, digital innovation, multi-year procurement of
critical munitions, and a strengthened defense industrial base.
With rapidly evolving threats in technology, accelerating our
modernization is crucial.
Lastly, trust is the foundation of our profession. The
joint force must build upon and uphold trusting each other,
trust with our families, trust of our elected leaders, and
trust of our Nation. Enhancing the quality of service and the
quality of life of our personnel is not just a moral
obligation; it is a strategic imperative.
This budget includes investments in quality of service
efforts, such as advanced training, educational benefits, and
career development, while also investing in quality of life
projects, like housing, medical clinics, and childcare
facilities, as well as funding spouse employment initiatives,
enhanced mental health resources, and robust programs to combat
sexual assault. We must create an environment where all can
reach their full potential.
Trust that our joint force stands ready, ready to defend
our national interest, ready to deter aggression, and ready, if
necessary, to fight and win our Nation's wars.
I thank you for your support and collaboration in our
shared commitment to face the security challenges of today and
prepare for tomorrow. We are living in consequential times, and
there is no time to waste.
Thank you, and I look forward to your questions.
[The information follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Defense Innovation and Rapid Fielding

Mr. Calvert. Thank you, General.
I want to make sure that each member has a chance to ask
questions, so each member will have at least 5 minutes, 5
minutes to answer their questions. When your timer turns
yellow, you will have 1 minute remaining.
First, I will recognize myself.
Innovation and rapid fielding to the warfighter has been a
number one priority of mine since coming to Congress. There are
many efforts underway, and I am encouraged by this momentum.
However, as stated before--and I support the Replicator
initiative. In no way should Replicator cannibalize from the
hedge fund established in fiscal year 2024.
General Brown, the transition of requirements to
capabilities to a program of record is low, not well
understood, and opaque to warfighters and industry alike. How
will you address this issue during your tenure?
General Brown. Chairman, I appreciate the question, and I
would also offer I have the same focus on being--accelerate
capability to our warfighters.
You know, part of this dialogue is really the collaboration
that I try to do with the service chiefs but how we can engage
with--from the requirements to our acquisition and to industry
to best accelerate each of these capabilities to go from a
prototype to production.
This also is very important about the defense industrial
base, so we can actually make sure we are able to deliver--once
we identify the innovation, be able to move it much more
quickly into the hands of our warfighters.
And so it is going to require leadership, which I am happy
to do, but it is also going to require for us to have, you
know, on-time resourcing, consistent demand signal, and to
build that trust across the spectrum to make sure we bring the
capability forward much faster.
Mr. Calvert. Well, I look forward to working with you on
that. We can make sure that we deliver the funds on time.
Secretary Austin, last week, Under Secretary Shyu
inaugurated the Transition Tracking Action Group, which will
employ advanced analytics to track how the Department delivers
capability to the field. Will you commit that this effort will
be collaborative with Congress and that you will support its
success?
Secretary Austin. Absolutely, Chairman.
Again, I commend Ms. Shyu, or the Honorable Shyu, on the
things that she has done since we have been together. I think
she has done a number of things, to include things like RDER
and OSC, as you know, to help us bridge the value of death.
And the programs that you mentioned or the initiatives that
you mentioned are really mutually supported, and we are going
to do every--continue to do everything we can to move
capability as quickly as we can across the valley of death and
get it into the hands of our warfighters.
Mr. Calvert. Ms. McCollum.

EXECUTION OF SUPPLEMENTAL DEFENSE FUNDING

Ms. McCollum. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Secretary, General Brown, Under Secretary McCord, the
Senate passed a supplemental, and it includes funding for
allies and partners in UCOM, CENTCOM and INDOPACOM, as well as
much needed humanitarian assistance.
Mr. Secretary, I am going to ask a couple of questions
together. Could you please let this committee know how our
allies and partners are reacting to our delays in the
enhancement of the supplemental?
General Brown, please share with us your military
assessment of the situation in Ukraine today and what it looks
like for tomorrow.
Mr. McCord, we know that the services are utilizing base
funds to cover the cost of deployed personnel operating in
EUCOM and CENTCOM. If we do not enact a supplemental, how will
this impact the services' fiscal year 2024 base activities?
So, in general, why do we need to pass the supplemental
right away? And is the United States losing stature in the
world community?
Thank you, gentlemen.
[Disturbance in hearing room.]
Mr. Calvert. The committee will not allow for disruption.
If any more disruption happens, we will recess and have the
disruption removed.
Mr. Secretary, you are recognized.
Secretary Austin. Well, thank you, Chairman.
You know, delaying the supplemental sends a terrible signal
to our allies and partners, and they will question whether or
not, you know, we are committed to this cause and whether or
not we are a reliable partner. And we have--as you know, we
have led every inch of the way in terms of making sure that
security assistance is provided to Ukraine. We have united
NATO, been instrumental in uniting NATO in ways that we haven't
seen. Actually, NATO has expanded. And so I think that American
leadership in this endeavor has been really, really important.
I think that it is also--you know, the supplemental is also
important to us for our security as well. This supplemental
invests in our industrial base.
As you know, we don't provide funds to Ukraine. The
Department of Defense doesn't. We provide materials in terms of
weapons, vehicles, munitions. And all of those things are
replaced by us, and the replacements are designed and built in
our industry. And so that means good jobs, good jobs for people
in America.
So if that supplemental was passed, and when it gets
passed, some $50 billion or so would flow through some 30
States here in America, and I think that is really important.
And again, the supplemental not only provides support for
Ukraine, but it also provides much needed support for Israel
and also for Taiwan.
[Disturbance in hearing room.]
Mr. Calvert. The committee will stand in recess until the
Capitol Police can restore order.
[Recess.]
Mr. Calvert. The committee will come back to order.
Mr. Secretary, you are recognized.
Secretary Austin. So to sum it up, this supplemental is
really important for a number of reasons. And, again, it is
important to us for our security as well, and it is really
important that we have the ability to replenish the stocks in
our inventory that will be critical for us going forward.
General Brown. Ranking Member McCollum, you asked about my
military assessment on Ukraine, and I will just tell you that
Ukraine right now is facing some dire battlefield conditions.
And it is partly because their capability from a resourcing
standpoint, from--whether it is munitions, whether it is
vehicles, whether it is platforms, they are not being
outmatched by the Russians.
They have had some pretty--the Ukrainians have had some
positive gains in the course of the 2-plus years that they have
been in this conflict, regaining more than 50 percent of the
territory that the Russians seized at the beginning of the
conflict.
Those hard-fought gains can be lost without our support,
and so it is important that we continue to provide them the
capabilities that they require.
And so when I think about this, I think about the
supplemental, those three things. One, it supports Ukraine's
ability to defend itself. It shows--it puts money into our
defense industrial base, not just for Ukraine, but for many of
our allies and partners because the U.S. equipment is valued
around the world. And last, it shows U.S. leadership.
I have been in this job 6 months, and I have had about 115
engagements with my counterparts from around the world, and
they often talk about U.S. leadership. I can tell you it is
watched, it is desired, and the actions we do are sending a
message of where our commitments are. And it also sends a
message to our adversaries. And I think it is important that we
continue to show leadership like we have done throughout my
entire career wearing this uniform, and I want to make sure
that we do that.
Ms. McCollum. Mr. McCord, if you could be brief.
Mr. McCord. Ranking Member, thank you.
Well, the security assistance is, of course, the most
urgent, time-sensitive part of the supplemental. It cannot be
replaced with anything in the base budget.
You highlighted the lesser known part is that the Secretary
and the President, of course, can deploy forces quite legally
where they choose to, and we have surged forces in Europe the
entire fiscal year to date. Navy and particularly CENTCOM the
same way.
We have incurred over $2 billion and counting of
operational costs that, if we can't get the supplemental, will
have to be absorbed in the base budget. We would have to work
with this committee and the other committees to try and
reprogram funds hopefully not from direct readiness but from,
if not that, readiness enabling things like facilities
maintenance and equipment maintenance. So there is an impact on
our forces and our readiness as well if we cannot get the
supplemental approved.
Ms. McCollum. Thank you, gentlemen.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Calvert. Thank you.
Mr. Cole.

DEFENDING ISRAEL

The Chairman. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Secretary and General Brown, I want to ask you, if you
would--first of all, I want to compliment you. Thank you for
the performance of our forces and your leadership in the recent
attack by Iran on Israel. Our personnel was just outstanding,
and that reflects well certainly on both of you and our
military.
What additional things in your professional opinion do we
need to do to provide Israel with what it needs to defend
itself in the short term?
Secretary Austin. Thanks, Chairman. The most important
thing that we can do right now is to pass the supplemental, and
that will provide us the opportunity to continue to provide
security assistance to Israel in the form of air defense
interceptors, you know, munitions, and things that it
critically needs to be able to defend itself.
But that supplemental, I would say, Chairman, is truly the
most important thing that I would highlight for you.
The Chairman. General?
General Brown. Chairman, I would echo those comments. As I
have a chance to talk to my Israeli counterpart and my other
counterparts, region, it is important that we provide that
capability through the supplemental.
But I also think about what it does for us and for our
forces. And I will just also highlight, I mean, I couldn't be
prouder of the work done by our forces over the course of this
past weekend. It shows the professionalism of our force, and
that is why we had the most combat credible and most respected
force in the world, because of events like that.

U.S. FORCE PROTECTION

The Chairman. I will also ask you both, obviously, when we
employ our forces in this way, you know, they are exposed
themselves to being attacked, and we have certainly had plenty
of incidents from Iran attacking.
So where are we at in terms of force protection for our men
and women on the ground that are engaged in these activities?
Secretary Austin. Force protection is of utmost importance
to me and to the Department and to the President, and we have
done a lot in the last several months to reinforce our force
protective posture in the region. As you know, we deployed a
number of additional assets over the last several months to
ensure that we accounted for, you know, just about any
contingency that could arise.
As I said earlier, while we know that--we haven't seen any
additional attacks from Shia militia groups over the last
several weeks. We know that that could change in a moment's
notice. If it does, then you can expect that we will do what is
necessary to protect our troops, and we will respond at a time
and place of our choosing.
General Brown. Again, I would echo exactly what the
Secretary said. It is very unfortunate we lost three
servicemembers back in January. But the tremendous work by our
forces, the force protection, to be able to respond like we did
back at the beginning of February sent a pretty clear message
that we will defend ourselves, and the Secretary and I will
continue to do so.

DELIVERY OF WEAPONS TO TAIWAN

The Chairman. Obviously, this supplemental has a lot of
different components to it. We talked a lot about Israel and
Ukraine, the importance of both of those, and I certainly agree
and hope we can get that done literally this week.
But there is another component portion, of course, and that
is directed at the Western Pacific, both our own forces and to
Taiwan. Widely known that Taiwan has ordered billions of
dollars worth of weapons from our country that haven't been
delivered. Can you give us some insight as to the difficulty,
why we have not been able to help a country that literally is
under enormous pressure from China, receive weapons that it has
actually paid for?
Secretary Austin. This has been an area of focus for us,
Chairman. From the very beginning, you know, I asked my team to
bore into what was causing the delays or is causing the delays,
and there are a number of things that come together to create
those delays. And we are working hard to make sure that in
every way possible we do everything we can to speed the process
up.
I agree with you that this is critical capability that is
very much needed by Taiwan, and so we are going to continue to
work on this. But it is a complex picture, but, nonetheless, we
are going to make sure that we are doing everything we can to
move as quickly as possible.
And, you know, we continue to communicate to our allies and
partners--where we are in terms of getting them the needed
capability. And again, I could not agree with you more, this is
really, really important.

E-3 CAPABILITIES

The Chairman. One last question, and I will direct this to
you, General Brown. You are very familiar with Tinker Air Force
Base. We have talked about it a lot over the years. As you
know, the AWACS Wing is primarily based out of Tinker. Those
are really old air frames, E-3s. We know we are beginning to
try and address that problem, but it is something I have raised
in this committee for many, many years.
Tell me where we are at in terms of the E-7. I am a little
disturbed. I think in the Department budget we are zeroing out
that line. Again, I know you are under a lot of pressure for
money for that right now, but let me know where we are at,
because I do worry.
With the Russians, this is, you know, airborne early
warning combat control capability. We have lost a lot of that
as we have retired E-3s. We haven't been able to replace them
anywhere near as rapidly as we should. So give us an update on
how we are doing there.
General Brown. Well, Chairman, I am a little bit removed
from my time in the Air Force, but I will defer to the Air
Force to get you some specifics and will do that.
The Chairman. I will have that opportunity next week with
them.
General Brown. Okay. But, you know, one of the things we
are really trying to do is, first of all, as you know, you have
got to buy the green aircraft and then convert it over. And,
you know, we were looking at the long lead items to make sure
we are able to do that, but also at the same time working with
our allies and partners, particularly the Australians who have
the platform today. And we have, you know, airmen in Australia
that are training.
So not only, you know, it is the aspect of getting the
capability like you described with the prototype, but also
marrying up our servicemembers so they can operate it as soon
as it becomes available.
And we'll continue to work very hard to make sure we bring
that capability forward as well.
The Chairman. Well, I look forward to working with you on
that, but I just want to highlight it is a matter of real
concern. I think this really relates to Chairman Calvert's
larger point about delivering weapon systems on time and on
budget. And I think we have got a problem across the board.
We have used a lot of--eaten up a lot of our immediate
capability on the assumption certain things would be ready at a
certain time, and it hadn't happened. So we have a gap where
the capability is gone, and we haven't gotten the replacement
online. Worries me a lot.
With that, I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Calvert. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Ms. DeLauro.

SHIPBUILDING AND SUBMARINE DELAYS

Ms. DeLauro. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Secretary, welcome. Sorry we are kind of hearing
hopping this morning. So welcome you to the committee.
Mr. Secretary, it is well known that the Navy is
experiencing significant issues related to shipbuilding and, in
particular, submarines. We know we need more ships, more subs,
but we lack the infrastructure and the workforce to stay on
track. I want to be clear that the private sector could do more
to help.
There are delays in several programs, including both the
Columbia and Virginia-class submarines and a future aircraft
carrier. We also have a significant backlog of ship and
submarine maintenance, all of which have a footprint in my
State.
These delays will impact the Navy's readiness, and the Navy
completed a 45-day shipbuilding review to address some of these
issues. And I noted in a recent article here, Sea-Air-Space,
that it says that the Secretary of Navy says 45-day
shipbuilding review will be followed by another review.
Can you share with us your impressions of the findings of
the first review, particularly the delays in the Columbia-class
submarine, and how this might impact the shipyard industrial
base and what this committee can do to assist you?
Secretary Austin. Regarding the delays, you know, I share
your concern. As you know, we are requesting to invest in one
Virginia-class this year, versus two, and the reason that we
are doing that is because there is a backlog. And rather than
increase that backlog, the right thing to do, in my view, is to
invest in the industrial base in terms of giving the industrial
base the means to expand capacity by recruiting and retaining
the right people, making sure that they can strengthen their
supply chains.
And so in 2023 and 2024, we asked you for $1.9 billion to
invest in the submarine industrial base. And this year, we are
asking you for, in this budget, for some 25--some $4 billion,
excuse me, for the industrial base for the 2025 budget. That is
in addition to the $3.3 billion that is included in the
supplemental.
So as you can see, there is some pretty significant
investment in the industrial base, and I think we have to do
everything we can to put those resources to good use.
Now, I met with the CEOs of General Dynamics and Huntington
Ingalls here recently, and we talked about what their
challenges were in terms of workforce challenges and supply
chain challenges. And we talked about, you know, how we could
best use those resources that you are allowing us to invest in.
So, certainly, they are doing things on their own to invest
in increasing capacity, and I think the right things are going
to happen. It is just going to take a bit more time.
And as you know, because of AUKUS, Australia is also
investing in our submarine base. So the amount of money, the
amount of resources that we are putting against expanding
capacity I think is material. It is real capability, and we
have to make sure that we are putting it to good use. I know
that industry is serious about it, and, again, it is just going
to take a bit more time.
Ms. DeLauro. I understand. And if we could, we can speak
offline, but the findings of the 45-day review, I understand
it, and I think the committee has tried to provide resources.
But then I just, you know, read that we are then looking at
additional review to deal with ordering another review to take
a deep dive into the opportunities for improvement. I don't
know how many dives we need with regard to submarines. You
know, how many dives are we going to accommodate here?
But I just--I would like to know, I hope the committee
would like to know the results of that review, where you think
it takes us, and what is going on with an additional review of
this?
And I appreciate your working with General Dynamics and
others and getting their view, and the Australians.

CONSEQUENCES FROM CONTINUING RESOLUTIONS

If I can ask you a question about continuing resolutions. I
appreciate your comments and your testimony regarding the--
about the importance of passing government funding bills on
time to ensure our Nation's safety, keep the industrial base
strong, outcompete our adversaries.
Many of my colleagues speak at length about wanting to
achieve these goals, yet, as you know, we passed a defense
spending bill this year over 5 months late. I repeat, 5 months
late. I hope that we do not continue to play games with our
Federal spending process this year.
Can you an elaborate on the negative effects of continuing
resolutions for the Department of Defense, American
manufacturers, the industrial base, and for our readiness
generally? What would be the consequences of another CR this
year, Mr. Secretary?
I hope General Brown and Mr. McCord can chime in as well.
Secretary Austin. Well, the effects of the CRs are
significant, especially if you have CRs that last that long.
You obviously can't initiate new starts. You lose a lot of time
on initiatives. And the one thing that you can't buy back is
time. And so, over the course of years, these things compound,
and they create--they add some of the friction that we have
been discussing.
But, again, I think the best way that we can help ourselves
is to make sure that we receive an on-time budget. And as you
know, our budget request is directly linked to our strategy. So
without a budget, we can't execute the strategy to its fullest.
And, you know, I have been pretty deliberate in asking my
staff to maintain course on making sure that, you know,
everything that we ask for is directly linked to the strategy.
And, you know, we have done a good job of that over the last 3
years. But if you don't get a budget on time, you know, you are
not executing to your full capability. So it has a significant
impact on our ability to do a number of things, but you can't
buy back time.
Ms. DeLauro. General Brown.
General Brown. Thanks for the question. I will tell you I
have been a general officer for about 15 years, and we spend
about a third of that in continuing resolutions. And the
challenge we have there is--and I will use this year as an
example. There is about 400 things we couldn't do, whether it
was new starts, change our levels of procurement, or to do
MILCON.
And so the concern I have there is that what it does to us
is it drives uncertainty; it erodes trust, particularly when we
work with our defense industrial base; and then it increases
cost and it increases time.
And we talked earlier about that we want to deliver
capability on time. The best way to do that is to have the
resourcing on time. But I think the same thing for us as a
Department is that we have a consistent demand signal, which is
why multi-year procurement is another piece that helps that
demand signal. It allows the defense industrial base to do
their supply chains, have a workforce that has consistency in
employment. And so it is important. All that comes together for
our national security. It is really--it is hugely important.
Ms. DeLauro. Thank you.
Mr. McCord.
Mr. McCord. As Secretary noted and General Brown noted, we
have now emerged into a pattern over many years of spending
about a third of each fiscal year in a CR, which is much more
problematic on the acquisition side, to go back to Chairman
Cole's comments about trying to deliver things on time. Our
contracting gets delayed. We have a better time managing on the
operating side than we do on the acquisition side.
In this year, the particular issues were the difference
between our request and the CR was about $25 billion. So think
about losing $2 billion a month, falling behind, hoping that
you will catch that up. But also, just given the way that the
Fiscal Responsibility Act was written, there was a chance,
however remote, of a full year CR, of a sequester. And so
myself and others spent considerable time planning for things
that didn't happen, which was also time that could have been
used on other--you know, more productively.
Ms. DeLauro. Just this final comment. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
I think it--and the ranking member mentioned it a moment
ago. This winds up being a terrible waste of taxpayer dollars,
and people who care deeply about that should think about this,
as well as people who care about our national security and our
being able to do--you can't buy time. I think that is a
critical comment, Mr. Secretary. And thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Calvert. Thank you.
And I think that we would all agree, no one on this
committee enjoys continuing resolutions.
Ms. DeLauro. I understand that.
Mr. Calvert. I hope that we can talk to some of our friends
and colleagues over on the other side of the building in the
United States Senate. We got our bills done relatively on time,
and, unfortunately, the Senate seems to be in the habit of not
passing appropriations on both sides of the aisle.
Ms. DeLauro. Mr. Chairman, with all due respect, I think we
have to talk to people on our side who proclaim that continuing
resolution would be great. Even shutdown of the government
would be great. We know and I know and others know that ain't
the truth.
Mr. Calvert. That is not anybody on this committee.
Ms. DeLauro. No--hey, I am not talking about this. Please,
people shouldn't feel, you know, threatened, but it's out
there.
Mr. Calvert. Thank you.
Ms. DeLauro. Thank you.
Mr. Calvert. Mr. Rogers.

RAMIFICATIONS OF THE WAR IN UKRAINE

Mr. Rogers. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Gentlemen, welcome to the subcommittee.
And, General Brown, congratulations on your elevation.
First time in front of us, you are with us as Chairman of the
Joint Chiefs. So congratulations and welcome.
Let's talk a moment about the ramifications of what we do
in Ukraine. Obviously, our most severe noncombatant is absent
from the scene, but the ramifications of what we do there or
don't do there is heavy.
Mr. Secretary, would you care to tell us what you think is
the bigger picture, the strategic and moral importance of the
situation in Ukraine as it relates with us?
Secretary Austin. You know, what we said from the very
beginning, sir, is that we want to see, at the end of the day,
a Ukraine that is a democratic, independent, and sovereign
state that has a means to defend its territory and deter
aggression. And Ukraine is not asking for us to fight the fight
for them. They are asking for us to assist by providing some of
the means that they need to protect themselves and defend their
territory. And we have done that over the last 2 years, and
that is why they are in the place that they are now.
I mean, they have defended against a much superior force
and not only held their ground but also taken back some 50
percent of what Russia--the ground that Russia occupied
initially. And I think, for a much smaller force, I think that
is commendable.
But unless they have, you know, the air defense
interceptors, the artillery munitions, and others things that
they need, it is going to be very difficult for them to sustain
their efforts.
Now, if they are not successful, to your question, it has
ramifications not only for Europe but for the United States of
America, because we all know that Putin won't stop in Ukraine.
This will continue. And, you know, our allies on the Eastern
front there are very, very concerned about that, and rightfully
so.
It will also signal to other autocrats around the globe
that, you know, the United States is not a reliable partner.
And so all of the alliances and partnerships that we have
worked hard to develop over the years will be in question in
terms of their eyes.
So it has significant ramifications, but, again, I think
Ukraine has done an incredible job of inflicting significant
damage on the Russian military with a much smaller force, and
they have done that with our help and the help of some 50
nations that we have rallied in their support.
Mr. Rogers. Well, with Mr. Putin saying very openly and
repeatedly that he wants to restore the old Soviet Union, and
all of the nation-states in Eastern Europe especially, as you
have said, are looking to us. And if we fail them, I think it
fuels further the belief that Putin will try to succeed in
restoring the old Soviet Union.
Do you agree with that? Do you agree with that?
Secretary Austin. I absolutely agree, sir, and you know, I
think Putin believes that he can wait us out. He believes that
the resolve of the Western countries will soon fade and our
coalition will fracture. But Putin's wrong, and, you know, we
are going to continue to try to find ways to support Ukraine.

LANDMINES IN UKRAINE

Mr. Rogers. Let me quickly ask you about land mines in
Ukraine. ``60 Minutes'' on CBS last week did a story about the
land mines that have been sewn all through Ukraine by Putin and
his forces. What can you tell us about that problem?
Secretary Austin. The Russians have made extensive use of
land mines, and we saw the Ukrainians go up against that last
spring as they launched their offensive. And they have done
that--the Russians have done that in every place they fought,
but in this case, the territory, the terrain is littered with
just, you know, with land mines, and it will take years to
police this up, to clean this up.
We have stood up a capability coalition with countries who
are volunteering to pull together their capabilities to assist
Ukraine in acquiring the right capabilities to address this
problem going forward, but it is going to be something that is
going to require a lot of countries to work together on in the
future.
Mr. Rogers. Thank you, Mr. Secretary.
I yield back.
Mr. Calvert. I thank the gentleman.
I recognize Mr. Cole for an announcement.
The Chairman. I think probably good news on all fronts.
Just want folks to know that the three component bills of the
supplemental have been filed--three: one for Israel, one for
Ukraine, one for the Western Pacific.
My understanding, there will be a fourth bill that relates
to border security, but those will be--the component parts of
the supplemental will be considered independently.
So just wanted people to be aware of that. I think that is
good news all around.
I yield back.
Mr. Calvert. I thank the gentleman for that announcement.
Mr. Ruppersberger.

CHINA'S MILITARY ASSISTANCE TO RUSSIA

Mr. Ruppersberger. Yes, thank you.
First thing, thank you all for being here today and for
your service to our country. This is a very important time.
Honorable McCord, thank you for all you do and your
expertise.
You know, we are going through the President's budget and
the supplemental, and I share your concerns about the current
global security environment and the multiphase challenges that
we face.
Just last weekend, Iran directly attacked Israel for the
first time in decades. What happened in the Middle East this
past weekend is a snapshot of what happens every day in
Ukraine. But right now, Ukraine is running dangerously low on
ammunition and other equipment, as you have stated before.
Without additional aid, I don't see how much longer they can
hold out.
And amidst all these conflicts, there is China. The
National Defense Strategy identifies the PRC as our pacing
threat, and while the global security environment is rapidly
changing, we continue to be in a great power competition with
China.
So in that vein, General Brown, can you please describe how
China is helping Russia reconstitute its military since its
invasion of Ukraine? How is the PRC strategically exploiting
the conflict to gain advantage in this great power competition
with us?
General Brown. Thanks for the question. And so how the PRC
is helping Russia is, you know, it is very low level but, by
and large, it is by not condemning the acts of Russia invading
another country.
And how that has impacts is how the PRC is watching what
Russia is doing, they are watching what we are doing, and are
doing things to prepare themselves should they decide pursue
any type of conflict in the Indo-Pacific.
And so it is hardened our capabilities from an economic
standpoint but also looking at their military capabilities and
what they can learn as they watch current events there in
Russia--in Ukraine, excuse me.
Mr. Ruppersberger. Well, thank you for that. It is apparent
that it is not helping Ukraine. We are helping China.
Now, in March, the Senate passed a national security
supplemental that provides foreign aid to Ukraine, Israel, and
Taiwan. It sounds like we are set to consider some version of
that in the House, hopefully.

IMPORTANCE OF MILITARY AID TO UKRAINE

Now, Secretary Austin, why is it critical to our own
national security that we get additional military aid to
Ukraine as soon as possible? If we care about the threat of
China, why does it follow that we should also care about
Ukraine and whether it wins or loses?
Secretary Austin. Well, thank you, sir. Again, in terms of
our own national security, we know that--or we believe--I
believe--that Putin won't stop with Ukraine. I mean, I think he
will continue to seek to pull back in some of those countries
that were in the former Soviet Union. And I think the--we can
look for significant turbulence in the region going forward, if
he is successful.
We have provided a number of elements to Ukraine and hope
to continue to do that in terms of security assistance. We have
to replenish what we have provided, and so having the means to
do that, I think, is really, really important for our readiness
and our security.
And you mentioned China. China, Iran, and others are
watching what happens in Ukraine. And if the United States
proves to be an unreliable partner, not only will it erode the
confidence of our European allies in NATO, but it will also
encourage players like the PRC and Iran to do the kinds of
things that they would want to do anyway.
So I think this creates more discord potentially in the
future, but this is really important. Ukraine matters not just
to Europe, it matters to the whole world. This is about the
rules-based international order and making sure that a
country--a leader of a country can't wake up one day and decide
that he is going to erase the borders of his neighbor and get
away with it. I mean, there has to be some kind of a
international order.
Mr. Ruppersberger. Yeah, I am very--I want to make this
comment. I am very concerned that certain Members of this House
are acting as if China is our--I mean, Russia is our ally. And
I hope that if we can get the facts out, that this is a very
serious issue. And I wish more people who feel that way in this
House would attend this type of hearing to realize how
dangerous that is.
Mr. Calvert. I thank the gentleman for his questions.
Mr. Womack.

CONTINUING RESOLUTIONS AND TOPLINE CONSTRAINTS

Mr. Womack. Thank you.
My thanks to the gentlemen before us for their long-
standing service to this country.
I want to follow up on a conversation that we were having
with the ranking member of the full committee, Ms. DeLauro, on
budget process and on continuing resolutions and that sort of
thing.
Secretary Austin, have you ever known Russia to operate
under a continuing resolution?
Secretary Austin. I have not, sir, and I have never known
China to operate under a continuing resolution either.
Mr. Womack. Well, I am glad you asked that question because
my next question was to General Brown. Have you ever known
China to operate under a continuing resolution?
General Brown. I have not.
Mr. Womack. So if they have needs, they take care of those
needs?
Secretary McCord, Kim Jong-un, does he operate ever under a
continuing resolution?
Mr. McCord. He does not, Mr. Malone [sic].
Mr. Womack. And I won't bore you with the others. I had
listed ISIS-K, violent extremist organizations.
The fact is, adversaries to our way of life and to the way
of life of free nations all around the globe, they don't
operate under continuing resolutions and they don't threaten to
shut their government down. And to me it places a heavy risk on
our men and women who serve in the greatest military on the
planet that we would ever consider delaying the budget, like we
did this past year for 5.5 months in the fiscal year, because I
think that does endanger our way of life. I will leave it
there.
Secretary Austin, the DOD budget request for 2025 is capped
at a 1 percent increase compared to 2024 under the FRA. It is
clear the DOD prioritize increased funding for some services
more than others. For example, the Army saw a 0.2 percent
increase in funding. The Air Force got 1.1 percent.
Can you outline the risks that we buy in this budget
proposal to the Army if we adopt those top-line constraints?
Secretary Austin. Because of the top line, you know, we had
to make some choices, but, again, we linked our request to our
strategy, and these were difficult but, I think, prudent
choices. And, again, as we have worked with the services, I
think that, you know, the investments that we have made in
near-term readiness and in modernization and in taking care of
our people will pay significant dividends for us in the near to
midterm and in the long term as well.
And we also recognize that, in the outyears, the top line
is going to have to grow a bit in order to make sure that we
maintain pace and speed with modernization.
So it is something that we don't take lightly in terms of,
you know, how we resource the entire force. And choices have to
be made. The services participate in our deliberations. And so,
again, I think it is--these--it is--the risks are acceptable at
this point in time.

MULTINATIONAL TRAINING EXERCISES

Mr. Womack. General Brown, both of you are keenly aware
that joint multinational large-scale training exercises enhance
our forces' readiness. Can you describe how these exercises
help our formations in learning how to integrate at scale and
across domains and how the continued repetitions set the joint
force up for success in the face of conflict?
General Brown. You know, every time we get to train,
whether it is individually within our services, train as a
joint team, or train with our allies and partners, it just
makes us stronger. And what that does, it allows us to work on
our areas of interoperability, but it also identifies some
areas we can improve upon, because we want to continue--every
time we have an exercise is to step away from that exercise and
learn something about ourselves as a force that will be
applicable to the threat.
And so every time we do this, it is--you know, we try to
take the lessons learned. And they are not just lessons learned
or observed, it is how we implement those to ensure that our
joint force, with our allies and partners, can do what the
Nation asks for, but also for our national security and the
security of our allies and partners as well.
Mr. Womack. So if we were forced to make some decisions,
buy some more risk because of budget constraints that we have,
where would those joint exercises fall in the list, if you
will, of candidates for either scaling back or doing without?
General Brown. Well, in this particular budget, we focused
on readiness. And so, as the Secretary highlighted, we deferred
some of the modernization to maintain that readiness. And so,
you know, one of the responsibilities I have as the chairman
working with the Joint Chiefs is to balance that risk between
our readiness and our modernization, and we take a hard look at
all the various exercises.
I would also highlight the fact that now because of
technology, we can do a fair amount, you know, through
simulation and the like. But we are trying to use every tool we
can to ensure our readiness and take advantage of the exercise
opportunities that we do have.
Mr. Womack. I thank you, gentlemen.
Mr. Calvert. I thank the gentleman.
Mr. Cuellar.

COLLABORATION BETWEEN NORTHCOM AND SOUTHCOM

Mr. Cuellar. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and Ranking Member.
And to all of our witnesses--Secretary, General, and Mr.
McCord--thank you so much for what you all do.
I would like to bring your attention to the Secretary and
General Brown. Want to get your thoughts what the Department
looks at sharing information and resources across combatant
commands, and in particular, I am talking about NORTHCOM and
SOUTHCOM when it deals with the southern border, what is
happening in Mexico.
You know very well what is happening there, and I am
talking about drugs and criminal organizations. The amount of
money they make, not only passing drugs, but if you look at,
what is it, 7 million, 8 million encounters at the border the
last 3 years, multiply that by an average of $8,000 that the
coyote charge, they are making billions of dollars to our
southern border.
And, you know, we have NORTHCOM that has Mexico, and then
SOUTHCOM has everything south--Central America and south. And I
want to see how we can get NORTHCOM and SOUTHCOM to work better
and sharing information and resources, because, as you know,
part of the work that you all do is the national security and
defense of our country also in that particular area. So just
want to get your thoughts.
And we have already talked to both commanders, both
SOUTHCOM and NORTHCOM, and we have asked them if they can align
themselves because they are apart. They see Mexico very
differently. Just want to get your thoughts on what we can do
to get those two commandant areas to work better.
Secretary Austin. Well, thank you, sir, and thanks for your
interest in this topic.
I do believe that we do a credible job of working together
currently. Both commanders are great commanders, and I have
tremendous confidence in both of them.
Having said that, there are always things that we can do to
improve our collaboration, and I think this gets to your point.
And from my perspective, what I see the commanders doing is
just that, finding ways to support each other, finding ways to
make sure that there are no gaps that can be exploited.
But, you know, the environment is dynamic, and there will
always be a new challenge that presents itself that will
require us to develop additional capabilities and also work
with allies and partners to develop their capabilities so that
they can, you know, control and protect their sovereign space.
So to answer your question, I do believe that there are
always things that we can do better, and we will continue to
focus on that.
Mr. Cuellar. Thank you. Yeah.
General Brown. If I could, I would add, it is not only the
Secretary, we have got tremendous commanders. But it is also
the work that happens between the staffs, between the Joint
Staff, between the staff at SOUTHCOM and NORTHCOM, to work in
the next level of detail in how things are interconnected and
to flatten that communication and using some of the digital
tools we have to be able to share information to visualize.
And then the last thing I would highlight is just the
relationships--relations with the interagency but also
relationships with our partners within both combatant commands;
to get their perspective as well helps us to raise our
awareness and have those two commands work better together.
Mr. Cuellar. Yes, sir. Yes, we need to see everything south
of our border together instead of two--and both commanders are
fantastic. We just want to see if we can push a little bit more
on that.

CHINA IN LATIN AMERICA

I would ask you also, the unity of government is so
important. China is just--you know what they are doing in Latin
America. They are in almost every country. And last night,
somebody sent me a video--and I remember, we had gone to El
Salvador, and the new President at that time wanted to work
with us and said, we want to keep China away. And whatever
happened, our relationship with El Salvador, you know, the
video that they were showing was this brand-new library, and
they were showing off this new library, as you know, China gets
involved. And right next to him was the Chinese ambassador.
And some years ago when we went to go see him at a codel,
he was trying to keep China--I guess he felt that the U.S. was
not providing the support, and guess who is right there with
him. And that, I can name country after country. You know what
they are doing down there.
So, you know, just showing up, and I know you all are doing
that. We are working our Guard also, our State Guard, that, you
know, we have our relationships. But I just want to make sure--
we got so many problems across the world, but we cannot wake up
one of these days and right across our southern border, you
know, we see the, you know, the work that China, and Russia to
an extent, but mainly China is doing down there. So we
appreciate that and the focus that you all can provide with
that.
Secretary Austin. To the point that you are making, sir, it
does require not only the tremendous efforts of the military
but also a whole-of-government approach. And so, you know, a
few dollars spent in the right places or invested in the right
places can certainly buy us credibility and goodwill, access
that is very important to us, and also displace some other
elements that would want to enter that space as well.
Mr. Cuellar. Yes, sir. Thank you. Thank you so much.
I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Calvert. I thank the gentleman.
I would point out too, to Mr. Cuellar--and we share the
same concern on Mexico being in NORTHCOM--the decision of
putting Israel into CENTCOM turned, I think, to be the correct
decision. Obviously, the coordination between Jordan, UAE, and
other countries within that region proved very valuable during
this last encounter with Iran.
I think the same thing could happen if we could work out
some kind of agreement to put Mexico into SOUTHCOM.
With that, I recognize Mr. Carter.

DIALOGUE BETWEEN U.S. AND CHINESE MILITARIES

Mr. Carter. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And welcome. Very proud of the service each of you give to
our country.
General, I also understand you had a meeting with the Prime
Minister of--or the Minister of National Defense for the PRC,
or a conversation at least, yesterday. Can you talk about the
call and how it went? And are there plans to continue dialogues
between our militaries? And what efforts are we taking to
address the unsafe, risky behaviors of the PRC military and
prevent conflict in the region?
Secretary Austin. Well, thank you, sir. This is very
important to us, and I think we have seen--across our
governments, we have seen a number of engagements over the past
several months, including Secretary of State, Secretary of
Treasury, the National Security Advisor. So we are engaging at
a number of levels.
This is the first time that I have had the opportunity to
engage the new Minister of Defense. And, of course, its
predecessor, we never had an opportunity to talk, and that was
very disappointing, even though we reached out a number of
times.
You have heard me say, sir, that I think it is critical
that great powers continue to maintain open lines of
communication, because if we are operating in the same areas,
if, you know--there are a number of things that can happen that
could quickly spiral out of control. And the inability to talk
to senior leadership and make sure that, you know, we have the
ability to dial down tension I think is really, really
important.
So the initial engagement, I think, was really good, and we
spent an hour talking to each other, and I hope to continue
that at some point in the future.
And, again, the things that we are interested in is making
sure that, number one, we dial back the unsafe activity that we
see in the region, you know, the unsafe intercepts of our
aircraft and ships, and also the aggressive behavior that we
see in the region against our allies and partners. And a good
example is what we just saw with the Philippines there at
Second Thomas Shoal. So we talked about a number of things
during that conversation, and it has been pretty widely
reported.
But, again, the most important thing to me, sir, is that
that dialogue is there. Those communication lines are now
opening up again, and we are going to try to do everything we
can to maintain those open lines of communication.
Mr. Carter. Thank you for that.

PACIFIC DETERRENCE INITIATIVE FUNDING

So your budget is based on strategy. The fiscal year 2025
budget includes $9.9 billion for the PDI. However, there are
concerns that we are not investing fast enough in the region.
Could we be moving faster with investments in that region
or do you feel we are doing enough in our investments we are
making? Are they going to be enough to deter China?
Secretary Austin. Thank you, sir. And let me again thank
you for your support over the years for PDI.
You are right, sir, we are asking you for $9.1 billion in
this 2025 budget. Over the last couple years, we have asked you
for some $20 billion-plus in support of PDI. We are investing
in those things that we can--that are achievable, you know,
things that we can actually accomplish in the time period that
we want to accomplish them in, in the near term. So improving
infrastructure, enabling our forces to be forward position in
theater, making sure that we have the ability to continue to
conduct exercises, and invest in the right things.
I think, you know, there are always things that we--
additional things that we can go after, but I think we have
made the right choices in investing in things that we can
actually achieve here in the near term.
Mr. Carter. Well, thank you. I visited that region once. I
am going to do it again probably in August. I have real
concerns. So thank you very much.
Mr. Calvert. I thank the gentleman.
I would like to briefly pause the proceedings to recognize
our newest member of the subcommittee. My friend from
Tennessee, Chuck Fleischmann, just joined us.
Chuck was chairing his own hearing over in Energy and Water
Subcommittee with the Army Corps of Engineers this morning--
good luck with them--so he couldn't be here this morning.
But, Chuck, welcome to the Defense Subcommittee. Pleased
that Chairman Cole appointed you. I look forward to benefiting
from your dedication and knowledge. Welcome aboard.
Mr. Fleischmann. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. It is a
privilege.
Mr. Calvert. Thank you.
With that, I recognize Mr. Aguilar.

SUSTAINMENT OF UKRAINE'S DEFENSES

Mr. Aguilar. Thank you, Chairman Calvert.
Mr. Secretary, many of us in Congress are committed to
passing this national security supplemental. Ukraine, Israel,
Taiwan, giving our allies the security assistance that they
need to combat the threats that you have discussed posed by
Russia, the PRC, and violent extremist actors that threaten
global peace and stability. We have been asking for this vote
for a number of months, in light of what the chairman of the
full committee said.
And I would just like to offer to the chairman of the full
committee, it is our hope, and our side genuinely hopes, that
we have an opportunity to vote on this this week, and that
other extraneous pieces of this aren't part of it, so from a
speed perspective we can deliver this aid as quickly and as
soon as possible. It would be unfortunate if that was held up
with other additional votes that weren't germane to our
national security and the importance of helping our allies.
General Cavoli told the authorizers earlier this week in
open session that the side that can't shoot back loses. If
Ukraine cannot shoot back to take out drones, they won't be
able to hold the line, and Putin could be able to take more
land.
The U.S. is obviously the main supplier of air defense and
artillery shells.
Mr. Secretary, is it fair to say, if we don't pass the
national security funding, that we can't provide those
artillery shells to help combat Russia? And from a timeliness
perspective, can you put a finer point on what the next few
weeks means for our ally in Ukraine?
Secretary Austin. You know, what we have done is try to
invest in our industrial base to increase our capacity to
produce, you know, artillery munitions and other things. And so
what we have asked for in the supplemental, some of that is
focused on increasing capacity in the industrial base. And if
we fail to do that, then it is very difficult for us to keep
pace with the requirements there.
In terms of, you know, what happens going forward and how
long Ukraine will be able to sustain its efforts, I think we
are already seeing things on the battlefield begin to shift a
bit in terms of--in Russia's favor. We are seeing them make
incremental gains. We are seeing Ukrainians be challenged in
terms of holding the line. They are doing a very good job, a
credible job, but in order to continue to do that, they are
going to need, you know, the right materials, the right
munitions, the weapons to be able to do that.
So passing this supplemental is absolutely critical, and
it--and our request is that we pass it as quickly as possible,
because time matters. And Putin, again, is trying to exploit
this time period where there is doubt created about the U.S.'
resolve.

EFFECTIVENESS OF THE PACIFIC DETERRENCE INITIATIVE

Mr. Aguilar. Thank you, Mr. Secretary.
General, I wanted to give you an opportunity to--kind of
building off of what Judge Carter's question about the PDI.
Aside from obviously the importance of the national security
requests that we have been talking about, all of us have been
pleased to see the Pacific Deterrence Initiative and the
European Deterrence Initiative contained within this proposal.
Can you elaborate on the effectiveness and how the
Department and how you plan to implement plans to execute
funding for the PDI?
General Brown. As the Secretary described, the PDI is going
to allow us to build out the capability within the region so we
can posture our forces. So some of that is in MILCON, military
construction. Some of it is in weapons capability. It is also
things we can do to work with our allies and partners.
And I will just tell you, I was the director of operations
for United States Air Force in Europe, and I got there the week
after Russia went into Crimea, and watched how the European
Defense Initiative came about to better posture ourselves for
today's current events.
I think the PDI will do the same thing in ensuring we are
doing all the things to prepare ourselves for a potential
future conflict. And the key here is to be so good at what we
do that we deter a future conflict, and this is where PDI is
going to help us be able to do that.
Mr. Aguilar. Thank you. Thank you, General.
I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Calvert. Well, we will all have a chance to vote on the
supplemental on Saturday night.
With that, Mr. Diaz-Balart.

HOMESTEAD AIR FORCE BASE

Mr. Diaz-Balart. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
And, gentlemen, thank you for your service.
I really have one point and then two questions. So first
point is that history is full of dismal failures that are never
forgotten; you know, peace in our time. After Putin invades
Georgia, that infamous reset by the then Obama-Biden-Clinton
administration.
And then recently, Mr. Secretary, I have seen a very catchy
word that has been used to try to dissuade our adversaries and
Iran's proxies: don't, don't, don't.
Unfortunately, that has been met by another--I guess our
adversaries have been using another phrase, which is ``just do
it'', and they have been doing it. It is pretty evident that
they feel that they can do so with hardly any real
consequences.
So here is the question--and this may require maybe a SCIF
to talk about it. First question is, are there going to be
serious consequences to those who did not listen to all of the
don't, don't, don't, don't words from the administration and
have done it? And including, obviously, we know that some of
our GIs have died. Question number one.
Question number two is this. At present, the current future
year's defense program indicates that the Air Force Reserve
plans is to divest in the F-16 program at Homestead Air Reserve
Base through 2028.
I don't have to tell you all of how China feels emboldened,
and they are making strides in this hemisphere, in our own
hemisphere. And while they don't have a base yet, they do have
things that are starting to look like bases. You know, refer to
Argentina as an example.
And so Homestead is the closest defense against any
potential future hostile action.
So in light of this divestiture plan, can you confirm
whether we--I can't even say that--recapitalization efforts are
being considered to ensure that the continuity and enhancement
of air combat capabilities at this key facility, shouldn't we
look at, frankly, Homestead's mission with F-35s rather than
continuing with the older F-16 Post Block upgrades?
Again, we use Homestead--we always think of Homestead Air
Reserve as a place that is essential for emergencies, for
hurricanes, et cetera. But I will argue that when you look at
what is happening in this hemisphere, I think we need to be a
little bit more concerned about what Russia, China, et cetera,
is doing in this hemisphere.
So two questions, and I appreciate hearing from you all.
Secretary Austin. Thank you, sir. Well, first of all,
Homestead is an important base because of its location, and it
has--you know, gives us reach that I think it is pretty
important. And so Homestead is going to--the plan for it is to
be in the inventory for some time.
So if you are asking as to whether or not we are closing
down Homestead, the answer is, no, that is not in the current
plans.
And then I will let the Air Force speak to some of the
specifics there in terms about--in terms of what is planned for
the future.

CONSEQUENCES OF ADVERSARIAL ACTIONS

Regarding consequences and what people have learned from
what has happened here in the Middle East here recently, you
know, Iran did launch an unprecedented attack against Israel
from its--from Iran with an unprecedented number of weapons.
What it should learn from that is that not only does Israel
have the ability to defend itself against significant
challenges, but its allies--principally the U.S.--has
significant capabilities as well.
And so what you saw come together there in defense of
Israel, I think, was quite remarkable. And, again, that doesn't
happen at the 11th hour. That happens because, you know,
countries are working together, making sure that we have the
right procedures and processes in place to enable us to do
that. And the skill of our pilots and the ability to pass
information between countries and share insights on battle
space, I think all of that came together the way it was
supposed to come together.
And General Kurilla and others have been working on this
issue for quite some time, and I think you saw some of the
outcomes on Saturday night.
But what Iran should learn is that, number one, their
assumptions are wrong, and, you know, number two, that, you
know, we are going to do what is necessary to help in the
defense of Israel.
Mr. Diaz-Balart. But, Mr. Secretary, I am running out of
time, but the key here, though, is that the administration,
you, the President, said don't, don't, don't, don't, don't to a
number--it wasn't just Iran. It was their proxies. And what
they did is, did, did, did, did, did.
And what I would like to hear from you--again, probably
this may not be the place--what are going to be the specific
consequences for those who basically thumbed their nose at the
President of the United States, at you, at others in the
administration?
When you said don't, they said did. And I hope that we are
able to see some serious consequences, because otherwise, with
all due respect, just like peace in our time, just like the
reset, that is going to be one of those words that will be kept
for history's sake as, frankly, a very sad joke.
I am out of time. I yield back.
Mr. Calvert. I thank the gentleman.
Mr. Kilmer.

NAVAL HOSPITAL BREMERTON

Mr. Kilmer. Thank you, Chairman.
And thank you, Mr. Secretary, for being with us.
Naval Hospital Bremerton in my district closed its labor
and delivery unit in April of 2022, as a result of the military
health system downsizing several military treatment facility
capabilities and staff.
In my neck of the woods, the local healthcare network has
simply been unable to manage the additional patient load, and
it is unrealistic to have our servicemembers travel all the way
to Madigan Army Hospital, which is 43 miles away, not to
mention having to cross a toll bridge, for consistent general
and maternal care.
Without continued pressure on DHA to expedite reassigning
additional personnel to the naval hospital and reopening the
labor and delivery unit, healthcare for our sailors and their
families will continue to deteriorate. These shortages are
unacceptable and dangerous at a critical time when the Navy
plans to expand its missions and maintenance in the region and
when the DOD recently announced the stabilization of the
military health system by bringing patients and families from
the heavily referred off-base providers back to understaffed
MTFs.
With this in mind, have you discussed the impacts of these
personnel shortages on our sailors' readiness with DHA?
Secretary Austin. We have, sir, and we have also discussed
it with the services. And to the point that you are making, we
do need to make sure that we invest in our healthcare system by
making sure that we have the right personnel on board in the
right numbers to be able to provide that service that our
servicemembers and families expect.
Mr. Kilmer. So with that in mind, do you plan on urging DHA
to reassign personnel to Naval Hospital Bremerton to respond to
the significant degradation of care in Kitsap County?
Secretary Austin. We are looking at rebalancing our
footprint across the board. And, of course, that is a part of
it, but we are taking a holistic look at this. And as you know,
we complied with congressional guidance in terms of
consolidation of resources and that sort of stuff. But as we
look at this and as we endeavor to make sure that our families
and our--our troops and our families are getting the right kind
of healthcare, it requires that we relook some of the
assumptions and relook some of the manpower allocations that we
have made in the past. And we are doing that.
Mr. Kilmer. I am making a personal plea that you look at
this, specifically related to Naval Hospital Bremerton and
labor and delivery. I can tell you stories that I have heard
from sailors and from their families that are heartbreaking,
and it is as a consequence of these decisions that have been
made. I understand tough decisions have to be made, and
sometimes they are the wrong decisions, and we can make this
right.
I will tell you we are also working on a bill called the
Midwives Act, which would direct the DOD to establish a 5-year
pilot to evaluate the use of professional midwives under the
TRICARE program to help alleviate some of these challenges. I
hope that we can work with you and your team to secure that
bill through the NDAA this year and just wanted you to be aware
of it.

PUBLIC SHIPYARD MITIGATIONS

With the time I have left, I wanted to talk to you about
our public shipyards, obviously a critical part of maintaining
the readiness of our submarines and our carrier fleets.
Puget Sound Naval Shipyard is in my district. We have
discussed the importance of the Shipyard Infrastructure
Optimization Program, which is a multiyear, multibillion dollar
effort to upgrade our four public shipyards.
Puget faced significant seismic risk and had to go to work
quickly to repair three of the highest priority dry docks this
past year.
My question for you is, how can Congress provide the
resources to ensure that the SIOP remains on track while also
addressing ongoing seismic mitigations? And, additionally, how
close is the Navy to a decision point on the construction of
the multi-mission dry dock, M2D2, understanding how this is
going to impact programming and planning for the necessary
work?
Secretary Austin. Well, in terms of what Congress can do to
help us stay on track, I think we have already talked a great
deal about that, and that is getting the on-time
appropriations. Even though, as you pointed out, we have
invested--we have decided to invest billions of dollars into
SIOP, it doesn't matter unless you get those appropriations on
time and you can start the construction and that sort of stuff
in a timely fashion. So your help in supporting that I think
would be much appreciated.
In terms of the Navy's decision process, I will let the
Navy speak to where they are specifically and how close they
are to a decision, and I will make sure that Secretary Del Toro
and his team get up to brief you on where they are.
Mr. Kilmer. Okay. Thank you, Mr. Secretary.
And thank you, Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Calvert. I thank the gentleman.
Mr. Joyce.

CURRENT INDUSTRIAL CAPACITY LIMITS

Mr. Joyce. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Gentlemen, thank you for being here today.
Secretary Austin, I would like to follow up a little bit on
what my colleague, Mr. Womack, brought up before, and just
wondering, what are the current industrial capacity limits for
producing key weapons and equipment, including precision-guided
munitions? And how quickly could industrial capacity for
producing key weapons in that equipment be increased?
Secretary Austin. Clearly, there are limits in each line
of--each munition, each weapon system is different. And we have
worked with industry on those critical items, things like
Javelin, artillery munitions--or artillery pieces, to expand
capacity and to increase production rate as rapidly as
possible.
Because of a number of challenges, this is not
instantaneous, and there are some clear lessons learned here.
If we want to be able to expand rapidly in the future, we need
to think about how we are doing things and whether or not there
are certain processes in the overall system that we can
compress, you know, where there are things that we can buy
ahead to be able to have on hand so that we can rapidly expand
production. Those are the kinds of things that we are working
with industry on. But it will vary by munition, by weapon
system.
But, you know, what you have done in terms of providing us
additional procurement authority, multiyear procurement
authority has been very, very helpful in sending the right
signal to the industrial base. And, again, I think we are going
to need that support that is baked into the supplemental to be
able to continue our work in expanding the industrial base
capacity there.
But it is critical. This is work that me and my Acquisition
and Sustainment Under Secretary are focused on routinely, and
we are also working with allies and partners to get them to
expand their industrial base as well. You know, our Acquisition
and Sustainment Under Secretary meets routinely with European--
his European counterparts to talk over issues of, you know, how
we can consolidate efforts and expand lines of production and
that sort of stuff. And that is having some effect, but, again,
it is not instantaneous. It is going to take time.
Mr. Joyce. Thank you. And certainly as we deplete our
resources to help our allies, we want to make sure we have
our--that readiness available for you at all times.

CHINA'S ILLEGAL SOVEREIGN MARITIME CLAIMS

General Brown, what has been taking place over in China? We
continue to see them continue to make illegal and illegitimate
sovereign claims over maritime areas in autonomous regions. In
the South and East China Seas, China is conducting island-
building campaigns to expand their exclusive economic zones,
and they have militarized those islands with new ports,
airstrips, bunkers, radars, and jamming stations. They are
deploying advance anti-ship and anti-aircraft missiles.
How are we working in concert with our allies and partners
to counter China's continual steps into acquiring an increasing
presence in areas where they have no legitimate or legal claim?
General Brown. Well, the best way for us to do it is to
challenge those claims, and it is the operations we do
throughout the South China Sea, the East China Sea, with many
of our allies and partners. A good example of that is how we
support the Philippines and resupply the Second Thomas Shoal.
It is the air operations and the maritime operations we do
throughout the region.
I would also highlight to you, having spent time as the
commander of Pacific Air Forces and watched over the past
really 6 years the growing strength of our partnerships with
many of our allies and partners and how they are adjusting
their visions, their strategies, and their National Defense
Strategies to align, to counter what the PRC is doing in the
region. And all that together is a way for us to push back. And
it is not only what we do from a military standpoint but also
with the rest of our government and the other governments, from
an economic standpoint, and how that plays into--to counter
what the PRC is doing in that part of the world.
Mr. Joyce. Thank you. I yield back, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Calvert. I thank the gentleman.
Mr. Case.

INDOPACOM READINESS AND MODERNIZATION

Mr. Case. Thank you.
Mr. Secretary, I appreciated the dialogue you had with my
colleagues earlier on the Pacific Deterrence Initiative. I have
been asking questions in our hearings this year to try to
figure out what PDI actually means, and I have to admit, I am a
little more confused than when I started.
If it is meant as a itemization or a confirmation of focus
on China and the Indo-Pacific, clearly $9.9 billion is not
that. So it is not supposed to be a summary of how good we are
doing in terms of a budget against the China threat and our big
picture response. If it is meant to be kind of a--more of a
short-term laundry list for things that we need--isolated
things that we need to be doing in conjunction with ancillary
to a specific part of our budget, I can understand that.
But when I take a look at the PDI list that we have for
this year, clearly some things, I think, fit into that
category, but others--for example, weapons acquisition--it
seems to me should be kind of more of a base budget as opposed
to PDI quantified.
So it is not necessarily a question, just an observation,
and I am not sure what it means nowadays, and I would love to
work with--you know, we have had--some answers have been to the
effect of, well, you know, it can mean a lot of things to a lot
of people. It is accounting. If it had an OCO-style component
to it, if there was more flexibility in the Indo-Pacific region
to apply it to things like campaigning, maybe it would work
better.
But I think it is kind of a work in progress, and I am not
sure it is exactly matching what we are trying to achieve. But
that is more of a rhetorical statement.
My question has to do with this comment. I think we all
realize in spades that wherever in the world it is, we can't do
this alone, we shouldn't do this alone, we are not going to do
this alone. And we need to have our partners and allies be full
contributors along the way, full participants.
We certainly have seen this in Europe, as you pointed out
in your opening statements, and we have seen a real increase in
the Indo-Pacific as well.
And an important component of that, I think we would both
agree, is, I guess what we euphemistically call campaigning, so
the sum total of the connections that we develop with other
militaries throughout the region, throughout the world, joint
training exercises, interoperability, that whole range.
I wondered if you might just give some comment to how that
is going with specific regard to the Indo-Pacific, where we
clearly have needs with key allies, such as Japan and Korea and
the Philippines, of course here this week, Australia, New
Zealand, and beyond. But also, I was concerned with whether
this budget does give sufficient attention to the overall area
of connections between our military, strengthening those bonds,
giving them the resources, the tools, the training, the
incentives, to undertake a greater share of the overall
defense.
I did note that, for example, in INDOPACOM's unfunded
priorities, they came in, one of their highest unfunded
priorities was about half a billion for campaigning.
So I just wondered, if that is how INDOPACOM feels about
campaigning--and I value their input--why didn't that get into
the base budget, or, you know, where does campaigning stack up?
How do you think it is going, and how do you think we fund it
properly?
Secretary Austin. I thank you, sir. As the gentleman
indicated earlier, you know, these operations and exercises are
fundamental to our readiness, and you see us investing some
$147 billion into readiness. That is a decision that we made in
light of the fact that there is a cap on the top line. So we
chose to invest in readiness and some modernization and also
taking care of our people.
In terms of the kinds of things that we are doing in the
region, you live in the region, so you are witnessing this
firsthand. We probably have the best relationship that we have
had with Japan in a very, very long time. We see Japan
investing in a significant way in its own defense. We see them
investing in long-range strike and other things, and they are
looking to work with us to co-produce certain items.
We have a great relationship with the Republic of Korea,
and we are working with the RoK and Japan in a trilateral
fashion to ensure that we can share missile early-warning data,
and that is going really, really well. And we saw recently the
two leaders of those countries conduct a summit with the
President here in the United States.
The Philippines. 3 years ago, the Philippines were about
ready to decide to not allow our troops to remain in the
Philippines. You fast-forward to today and we have probably one
of the best relationships with the Philippines that we have
seen in a long time. And we just had President Marcos here,
and, again, we opened up four new sites where our military can
work with his military on a number of issues. And those sites
are in addition to what we already had.
Australia. We just, you know, put in play a generational
initiative here that I think is going to continue to provide
tremendous capability to our allies in the region and to us,
quite frankly. This is the AUKUS initiative. Again, this
provides Australia with a nuclear-powered, conventionally armed
submarine capability. It will take years to put all the things
in place, but we are moving out, and that is--that is
progressing very, very well. And we are also working with
Australia to do a number of things in terms of potentially co-
producing a long-range strike and some other things.
India. We have, you know, a great relationship with India.
We recently have enabled India to produce jet weapon--jet
engine in India, and that is--that is kind of revolutionary.
And that will provide a great capability to them. And we are
also producing a--co-producing an armored vehicle with India.
So all of these things, when you add them up, are probably
more than we have seen happen in that region in a very, very
long time. And they all promote interoperability, and they all
help to increase, you know, our ability to respond to a number
of different things. But, again, these are real meaningful
steps that I think we have taken in the region that I think a
lot of people are not aware of. But we have made tremendous
progress, and we will continue to do so.
Mr. Calvert. Thank you, Mr. Secretary.
Mr. Garcia.

JUNIOR ENLISTED PAY

Mr. Garcia. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And thank you all for, the gentlemen, for your service to
our beautiful country.
General Brown, congratulations. Pretty good for a Viper guy
to be where you are right now, so----
I see our biggest near-term tactical threat is our open
southern border, and obviously the biggest strategic threat,
which I treat as an existential threat to our country, being
China, as well as our debt, but that is not your fault.
I don't think we have a capability gap. I think we have the
high end exquisite technology in most domains, but I do see us
losing the lead or having lost the lead in several domains in
terms of capacity.
And I am encouraged by hearing, I think we are all aligned
on the problem set and the challenges that we have. We have
some, obviously, readiness and end-strength issues, especially
in executing and finishing this pivot to the Pacific that we
have been talking about for, what, almost 20 years now. We need
to actually execute that, complete that, and deter war before
China gets aggressive against Taiwan.
And I think the bottom line is, is that whether the number
is $825 billion or $850 billion, we have got to make it behave
like a trillion dollars, so relative to what we are trying to
accomplish here and get those efficiencies.
I think any investments--and you are spot on, the CRs are
the most deleterious move that we can do in that regard. But I
think, beyond the CRs, if we are going to make investments in
our industrial base, we also have to make sure that we are
streamlining contracting and valuing speed as a measure of
merit out of the Pentagon. And I don't think we have that right
now.
You all know my number one priority is our troops,
especially our junior enlisted, E-1 through E-6. They are the
most precious, they are the most potent, and they are the most
powerful weapon system that we have. Without them, the B-21 is
nothing, the Columbia-class submarine is nothing, and our
nuclear triad is futile.
So last year, we missed our recruitment numbers, retention
numbers by a net 41,000 personnel, recruits across all the
services. I was encouraged that the President signed my
military licensing, Spouse Licensing Relief Act, into law, and
I think that helps.
And this committee did God's work last year. We passed, out
of HAC-D, a bill that took the starting salary for an E-1 from
$22,000 to $31,000, which is the equivalent of $15 per hour.
Unfortunately, the Senate stripped that out in their version,
and the NDAA ended up coming back to us without that pay raise.
And so recognizing the challenges that we have, recognizing
that our troops are our most precious weapon system--and I want
to push on this issue of base pay again because, right now,
even with the raise that we got in the NDAA last fiscal year,
the one we just signed, the E-1 is now starting at $12.80 an
hour.
In California, we just started a $20-an-hour minimum wage.
Okay. So for the DOD to be competitive in most States, but
especially in States like California and Virginia, it is very
difficult to keep up. BAH and BAS aren't keeping pace with the
market values.
And so I would like to submit, Mr. Chairman, for the
record, a review of the basic pay table in support of the 14th
QRMC, without objection.
Mr. Calvert. Without objection.
Mr. Calvert. We are going to stick to our 5 minutes because
the Secretary has to leave, so----
Mr. Garcia. Okay. Sorry.
What I am asking for, Mr. Secretary, is a commitment to
help get our troops above the poverty line, above that $15
minimum wage. The President threatened to veto the HAC-D bill
because of this pay raise that we put in our HAC-D bill. He was
citing the QRMC as the reason. He wanted to wait for that. The
QRMC has come out and validated the findings and said that our
HAC-D bill is the right path forward.
Can we get a commitment from you that you will help us get
our junior enlisted E-1 starting salary above $15 per hour in
the next year or so?
Secretary Austin. Well, as you would guess, you know, this
is a very important issue to me, and so taking care of our
people is something that I am always focused on.
I want to thank you and your colleagues for supporting a
5.2 percent pay raise for our troops. That is the largest pay
raise in 20 years. And before that, the year before that, we
had a 4.6 percent pay raise.
And in this budget, we are asking you for a 4.5 percent pay
raise. So my goal is to reduce the costs that our troops and
families are facing and increase the resources. Whether it is
childcare, whether it is prices in the commissary, a number of
things that we have done--and you are right, BAH is a thing
that we are focused on to try to make sure that we are coming
close to keeping pace and keeping pace. But the market in
certain areas is pretty dynamic, and it is no easy task to keep
pace, but we do remain focused on this.
Mr. Calvert. Thank you, Mr. Secretary.
If you can get us a written response on that. I know you
have committed to getting us a compensation review to us as
soon as possible. We would love to have it as soon as possible
so we can review that for the fiscal year 2025 proposal.
With that, Ms. Kaptur, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

COMMUNICATING RUSSIA'S THREAT

Ms. Kaptur. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Sorry to be late. We
had our own hearing.
Secretary Austin, great to see you. Welcome.
Your written testimony rightly states, ``The world of chaos
and conquest that Putin seeks--one in which autocrats think
they can rewrite borders by force--would leave the United
States far less secure,'' unquote.
You understand what is fully at stake at this pivotal
moment in Ukraine, Central Europe, and, indeed, the free world.
Generations of immigrants from Central Europe sought
security on our shores. I am a descendent blessed by the
survival of our grandparents' struggle to escape Bolsheviks,
Russia. Yet many Americans appear not to fully know the history
of Central Europe and what is at stake today.
What are you and the Department of Defense doing to better
communicate to the American people the gravity of the current
real threat to the free world represented by an armed Russia,
the third largest military in the world?
And then secondly, do you have any concerns that the
defense medicine in your department could be compromised by the
complete growing dependence of our country on imports of
pharmaceutical ingredients from foreign countries, some of
which are adversaries?
Thank you.
Secretary Austin. So in terms of what we are doing to
communicate on this issue, we seize every opportunity to point
out how important this is to us in terms of our national
security, how important this is to us for our defense
industrial base, and the fact that Ukraine matters not just to
Europe but to the entire world.
This is about the rules-based international order. And,
again, as you have heard me say a couple times this morning,
the rest of the world is watching, and they are watching to see
whether or not the United States of America is going to be a
dependable partner or not. And if it is not, then it is going
to change their behavior.
If it is one of our adversaries, they will feel emboldened.
If it is one of our allies or partners, they will then question
whether or not they can depend on us, you know, when times are
tough. And so this is really important to us.
But it is--you know, I think that Ukraine has done a
commendable job in terms of, you know, protecting its sovereign
territory, taking back some of the territory that the Russians
have taken, and holding their own. And they have done that
because of the security assistance that we and 50 other
countries have provided to them.
They haven't asked us to fight for them. They just ask for
help in terms of security assistance. And so I think the right
thing to do is continue to do that.

DEFENSE MEDICINE AND PHARMACEUTICALS

Ms. Kaptur. On defense medicine and the pharmaceuticals
being used in theatre by our own soldiers and the purchase by
the Department of Defense of pharmaceuticals, what are you
doing to assure their purity and manufacture in this country?
Secretary Austin. Well, you know, the health of our troops,
again, is important to us. And if there is a threat here of us
not having the, you know, pharmaceuticals that are up to speed,
then certainly that is something that we will delve into. But I
will get back to you on that issue.
Ms. Kaptur. Thank you very much. And thank you for your
service.
Mr. Calvert. I thank the gentlelady.
Mr. Ellzey.

EW AND AEW NEED

Mr. Ellzey. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you, gentlemen,
for being here.
He left but I want to point out that Steve Womack and I
don't like each other very much on one day and that is Army-
Navy day. But we are very good friends other than that.
I would argue with General Brown that my Super Hornet will
kick your tail in a Fighting Falcon. I know you like to call it
a Viper. But for most days, and as it is today, we should all
be united.
Mr. Secretary, you and I on social issues probably don't
agree on a single thing. But today is April 17, 1940, in my
mind, and I am on your side, because the winds of war are
already blowing overseas in a way they haven't in 80 years.
We have four dictatorships, all of which are involved in
genocide. Iran, genocide of the Jews. Russia, genocide of the
Ukrainians. China, genocide of the Uyghurs. And North Korea
wants to redefine their relationship with the south through
armed combat.
I wish it was April 17, 1946, when we could talk about
cuts, but we can't.
Furthermore, I would argue that we are already at war on
our southern border against the cartels because they are
killing wartime numbers of Americans, 200 a day from fentanyl
poisonings, which, in my mind, is a weapon of mass destruction,
on a chemical basis aided by China, controlled by the cartels.
In addition, we are losing that many number of people that
you are trying to recruit that need to be going to the police
force, to the Reserves, to teaching, to having families in this
country. You are in a struggle against a group that is being
killed at wartime numbers, not seen since World War II.
We should be on a wartime footing in this country right
now. So the border is an issue, but those four regimes that I
just talked about make it look like it is April 17, 1940.
And we have been fortunate enough to see a constellation of
stars on shoulders this week, and what they have all told us
from the EUCOM commander, he says he needs EW and AEW. They are
not building any 18 Growlers anymore. We need more of them. The
Israelis need tankers. I talked about that in June when we went
there before October and talked about that with the prime
minister.
INDOPACOM and the Marines need contested logistics
capabilities with C-130Js and their landing ship medium.
In Ukraine, most of the money that we are going to spend
goes to weapons for us.
You know, we won World War II with Liberty ships, and this
LSM that the Marine Corps needs 35 of and identified that in
2022 would have cost $100 million a piece. But requirements got
in the way, and here we are 2 years later, we still don't have
them. They have got ballooned up to $350 million because of the
requirements office. And we won't get them until 2027, and
that's assuming we pass these spending bills.
If we go on a CR, now we are in 2028 when we have
identified that Xi Jinping wants to act before 2027. So in the
supply and demand and equip realm, I would say that our
acquisitions process is broken. We need to be on wartime
footing. We need to bypass some of the requirements that we
have. Otherwise, we would have had a Presidential helo by now.
We would have had an LSM by now. F-35 wouldn't have been so
costly, and our newest version of the aircraft carriers
wouldn't be 3 years behind and billions of dollars over budget.
Because I am a little worried about what we have right now.
We are not ready for the war that looks to be looming, and I am
interested in preventing that.
So I would like to hear from you, General Brown, how you
feel about the EW need, because they are not making any more
Growlers, but the line is about to close on the Super Hornet.
If we lose an aircraft carrier and we don't have any Growler
capability, all that EW need goes away. We are losing our E-3
capability.
So how do you feel about the EW, AEW need right now?
General Brown. Well, let me start out with what you just
laid out as far as the sense of urgency that is required and
understanding where the threat is. And EW is an area that we
have watched that threat increase, and we haven't had to deal
with it for the past couple of decades, and we need to up our
game in this area.
Doesn't actually have to be a Growler, but I do think we do
need to approach this with seriousness on our focus on EW, on
tankers, on munitions, the range of capability and capacity
that we need in order to be able to address all the challenges
you highlighted.
Mr. Ellzey. Thank you for that answer.
And as far as the LSM goes, we need the high priority for
that because that is specifically needed for the Marine Corps.
The requirements office needs to drop its opposition and the
raising of cost because we don't have the money to deal with
that.
We won on Liberty ships that didn't have requirements,
didn't have shock trials. We need to move forward.
In the time I have remaining, if Article 5 happens and we
lose Ukraine, and they step one foot in Poland, the FRA is out
the door.
The investments we are making in Ukraine are small. For the
return on investment that we are getting for the Ukrainians to
fight on our behalf is a small amount of money, and they are
doing it for us. The last thing I want is for Americans to die
on a hill in Poland when the Ukrainians are willing to do it
for themselves with our help.
I yield back.
Mr. Calvert. I thank the gentleman.
Mr. Fleischmann.

NNSA DEFENSE PROGRAMS

Mr. Fleischmann. Mr. Chairman, I want to thank you again
for your kind words welcoming me to this subcommittee.
I want to also thank Secretary Austin, General Brown, and
Mr. McCord for their testimony today.
As the chairman alluded to, I chair the Energy and Water
Subcommittee of Appropriations. Ms. Kaptur and I, she is my
ranking member, we just had the Army Corps before us, but we
fund the Department of Energy. And as part of that funding of
the Department of Energy, the NNSA, the National Nuclear
Security Administration, we are responsible for funding our
Nation's nuclear arsenal for the ultimate customer, the
Department of Defense.
And I represent the people of the Third District of
Tennessee, gentlemen. That encompasses the great city of Oak
Ridge, birthplace of the Manhattan Project, Y-12 National
Security Complex. We are also building the uranium processing
facility. So I am working very, very heavily in the nuclear
sector.
In that regard, I am going to address my one question today
dealing with our Nation's nuclear deterrent.
Right now, the NNSA defense programs are intertwined with
the Defense Department's programs replacing all legs of the
triad, and we are thankful for that.
It will come as no surprise that I have concerns, given we
see that Russia has essentially fully recapitalized its nuclear
forces; China rapidly expanding its numbers and fielding a
triad of its own; and the looming prospect, sadly, of a nuclear
Iran. We also face the termination of New START in less than 2
years.
We are entering unchartered territory dealing with
potentially two pure nuclear adversaries as we are in the
middle of recapitalizing our entire deterrent.
My question, gentlemen, is, given this troubling strategic
threat picture, I am interested in hearing your outlook on the
current pace of recapitalization of our nuclear deterrent. Are
there any ways we in Congress can better support the
Department's efforts to meet these increasingly tight
deadlines?
And with that, I will await your response.
Secretary Austin. Well, let me begin by thanking you for
what you have done to date.
As you know, over the course of this administration, we
requested to invest some $149 billion in the modernization of
our nuclear program. It is the bedrock of our defense, in our
nuclear triad here, and I personally believe that all three
legs are important, and I think that we should continue to
invest in the modernization of all three legs.
Now, because of the fact that, you know, we are now faced
with two major nuclear countries or potential adversaries,
conditions have changed. And whether or not we are going to
need to do more in the future is something that we are going to
have to consider.
But I think following through with our current
modernization program is the right thing to do. And again, I
support you for what you are doing to support--I thank you for
what you are doing to support us. And, again, I think we should
maintain course and speed here.
Mr. Fleischmann. Thank you, Mr. Secretary.
And I will say, we work bipartisan. We have the Nuclear
Security Working Group. We work with the NNSA. We want to link
up and work very closely with the Department of Defense so that
we can have them make sure that our ultimate customer, you all,
are pleased with what is going on. We will continue to fund
that I think in a bipartisan and bicameral way.
I will close by saying this. Again, thanks to each and
every one of you all for your tremendous service to our
country. I did mention I represent Oak Ridge. I am very proud
of that great city.
But my home city, which I am not native to, actually, is
Chattanooga, Tennessee. I will let everyone here know that we
are going to be having our 75th uninterrupted Armed Forces Day
Parade.
Mr. Secretary, I know we have reached out to you. I will
ask you to maybe contact me offline in that regard.
Uninterrupted. I would maintain that Chattanooga is
probably the most patriotic city in America. Our veterans are
near and dear to us, as are our great men and women who are
serving our Armed Forces today.
And with that, I will yield back.
Mr. Calvert. I thank the gentleman and thank the gentlelady
from Minnesota for her interest in this and doing the great job
that she does.
And I want to thank all three of you for your service. And
before we conclude, I want to thank you for your testimony.
And also, if you have any--any members who have any
questions for the record, I ask witnesses to respond in a
reasonable period of time.
With that, thank you. The subcommittee is adjourned.

Tuesday, April 30, 2024.

FISCAL YEAR 2025 REQUEST FOR THE NATIONAL GUARD AND RESERVES FORCES

WITNESSES

GENERAL DANIEL R. HOKANSON, CHIEF OF THE NATIONAL GUARD BUREAU,
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
LIEUTENANT GENERAL JODY J. DANIELS, CHIEF OF ARMY RESERVE AND
COMMANDING GENERAL, U.S. ARMY RESERVE COMMAND
VICE ADMIRAL JOHN MUSTIN, CHIEF OF NAVY RESERVE, DEPARTMENT OF THE NAVY
LIEUTENANT GENERAL LEONARD F. ANDERSON, IV, COMMANDER, MARINE FORCES
RESERVE, DEPARTMENT OF THE NAVY
LIEUTENANT GENERAL JOHN P. HEALY, CHIEF OF AIR FORCE RESERVE,
DEPARTMENT OF THE AIR FORCE

Opening Statement of Chairman Calvert

Mr.  Calvert. Good morning. The subcommittee will come to
order.
Today, the subcommittee will receive testimony on fiscal
year 2025 budget requests for the Reserve components of the
United States Armed Forces.
To discuss the budget request and other issues related to
the Reserve components, we welcome our panel, consisting of
General Daniel Hokanson, the Chief of the National Guard
Bureau; Lieutenant General Jody Daniels, the Chief of the Army
Reserve; Vice Admiral John Mustin, the Chief of the Navy
Reserve; Lieutenant General Leonard Anderson, commander of the
Marine Corps Reserve; and Lieutenant General John Healy, the
Chief of the Air Force Reserve.
Welcome to you all and thank you for your years of
distinguished service. We are looking forward to your testimony
today.
The Reserve components provide our Nation with a critical
force multiplier in a time of war and indispensable national
response force in times of peace.
We all know that the National Guard is our Nation's 911
response when it comes to natural disasters. In California, the
Guard's firefighting capabilities save lives every year. But
the Guard is also desperately trying to repel an invasion
across our southern border. This invasion, encouraged by
President Biden's failed immigration and border policies, is
bringing deadly fentanyl and criminals into our communities.
While most Americans are aware of the Guard's domestic
responsibilities, they should also be aware of the great work
the Guard is doing internationally. Working with our partners
around the world through the critical State Partnership
Program, the Guard is enhancing the security of our allies.
Our Reserves also demonstrated their importance during the
periods of peacetime peril. At the height of the pandemic, our
Reserve forces deployed around the country to augment
overwhelmed civilian medical personnel in places like New York
City.
So for all that you do, we salute you. But to ensure that
our Reserve components can continue their great work, they must
be adequately resourced, especially given the dangerous global
environment we find ourselves in.
Unfortunately, the President's budget has failed to request
the resources necessary to support our Guard and Reserve. While
inflation is running over 3 percent, the overall funding
request for the Reserve components in fiscal year 2025 for
programs under the subcommittee's jurisdiction is nearly 2
percent lower than fiscal year 2024. This equates to a
reduction of over $1 billion. While there are some Reserve
components that receive increases in this budget over last
year, those appear to have come at the expense of other Reserve
components.
Now, some may argue that this strategy of robbing Peter to
pay Paul was made necessary as a result of the caps imposed by
the Fiscal Responsibility Act. However, the President has
ignored those caps when it comes to nondefense spending.
One need only look at the National Guard's unfunded
priority list as an example of the woeful inadequacy of the
President's budget request. The fiscal year 2024 list of
unfunded priorities totaled $662 million for programs under
this subcommittee's jurisdiction. For fiscal year 2025, that
list has grown to a whopping $2.4 billion. That is a 263
percent increase in unfunded priorities.
While the President's budget is obviously deficit, let me
be clear that this committee's strong support for the Guard and
Reserve is unwavering. In fact, last year we added $1 billion
above the budget request for the National Guard and Reserve
Equipment Account, and $200 million above the budget request
for the National Guard Counter-Drug Program.
But we need to understand your actual shortfalls. So I will
be interested in hearing from each of you regarding any risk
this budget is posing to mission requirements and the quality-
of-life improvements for your personnel as well as where you
would use this additional funding.
Specifically, I want to hear your perspectives on how
confident you are that you will meet your required end strength
in fiscal year 2025, the impact of NATO's expansion on the
National Guard's State Partnership Program, the challenges
posed to your National Guard units by the F-15EX fielding
timelines, and the timeline for the KC-46A bed-down at March
Air Reserve Base.
I will also be interested in the Guard's perspectives
regarding the proposed move of Guard personnel into the Space
Force, an issue which has generated considerable debate
recently.
With that, I recognize the distinguished ranking member,
Ms. McCollum, for her opening statement and remarks. Thank you.

Opening Remarks of Ms. McCollum

Ms.  McCollum. Well, thank you, Mr. Chair.
I was going to start out saying I agree with all your
remarks, but I have to take just a slight moment to talk about
my disagreement with your remarks about what is happening at
our southern border.
We do need to bring order to the border, but to lay all of
the blame on the current President of the United States I think
shortchanges the reality of how Congress has failed. We have
failed to produce any meaningful legislation to reform our
broken immigration system.
But, Mr. Chair, I couldn't agree with you more on the rest
of your statement about how we need to make sure that the
Reserve and the Guard has the equipment, the training to
fulfill its mission, and to return home safely when called
upon.
I want to welcome each of you before the committee today,
and a very special warm Minnesota welcome to Lieutenant General
Anderson.
General Anderson, it is 47 degrees in Duluth and 48 in
Minnesota. So welcome to steamy D.C. and your first appearance
before the committee.
Our sincere thanks to General Hokanson and Lieutenant
General Daniels and Vice Admiral Mustin for what may be your
last appearances before the committee. So we have got the new
kid on the block. So take lots of notes, Lieutenant General
Anderson.
Each and every one of you have dedicated your life to
service and know how indebted we all feel to you. And on behalf
of the people I represent in the Fourth District, thank you.
Each of your components are a vital part to our national
security. Each of you has personally deployed into areas of
conflict, assisting your Active Component counterparts in a
seamless manner. Thank you for the work that you do in leading
our Guard and Reserve personnel.
Today, I am particularly interested to hear how the
administration's fiscal year 2025 request will enhance your
ability to meet your mission's goals, and if any capability
gaps exist, as the chair pointed out.
Our National Guard and Reserve components are called upon
to support a variety of missions, including humanitarian
missions, the continued support to the southwest border,
overseas operations, and for the Guard in particular, the State
Partnership Program activities, which this committee dearly is
invested in.
It would be helpful to receive an update on the pace of
deployments affecting your troops' morale, readiness, and
retention efforts. It would be helpful for each of you to share
how your budget request will impact the current pace of
operations for each of your services.
Serving your country on top of managing a civilian job, and
in many cases, supporting a big busy family is one of the
highest forms of service. We thank you, and we thank everyone
who serves alongside and under you. You are truly putting
country above self. Thank you for all your efforts. And I look
forward to a productive dialogue today. I thank you for the
courtesy. And I yield back.
Mr.  Calvert. Thank you. General Hokanson, please take 3
minutes for your opening remarks.

Summary Statement of General Hokanson

General  Hokanson. Chairman Calvert, Ranking Member
McCollum, and esteemed members of the subcommittee, as
mentioned, this is my final testimony before you as the 29th
Chief of the National Guard Bureau.
It has been the honor of my life for Kelly and I and all of
team 29 to represent the soldiers, airmen, and families of the
National Guard. I am tremendously proud of their service and
sacrifices, and I am grateful for this subcommittee's support.
Thanks to you, we continue to increase the combat readiness of
our formations and improve the quality of life of our soldiers,
airmen, and their families.
Our Nation's investment in the National Guard comes at a
pivotal moment. Our strategic competitors are seeking
advantages in every domain, land, sea, air, space, and cyber.
If we are to compete and deter successfully and, if necessary,
prevail in combat, we must invest in our people.
Our soldiers and airmen, with the support of their
families, are the ones who carry out these missions. They stand
watch in the turbulent corners of the world. They monitor our
airspace. They train with our allies and partners. They respond
to our communities in time of need. It is our people who make
the difference. They make us lethal, resilient, and responsive.
Our people, like our pilots, maintainers and support
personnel and our Air Guard fighter squadrons, are experienced,
capable, and provide the capacity we need to keep pace with
global demands, deter our adversaries and, if necessary,
prevail in combat.
With significant fighter pilot and maintainer shortages in
the Air Force, we believe, through temporary cross-component
aircraft transfers, we can retain the critical fighter
capabilities in all 25 of our existing fighter squadrons until
aircraft procurement efforts can replenish them.
Our people, like our full-time support personnel, build
readiness in our formations and are increasingly challenged to
meet the growing requirements. The cap on Active Guard and
Reserve positions and a Federal Technician Program that is no
longer competitive, must be addressed to ensure we have the
full-time manning necessary to meet our service-directed
readiness requirements. Our people, as in every member of our
force, continues to grapple with complex duty statuses and
benefits disparity, which is why we need duty status reform.
Lastly, our people include our National Guard space units
that have nearly three decades of expertise and experience. We
must find a way forward for these highly trained professionals
as space becomes an even greater warfighting domain.
These are issues that affect our people, the heart of our
force. They are integral to recruiting and retention, and
ultimately our ability to fight and win. As my time comes to a
close, I will ensure a seamless transition to the next National
Guard leadership team, and continue to position the joint force
for success.
With your help, we will keep our promise to America to be
always ready, always there. Thank you for your time, your
friendship, and your support. I look forward to your questions.
[The information follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr.  Calvert. Thank you, General.
Next, Lieutenant General Daniels, please take 3 minutes for
your opening remarks.

Summary Statement of General Daniels

General  Daniels. Chairman Calvert, Ranking Member
McCollum, and distinguished members of the subcommittee, thank
you for the opportunity to testify once again this morning.
On behalf of Command Sergeant Major Lombardo, and the
190,000 soldiers and civilians of the Army Reserve, we stand
ready to protect American interests and posture ourselves to
meet challenges at home and around the globe.
On any given day, nearly 9,000 Reserve soldiers are
mobilized or deployed worldwide in support of combatant
commands, while tens of thousands more are engaged in training
events and annual combined and joint exercises. They reinforce
alliances and partnerships around the globe.
The Army Reserve is also a key partner in the Homeland,
facilitating large-scale mobilization operations and supporting
First Army in the activation of more than 12,000 soldiers and
civilians every year. As the joint force prepares to operate in
a contested logistics environment, the Army Reserve will play a
key role in delivering the critical enabling capabilities
needed for large-scale combat operations.
A ready and modernized Army Reserve is a crucial part of a
joint force that can deploy, fight, and win our Nation's wars.
From the start of my tenure, I challenged our leaders to
prioritize tough realistic training done safely well over
administrative metrics. That message is resonating throughout
the force and innovative readiness training, or IRT, is a
textbook example of this.
In 2023, more than 1,500 Army Reserve soldiers participated
in 16 IRT missions across 12 States and three U.S. territories,
providing key services to almost 40,000 patients.
The Army is undergoing a once-in-a-generation
transformation. The Army Reserve requires robust investment to
modernize our aging equipment, to enable interoperability with
the joint force. NGREA represents roughly 30 to 40 percent of
the Army Reserve's equipment procurement budget.
That said, the Army Reserve's unfunded equipment
requirements list continues to grow. With inflation and
material costs rising, our buying power is no longer the same.
The success of the Army Reserve's modernization efforts hinges
on NGREA funding, and we greatly appreciate the committee's
continued support.
Additionally about half of our 18,000 Humvees are beyond
their useful life, reducing our ability to respond to crises
and risking soldiers' safety without upgraded antilock brake
systems and electronic stability control kits. Your support to
these modernization programs will build readiness and enhance
safety for decades to come.
Despite the most challenging recruiting environment in
decades, the Army Reserve's end strength has remained above the
fiscal year 2024 and 2025 strength objectives. I would ask that
this committee support Reserve Personnel, Army, the RPA
account, funding reflective of our current end strength to
maintain a momentum and to continue to train, fight, and
accomplish our mission.
Caring for our soldiers and families and ensuring they
receive the benefits that they deserve is vital. Last October,
the Army Reserve developed a first-of-a-kind intergovernmental
support agreement pilot to deliver childcare services to
soldiers during weekend training. We still need assistance with
getting additional weekend childcare providers.
Once again, I would like to thank the committee for your
support throughout my tenure. Thanks to Congress' support, our
soldiers are equipped and ready to face any conflict in the
Domain. Command Sergeant Major Lombardo and I are ready for
your questions.
[The information follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr.  Calvert. Thank you, General.
Vice Admiral Mustin, please take 3 minutes for your opening
remarks.

Summary Statement of Vice Admiral Mustin

Admiral  Mustin. Good morning, Chair Calvert, Ranking
Member McCollum, and distinguished members of the subcommittee.
It is a privilege to report to you today on the status and the
vision of America's Navy Reserve.
I would like to begin by recognizing my wife, Kim, whose
steadfast support for 31 years exemplifies the unsung
sacrifices typical of our military spouses.
I would also like to thank Master Chief Tracy Hunt for his
tireless efforts in support of our enlisted Reserve sailors, as
well as express my thanks and appreciation to Lieutenant
General Jody Daniels, as we bid her fair winds and following
seas.
Given this will be my last hearing before this committee, I
want to thank General Hokanson and my peer Reserve chiefs for
their support and friendship during my tenure as Chief of the
Navy Reserve.
On any given day, the Navy Reserve provides 100,000
sailors, three dozen ship, wing, and squadron commanding
officers, nearly 150 aircraft, two SEAL teams, three
expeditionary medical facilities, 2,200 strategic sealift
officers, 450 civilians and nearly half of the Navy's
Expeditionary Combat Command and intelligence capability. 24/7
365, your Navy Reserve is standing at the ready, with nearly
15,000 sailors serving on Active Duty orders every single day.
For more than a century, your Navy Reserve has reliably
responded when and where needed. Today, our current operations
extend around the world. You will find our sailors supporting
operations throughout Europe, in the Indo-Pacific region, in
the Red Sea, and even locally, including recent support
operations in Baltimore, all showcasing the flexibility,
readiness, and value our citizen sailors generate and
contribute to our national security.
And yet, these contributions merely hint at the demands
required of our force in a great power conflict. We have 977
days until 2027, and the accelerating pace of that countdown
clock drives our actions with a committed sense of urgency.
During my tenure, the Navy Reserve has aggressively
executed a multiyear transformation focused unambiguously and
unapologetically on warfighting readiness to prepare the force
for high-end, multi-domain warfare.
This effort required the modernization of equipment,
training systems, and mobilization processes to ensure our
sailors are trained, available, and combat-ready from day one.
The procurement of modern KC-130Juliet aircraft is the Navy
Reserve's number one equipment priority. This modernization to
replace aging legacy airframes is essential to ensuring the
Navy Reserve can effectively and efficiently meet the contested
logistics requirements and operations demanded by our combatant
and fleet commanders, particularly in the Indo-Pacific area of
responsibility where this Reserve-only capability factors
heavily into our operations plans. We share a strong bipartisan
alignment on this priority, for which I am grateful and
thankful.
Beyond equipment, we are embracing technological
advancements to improve work and training environments,
harnessing our greatest asset, the minds, talents and ideas of
our Reserve sailors, and propelling the Navy Reserve into a new
era of operational and digital readiness and efficiency.
Commitment to our sailors is central to our Navy's enduring
warfighting advantage, so we have amplified the personnel and
professional development of every sailor, and instilled a
culture of excellence so every sailor, civilian, and their
families can thrive.
I extend my gratitude for the committee's support, which is
crucial to maintaining the operational predictability essential
for our sailors, their family, and our global combat readiness.
Chair Calvert, Ranking Member McCollum, and members of this
committee, the dedication of our citizen sailors, civilians,
and their supportive families is a gratifying source of daily
inspiration.
Commanding, representing, and advocating for the Navy
Reserve has been the honor of a lifetime. Thank you for your
continued support and for the opportunity to address you today.
I look forward to your questions.
[The information follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr.  Calvert. Thank you, Admiral.
Lieutenant General Anderson, please take 3 minutes for your
opening remarks.

Summary Statement of Lieutenant General Anderson

General  Anderson. Chairman Calvert, Ranking Member
McCollum, and distinguished members of the subcommittee, thank
you for the opportunity to appear before you today and testify
on behalf of the Commandant of the Marine Corps about your
Marine Forces Reserve.
I am honored to appear before you with my fellow Reserve
Component service chiefs and with my senior enlisted leaders,
Sergeant Major Edwin Mota and Command Master Chief Michael
Mussett.
The Marine Corps Reserve has always been a critical
component of the Marine Corps total force. The emergent picture
of the intricate and multi-domain warfighting environments of
the future increasingly reveals the risk of relying on the
Active Component alone.
The problem set demonstrates why the Marine Corps
strategically leverages its Reserve Component in two important
ways. First, the Marine Corps Reserve provides support to
global force management, employed as a vital contributor to
meet combatant command requirements.
The Reserve Component, in close partnership with the Marine
Forces Command and Second Marine Expeditionary Force, continues
to mature the utilization of service-retained forces in support
of global crisis response operations.
We provide Reserve forces for global deployments that span
the spectrum of conflict, and we participate in combat-related
training exercises in every geographic combatant command and
CYBERCOM.
Second, the Marine Corps Reserve is amplifying its talent
management efforts. This subcommittee has been briefed
extensively in recent years on the Marine Corps' Force Design
Initiative. Talent management is a major focus for the Marine
Corps and the Marine Corps Reserve.
We are identifying select individuals with high-demand,
low-density skill sets that are inherently challenging to
acquire and providing those Marines pathways to continued
military service that are complementary with their civilian
careers.
Each year, this subcommittee provides National Guard
Reserve equipment appropriation funding for the Marine Corps
Reserve, and I am grateful for your continued support through
NGREA. The Marine Corps Reserve is designed to be equipped at
near parity with the Active Component, and NGREA funds allow
the Marine Corps Reserve to resource the requirements set forth
by Congress and the combatant commanders.
The Marine Corps Reserve would realize an even greater
advantage by receiving NGREA funding that restores its
historical share. I ask that you consider this in your future
funding decisions.
The Commandant of the Marine Corps recently called the
Marine Corps Reserve our backbone and emphasized to our senior
leaders the need to maximize the potential of our Marine Corps
Reserve forces by resourcing and equipping them to ensure they
are prepared to meet the threats that face this Nation.
Reserve Marines serve honorably while balancing their
civilian careers and families. They bring a breadth and depth
of knowledge to the Marine Corps that gives the total force an
asymmetric advantage.
Thank you. I am glad to be here, and I look forward to your
questions.
[The information follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr.  Calvert. Thank you, General.
Next, Lieutenant General Healy, please take 3 minutes for
your remarks.

Summary Statement of Lieutenant General Healy

General  Healy. Chairman Calvert, Ranking Member McCollum,
and distinguished members of the subcommittee, on behalf of the
69,600 men and women of the Air Force Reserve, it is an honor
for me to be here today with my senior enlisted leader, Chief
Master Sergeant Israel Nunez.
As a commander, I am continually amazed at the
accomplishments of our Reserve airmen as they meet every
challenge they are given on behalf of the Nation. The Air Force
Reserve provides the Nation with operational capability,
strategic depth, and surge capacity across every Air Force core
mission set, both overseas and here at home.
As a largely part-time component, we provide a ready-now,
accessible force that is both mission-effective and cost-
efficient. As our near-peer threat increases, we are committed
to the operational imperatives and the re-optimization efforts
within the Department of the Air Force.
Since October 7th, Air Force Reserve personnel and aircraft
have mobilized to fill critical airlift and air refueling
missions in support of U.S. Central Command and U.S.
Transportation Command, some with only 72 hours' notice.
To date, in fiscal year 2024, Reserve airmen have
accomplished over 68,000 man-days, supporting Levant
operations, filling critical requirements amidst continued 24/7
operations.
Reservists provide an experienced support to NATO allies
and European partners, performing everything from intelligence
analysis and cybersecurity, to airlift and air superiority
missions, to aircraft maintenance and force protection. The
U.S. Air Force and the U.S. Space Force would not be able to
support Levant operations without Reserve airmen.
To optimize our performance as the total force, the Air
Force Reserve must transform for the future. This
transformation requires the Air Force Reserve be proportionally
modernized, and concurrently fielded with regular component
equipment.
Maintaining equipment parity with the regular component
ensures our ability to match a pacing threat. Legacy aircraft
investment without recapitalization and delayed modernization
add substantial risk to sustaining combat credible air
superiority and surge capacity in the future.
We are grateful for Congress for the National Guard and
Reserve equipment appropriation. NGREA enables us to modernize
and replace obsolete equipment when recapitalization by the
Active Component is not feasible. During the past year, NGREA
funding enabled installation of the most advanced radars and
secure communication equipment and self-protection systems, all
designed to make our aircraft more lethal and more survivable
in a contested environment.
Our most important weapon system is and always has been our
airmen. We are focused on ensuring that Reserve airmen and
their families receive the support they need. Two of our most
significant lines of effort focus on providing accessible,
affordable childcare for our members, as well as making
healthcare more accessible for family members with special
needs through the Exceptional Family Member Program.
Over the past seven decades, the Air Force Reserve has
provided combat-proven readiness. I am certain that the Air
Force Reserve will be prepared to defend the great Nation now
and in the future.
Thank you for the opportunity to appear before you today
and continued support of the Air Force Reserve, our citizen
airmen and their families, and I look forward to answering your
questions.
[The information follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

FENTANYL CRISIS

Mr.  Calvert. Thank you. Thank you, General.
I want to make sure that each member has a chance to ask
questions, so each member will have 5 minutes for their
questions and answers. When your timer turns yellow, you have 1
minute remaining.
First, I will recognize myself for 5 minutes.
Fentanyl, we are going to hear a lot about that I am sure
from all of you, but we certainly hear about it all over the
country. Fiscal year 2024 Appropriations Act provides $300
million for the National Guard Counter-Drug Program, which is
$200 million above the President's budget request.
General Hokanson, how can the National Guard best utilize
these resources to address the fentanyl crisis, which has
claimed the lives of more than 100,000 Americans just over the
last year?
General  Hokanson. Chairman, first of all, thank you for
the additional funding specific to our Counter-Drug Programs.
As you are aware, in every one of our States our National Guard
works closely with local law enforcement to provide additional
support and capabilities that exceed what the State has. Not
only that, we have counter-drug schools, five of them
throughout the country.
We will utilize this funding as best we can within the
authorities we are given to help support local law enforcement
and address this serious issue that we are facing.
Mr.  Calvert. Can you be more specific on that? Obviously,
intelligence data we have seen shows that the Chinese have been
working with the two major cartels and getting the base
chemicals into Mexico primarily to make the fentanyl, and then
the fentanyl is distributed. And then apparently these Chinese
criminals are working with the cartels to launder the money.
Is there anything you are doing on that end to use some of
your personnel to support activities that would track this
money?
General  Hokanson. Mr. Chairman, obviously, the stuff that
is coming up from our southern border is monitored very closely
by U.S. Northern Command that has that responsibility.
We are in close coordination through them, through Joint
Task Force North, to identify, and also work with the local
border States to help mitigate that wherever we can. However,
with our counter-drug specifically, we are just working within
the States to provide additional personnel, in some cases,
aircraft as well for surveillance, but we do have to follow the
authorities when it comes to intelligence gathering and sharing
that information.
Mr.  Calvert. Well, I would hope that we are all working
with those various agencies as a team effort. I understand
between the fentanyl, the opioid traffic--and that includes
methamphetamine, cocaine, crack cocaine, all the rest of it--
plus the human trafficking side of it plus the illegal farming,
illegal logging operations, the FBI told me it is about $100
billion a year in activity that is controlled by the two major
cartels, $100 billion a year. And it is killing over 100,000
U.S. citizens a year.
And I can't emphasize the importance of us focusing on this
problem. That is more deaths than is happening in all the
combatant commands combined that is happening along our
southern border with this fentanyl crisis. So I would
appreciate anything that can be done to facilitate that.
With that, is Dutch here? Yeah, Dutch you are recognized.
Excuse me, Ranking Member McCollum.

SPACE FORCE TRANSITION

Ms.  McCollum. I think we will probably have a round
possibly for another session of questions, so I want to go to
something both the chair and I have grave concerns about, and
that is, the Air Force reservists and Space Force transition.
General Healy, in your testimony, you said about 200 Air
Force Reserve space operators and professionals are currently
conducting space operation functions, as per the Space Force
Personnel Management Act. This will give the airmen the option
to transition into Space Force under their unique personal
structure.
I would like you to talk a little bit more about how you
see this going forward and what percentage you expect to
transform into Space Force.
But what I do have a concern about is the decision that has
been starting to take place to just move Air Guard around into
other positions within Space Force.
And I have with me--and, you know, Mr. Chair, I have never
done this before. Do we put things into the record here? I do
have a letter from----
Mr.  Calvert. I would be happy to submit that for the
record.
[The information follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Ms.  McCollum. The National Governors. And I just want to--
I am speaking as a former State representative as well as a
Member of Congress. States put significant amounts of money
into National Guard, whether it is tuition reimbursement,
whether it is into, you know, equipment, land, and other things
like that.
So the States not only have a role in having a National
Guard to be there in times of disaster, to make sure that we do
our bit as a State to make sure that they are trained and
prepared to serve when called upon, as they have been.
Especially, we see Iraq and Afghanistan, the heightened number
of reservists and National Guard that were called out.
But I am going to just read something here from the
Governors' letter. The legislation that is proposed, ``The
legislation that sidesteps, eliminates or otherwise reduces
Governors' authority within their States and territories
undermines longstanding partnerships, precedence, military
readiness and operational efficacy. This action also negatively
affects the important relationships between Governors and DOD
at a time when we need to have full trust and confidence
between the two to meet the growing threats posed by the era of
strategic competition as well as natural disasters.''
Can you tell me, has there been a response back to the
Governors, how you see in the future a dialogue between
Congress and between the States on this? Because this is a
fundamental change as to how the Guard works.
And, with that, I will yield for time back. And, Mr. Chair,
if there is something I missed in the question----
Mr.  Calvert. Maybe I could add to that just to emphasize
this. Obviously, 48 of the 50 Governors signed this letter, and
all the territories signed the letter.
And one of the concerns that I think the ranking member and
I both share is that once the precedent is set that the
movement of Guard personnel to the regular force for whatever
reason, that can continue. And I would like to add that to the
gentlelady's question.
Do you agree with that, this is setting a precedent that
has never happened before and this could erode over time the
Guard?
General  Hokanson. Mr. Chairman and Ranking Member
McCollum, obviously, this is a new precedent. Obviously, the
fact that I did see the letter yesterday had 53 Governors that
had signed it, obviously expressing a concern that it changes
100 years of precedent.
It also ignores the non-federalized role of the Air
National Guard, the role that they have in their States, which
is very significant for all of our formations, to include our
space formations as well.
As a result, I think you are seeing a big concern coming
from all the Governors as well as all the State adjutants
general about the potential precedent that this could set.
Ms.  McCollum. I would just add, we see the Navy and the
Marine Corps sitting next to each other in a reservist sense.
And, you know, the Space Force, in my opinion, was hastily put
together. I am not opposed to the fact that we have a Space
Force; but Congress, in my opinion, did not give all the due
diligence as to how this was going to be organized, what it
would look like in the future, including--including--what a
Reserve and a Guard component would look like in the future.
Now is the time for Congress, working with the Governors,
to weigh in. And so, I appreciate your answer. And just, I
think, we are going to have the same discussion--I am going to,
I am sure you are--with the Secretary of the Air Force later on
this afternoon.
This has not gone unnoticed, and it will not be done. You
are not doing anything wrong by moving forward with this. I
just don't think it was as well-thought-out as it could have
been.
Before I yield, I just failed to mention this in my opening
remarks. When the National Guard deploys, they deploy together
as units. And I want to recognize the number of deployments I
have been to over the years where there has been one or two
reservists who have been part of that deployment.
And sometimes--I know our Minnesota National Guards, when
we are deploying we embrace them, we welcome them in. But it
can be overlooked sometimes how when reservists deploy, they
deploy and they don't deploy as a full unit until they are--
probably you have seen an Army term--mustered together. But I
just want the reservists to know how much they are appreciated,
and it doesn't go unnoticed.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Mr.  Calvert. Thank you. And it has been my experience here
to get 48 Governors to sign anything is remarkable in itself,
including all the territories. So my recommendation to the Air
Force, I think they need to work with the States in a
reasonable way ahead, because obviously, this is not going to
fly, I think, nationally.
With that, Mr. Rogers, you are recognized.

GRAY EAGLE RECONNAISSANCE DRONES

Mr.  Rogers. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Welcome, gentlemen, to the committee. There has been a
longstanding effort to secure Gray Eagle reconnaissance drones
for the Army Guard, so much so that in fiscal year 2023 we
approved, with Senator McConnell's help on the Senate side, we
helped secure $350 million in funding to the Guard to acquire
and field 12 Gray Eagle drones, which is, I understand, a
company's worth of drones.
Where do we stand, General Hokanson, on fulfilling the
orders of this committee and the Congress on the drones?
General  Hokanson. Congressman Rogers, first of all, we
greatly appreciate the support from this committee to purchase
those 12 Gray Eagles.
And my understanding, we will be getting the new aircraft
off the line in 2027. We are in the process right now of
working with the States to identify where those aircraft will
be fielded. Interestingly, we purchased 12. The Army has since
changed the force structure from a company of 12 to a company
of eight, and so, we are looking for the opportunity to
potentially get four more so we can field two companies instead
of one.
This really sets the precedent for us as well. With eight
divisions in the National Guard, some of those key capabilities
are Gray Eagles as well as attack aircraft.
With the decision to cancel the FARA, we are looking to put
attack aircraft in all of our divisions as well as Gray Eagles
in all of our divisions so that we have the same capability as
our Active-Duty division so, when called forward, the combatant
commander can expect the same capabilities coming from a Guard
division as their Active-Duty counterparts.
Mr.  Rogers. So what is the final deadline time?
General  Hokanson. Sir, so later this year we will make the
decision on the fielding of the first company, and then we will
also decide where the second unit will be going as well. And
the first four will be the half of that next company going
forward.
Mr.  Rogers. I assume you have the criteria at least in
some form?
General  Hokanson. Yes, sir. The criteria has been given to
all States. They are all applying, those that are interested.
And, as I mentioned, later on this year is when a board
consisting of leadership within the Army, the Army Guard, and
also the adjutants general, will make those recommendations to
the Secretary of the Army where those units will be fielded.

DUTY STATUS REFORM

Mr.  Rogers. On another topic, I am a former guardsman, so
I understand this issue is important to all of us. I am
concerned that they receive the benefits that they deserve.
It seems like for decades, we have been trying to address
the issue of duty status reform. Our current duty status and
pay and benefit system is complex, overly complex, burdensome,
has resulted in multiple problems.
Today, the most noteworthy problem is that similarly
situated servicemembers can be doing essentially the same job
and receive a significantly different pay and benefit package,
simply based on the authority on which they were ordered to
duty.
Help me out here, why is status reform important to our
soldiers?
General  Hokanson. Congressman Rogers, sir, that is a great
question. And since 2019, we have been working on this. And it
basically streamlines 27 different duty statuses down to nine,
to ensure whether the person is on Active Duty, Guard, or
Reserve, if they are working side by side at the same time,
same location, same duties, that they are eligible for all the
same benefits.
And it would streamline the process significantly, but also
ensure that we no longer have disparity, as I mentioned in my
opening statement, between our servicemembers.
Mr.  Rogers. Do any other of the panel members wish to be
heard on this issue?
General  Daniels. So the Army Reserve is greatly supportive
of duty status reform, and whatever we can do to help make that
a success, we would appreciate that. It would help us with our
efficiencies of processing pay actions as well.
Admiral  Mustin. I can tell you, the Navy is strongly
supportive and disappointed that it has taken this long. We
have talked about it for several years, since before 2019 in my
case. We all enthusiastically support the concept. I would
appreciate your direction to the Department of Defense to get
it done.
Mr.  Rogers. What is the problem? How do we solve it?
General  Hokanson. Sir, it is actually with OMB right now.
It has cleared the Department, and almost everyone that I know
of is supportive of that. I think the issue is getting it
through OMB to come forward, sir.
Mr.  Rogers. Anyone wish to be heard?
General  Healy. That is my understanding as well. The Air
Force Reserve is absolutely supportive. It has been in every
one of my talking points at every visit to the Hill in the
previous 2 years. It is about aligning and getting rid of the
deficiencies that we currently have for the multitude of
statuses.
It is a retention issue as well. It makes it easier for our
airmen to serve if they know it is a basic one, two, three,
four, so to speak, of what I get paid and what entitlements I
am due.
Mr.  Rogers. I thank all of you for your service.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr.  Calvert. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Next, Dutch, got you this time.

BALTIC RELATIONS

Mr.  Ruppersberger. First thing, I noticed with everyone
there a lot of stars in this room. Thank you for your service.
I want to talk about--the members of this committee are
familiar with the National Guard State Partnership Program. And
as you know, the Maryland National Guard works very closely and
is in partnership with Estonia. And I have been to Estonia on
numerous times, and I am very impressed with the Estonian
people working with us. And they do a lot of good work, in my
opinion.
Can you please share how this relationship is contributing
to strengthen the security of the Baltic region in the face of
Russia's invasion of Ukraine, as well as reassuring our allies
in the region.
And I guess, General, we will start with you, but I know
everyone will be able to talk, so----
General  Hokanson. Yes, sir. Thank you for that question.
And so when you look at the partnership with the Baltic
nations--Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania--those were the first
partnerships we began over 30 years ago, and obviously Maryland
with Estonia.
Where we really saw the power of this was in 2007, when
Russia had a crippling cyber attack on Estonia, which they were
unprepared for. So the Maryland Guard has worked with them ever
since to establish a Cyber Center of Excellence, where we share
information with each other, because a lot of times, they are
at the leading edge of seeing some of the things coming out of
Russia.
Shortly after the invasion, unprovoked invasion of Russia
into Ukraine, I traveled to the Baltics, to Estonia, Latvia and
Lithuania, to reassure not only our NATO allies, but also our
state partners. While I was there, it was brought to my
attention that Narva, which is a city in Estonia, that Putin
had mentioned, that is actually a Russian city even though it
is in Estonia.
So they were very concerned about that statement. And so we
worked very closely with them on their Reserve Component and
really changed all of our training plans to focus on preparing
them for a potential invasion from Russia.
Estonia has been very forward-looking on that and preparing
their Nation as best they can, and we are doing everything we
can to work with them on those areas where they feel they need
the most help. That is a great thing for the Maryland Guard,
but also, all of our other state partners in the region.
Mr.  Ruppersberger. Anyone else on the panel have anything
to say about that? Okay.
Also, General Hokanson, many--how much time do I have? Two
minutes, okay.

CYBER CAPABILITY

Broadly speaking, what advantages or disadvantages do the
Reserve forces have with respect to the attrition of cyber
specialists to the private sector, especially compared to those
by our Active-Duty components?
General  Hokanson. Congressman, I would say within the
Guard, we have a very strong cyber capability, and the great
thing is, is we offer a different option here. They can not
only have their civilian career, but they can also continue to
serve in the military. And some of, I would argue, our best
cyber units in the country are in the National Guard and
Reserve, because they take their civilian skill set, they bring
it to work, and what they learn at work in their Guard role,
they also bring to their civilian career. So both see great
value added related to that.
The other option is, folks get trained on Active Duty and
they make the decision to get out. It gives us the opportunity
to retain that experience in the Guard and Reserve so our
Nation continues to benefit from all the training that we have
put into them at a time when cyber professionals are in
extremely high demand.
Mr.  Ruppersberger. We really have issues in Maryland,
because NSA is located there. So it works a different way,
because there is a lot of personnel there.
I yield back.
General  Healy. From the Air Force Reserve, if I could,
sir, from our perspective, what we are particularly proud of is
our cyber force retention right now is on the order of 86
percent.
So we are actually retaining these cyber professionals, and
I think it is through innovative things that we have done, like
a direct commissioning source. So we are able to direct
commission enlisted and folks off the street who have the
necessary requirements to make those positions.
In addition to that, we have constructive credit which we
are allowing people to take from the civilian community and
bring it forth and allow them to continue to work in a military
capacity on the weekend.
I think this is what is allowing us to keep this elite
talent that is working out there in the civilian sector and
allow them to be citizen airmen at the same time.
Mr.  Ruppersberger. Good to hear.
General  Anderson. Sir, if I could, at the Marines'
MARFORCYBER there right at Fort Meade, we have what we call an
Individual Mobilization Augmentee unit, IMA det there that
captures the talent that leaves, potentially leaves MARFORCYBER
from the Active Component.
A quick example of that is that we have a 6th Comm
Battalion on the East Coast. And while certainly not directly
involved in the country of Ukraine, they worked cyber with
State Partnership Program in Guatemala, Honduras, El Salvador,
to really, you know, show our influence in that region
countering some of the narrative that they are getting from
Russia.
Mr.  Ruppersberger. I yield back.
Mr.  Calvert. Thank you. That was a good question, Dutch. I
think with Estonia especially, their proximity to Saint
Petersburg, and most of the cyber operations for Russia ran out
of Saint Petersburg, the old headquarters of the KGB and their
training operations. But the Russians are very capable,
unfortunately, when it comes to cyber.
Mr. Carter, you are recognized.

RESERVE INTEGRATION

Mr.  Carter. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And welcome to each
of you warriors. I am very proud of each and every one of you.
We are very proud of our Guard and Reserve. We want to make
sure that you are treated equally.
General Daniels, I will talk to you. And each of you might
want to talk about this. Based on the most recent Army force
structure design, the Reserve Component will take a larger role
in providing support, especially in areas of logistics and
engineering.
We know that in the case of large-scale combat, effective
integration between Reserve and Army components is critical.
Does the Reserve Component have the resources necessary to take
on this increased responsibility, particularly in the area of
sustainment?
And how is the Reserve Component integrating with the
Active Component through training cycles to build cohesive and
deployable teams?
General  Daniels. So thank you very much for the question.
We, the Army, just had a very large summit within the last
couple of weeks looking at 2030 and 2040 and our future
requirements. And so, one of the requirements that was placed
back onto the Army Reserve to do a pilot, or series of pilots,
looking at forward stationing some of our equipment for some of
our logistics, engineering, and other kinds of capabilities,
particularly in the INDOPACOM and EUCOM areas, see if we could
station that equipment forward, use it for exercises, work with
our counterparts in those different areas, and then maintain it
when we are not using it.
So, we are looking at the--when we forward station this
equipment, it will then require us to be interoperable with the
other forces and work with our partner nations. So for us, this
is a great opportunity to explore some new relationships.
Mr.  Carter. The ability to train together, from what I
understand, is critical, especially in the big fights. You got
to be part of one team working together. I don't know whether
everybody goes to the National Training Center or not, but if
that is where they train, do you get the opportunity to go with
the Active-Duty people and have the funds within which to do
that on this new idea that you are going to do the logistics
part?
General  Daniels. So the logistics will actually be
stationed out within the areas--within the combatant commands.
Mr.  Carter. Okay.
General  Daniels. However, the Army Reserve does support
every single CTC rotation, every single warfighter, with some
of our capabilities. So we are actively participating, and we
are actually looking to link a CTC rotation with one of the
Army Reserve's large exercises called a CSTX.
We are looking to do those simultaneously next summer to
further expound on using our logistics capabilities and make
sure that they are being really tested and pushed to their
limit to make sure that they work as they are going to be
needed.
Mr.  Carter. Thank you. Any other comment from anybody
else?
Admiral  Mustin. I would like to comment also about the
importance of what we refer to as contested logistics and the
Navy Reserve's complete integration into the Navy and joint
force operational plans.
We talk about multiple Rs: Refuel, revive for medical,
resupply. And every one of the capabilities is reflected in our
force design. You are very familiar with my opening statement
about KC-130Juliet. That is a part of the intra-theater lift
capability.
But also, if you are tracking, we are seeing a lot of
missiles in the Red Sea. And we used to have to drive them back
through the Suez Canal through Rota, Spain, but now we have got
expeditionary vertical launch reload teams. That is a largely
Reserve capability. So our sailors are doing that in real time
in the Red Sea as well.
So those investments from prior years are paying benefits
today, but we continue to invest in the capacity so we can do
more of it in more places.
Mr.  Carter. Good.
General  Hokanson. Congressman Carter, if I could add from
the Army Guard side as well, with eight full divisions, our
logistics is fully integrated into our divisions. And when we
go to the National Training Center or the Joint Readiness
Training Center, we send our logistics packages with them so
they train exactly as they would fight.
On the Air Guard side, as I mentioned, we had a lot of a
lot of volunteers in our C-17 and other aircraft when we
logistically had to surge weapon systems overseas. And we
continue to rely on volunteers and on our air guardsmen to make
sure we can fill that gap and get munitions where they need to
be in a timely manner.
Mr.  Carter. Well, I tell you, I will wait till the next
round.
Mr.  Calvert. Okay, Judge.
Mr. Case.

AIR NATIONAL GUARD

Mr.  Case. Thank you.
And to all of you, thank you so much for your service.
And General Hokanson, a special mahalo to you from our
Hawaii Army and Air Guard. You have always been an incredible
partner of our Hawaii Guard. And we are, you know, really proud
of them and grateful for them, not only for the deployments
overseas, but for some really key emergencies in Hawaii proper,
to include COVID, Red Hill, most recently the Maui wildfires.
And you have been fully supportive of all of that. So thank you
very much from us.
I feel like I have to channel our absent friend, Mr. Womack
in joining in support of the State Partnership Program, because
he is your biggest fan. And you have already heard mention of
that.
I just want to add to that. I was with five of our House
colleagues last week in the South Pacific in Fiji and Tonga.
And they have State partnership programs with Nevada. And it is
truly amazing what an impact that Partnership Program has in
terms of the overall relationship with those key countries.
We met with the senior leadership of those countries. They
are well aware of the Partnership Program. They value it, and
it means a lot to them. So, you know, this is something that I
don't think we can overinvest in.
I just want to follow up on my colleague's questions on the
Space Force, because, frankly, this is kind of a puzzle to me.
I am going to put this in layman's terms or at least my terms,
whether it is layman or not.
We have a Space Force. We are trying to turn the Space
Force into a full partner in the Armed Services. To do that,
the Space Force, it seems to me, needs some form of a Guard/
Reserve construct. The Space Force has come up with their own
construct that they believe works for them, which is a Space
Force component, which is really a full-time/part-time
component.
Somehow, that has to be staffed. That has to be fully
staffed out for it to really be an effective component. The
most direct place to get that from is the Air Guard and I
suppose Reserve to some extent. That is being resisted for
various reasons, which I can appreciate. The response to that
was the Secretary of the Air Force legislative proposal, which
engendered a strong response from, you know, you all, and also
from our Governors over precedent, and also the fear expressed
and implied that if this was forced upon space-related Guard
and Reserve units out there, that they would leave the service
rather than go to the Space Force. I, frankly, don't know
whether that is true or not, but it is certainly an expressed
term.
So it seems to me that we obviously haven't found the right
answer yet. But one question that I think it does beg is that
if the Secretary of the Air Force's proposal to essentially
require the transfer is not adopted, how does the Space Force
effectively staff out its proposed component? And will that
really do particular damage to, for example, the Air National
Guard? I mean, these are space missions. In a time of
mobilization, they would probably be mobilized to the Space
Force, so why shouldn't they get into that channel right now?
So these are just--you know, I am just trying to sort this
through in my mind. I don't think any of us has come up with a
particularly good answer. I signed the letter that supported
our Governors, because I value their NR adjutant general,
because I value their input on a fear of demobilizing their own
existing Air Guard, and because I am also concerned about the
precedent, but I don't think anybody has answered the basic
question.
General  Hokanson. Congressman Case, thank you for the
opportunity to address this. And, as I have been very clear in
all of my testimony since I became the chief, I feel the best
option is just basically no cost to our Nation. Our air
guardsmen are currently serving space missions. If they want to
be in the Space Force, we can just change their name tape. They
would still be in the National Guard. They would still have
their same civilian job, same location, same mission. All we do
is change the signs on their name tape.
The concerns that we have, and our guardsmen have expressed
this--and this is coming directly from the Space Force--is they
don't even have in place the admin processes for a part-time
force to manage them, retirements, pay, benefits, any of that.
That doesn't exist. So they are going to have to create that
bureaucracy. We already have it, and we have had it and it runs
our Air Guard. And we have effectively continued to perform our
mission, to include 11 overseas deployments, since the Space
Force was established. And they continue to do that as
guardsmen in the Air National Guard.
And when you look forward, we have asked them very closely,
because we are concerned. Space capabilities are very critical
to our Nation right now. And when you look at the National
Guard, we are actually units with equipment that perform
missions. And we are not usually fillers or anything like that.
And so when you look at the role that the Space Force is
looking for their part-time force, they don't see them in
operational units anymore. They are seeing them in admin,
educational, and institutional or test units or in staff
positions. And that is really not what we do right now.
And at the end of the day, whatever decision is made, it is
my responsibility to make sure we continue to provide the
absolute best space capability we can right now. And we do
that. We have got another deployment scheduled very shortly.
Our folks continue to do their mission, but many of them
and up to 70 percent said, Look, I am going to stay in the
National Guard. And my promise to them is, I will find a
position for them in the National Guard if they do not want to
go into the Space Force if they are forced to do so.

BENEFIT PACKAGES

Mr.  Case. Okay. So if we solve for the basic lack of
comparable, you know, benefit packages that you say that they
are concerned about, how much of the problem does that solve?
Do you think in that case, that if they were given a
voluntary choice about whether to stay in the current Guard or
transfer over to the Space Force side of things, would they
take that? Because somehow, we have to do this. And that is the
basic challenge here. If it doesn't happen on a smooth
voluntary basis then somehow we have to make it happen.
Mr.  Calvert. If we can get that answer back for the record
for Mr. Case, that would be great.
With that, Mr. Fleischmann.

READINESS LEVELS

Mr.  Fleischmann. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I want to thank each and every one on the dais for your
respective service to your great branches and collectively to
our country. Both officers, enlisted, thank you very much.
A small point of privilege: Chattanooga, my hometown, is
the venue of the Nation's longest serving, lasting,
uninterrupted 75 years Armed Forces parade.
I spoke with the Defense Secretary at our last hearing, and
he was kind enough to give us General Mengus and I think
Admiral Spivey to come and honor the men and women of
Chattanooga. Uninterrupted, inclement weather, COVID, you name
it. We are the most patriotic city in America. So a heartfelt
thank you to you all.
I have a question on force readiness, prioritization of
readiness. We all recognize the ongoing challenges reinforcing
NATO's eastern flank, deterring and responding to further
aggression by Iran and its proxies across the Middle East, and
last and most serious, the threat posed in the Western Pacific.
Since the Cold War, we have more than half the total force
without an equivalent reduction in responsibilities. That seems
increasingly untenable in today's environment as our relative
military advantage declines.
I already had concerns about the readiness levels across
the force from the regular deployment cycles, often of Guard
and Reserve units, before these crises in Europe and in the
Middle East.
I very much appreciate the importance of demonstrating
presence to both deter adversaries and reassure allies and
partners, but I worry about the cost of this posture on our
ability to then sustain forces in the event of a major war.
My question for all of you all is, could you please briefly
comment on the demands of the ongoing crises and deployments on
readiness and potential impacts that might have on force
generation in the event of a major war? And I thank you.
General  Healy. Most recently, with the Levant operations,
we saw a significant increase in the requirements for mobility
aircraft air refueling to go over to CENTCOM.
I think what we do well is we prepare our crews and our
aircraft to be able to respond to those things. Each of those
mobilizations, this one, the first time since the 1980s, within
a 72-hour callout, has benefits that allows the Active Duty to
continue 24/7 operations, which is what we are designed to do
is augment surge if a requirement exists, a contingency exists.
But it comes with a price as well. That price is a
mobilization to dwell. So, for the 3 to 4 months that our units
were mobilized in that case, they are going to get five times
that where they are not approachable and not deployable again,
the purpose of which is to ensure that they have the ability to
reset, the ability to get the aircraft working and operable
that might have been overused during that time period.
In the case of an all-out war, if that were to occur during
that five-time mobilization reset, all bets are off. In the
event of--you know, what we talk about, if there is an actual
conflict with the PRC, all bets are off. We are all in, and the
mobilization to dwell restrictions I would expect to be waived
by the Secretary of Defense in that case.
Mr.  Fleischmann. Thank you.
General  Daniels. So I am going to take a slightly
different tact, which is the Army Reserve has--our overall
requirements have come down over time. However, through an
authority called the funded reimbursable authority, this is an
authorization that allows the combatant commands and others to
bring on Reserve personnel to recolor their money in times of a
crisis, specifically for intelligence personnel only at this
time.
We are asking the committee to take a look at expanding
that authority to include cyberspace and information operations
types of activities so they can counter some of these
activities that we see from our opponents.
So it is called the funded reimbursable authority.
Thank you.
Mr.  Fleischmann. Thank you.
General.
General  Hokanson. So we have not seen a decrease at all in
our operational tempo. In fact, it has kind of been above the
standard, gone up. On any given day, we have 24,000 guardsmen
deployed, supporting overseas our combatant commanders.
And we talk about the impact to readiness. We actually gain
readiness when we deploy because now we have our personnel on
full-time orders, training up, deploying, and they are really
at the peak of their readiness while they are there.
Where we face challenges is when we have mission sets like
along the southwest border where there is no military training
value. And if you are not from a border State, it might as well
be a deployment.
So it does have an impact on readiness for them because
they are not training on their military skill set.
The other one I would highlight most of all is the need to
have fighter squadrons. We have got a 60-fighter squadron
requirement with 48. We have 25 of those in the National Guard,
and our ability to retain that capability when we are already
short fighter pilots and maintainers will be critically
important in the next coming years as we start to modernize our
fleet.
Mr.  Fleischmann. Thank you.
In the interest of time, I thank you for your answers.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr.  Calvert. I thank the gentleman.
Ms. Kaptur.

RECRUITMENT

Ms.  Kaptur. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I just wanted to endorse Mr. Ruppersberger's interest in
Central Europe and our State partnership programs.
Ohio is partnered with Hungary and Serbia. I guess we
haven't done that good a job, but I know our soldiers have. So
I just want to put that on the record. I think it would be
great to learn more about all of these Central European
partnership efforts.
We all come from different parts of the country, Generals
and Admiral, and I am from up by the longest coastline in
America, the Great Lakes. We are heavy industrial and
agricultural, and we have just in my district five units that
are Guard and Reserve.
I wanted to ask you some questions--oh, and, General
Anderson, I began my Sunday, 7 a.m., at a marine landing in
Toledo, Ohio. And the people came from all across the State and
even--I don't know how the Michiganders got in, but they got
in. They had a great time.
And so there is great esprit de corps in our part of the
country toward the Corps and all services, but that one is
particularly memorable. They really had a good time.
My questions involve recruitment and workforce development,
and I want to ask the questions and then you can answer.
General Daniels, I represent a 983rd engineering battalion,
all kinds of trucks, all kinds of equipment. No connection to
our local school system in terms of recruitment and gaining
skills in essential tasks as mechanics, as maintainers, as
drivers.
I have thought about that a great deal of the time. Maybe
the Department has some programs I am unaware of, but the
connection is very loose if it exists at all.
In terms of the--General Hokanson, have I got that right?
General Hokanson. Yes, ma'am.
Ms. Kaptur. On the medical front, we were hoping to get a
Guard medical unit next to our medical university. They sent us
an MP unit. You know, we do our best, but I worry about medical
backup in theater, and I think we could do a whole lot better
in Ohio by our Guard paying attention to medical units, which
doesn't appear to be happening, in my region, anyway.
And I am wondering what the criteria is that the Guard uses
to establish medical facilities and stations for medical units
and the training that has to go with them.
And thirdly, in terms of Air Force, we have an F-16 Armed
Guard air wing in our area. We are very proud of them. I am
concerned about what is going to happen to them with this Space
Force proposal. And we have worked for almost half a century to
build it into a real base and it is. We competed for F-35s, and
I am angry to this day we didn't get them because we weren't
close enough to, they told us, a training base. That is
interesting.
But we have got Northern Command, northern watch. That is
part of their duty station--that is part of their duty, and
they do a great job, by the way.
So those are kind of my first-round questions.
General Hokanson. Yes, Congresswoman. With respect to the
medical units, all of ours are part of the total Army, and so
when they are in our divisions, we look at the floor structure
we are authorized, and then we work with the adjutants general
to determine the best locations for those.
I will follow up with General Harris----
Ms. Kaptur. Thank you.
General Hokanson [continuing]. On the interest within the
State.
With respect to the fighter aircraft, to the F-16s and,
obviously, the space units in Ohio, obviously, our number one
priority is our people. We want to keep them and retain them as
best we can. And so, we are working, hopefully, to get a
resolution for what our space professionals will do.
But obviously, when we look at the F-16, it is a great
unit, and we look forward to continuing to modernize them in
the F-16 and hopefully look for future aircraft.
With just one touch on the recruiting, you mentioned access
to the schools. We are actually doing a pilot program right now
with the Aircraft Owners and Pilots Association because within
the Reserve component and the active, we run a star-based
program where we teach STEM primarily in middle schools.
AOPA and the Experimental Aircraft Association also do that
at the high-school level. And so we are trying to develop a
connectivity to encourage kids to pursue STEM degrees in STEM,
but then also connect them to the local Guard and Reserve and
active organizations there to show them potential careers in
aviation.
Ms. Kaptur. Mr. Chairman, I would really appreciate, for
the record, each of you summarizing whatever connectivity
programs you have to our younger people that connect service
and workforce development. I am really, really interested in
that.
And you know what, working with the Department of Defense
on that issue is misery, just trying to figure out what they
are doing, where they are doing.
And thank you very, very much again.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Calvert. I thank the gentlelady.
Mr. Joyce.

PSYCHOLOGICAL OPERATIONS

Mr. Joyce. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, ladies and gentlemen in the front and back row
for your service to our country.
Lieutenant General Daniels, according to a recent report on
the Army's shortage of psychological operations soldiers, I
understand that 83 percent of the Army's psychological
operations soldiers are in the Army Reserve.
How can we help ensure that the Army leverages those unique
skill sets uniquely in the Army Reserve? And how does their
position in the Army Reserve impact the overall--Army's overall
psychological operations mission?
General Daniels. So one of the initiatives that we have
taken on this past year is to look at those programs, those
skill sets, civilian-acquired skill sets that can be brought on
to Active Duty, brought into the Army Reserve, brought into the
Guard that don't require--we will accept the credentialing from
the civilian agencies so they don't have to go through training
again.
So the Army Reserve had--of the 44 that the active
component was accepting, the Army Reserve only had seven. We
are now up to that full complement of capability. So they spend
less time doing training and are back at their employers. So we
are trying to minimize that time away from work and that time
away from their hometowns in order to conduct Army training.
We are looking to further increase our direct
commissioning, improve that process. It has been taking about
18 months. We are trying to get it down to about 9 months. That
will be a piece of the new Army recruiting command. They are
taking a look at how they can integrate that and have a single
point of entry so we can, again, bring those civilian-acquired
skills into the Reserve and then help keep them there.

FLYING HOURS CUT

Mr. Joyce. Lieutenant General Healy, the fiscal year 2025,
budget shows a significant cut to flying hours for the Air
Reserve, which is a nearly $160 million reduction. How does
this budget request ensure maximum readiness for reservists as
we continue to see pilot shortages across the Air Force?
General Healy. I appreciate the question.
The flying hour cut that we are looking at in 2025 is
16,000. It could be as much as 10,000 below a 76,000-flying-
hour budget that we require in order to meet our readiness
needs.
But based on the current contingency flying that we are
doing, a different pot of money, TWCF, Transportation Working
Capital Fund, which gets after contingency operations, if the
amount of contingency flying, specifically for CENTCOM and the
Levant operations continues, we are able to get that deficit
made up with those TWCF hours.
If it flatlines a little bit and there is not as much
contingency in 2025, the expectation is that we would come back
for a roughly 10,000 hour bump up, specifically for our C-5 and
our C-17 flying hour operations.
Mr. Joyce. Seeing that I have a little more time, and
following up on some questions from the chair, the ranking
member, and Mr. Case, General, were you at all given the
opportunity to advance your concerns? And how do you think the
rank and file have accepted this reallocation of Space Force?
General Hokanson. Congressman Joyce, we have been involved
in the process. Obviously, there is the legislative proposal
that we discussed earlier about where the governors have all
signed letters towards that.
The committee, over the course of the years, has asked for
I think six studies, and none of them--only one has made them
over here. There is currently another proposal right now, a 924
report that is going through the process. So we are involved in
that. We have our folks there.
When it comes down to the rank and file, about 70 percent
say they want to stay in the Guard. In fact, would even go to
doing a different job in the Guard. And right now, frankly, our
country can't afford to lose that level of experience in the
space field.
Our units have been doing this for almost 30 years. Some
are extremely good. I would argue some are the best at what
they do, and so for me, I'm trying to retain that capability in
our Nation because we absolutely need it.
Mr. Joyce. Thank you.
I yield back, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Calvert. I thank the gentleman.
Mr. Ellzey.

KC-130J

Mr. Ellzey. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Good to see you all. Thank you for being here. I haven't
seen this many stars since I did my last unsuccessful fly by.
But I will say that I am truly afraid of the senior enlisted
advisors behind them who have probably 8,000 years of
experience combat time. And thank you all for all being here,
including the folks in the back.
General Hokanson, you are the right guy for your job. Class
of '86 at West Point, I'm sorry, but you did go to PG school at
the Navy War College to get to where you are today, so I am
glad to see that.
General Daniels, incredible resume, and especially for all
of your background, you are the perfect person for this job,
empirical data, in a time in which the money doesn't seem to
exist. Neither do the resources.
General Healy, your career in tankers and logistics is
going to be extremely important if the balloon goes up by 2027.
You are the perfect guy for the job.
And then, Lonnie Anderson--I'm sorry--General Anderson. It
is on his bio, but it is kind of glossed over. Blue Angel.
Right there. And he flew with my friend, Jerry Deren, who says
to give you a hard time, which I am not going to do yet.
And then Admiral Mustin. It is good to see you. I have
known him for a long time. We have the most incredible group of
folks with corporate knowledge for the Guard and Reserves that
I have ever seen assembled in one place, which I think is
timely based on what we are talking about in a world
environment that looks very much like 1940.
For my limited time, I am going to go ahead and address
Admiral Mustin. And let's talk about the unsexy stuff that we
do: Logistics, tanking, things that we are going to need after
day one. The war games talk about day one. What about day two?
Contested logistics and INDOPACOM is an extremely important
thing, and now that we are looking at a, perhaps, wider war in
Europe, all of these things come to a very important peak that
you all are going to be needed for.
So let's talk about C-130Js. The Navy's unfunded priority
list includes the KC-130J, which is a great picture--of a KC-
130T tanking a H-53K carrying an F-35 that came out this week.
All three integral pieces of our warfighting capability.
So that aircraft is important for intratheater lift
requirement, especially for INDOPACOM, for Pappy, where the
U.S. faces a tyranny of distance. Our goal is to replace the T
with the J by 2030.
Can you detail the Navy's need for everybody why we need
the 130J?
Admiral Mustin. Absolutely.
Well, Congressman, it is great to see you. Thank you so
much for the question.
And, you know, my opening statement heavily emphasized the
need for the transition from the tango to the Juliet variant.
So starting from requirements, my requirement is validated
at 32 airframes. That is predicated on a 75 percent mission
capable rate, really 24 airframes. Again, that is a minimum
number when you talk about Admiral Paparo and now Admiral
Koehler. I will tell you they are going to say that that number
is about three times that number.
But as it relates to today, we are looking at a need for 24
operational airframes. Flying the tango, which, for me,
averages per airframe at about 31 years, means that I'm
struggling to maintain about nine airplanes that are mission-
capable on a daily basis.
Now, keep in mind, not just for INDOPACOM, but around the
world I have got enduring detachments where we are flying
these, most recently in CENTCOM where the request came in for
my detachment to double the amount of C-130s that were on
station. So the reality is the demand for them is persistent
and real and the scale will only increase.
Back to how we are going to get there. Originally, my boss
at the time, the chief of naval operations, Mike Gilday, tasked
me to recapitalize by 2030. So it is 32 airframes by 2030.
We predicated a plan, from 2025 to 2030, six airframes per
year, and now we are just at the point where we are beginning
to realize with the first, thank you all very much, in 2024.
But ultimately, what is going to happen is, we are probably
going to need to increase that number per year.
Next year, for instance, I will need nine to get us back on
glide to get there.
Mr. Ellzey. Well, that answered my question.
I am going to give back to reserve my time, Mr. Chairman,
thank you. I will hold for the second round.
General Hokanson. Congressman, if I could just add one
thing to that?
Mr. Ellzey. Go ahead.
General Hokanson. You bring up a great point. So we talk
about capability, but we don't talk enough about capacity, and
it is the depth that the Reserve component provides.
In one of the recent RAND studies commissioned by the Air
Force, it took just the F-16, and they realized in the Reserve
component, it cost 42 percent less to operate an F-16 and, in
fact, 34 percent less for our KC-135s.
And when we look at the amount of area refueling capability
we have in the Reserve component, we have to make sure we keep
that capacity.
Mr. Ellzey. Thank you, General.
I yield back.
Mr. Calvert. I thank the gentleman.
Mr. Garcia.

MILITARY SPOUSE LICENSING RELIEF ACT

Mr. Garcia. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I apologize for being
late. We had the NASA administrator in the other room.
So I want to thank you guys for your service, your
continued service and your leadership in the Reserves.
I had the pleasure of being in the Reserves for 3 years
myself, and then I realized I was the most dangerous guy in the
sky and decided to grow up and get a real job, which was not
this one, by the way. So I want to thank you.
We passed a piece of legislation back in December of 2022,
that was actually signed into law by the President in January
of 2023 on the Active-Duty side called the Military Spouse
Licensing Relief Act.
It is now the law of the land, and it has actually helped a
couple of hundred thousand family members on Active Duty where
it allows the spouses to basically cross-deck their
professional licenses across State lines.
So if they were a teacher, a nurse, a doctor, a real estate
agent, whatever it is, when they got orders, when their spouse
got orders from one State to the next, they didn't have to get
recertified, and they didn't have to pay the money to get
recredentialed and go in front of a board. Sometimes that takes
over a year, a couple thousand dollars. It is cost prohibitive,
time prohibitive, and they don't do it.
So now you have got an Active-Duty family going down to a
single income for 2 to 3 years wherever they are based.
That is now the law of the land on the Active-Duty side.
I have got a mission now and, frankly, hopefully in
partnership--I have spoken with a few of you all here already--
that I would like to expand that. And that is not necessarily
the purview of the Appropriations Committee, but I would like
to expand that and enable that on the authorizing side with
HASC to get that to apply to the Reserve side.
So I think in terms of quality of life, there is a lot of
issues we have got going on. We have got record low retention
and recruitment. The pay is not where it needs to be. There is
a whole lot of issues. It is a multi-faceted problem.
I think getting that dual income, allowing the spouse to be
able to stay in the workforce, but then the collateral benefit
of also having that community, having access to more teachers
and more nurses and more doctors where, in districts like mine,
we are short, and then having that tax revenue at the local
levels, the State levels, and Federal levels get reinjected, I
think it is a win, win, win, if we do it right.
So I wanted to float that idea. That is a two-putt, you
know, process. It is not something probably you are going to
get done in fiscal year 2025, but we didn't think the Active-
Duty side was going to get done in 2023, to be honest, and it
ended up getting expedited.
So I wanted to get your thoughts on that if you are hearing
that feedback on the Guard side, on the Reserve side. And then,
you know, can we get your support on something like that to get
some pull from the leadership, especially affecting our junior
enlisted and mid-enlisted, senior enlisted ranks as well.
But I will open it up to anyone who has feedback on that.
If you have got anybody that--or see any reason why that is a
dumb idea to go run up that hill, let me know, but I am going
to go run up that hill otherwise.
General Hokanson. Congressman Garcia, I will jump in.
My wife and I went to a recent signing for the active
component, and we are actually part of that process. My wife
was a schoolteacher, and every time we PCS-ed, she had to go
through--and it would take the duration of our time that we
were there.
And so, I would be greatly supportive of this because at
the end of the day, as you mentioned, it is very difficult now
without two incomes for many families to make it, and anything
we can do to make their service easier is going to make a huge
difference for recruiting and for retention.
Mr. Garcia. I appreciate that, General.
I see it as a cost saver. As an appropriator, we can either
throw more money at pay and benefits and everything else, or we
can help on the quality-of-life side. If we can get the local
communities to pay for that second income to augment the total
household income and get quality of life above the poverty
line, then we can save American taxpayer dollars.
And by the way, like I said, the government actually makes
money on that when they are working and getting taxed, and we
get the workforce in the local community.
So that is all I have. I want to thank you guys for your
support.

RESERVE ASSETS

I am very concerned about the lack of, frankly, assets
within the Reserve components, especially on the Air National
Guard side to be that complementary force to the Active Duty
right now. I think we have gotten below or are approaching
below critical mass on some of the platforms that are being
allocated to you all. And I think that is something we have got
to keep looking at, as appropriators, to make sure that we are
getting the right equipment at the right levels to the Guard,
to the Reserve units, and making sure that, again, one plus one
equals three, and you are not just seen as the ugly stepchild
to the Active-Duty side.
So you have got that commitment. We will keep pushing on
that.
General Healy. I would certainly like to comment.
As I said in my opening comments, concurrent proportional
fielding, we absolutely want to see that continue with its
intent so that we are able to have fifth gen aircraft
participating as a surge capacity in a fifth gen fight in the
future.
Mr. Garcia. Well said. Thank you, General, for that.
And with that, I am out of time. I yield back.
Mr. Calvert. I thank the gentleman.
We are going to do a lightning rod real quick because we
have votes coming up. So I will start off quickly.

KC-46A

One, with the March Air Reserve, I will be a little
parochial here on that. General Healy, 2 years ago your
predecessor indicated he expected to bed down the KC-46A at
March by the second quarter of fiscal year 2025.
Is that still on track?
General Healy. No, sir. Due to production delays, not of
our control, the expectation is third quarter of '27 will be
the first aircraft arrival of 12.
Mr. Calvert. Well, talk to our friends at Boeing. We seem
to talk to them often lately.

F-15

Also, obviously, General Hokanson, the Air National Guard
is dealing with the potential gap, as we talked about, in
fighter jet capacity as it modernizes from the F-15C to the F-
15EX. What are we doing to eliminate that gap? And I suspect
you have some production problems there, too, but what is the
answer to that one?
General Hokanson. Mr. Chairman, obviously, you saw my
unfunded priority list. I added six F-15EXs because they were
cut from the Air Force buy, as well as six F-35s, to make sure
that we can continue to field these units so that we don't
create what we call a bathtub where we don't have enough
capability at the most critical time as we face challenges from
our competitors around the globe.
So we are working everything we can to get those airplanes
as fast as we can.
Mr. Calvert. Thank you.
Ms. McCollum.

QUALITY OF LIFE ISSUES

Ms. McCollum. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
I am going to focus by talking to General Daniels.
In your testimony, you talked about a childcare pilot
program that started in the fourth quarter of 2023, and with an
intergovernmental support agreement in Kansas City metropolitan
area, which was offering no cost childcare options during the
weekend and annual training.
As Mr. Garcia pointed, there are a lot of things that go
into recruitment and retention, both for yourselves and for
your full-time partners. Why don't you just take a minute and
not only tell us if there are funds set aside in 2025 for
going, but what this means when we can get not only the pay
right, but the healthcare right, the housing right, the
childcare support the families need.
General Daniels. Thank you so much for that.
Our first pilot failed gloriously. We were not able to find
providers. So the IGSA proved to be a really good venue to find
sort of on-demand care. Sort of like ordering an Uber. They are
vetted. They are credentialed. You know exactly what the
product is that you are getting. These families are very
comfortable. They are within a reasonable distance of where the
family lives.
So it is giving those soldiers a lot of relief and ability
to go and attend when they may not have been able to. They may
have been challenged. So for retention purposes, this has been
tremendous.
We have been working with the Guard at looking at some
other locations. We are looking with the Navy Reserve at some
other locations to expand the program. So we are looking to
build this into future years' budgets because it is truly, it
is, a great retention tool.
Ms. McCollum. So if you could--this is a lightning rod.
What is the one thing, it could be childcare, whatever, that
keeps you up at night when it comes to having people stay on,
or come into the Reserve or the Guard. What is one quality-of-
life issue?
General Hokanson. Chairman McCollum, I will add healthcare.
We have about 30,000 guardsmen that don't have healthcare. And
for me, we need them 24/7, not just for their overseas
deployments, but, as we know, emergencies occur in a community
at any time. We need them to be medically ready.
And if they don't have healthcare or access to healthcare,
then they can't be ready, and then they can't perform the job
that we have trained them to do.
To me, it is, for lack of a better term, like an insurance
policy on investment we have made but also an investment that
they have made.
General Healy. From the Air Force Reserve perspective,
ma'am, you know, I would say that the access to TRICARE Reserve
Select for our Reserve technicians and our Title 5 civilians,
that is in excess of over 10,000 of the folks working for us.
They don't have access to TRICARE Reserve Select until 2030 is
the wedged timeframe right now.
In some cases, that is doubling, tripling the cost of the
premiums for them. But what it lacks is the continuity of care.
So if we have a Reserve technician who is a civilian during the
week, the Federal Employee Health Benefit system, and then they
are, perhaps, on a set of orders for an extended period of
time, they are having to transition back and forth between
multiple care providers, which provides a challenge.
This is the force that trains our part-timers. It is
critical to readiness, and it is certainly a retention issue
and a recruiting issue for that full-time force.
General Anderson. For the Marine Reserves, ma'am, I think
access certainly to TRICARE Reserve Select needs to continue,
but just to give you a little vignette of what that looks like
for a sergeant that just left the active component, direct
affiliate to the Reserves.
Over the course of the weekend, if she is going to have
TRICARE Reserve Select and pay for Servicemembers' Group Life
Insurance at the same time, when she leaves that drill weekend,
she has really got about $120 in her pocket at the end of the
day for 2 days of work because of the expense of TRICARE
Reserve Select and the travel to a drill site.
Admiral Mustin. I think access to healthcare, we have
beaten that sufficiently, but I would say what keeps me awake
at night is the sufficiency of the training of our sailors. So
what we are finding right now, believe it or not, I know we
like to hear in the headlines that the military is struggling
on recruiting and retention. And I always say those are two
very different things.
Right now, the Navy Reserve, in our selective Reserve
capacity, is at a 7-year high for retention, and I attribute
that to the quality of training. I think our sailors appreciate
having a well-defined mission, a well-defined adversary for
which we can prepare. And the sense of purpose and the
professionalism that is associated with it is impacting
positive retention in our case.
Mr. Calvert. Thank you.
Judge Carter.

3D PRINTING

Mr. Carter. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
General Hokanson, a few years ago the Texas National Guard
3D printed barracks, the first of their kind. Other State
Guards have used 3D printing for aircraft parts.
Overall, is the Guard looking at using more 3D printing?
And where else would the Guard like to use this technology, and
what benefit could it bring to you?
General Hokanson. Congressman Carter, thank you.
I have actually been there to see the 3D-printed barracks,
and we did it in half the time, at two-thirds the cost. In
fact, they also built a training center as well in Texas, and
also, as you mentioned, we are using 3D-printed parts.
We see great capability and great promise here because
these facilities are actually enduring, very well made. But
once again, we have the ability to save cost and get that
facility up in a much quicker time. So we look to continue to
invest in this across the 54 National Guards in the
environments that make sense to put those facilities in.
Mr. Carter. Well, I was very impressed with 3D printing,
the speed and solid building it builds. And I hope that all the
folks that are building buildings ought to take a look at this.
Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Calvert. I thank the gentleman.
Dutch.

CYBER PROFESSIONALS

Mr. Ruppersberger. Thank you.
General Daniels, you have mentioned your desire to grow and
flesh out your cyber brigade but that there are challenges in
the training pipeline for the cyber career field. Can you share
some of these challenges and how you are addressing them within
the Army Reserve?
And if anyone else would like to talk on that, feel free.
General Daniels. So this is a place where we are looking to
try and use as much of the civilian-acquired skills to receive
credit on the Army side. So you don't have to do training that
you could possibly even instruct. So we are trying to have
those credits available, reduce the amount of time that that
cyber professional is away from their civilian career.
So minimize the training pipeline that they must go through
because they already have that expertise and go ahead and
leverage that.
So we have been working with the Army on not only the cyber
career field, but lots of other civilian-acquired skills to
make sure that the Army appreciates the training that these
soldiers, you know, citizen soldiers already come to the force
with.
Mr. Ruppersberger. Anyone else have a comment?
Admiral Mustin. Yes, sir. And very similarly----
Mr. Ruppersberger. Where are your stars?
Admiral Mustin. They are actually on my collar. I know you
mentioned that I don't have them on my shoulders here. They are
right there. I was going to offer that in private, but anyway.
But very similar to what you heard from Lieutenant General
Daniels, we are investing heavily in cyber capability. We have
also increased by adding a cyber rating now for our enlisted
sailors and a cyber designator for our officers.
And we are very interested in direct commissioning to
increase the capacity across the Reserve Force, which we see as
a growth industry.
Mr. Ruppersberger. Have you ever worked with a naval
academy at all on this issue?
Admiral Mustin. Absolutely. In fact, I frequently go to
Hopper Hall, which is the cyber center.
General Anderson. I will hit on the training aspect of this
real quick, sir. I can have somebody flying an F-35 before they
are fully qualified to operate on infrastructure as a cyber
operator.
So the footprint that is required if I am going to take
somebody directly into the Reserves and they are not trained, I
have to come up and find that Active-Duty time to train them
and, oh, by the way, be away from their civilian career to get
to that point.
So we really rely on capturing the active component talent
that comes to the Marine Forces Reserve because we can't do it
and train our own people.
Mr. Ruppersberger. Anyone else?
General Hokanson. I would say the same with the Guard. We
have 66 cyber units in 42 different States, and we rely very
heavily on the civilian-acquired skills that they bring.
Not only that, but you will see, we also are very involved
to ensure election security by leveraging that. We are in the
process now of changing the way we had our--we had a cyber
element in every State, and we are actually building them into
a--we call it a defensive cyber element. It is kind of like a
squad, so that if we need to, we can combine States to actually
have cyber additional force structure to address not only on
their Title 10 role, but also how they can help the communities
and mitigate a lot of the ransomware attacks on our public
schools and counties.
Mr. Calvert. Mr. Garcia, we only have a few minutes, so
just--I want to try to get everybody real quick.

VFMA-112

Mr. Garcia. I will just be brief.
First of all, I want to say it warms my cockles to hear an
Army four star say that he asked for six F-35s and additional
F-15EXs. That's some good joint operation shaping you guys are
doing there.
General Anderson, for the Reserve F-18 squadron VFMA I
believe 112, are they getting the APG-79(V)4 AESA Radar upgrade
down in those jets yet, or what is the plan there?
General Anderson. Thank you for the question, sir.
We are upgrading the aircraft for VFMA-112 and plan on
keeping them in the rotation. In fact, they will be going on
their next GDP here in the coming years, just like we have
battalions that are going forward into the first island chain.
So certainly for TAC Air in the Reserves, while small,
right, I would like to have more TAC Air squadrons, but for
that particular component, as the F-18 community overall has
gotten smaller in the Marine Corps, we have captured the bench,
and that squadron is pretty deep.
Mr. Garcia. Yes. You are getting golden parts in there.
But are you getting the AESA upgrade done?
General Anderson. Yes, we are getting not only the upgrade,
but certainly, when you talk about parts, we have excess
capacity now as we get some more from the West Coast.
Mr. Garcia. Okay. I would love to come see that operation
if we can.
General Anderson. Absolutely.
General Healy. And likewise, with the Air Force Reserve,
the F-16s are preblocked. The oldest F-16s we have got running
out there right now we have been using, and we are very wisely
putting to use the radars in those.
Mr. Garcia. In the SABR, the Northrop Grumman SABR in
there. Good. Awesome. Great. Thank you, guys.
General Hokanson. Lastly, Congressman, 22 will complete our
buy. And as John mentioned, in the preblocked F-16s, in another
setting I can tell you how successful they have been, and it is
a huge investment.
Mr. Garcia. It is a game changer, absolutely.
Well, thank you all. I appreciate it.
I yield back.
Mr. Calvert. Great.
Ms. Kaptur, real quickly.

WORKFORCE DEVELOPMENT AND RECRUITMENT

Ms. Kaptur. Thanks, Mr. Chairman.
I am just wondering if you could provide for me, each of
your services, an understanding of how workforce development
and recruitment work to attract enlistees.
And the Army Reserve civilian-acquired skills program, talk
to me about my 983rd unit. How does what you do impact that and
impact recruitment and workforce development in that region? I
have no idea.
Mainly, Reserve and Guard don't come to see us very much.
Active Duty does more, and it is really hard to--the commanding
officer for that unit is in Chicago, so that creates another
issue.
But I am very interested in how each of your services
connects recruitment to workforce development. If you could
provide more specific information to the record, I would be
very grateful for that. Especially in the fields of mechanics,
machine tooling, truck driving, vehicular operation on land,
and then in the air.
General Daniels. So if I could very briefly----
Mr. Calvert. If we could get back on the record on that.
General Daniels. Okay.
Mr. Calvert. That way I will have enough time to recognize
Mr. Aguilar before we probably then have to go vote at that
point.
Mr. Aguilar.

NATIONAL GUARD STATE PARTNERSHIP PROGRAM

Mr. Aguilar. I appreciate that, Mr. Chairman.
I just wanted to briefly ask a question, and maybe it can
be for the record, to highlight the National Guard's State
partnership program. This is something Chairman Calvert has
discussed time and time again to highlight the partnership that
California has with Ukraine. And it proved invaluable, as an
invaluable resource for our ally in this war against Putin's
aggression.
That partnership is a strong example of a proactive
military-to-military relationship, as you all know. I was
pleased to see the increase in funding for the State
partnership program in fiscal year 2025 request.
So I wanted to ask about insight as to how this increase
will support the SSP program this year, including support for
new partner nations as well.
General Hokanson. Congressman, if I could just touch this
briefly. We have really leveraged Russia's invasion of Ukraine
to, in fact, we have actually spoken with a lot of former
neutral countries. Sweden and Finland, obviously, became NATO
allies. They also became a member of the State partnership
program.
Switzerland recently submitted an application to be a state
partner. We have also talked to other neutral countries, yet to
be named, but they have all expressed an interest that they
need to develop a capability based on what they saw. No one
thought there would be another war in Europe. There is now, and
they realize that capability that they need.
We are able to add seven countries this year, which is the
most we have really since we started, because they realize the
benefit that they can get by training with our guardsmen up to
a high level of standard and addressing those shortages they
have in their military.
Mr. Aguilar. I think California has expressed interest in
that Sweden relationship as well. I appreciate the answer.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Calvert. Thanks. We all want to go to Switzerland and
check out the program. All we need is more money for these
state programs. So hopefully we can get through this budget
process.
I appreciate everyone coming out today. Before we conclude,
I want to thank our witnesses for their testimony today.
Ms. McCollum, do you have any comments you would like to
make?
Ms. McCollum. Just once again to the folks who are--this is
the last time before the committee. Sincerely, not only to
thank you, but thank your family members who supported you in
your journey.
Thank you.
Mr. Calvert. And, Mr. Ellzey, I know you had a quick mark
to make so----
Mr. Ellzey. I did. Thank you, sir.
The definition of Reserves is a military force withheld
from action for later decisive use. And that is what the
Reserves are. The Reserves mean if we attrite in war, we send
in the Reserves, both the aircraft, the maintenance, everything
that they need. That is the Reserves. We don't have enough.
The Chinese know that we have got KC-46 delays. The Chinese
know that we are closing the F-18 line. The Chinese know we
don't have any more capacity for F-35s.
So as we look at these line closings imminently and the
inability to send Reserves, we can't send Reserve F-16s to
augment the loss of an aircraft carrier and its F-18s. We need
to keep those lines open because the Chinese know the tanking
capacity, the ability to infill our lines with what we are
going to lose.
Whether it is in Europe, EUCOM, or INDOPACOM, and we need
more--as you said, all it takes is money. However, we need to
keep those lines open because they are watching.
Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Calvert. I thank the gentleman.
We will go with the other 11 committees, take their money,
and we will be able to get this all taken care of.
With that, we are adjourned.

Tuesday, April 30, 2024.

UNITED STATES AIR FORCE AND SPACE FORCE

WITNESSES

HON. FRANK KENDALL III, SECRETARY, DEPARTMENT OF THE AIR FORCE
GENERAL DAVID W. ALLVIN, CHIEF OF STAFF, DEPARTMENT OF THE AIR FORCE
GENERAL B. CHANCE SALTZMAN, CHIEF OF SPACE OPERATIONS, UNITED STATES
SPACE FORCE

Opening Statement of Chairman Calvert

Mr. Calvert. The Defense Subcommittee will come to order.
Today, the subcommittee will receive testimony from the
Honorable Frank Kendall, Secretary of the Air Force; General
David Allvin, Chief of Staff of the Air Force; General Chance
Saltzman, Chief of Space Operations. Thank you all for joining
us today.
General Allvin, I will note that this is your first
appearance before this subcommittee. Welcome and
congratulations on your new role.
Increasingly, volatile world events since the hearing last
year have underscored the importance of maintaining a strong
and ready Air Force and Space Force.
China has engaged in a historic military buildup, seeks to
erode our military superiority. While China remains our pacing
threat, it is not only a threat we face. Russia continues its
assault on Ukraine, and early this month, Iran launched its
first ever direct attack on Israel.
I am pleased that we are able to get supplemental
appropriations across the finish line to address emergent needs
in these three regions.
Our Air and Space Forces must be ready and able to respond
across the globe if needed. We need to be innovative and agile
with the goal of rapidly putting advanced capability in the
hands of our airmen and guardians.
For the Air Force, the fiscal year 2025 budget request is
$228.8 billion. This is 2 percent more than the enacted amount
for fiscal year 2024, which I note does not keep up with
inflation.
When budgets are constrained, tradeoffs must be made, and a
certain level of risk is assumed. Today, we will discuss your
proposed tradeoffs in a constrained top line.
One area that gets a lot of attention is the divestment of
aircraft, and this budget proposes significant divestments. On
one hand, older airframes are less suited for modern missions,
expensive to maintain, and parts are at a premium.
On the other, quantity has a quality onto itself,
particularly in a perilous security environment.
I understand that you have to prioritize to your
constrained top line, but we need to understand the capability
gaps this will create and your mitigation plans.
We also need assurance that your bet on modernization over
sustainment will yield success, and, unfortunately, the track
record is not encouraging so far.
Just last week, we were notified of a Nunn-McCurdy breach
for the MH-139 gray wolf. This follows the Sentinel's Nunn-
McCurdy breach. We need to understand the implications of both
of these breach reviews for fiscal year 2025 and beyond.
I also hope to hear how the Air Force plans to address the
acquisition delays and mitigation plans to ensure there is no
capability gap for the warfighter and the F-15EX, T-7, and E-7,
to name just a few particularly of all of our concern.
On the bright side, I am pleased to see that the Air Force
continues to prioritize investments in the B-21 and Next
Generation Air Dominance aircraft, especially with the recent
down select of the Collaborative Combat Aircraft, two
companies, one of which was founded just a few years ago.
For the Space Force, the fiscal year 2025 budget request is
$29.4 billion, which is, effectively, flat funding compared to
last year. Factor in inflation, this is a real dollar cut. In
fact, the projected budget for Space Force remains flat at this
amount for over the next 5 years.
Budgets are, obviously, tight. However, given the
increasing reliance on space capability and plans to pivot some
missions from aircraft to space, I am skeptical that a flatline
level budget is credible to deliver all the capabilities
needed.
I would like to know where you choose to take risk in the
space portfolio in this year's budget.
This committee expects programs to be well managed. One of
the key reasons for establishing the Space Force was to bring a
focused discipline in delivering capabilities on schedule and
within budget.
The Space Force continues to work in progress in this
regard--a work in progress in this regard, I should say,
especially when it comes to delivering ground systems and user
equipment. For example, the Global Positioning System ground
control system is more than $3 billion over budget, more than 7
years late, and still has not been delivered.
Further, your own assessment identifies a space command and
control program and the family of beyond-line-of-sight
terminals as another challenging program that failed to meet
scheduled milestones and will be delivered late.
The pattern is clear. The problem with space is on the
ground. I hope to hear your plans to ensure ground systems keep
pace with the satellite developments.
On a positive note, I continue to be impressed with the
progress of Space Development Agency and their rapid
development to acquisition process. This committee is willing
to give the Space Force resources to take risk and pursue new
approaches when warranted, and SDA has lived up to its
investments so far.
I think we can agree that there are challenges that need to
be addressed, but I also know that the devil is in the details,
and it matters how things are being addressed.
I have been disappointed with the level of rigor in the
analysis behind some of the Department's program decisions and
organizational proposals. This subcommittee is data driven and
will not accept proposals that are presented simply as done
deals.
Another area of concern is the innovation of rapid fielding
accounts, which has been a focus of mine. The request for
AFWERX is 20.5 million, a substantial decrease from the last 2
years. AFWERX and the SpaceWERX are critical to the defense
innovation ecosystem, essential to expanding opportunities of
nontraditional defense companies and increasing use of
commercial technologies.
I will be interested to hear how you intend to get after
various innovation, if not through the AFWERX and SpaceWERX.
Finally, we are aware of the challenge that the entire
Department is having with recruitment across all components. I
want to hear about your strategy to recruit the airmen and
guardians of today and the service leaders of tomorrow.
We will be working closely with you throughout this budget
process to find ways we can accelerate the fielding of
platforms needed by our warfighters today.
With that, I will yield to the ranking member, Ms.
McCollum, for any opening remarks she would like to make.

Opening Remarks of Ms. McCollum

Ms. McCollum. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for the courtesy.
I would also like to welcome Secretary Kendall, General
Allvin, and General Saltzman.
For fiscal year 2025, the President has proposed eight--
excuse me--$832 billion within our subcommittee's jurisdiction
for the Department of Defense, which is $213 billion for the
Air Force and Space Force.
The Air Force has requested a 1-percent increase, and Space
Force remains relatively flat following a large growth year in
2024. Each of these dollars represents an effort to remain
vigilant in our national defense and to ensure that America
meets our pacing threats.
We are operating under the umbrella of the Fiscal
Responsibility Act, and I know that tough choices were made in
this budget in order to conform to what the law will allow.
As I said in the hearing with Secretary Austin, I hope
Congress has learned a hard lesson, that we should not hold the
national debt limit hostage to arbitrary spending caps.
So, for those who have buyer's remorse over their votes
last May and those who are now criticizing the overall levels
in the budget request, I wish to remind them that the
fundamental strength of our Nation's defense is in the strength
of our military personnel and their families. And that requires
a whole-of-government approach.
Our national security is supported through our entire
budget, which includes healthcare, education, transportation,
and not just the defense budget.
Growing our technological superiority in the air and space
domain are also critical, and it is as important as ever to
educate and train the next generation of mathematicians,
physicists, aeronautical engineers, and computer scientists.
In addition, Congress set the Department's hiring and new
start schedules 6 months back by enacting a final
appropriations bill in March. We must do better to break the
cycle of continuing resolutions.
And I turn to the budget at hand now and the modernization,
which we know is a key theme for the Department of Air Force.
It is concerning that several Air Force programs are still
struggling. F-35 deliveries are delayed, along with an
associated plant repair and infrastructure projects.
Mr. Secretary, we have discussed this several times in
conversations now, and I hope that it is being resolved. It
needs to be resolved. It needs to be resolved immediately.
The Sentinel program is under a critical review because of
time delays and major cost overruns.
The E-7 program has been delayed, and the budget does not
have an advanced program for procurement. At the same time, the
Air Force is proposing fielding new capabilities and required
complex technology development along with it.
For example, I have to ask, how can we be assured that
programs that support long range kill chains will be a success
when the Air Force continues to struggle with the existing
programs of record?
I am also concerned about the state of the Air Force's
infrastructure. It is deficient, and it does not seem to be a
high priority. We have discussed sinkholes at Vandenberg Space
Force Base, the deterioration of runways, the early warning
radar stations in Alaska.
Climate change continues to have a high cost impact on our
national security. Infrastructure at Guam still needs repair
following last year's typhoon, and Congress should have acted
on that. I hope we do so in the future.
But, most importantly, our servicemembers need all of us,
Congress and the Department, to do a better job working
together to provide and maintain infrastructure necessary for
them to be able to even do their jobs.
Mr. Chair, as I close, 10 days ago, we had a series of
overwhelming bipartisan votes on the components of national
security supplemental to support Ukraine, Israel, and the Indo-
Pacific. I hope that that will serve as a model for improving
appropriation bills and getting them approved expeditiously
through 2025, because, as you pointed out, we don't have time
to waste.
Gentlemen, I thank you for your service to the country and
for appearing here today.
With that, Mr. Chair, I yield back.
Mr. Calvert. Thank you, Ms. McCollum.
Chairman Cole intended to be here today but is unable to
present his statement due to obvious disaster in Oklahoma. And,
certainly, our prayers for those who experience these terrible
tornados in Oklahoma, Nebraska, and elsewhere.
So, without objection, his prepared remarks will be
included in the record.
[The information follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Calvert. I will now recognize Ranking Member DeLauro
for any comments she may like to make.

Opening Remarks of Ms. DeLauro

Ms. DeLauro. Thank you so much, Mr. Chairman. And thank you
to you and to Ranking Member McCollum for holding the hearing
on the 2025 budget for the United States Air Force and the
Space Force.
I want to thank our witnesses, Secretary Kendall and
Generals Allvin and Saltzman for appearing before this
subcommittee today and for your dedicated service to our
Nation. You keep the Nation safe. You keep our airmen and women
and guardians safe, and you ensure our allies are supported
wherever democracy and freedom are threatened around the globe.
Through the fiscal year 2025 budget, Congress has a sacred
duty to ensure the Air Force and Space Force have the resources
to fulfill its mission to keep our country secure and ensure
our servicemembers are protected and well equipped.
The President's 2025 budget supports our brave airmen and
women, guardians, their families with a 4.5-percent pay raise,
furthers initiatives to improve access to healthcare and
childcare while addressing housing and subsistence needs. This
is a full compensation package that our servicemembers deserve,
and we need to deliver on all of those components.
In the President's request, the Space Force budget is
relatively flat, following a large growth year in 2024.
Meanwhile, the Air Force has requested roughly $3 billion more
than last year.
I would be remiss if I did not point out that the combat
rescue helicopter is not included in the request. This
helicopter is still flying a critical mission, and Congress
supported this mission in the final 2024 bill by ordering an
additional 10 helicopters to maintain production.
I will continue to support this program and hope to hear
more about the Air Force's plans for maintaining a strong
combat rescue capability.
I am also interested to hear today about how the forces
plan to balance their modernization efforts with management of
existing programs. Additionally, I want to hear about how the
Air Force and Space Force are addressing recruitment issues.
Regrettably, the majority chose to inject culture war
debates into last year's Department of Defense funding process,
and I am concerned with how that might further hurt recruitment
efforts, especially among women.
We must do all we can to ensure that any American who wants
to bravely serve in the U.S. Armed Forces and defend our Nation
feels that they belong and that they are not going to be drawn
into political warfare while confronting the legitimate threats
to freedom, democracy, and, above all, to our national
security.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Calvert. Thank you.
Gentlemen, your full written testimony will be placed in
the record. Please give a brief summary of your statements.
Secretary Kendall, you are recognized.

Summary Statement of Secretary Kendall

Secretary Kendall. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Calvert, Ranking Member McCollum, members of the
subcommittee, General Saltzman, General Allvin, and I thank you
for the opportunity to testify today on the Department of the
Air Force's fiscal year '25 budget submission.
The Department of the Air Force budget request supports the
National Defense Strategy. We appreciate the committee's
support for the recently enacted fiscal year 2024 budget and
your efforts to secure timely passage.
As you are aware, the 6-month delay has had a real impact.
That time cannot be recovered, but at least we can now move
forward with our urgent modernization plans.
As I have testified before this committee repeatedly, time
is my greatest concern. We are on a race for military
technological superiority with a capable pacing challenge. Our
cushion is gone. We are out of time. As we have briefed the
committee at a classified level, the pacing threat moves
steadily forward.
Continued failure to provide on-time authorities and
appropriations will leave the Air Force and Space Force
inadequately prepared. We know this committee fully recognizes
this, and we appreciate your strong bipartisan support.
Our fiscal year 2025 budget request complies with the
Fiscal Responsibility Act. We are requesting 217.5 billion for
the Department of the Air Force, which includes 188 billion for
the Air Force and 29.4 billion for the Space Force.
The fiscal year 2025 budget reflects an increase of 2.1
percent for the Department of the Air Force over the enacted
fiscal year '24 budget, a 2-percent increase for the Air Force
and a 2.4-percent increase for the Space Force. This does not
keep pace with inflation, as was mentioned earlier, or with the
7-percent publicly acknowledged growth to China's military
budget.
To stay within the levels of the FRA, the Department of the
Air Force had to adjust our previous plans. The DAF 25 budget
seeks to preserve the momentum behind our modernization
efforts, particularly the work on operational imperatives that
we initiated and that this committee supported in fiscal year
2024.
In order to preserve modernization, we have marginally
reduced procurement, and we have sustained our foundational
accounts to levels we deemed acceptable, but no more. Because
the Space Force budget is dominated by research and development
accounts, we have had to marginally reduce the pace and scope
of our Space Force modernization programs.
Our first priority in the National Defense Strategy remains
defense of the homeland, which the Department of the Air Force
primarily supports through investments in domain awareness, air
and space defense, early warning, and cyberspace defense
programs.
Our second priority is to deter strategic attacks against
the United States, our allies, and our partners. The Department
of the Air Force fiscal year 2025 budget request prioritizes
nuclear modernization to maintain a safe, secure, and effective
nuclear deterrent.
Notably, the Sentinel ICBM program has experienced
unacceptable cost and schedule increases and is currently
undergoing a Nunn-McCurdy review. The Department of the Air
Force will work closely with the committee as that review
reaches its conclusions.
The third National Defense Strategy priority is to deter
aggression and be prepared to prevail in conflict when
necessary. The Department of the Air Force needs immediate and
significant capability modernization to keep pace with the
growing military capabilities of the PRC. The Department of the
Air Force operational imperatives and the closely related
crosscutting operational enablers continue to guide our
modernization program. The fiscal year 2025 budget request
includes 6.1 billion for these efforts.
Finally, the fourth national defense priority is to build a
resilient Joint Force and enduring advantages. This budget
request invests to ensure that we can recruit and retain the
force we need and ensure that our airmen and guardians and
their families have the quality of life they deserve and can
serve to their full potential.
As we have briefed the committee, the Department of the Air
Force is also currently undertaking a Department-wide effort to
reoptimize to meet the demands of great power competition. The
intent is to minimize both cost impacts and personnel of our
unit movements.
We will work closely with the committee as we develop
detailed plans. We do not anticipate any significant impact on
the fiscal year 2025 budget, and we have not requested funds
for this purpose.
The Department also appreciates the committee's support for
the DOD quick start initiative that was enacted last year. The
Department of the Air Force has obtained approval from the
Secretary of Defense for two programs that will be initiated
under this new authority. They are more resilient national
position navigation and timing capability and C3 battle
management for moving target indication.
Time matters, but so do resources. The United States is
facing a competitor with national purchasing power that exceeds
our own, a challenge we have never faced in modern times.
China is actively developing and expanding capabilities to
challenge strategic stability, attack our critical space
systems, and defeat our ability to project power, especially
air power. Conflict is not inevitable, but it could happen at
any time.
General Allvin and I just returned from a trip to some of
our key bases in the Indo-Pacific. We should all be very proud
of our men and women serving in harm's way and doing everything
they can to deter and be ready for a conflict unlike any we
have seen before.
The Department of the Air Force fiscal year 2025 budget
request is focused on addressing these realities. We commit to
working with the committee to secure timely enactment of this
budget request.
Thank you. We look forward to your questions.
[The information follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Calvert. Thank you, Mr. Secretary.
I now recognize General Allvin for his remarks.

Summary Statement of General Allvin

General Allvin. Thank you. Good afternoon, Chairman
Calvert, Ranking Member McCollum, and distinguished members of
this subcommittee.
Today, I am proud to represent the 677,000 total force
airmen serving our Nation. I want to thank you for your
unyielding support not only for those airmen but for their
families as well.
As we look across the strategic landscape, we find
ourselves in a time of significant consequence. Simultaneous
demands of strategic competition with an aggressive and
increasingly capable PRC and persistent acute threats from
around the globe require the Air Force to maximize their
readiness of today's forces while adapting our structures and
processes to offer the best opportunity to prevail in an
environment of enduring great power competition. Time is not on
our side.
The fiscal year 2025 Air Force budget request reflects
difficult choices. We made tradeoffs to keep the Air Force's
operational readiness today at the minimal acceptable to meet
the Nation's needs while seeking to preserve the previous
year's advances in modernization.
The Air Force budget request also invests in the Air
Force's most precious asset, its airmen, to ensure they remain
the decisive advantage upon which the Nation depends.
Strategic deterrence is a key priority in our National
Defense Strategy, and the U.S. Air Force remains committed to
recapitalization of our nuclear force. We are actively
supporting the process triggered by the Nunn-McCurdy breach of
the Sentinel program and will continue to pursue the path of a
safe, reliable, secure, and effective ground leg of the nuclear
triad well into the future.
Our ability to support the National Defense Strategy
priority of deterring aggression and prevailing in conflict
demands a modern Air Force that is connected to the Joint Force
and can close multiple kill chains in minimal time to control
the tempo of a complex fight with a peer competitor.
To that end, the fiscal year 2025 budget proposes continued
investments in the F-35 and the F-15EX, albeit with fewer than
preferred quantities dictated by the constraints of the Fiscal
Responsibility Act.
We remain committed to the advanced air battle management
system of the NGAT family systems, particularly the
Collaborative Combat Aircraft, which will allow the Air Force
to deliver the affordable mass required to be effective against
a very capable PRC.
We are also committed to building forward basing that is
resilient enough to enable continued sortie generation even
while under attack.
To arrest the decline in our readiness, we have proposed
modest increases in investments in flying hours and weapon
system sustainment to support them while prioritizing
investments in critical physical and cyber infrastructure.
Our airmen are and always will be the deciding factor in
any conflict our Air Force faces, and we are committed to their
health, development, and quality of life.
We have made significant progress, thanks to Congress'
support, in increases in basic pay, adjustments to basic
allowance for housing and subsistence to account for the
macroeconomic factors they face. There is still work to be
done.
During our recent trip to the Indo-Pacific, Secretary
Kendall and I saw dedicated airmen that were eager to
accomplish the mission, despite infrastructure degradation
caused by natural disaster and persistent environmental
challenges, as well as limited access to the healthcare enjoyed
by most CONUS bases.
The job of your Air Force has not changed since its
inception. Support the defense of this Nation through credible
deterrence and unmatched combat prowess. To preserve that level
of deterrence, we must maintain our readiness today, modernize
our force for tomorrow, and provide the absolute best support
to our airmen and their families.
Success on any battlefield is a team effort. I want to
thank the Members of Congress and this committee for your past
and continued support.
Thank you. And I look forward to your questions.
Mr. Calvert. Thank you, General.
Now we will move to General Saltzman for his remarks.
General, you are recognized.

Summary Statement of General Saltzman

General Saltzman. Chairman Calvert, Ranking Member
McCollum, and distinguished members of the committee, thank you
for your continued support and for the opportunity to testify
on the Space Force's posture for fiscal year 2025.
As the Space Force prepares to celebrate its fifth
birthday, we are wholly dedicated to the work of forgoing a
service purpose-built for great power competition. Space has
never been more critical to the security of our Nation, and the
success or failure of the Joint Force depends heavily upon the
capabilities we present.
It is our responsibility to contest and control the domain,
to defend U.S. space capabilities, and to protect the Joint
Force from space-enabled attack. Gaining and maintaining space
superiority is the purpose for which the Space Force was
established.
With about 3.5 percent of the DOD budget, the Space Force
offers a tremendous value proposition to the Nation. Every
dollar invested in space brings asymmetric returns, but that
means every dollar cut creates asymmetric risk.
Against a near-peer adversary, space superiority is the
linchpin. Without it, we cannot deter conflict. Without it, we
cannot provide vital effects. Without it, we cannot protect the
Joint Force. Until we have built the infrastructure to achieve
space superiority, the Space Force is a work in progress.
The Space Force's theory of success includes three parts:
avoid operational surprise, deny the benefits of attack in
space, and conduct responsible counterspace activities.
The Space Force budget request is designed to support the
National Defense Strategy by building, training, and equipping
the forces the Nation needs to perform each activity,
preserving freedom of action in space while deterring and
denying adversarial objectives.
Avoiding operational surprise requires us to maintain an
accurate understanding of the space domain at all times. 8.3
percent of our budget is dedicated to this aim. Operating
across disaggregated sensor frameworks, the Space Force
provides the maximum information possible to decisionmakers
from the tactical to the strategic level.
Denying the benefits of attack in space demands that we
make any attack against U.S. space capabilities impractical and
self-defeating. 43.4 percent of our budget is devoted to this
objective, investing in resiliency for missile warning and
tracking, satellite communications, and positioning,
navigation, and timing.
Hybrid architectures and proliferated constellations impose
a heavy cost on aggression.
Finally, responsible counterspace activities describes the
mechanism by which the Space Force contests and controls the
space domain. The fiscal year 2025 budget dedicates 24.7
percent of the Space Force budget to space superiority.
Within the constraints of the FRA, fiscal year 2025 Space
Force budget reflects hard choices to maintain legacy space
services and preserve current readiness, but it also slows the
fielding of a modernized force.
Thank you for the opportunity to discuss the Space Force's
fiscal year 2025 budget and posture. Even in the face of
accelerating threats, the Space Force remains the preeminent
military space organization in the world.
With the support of this committee, our guardians will
preserve and expand our strategic advantage, and we will step
up to meet our pacing challenge. So long as you continue to
trust and invest in your Space Force, the Space Force will
respond with unparalleled value for the Nation.
I look forward to your questions.

KC-46 DELAYS

Mr. Calvert. Thank you.
And we will begin with the questions. Each member will be
given 5 minutes for their questions and answers. When your
timer turns yellow, you have a minute remaining.
First, I will recognize myself.
Obviously, the KC-46 is an important aircraft for us to
obtain. The Air Force is in the process of recapitalizing this
aging fleet of KC-135s, which I think was the old 707 airframe,
which is probably the only plane on the--707 is still flying on
the planet, our fleet of that aircraft.
There has been some issues, obviously, with the KC-46. But
one that seems to keep--never seems to go away is the remote
vision system, the RVS, and the stiff refueling boom. Efforts
to resolve both these issues are underway. It has been underway
for a long time. I understand there is a final design solution
expected for RVS by the early fiscal year 2026 and mid-fiscal
year 2025, respectively.
Until the deficiencies are resolved, the KC-46A will not be
fully mission capable.
Secretary, we just heard this morning from the chief of the
Air Force Reserve that the delivery of the KC-46, for instance,
at March Air Force base in my area will be delayed. What is the
problem, and what are you doing to resolve it?
Secretary Kendall. As you mentioned, Mr. Chairman, the
issue with the remote viewing system has been there for quite
some time. It does not completely limit the aircraft. The
aircraft is capable for transmitting fuel to every aircraft in
our inventory except the A-10. I think that is the only one at
this point that we can't refuel.
And there were certain lighting conditions, which make it
difficult to do refueling. So the aircraft is largely
operational, and we are continuing to take delivery of them
while we work through solving this problem. I think the dates
you said were roughly the dates.
We are continuing to procure the KC-46 at a rate of about
15 per year, including fiscal year 2025. And we are starting
the work on the transition to the Next Generation, which will
have to be able to survive in a more contested environment.

INNOVATION CAPABILITIES

Mr. Calvert. Okay. We are looking forward to getting that
resolved and getting delivery on the KC-46 aircraft.
Innovation and rapid fielding to the warfighter have been,
obviously, top priorities of this committee and mine since
coming to Congress, which I consider a collaborative effort
with DIU. Establishing a strong infrastructure for the defense
innovation ecosystem is critical.
In fiscal year 2025 request, it includes 20.5 million for
AFWERX prime, which is a decrease of 83.3 million in 2024 and
over 130 million in 2023 request.
Agility and autonomy prime efforts dropped from 70 million
in fiscal year 2024 to 6 million in 2025. I am concerned the
Air Force has decided to slash resources in a well-known
innovation hub.
Mr. Secretary, what message are you sending to innovators
if AFWERX's budget request has been gutted in fiscal year 2025?
And, given the importance of innovation, can I get your
commitment to support DIU with manpower billets and detailees
so we can get this thing off the ground?
With that, Secretary, you are recognized.
Secretary Kendall. You won't find anybody more supportive
of innovation than myself and my colleagues here I think.
As I mentioned in my opening statement, we are putting
about $6 billion into modernization under the operational
imperatives. The guidance I have given to our acquisition
people is to structure programs to give meaningful capabilities
into the hands of our operators as quickly as possible. So that
is what we are trying to do with our programs.
But there is also an observation that goes back some time
that we have been starting more things than we can finish by a
significant margin. We have to be more careful about the things
we start and be certain that they are going to be cost-
effective, and they are going to fit into our budgets in the
future and lead to real field of capability.
So we have been trying to pare back some of the things
which have little, if any, chance of actually transitioning
across the valley of death to focus on the things that will.
I have recently reached out to the directors of both DIU
and SCO to set up day-long briefings with them to go through
all their programs and give them feedback on the things that
they are working on that we think will actually get into our
budgets.
And, in general, what we are working to do is try to ensure
that we have a much more efficient and effective pipeline of
new capabilities coming into the inventory as quickly as we
can. The threat demands that.
So you wouldn't find anybody, you won't find anybody more
interested in innovation and getting it fielded, but we also
have to, given the budget constraints we have, make wise
decisions at the front end about which things to pursue.
Mr. Calvert. Anything else, General?
General Allvin. The only thing I would add to what the
Secretary said is also in one of our reoptimize for great power
competition. One of the things that we are looking at is having
this integrated capability command. When we talk about the
valley of death, we need to have the other side of the valley
of death pulling, saying bring this to me.
And having this integrated into one entity that says I have
a single force design, I need this, I need this, I need this,
and be able to match the innovative ideas to something that
will make it into the force design so, as the Secretary said,
that dollar has a better chance of making it into meaningful
capability sooner.
So we are trying also to work on the other end to make sure
those innovations are targeted and focused on a force design
that is going to use them.
Mr. Calvert. Ms. McCollum.

SPACE NATIONAL GUARD

Ms. McCollum. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
This morning we heard from the National Guard, during the
budget hearing, a lot about a legislative proposal to move the
Air National Guard members to Space Force. In the hearing, we
were informed that 70 percent of Guard members wish to stay in
the Guard.
And I expect that you are more than aware that our
Governors, the chair's and my Governors included, were very
unhappy about this proposal. 48 of the 50 Governors signed a
letter in opposition, as well as all the States and
territories.
And, as I mentioned this morning, as a former State
legislature that had the purview over the Minnesota National
Guard, I can tell you that the States need to be consulted and
need to be full partners moving forward in any major change
such as this.
So, you know, one would wonder why Congress should
seriously consider this if our Governors and the National
Guards are so opposed. Maybe, I wonder, were they opposed
because they weren't consulted and their input wasn't sought
before this proposal.
So, right now, this morning, it would appear that this
would be dead on arrival.
And the creation of a space National Guard might not be the
most cost-effective idea either. In fact, the Congressional
Budget Office said in 2020 that the estimated one-time cost of
$400 to $900 million for additional facilities in each State
and then anywhere from $385 to $490 million in annual operating
costs.
So I know the authorizers are looking at that. This is
their purview. I look forward to their decision, and then we
will work with them as finding funding as they move forward.
So we had the conversation this morning. I thought it was
only fair that you hear what this committee had to say.

CANCER RATES

What I want to ask you about, though, today, is cancer
rates. Last year, we discussed about the high cancer rates in
pilots and ground crews. Air crews and members had an 87-
percent higher rate of melanoma and a 39-percent higher rate of
thyroid cancer. Men had a 16-percent higher rate of prostate
cancer; women, a 16-percent higher rate of breast cancer.
Overall, air crews 24-percent higher rate of all types of
cancer. In addition, ground crews had a 19-percent higher rate
of brain and nervous system cancers, 15-percent higher rate of
thyroid cancers, 9-percent rate higher of kidney or retinal
cancers, while women had a 7-percent higher rate of breast
cancer.
Now, a new 2-year Air Force study has found what appears to
be a higher rate of brain and spinal cord cancer among children
of servicemembers at Cannon Air Force Base in New Mexico. The
Air Force has been saying that the three instances of the rare
cancers are not significantly significant--statistically
significant, yet those rare tumors are showing up among
children with parents stationed at Cannon Air Force Base at
higher rates than children with parents stationed at other
bases or in the civilian population.
And, of course, the Air Force is still investigating cancer
concerns among missileers, nuclear missile maintainers, and
support staff.
So, if this is about how we are keeping our troops and
their families safe, if our servicemembers are signing up to
serve, and they are getting cancer at 30 to 40 years old, or
their spouses or their children now have life-threatening
tumors, how is their quality of life affected?
Not only do they have to worry about their own personal
health, they have to take time off of duty for extended
hospital stays and doctors' appointments. This will certainly
impact retention and will impact overall DOD healthcare costs.
Secretary Kendall, your posture statement in a lengthy
session is outlining in the Air Force's role in taking care of
its people, but it fails to mention about the healthcare or
cancer. So please tell me that you are working to address this
and what we can expect to see from the Air Force about these
cancer rates. They are alarming, and I want you to know this
committee is very concerned.
Secretary Kendall. Ranking Member, we are very concerned
about the possibility of increased cancer rates among people
that are serving in certain locations in particular. We have a
study, as you mentioned, on missileers that has been going on
for about a year now. It is well underway.
We are trying to be very transparent about our findings and
work very closely with our people. We are reaching out to
people who have served to try to get a better sense of what
cancer it really is. And we are working very closely with the
VA on this.
So we are just as concerned as you are about this. We are
trying to get to the bottom of it and understanding exactly
what has happened and try to make sure that our people work in
a safe environment.
Do you want to add anything to that?
General Allvin. I would just state, as the Secretary said,
the Air Force School of Aerospace Medicine is doing as much
longitudinally forward as backward as we can do because there
is the correlation and the causation. We really need to figure
out what some of the root causes are so we don't spend money
where it is not going to be most effective for them and their
families.
But, to the Secretary's point on the transparency, that is
the one thing we can do. That doesn't cost any money, and we
are being very aggressive about that. Our commanders and our
leaders are letting the people know in the communities what is
going on when it is going on. However, until we get to the
final answer, we understand that that is not going to be
satisfactory.
So we are putting the Air Force School of Aerospace
Medicine on this as hard as we certainly can.
Ms. McCollum. Well, being of the Agent Orange generation
and--I will just--I won't get too personal about this. Being to
reunions and that, Marine Corps reunions, hearing the stories
of how things were impacted, knowing how difficult the
Department of Defense and the VA made processing Agent Orange
claims, the lesson we learned in passing the PACT Act and
moving forward on that, I know that you are working and looking
at studying it.
But, for these families affected, looking and studying, we
need to start making sure that they are included in how we are
moving forward and addressing this.
And I hear what you are saying. I just don't know that
people are feeling the care the way that we want them to. So
would you keep the committee informed on a quarterly basis
where you are on this?
If you need more funding, more resources, we have to work
with the NIH. We have to do whatever we have to do. But the
atomic war veterans are, you know, still not recognized for
their health concerns in my opinion, and I don't want on my
watch to be part of this committee, nor do I believe you
gentlemen want to be on your watch not addressing this
expeditiously.
I yield back.
Mr. Calvert. I thank the gentlelady.
Ms. DeLauro.

COMBAT RESCUE HELICOPTER PROGRAM

Ms. DeLauro. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Thank you,
Mr. Womack.
Secretary Kendall, General Allvin, again, thanks for being
here. I understand you have to make difficult budget decisions.
In my view, a top priority should be the capability to rescue
our men and women who are in harm's way.
I am concerned about the service's decision to terminate
the combat rescue helicopter program. In my view, the moral
imperative to, quote, leave no one behind is critical to show
our commitment to the men and women who risk their lives to
protect and defend us in all theaters of operation.
Last year, the Air Force told this committee that a
decision to truncate CRH would limit the capacity for dedicated
combat search and rescue, combat search and rescue forces
available to the Joint Force.
How does this decision ensure that no one is left behind?
How do you plan to protect the men and women in uniform moving
forward? You know, what will you be doing in the future? Is
there a replacement for what we are doing with the combat
rescue helicopter?
Secretary Kendall. The search and rescue mission, the
recovery mission is a critical mission for our force. What has
changed and caused to change our program is the threats that we
face and the operational environment which will likely be
committed.
When we look at the mix of systems that we have and our
capabilities that are in the Joint Force, the type of
helicopter that the 60 Whiskey is will work in certain
circumstances but not in others. In particular, not against the
most stressing threats that we face.
And, also, for a lot of recoveries in the Pacific over
water, for example, you don't need that kind of capability. You
can use a helicopter that is not specially equipped or very
expensive.
So we are looking at the mix. We think we have acquired
enough of the 60 Whiskeys that will be able to do the mission
where it is an appropriate tool to do it. And we are starting
to look at more survivable ways to do recoveries and provide
airmen the chance to survive in other environments,
particularly in more contested environments.
I will let General Allvin add if he wants to.
General Allvin. The Secretary really covered just about all
of it. We are not only looking at our joint partners who do
have additional capabilities but also our allies and partners
in the environments in which we may also need them, which is,
when we think about the European context, we do believe that
between our joint partners and allies and partners who have
that capability, we will be able to have enough capacity
sufficiently.
But the Secretary really nailed it. When we talk about the
Indo-Pacific theater, it is a different ball game, and we have
to understand how to get there over vast distances and try and
survive.
We have our folks at the warfare center doing weapons
school, integration exercise and tasks to figure out how
through tactics, techniques, and procedures we can make it more
survivable.
And the combat rescue helicopter and the HH Whiskey is not
that significantly more survivable than the Gulf's War or in
any of the other that our joint partners have. So anymore of
that capacity did not yield that much more capability for us to
do that.
So we do need to solve that problem in the Indo-Pacific,
and I would say with the additional 10 that was added in 2024,
we are almost to the program of record anyway. So the program
record, as designed with that additional 10, it almost gets us
there anyway. So we almost have the capacity that was
envisioned to begin with.
Ms. DeLauro. Is it possible for you all to share with us,
given what you have talked about in terms of changing
environments, changing theaters, et cetera, to really let us
know what your--what are your plans in terms of replacing that
capacity?
And, you know, at what stage is the development--at what
stage are we in that planning for the future? The Indo-Pacific
is in the future, you know, but today we are operating in the
Red Sea. So it is--how do we operate there? What is our
capacity going to be?
And, you know, again, for the future, to let us know where
that is going, but I worry about the near term versus what that
future environment is going to be.
General Allvin. Yes, ma'am. Absolutely. I agree.
And I would say that the Indo-Pacific is not only the
future. It is approaching us rapidly.
But your point about today being the Red Sea and the Middle
East, with that, we do have the capacity. And again, between us
and our joint partners, we do have the capacity to meet those
needs.
Ms. DeLauro. You believe we have the capacity?
General Allvin. I do. I do.
Ms. DeLauro. You do.
Okay. I think it is important for this committee to
understand and to know because what we don't want to do, as I
say, last year you told this committee the decision to truncate
would limit the capacity for dedicated combat search and rescue
forces available to the Joint Force. That was just last year.
General Allvin. From the Air Force, yes. And so that is why
we are working with our other joint partners and allies and
partners. And, with the addition of the additional 10 percent
of the capacity that was added into last year, I believe we
have sufficient capacity.
Ms. DeLauro. Okay. If you can lend more clarity to that for
us, I think that would be helpful, at least for myself. I don't
know about others.

F-35 ADVANTAGES

Let me just try to focus on another aircraft. In full
disclosure, it is tied to my home State of Connecticut. That is
the F-35. Many capabilities with the F-35. We cannot discuss
them all here in open session, but do you know of any other
tactical fighter in the world being produced that is as capable
as the F-35?
Secretary Kendall. No.
General Allvin. No.
Ms. DeLauro. Okay.
What advantage does the F-35 and the fifth generation
aircraft bring to the fight? What positive feedback have you
gotten from the recent deployments on the jet? And what
additional investments can Congress make to increase readiness
of the F-35 fleet?
General Allvin. I would say, to begin with, the F-35 offers
additional survivability, an advanced suite of sensors, and
integration into the fight that really we haven't seen before
in modern combat. So that survivability, the lethality of it,
and the ability to penetrate deep in places that other of our
fourth generation aircraft can't, including the sensors and the
radar that is coming.
That is why I want to say this is the difference. The F-35
we have is a good F-35. The F-35 on the horizon is the F-35
that we really need for the China fight, the one that has the
tech refresh that gives us the capability to have those
future--the future capabilities that meet the threat where it
is.
So it is capable, and it will defeat the threats that we
have today. We continually need the modernization and the new
capabilities to meet the threat that is rapidly approaching.
Secretary Kendall. Let me add to that. I have been with the
F-35 since its inception, and it is the best aircraft all
around, multi-role aircraft certainly in the world and will
stay so, but it has got to get to the next set of technical
upgrades. Block four is what it is called.
And, for the years I was in my previous position, we were
trying to get to block three. The threat has not stood still,
and we have got to continue to modernize and upgrade the
aircraft as we go forward. And right now the contractors are
really struggling to deliver block four to us.
And that is our priority is to get those aircrafts. That is
one of the reasons we reduced our buy of F-35 a little bit in
this budget. We had financial constraints as well, but we also
are really in great need of getting that next generation of
capability out of it.
Ms. DeLauro. So does that--so you are meaning additional
investments from Congress to assist in that process or is it--
--
Secretary Kendall. What we need fundamentally is for the
contractor to deliver the capability that we have been
promised.
Ms. DeLauro. What are the obstacles to getting to block
four?
Secretary Kendall. The struggle with the technology, with
the software in particular but also with some of the hardware
involved in the--each major upgrade includes both hardware and
software upgrades, and both have been a problem for this
aircraft.
I can't--as you said, it is classified. I can't go into a
lot of details, but we can get you a briefing on the details if
you would like to see that.
And some of the subsystems are struggling as well. So it
has been a combination of problems with different parts of the
major upgrade.
Ms. DeLauro. Thank you.
I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Calvert. I thank the gentlelady.
Mr. Womack.

FOREIGN PARTNER TRAINING

Mr. Womack. Thank you.
I am so glad you brought up the F-35 because I am going to
throw a softball question at the Secretary.
You know, we are not the only people that are going to be
flying the F-35. We have got a lot of allies and partners
buying it through the foreign military sales program, and after
an exhaustive and very lengthy process, the decision was made
to train foreign military pilots in my district, in Fort Smith,
Arkansas.
And I can tell all of you the river valley in Arkansas is
very excited to hear the sound of freedom beginning this fall,
I guess, when the Polish show up.
Secretary Kendall, how important is it to get our foreign
partners trained on this amazing airframe and the impact it has
on national security?
Secretary Kendall. It is critically important. I think one
of the best testimonials to the value of the aircraft is that
the number of countries buying it keeps increasing. You know,
we started with seven partners, and now we have got quite a few
additional people acquiring it.
And it is critical for a number of reasons. A, it is
cutting-edge technology, but, B, it allows us to interoperate
very effectively, train with, and fight alongside of our
partners in the same way to be as effective as a total force as
possible and to integrate into the rest of the elements of the
force.
So we are delighted that we are moving forward on that and
getting that under operation as well. That is going to be a
major step forward to be able to train in the United States,
which is what we have planned.
Mr. Calvert. General Allvin.
General Allvin. I was just going to second what the
Secretary said about the value of the being able to hold
training on fifth generation platforms, and I am a little bit
biased, but I would say we have the best pilots in the world.
And, if you are going to train, you want to train with the
best.
And I just think that helps our combat capability as the
United States Air Force, as the Department of Defense, and as a
Nation, if we can maintain the ability to train in the common
tactics, techniques, and procedures and be able to proliferate
that throughout like-minded nations, I think that is a value
proposition that makes the foreign military's training in the
United States that much more.
Mr. Womack. To stand up a mission like that is not easy.
There are facility improvements that need to be made, and this
committee has been very good to help us fund those. And all of
you have a standing invitation to come down and see the work
that is going on and to see some of that training once it
commences a little bit later on this fall.

PACIFIC AIR FORCE EXERCISES

I want to ask you a question about exercises because I note
that there is an unfunded requirement amount of nearly a
quarter of a billion dollars for the pacific Air Force
exercises.
General Allvin, help me understand the importance of
conducting these theaterwide exercises. How do they help our
formations? How do they help us integrate at scale and across
domains?
General Allvin. Thank you for that, Congressman.
We certainly are looking to change the manner in which we
do exercises. We have done exercises in bits and pieces, and a
lot of the exercises are done on the backs of the wing commands
who understand how they want to try and get their formations
within their wings more ready for their piece of the fight.
But, if we are going to enter a fight in the Indo-Pacific
where we have to do agile combat employment, complex situations
where we need to be able to aggregate for effect and
disaggregate for survival, that is complex and that takes
training at a larger scale.
If you just do it in bit pieces, you won't find out where
the holes in your swing are. You have to understand fitting it
together in something that looks more like you may actually
have to experience in combat before you will do that.
So the increase in being able to do larger scale exercises,
that is where you are going to find out where some of your
weaknesses are. We haven't had the ability to do that as much
as we would like to. And so, moving forward, I think that will
help us advance our capability more effective in the Indo-
Pacific fight.
Mr. Womack. Yes.

LP 480

Finally, Mr. Chairman, you know, I am going to reserve, you
know, an opinion on this whole LP 480, this legislative
proposal that Ms. McCollum brought up. I do think it is a bit
dangerous, though, for us to enter into an era where we are
usurping the authority of our Governors. Forty-eight of them
have expressed some discontent with the proposal.
There is the option of status quo, and I don't know--you
know, I have not thought through it completely, but as a
guardsman, as somebody who has some unique insight into the
dual mission of our Guard, I guess I would say this. I am a
little concerned. I saw some numbers on polling among these
personnel. We are talking about a thousand people here, and the
prospect of some of them looking for other missions so that
they can remain part of the Guard is a bit of a concern for me.
So I guess my last question would be, are we going to
create a gap in here in capability? That would ultimately be my
biggest concern.
Secretary.
Secretary Kendall. There has been a lot of confusion I
think about this. First of all, we deeply value the Guard
itself. It is an enormously important component of our overall
force. And we deeply value these people and the units that they
are in. There are only about 578 people that will be affected
by this. You know, the Guard is over 100,000. So it is a very
small fraction.
This is a very unusual situation we have. We created this
Space Force, and we took people out of the Air Force and other
services, and we are taking people out of the Reserve
component.
And under the act we just passed last year created a
personnel management system for the Space Force so they could
have full- and part-time people and manage that very small
force as efficiently as possible.
We have got 578 people in the Guard, in the Air Guard who
are, essentially, orphans right now, and they really need to be
integrated into the Space Force. The attempt is to integrate
them exactly as they are, to keep them in place, keep them in
the same job, serving the same way, doing the same thing. So
there is not going to be any change here.
This is also--this is not a precedent for anything else.
This is a very unusual, unique situation that we created
because of the creation of the Space Force. So we are trying to
essentially clean up the battlefield and fix this loose end, if
you will, in the creation of the Space Force.
General Saltzman has a very small entity--I don't mean to
say that in a derogative way--but a very important one. His
mission is absolutely critical in the country, and he needs to
be able to manage that force, including the personnel in that
force as efficiently and effectively and with little
bureaucracy as possible.
So we don't want to go in the opposite direction that the
Congress went in last year of giving the opportunity to do that
under the Space Force Personnel Management Act by creating a
whole new entity or by leaving, for that matter, the people in
the Air Guard where we can work that out. We can make any of
these things work if we have to, but, by far, the best solution
is to actually integrate these people into the Space Force.
And, again, this is not an attempt to undo the Guard. It is
a very small number of people. It is only six States that are
affected. It is not a precedent for anything else. It is just a
way to make the Space Force into the entity that it needs to be
to be effective.
Mr. Womack. Thank you for clarifying.
I yield back, Mr. Chairman. Thank you so much.
By the way, I have got to leave here in a minute and go
meet with the city of Fort Smith board of directors who are
here today, and I am sure the first thing they are going to ask
me is, how is our F-35 mission coming? So thank you so much.

UAE ACQUISITIONS

Mr. Calvert. Since you brought up the F-35, just really
quickly, what is going on--since I heard from some of our
friends on UAE the other day, what is going on with the
proposed purchase, UAE acquisition of the F-35? Any progress on
that?
Secretary Kendall. I don't have anything new on that. Let
me take that and get back to you, Mr. Chairman. As far as I
know, there is no obstacle that I am aware of right now.
Mr. Calvert. Thank you.

PILOT RETENTION

Mr. Ruppersberger. Secretary Kendall, as you are well
aware, the Air Force is having trouble retaining as many pilots
because of the private sector paying so much more money, better
benefits, and those type of issues. The Air Force is competing,
and I don't know how they can continue to compete. So it is a
major issue that we have to deal with.
What are the incentives that we have, if any, that they can
do that? There are people that can leave the Air Force, fly,
and then also be in the Reserves or National Guard or whatever
you would call that. Have you seen any an improvements over the
last 2 years of this issue?
And then, finally, what about the percentage of pilots who
leave active duty for private sector and--I have asked this
before--joined the Reserves or National Guard?
Secretary Kendall. We can get you some numbers on that. We
do have a shortage of pilots, and we have been working to
reduce that. The greatest obstacle to higher pilot production
is the pipeline, particularly the availability of training
aircraft. And that is one of the reasons we need to get the T-7
fielded to have a more reliable aircraft.
So I have been visiting the contractors involved in the
maintenance of the T-38, and just it is a constant struggle to
try keep those airplanes flying and get people through the
pipeline.
We are using bonuses very effectively. The Congress just
gave us the authority to increase our bonuses for pilot
retention, and I think that was just put in place. And I think
early indications are that that is going to be effective.
We have a lot of pilots who are in the Reserve and Guard
who are commercial pilots, you know, during their civilian
lives and then still remain in the service part time. And that
is a very effective way to retain those people as well.
Do you want to add something?
General Allvin. I would just add to the retention
initiatives, you know, we have often offered the incentives for
reenlistment or retention bonuses. What we have done, though,
is we have actually taken some data. And it turns out that the
way we have done it in the past, sometimes we ask those who are
eligible for it maybe within a year or a year and a half of
when their sort of commitment is up, and we found out after
lots of surveys that they may have already sort of made up
their mind by that time.
So, in working with Congress, this new incentive program
allows us to actually request it earlier, and they can help
shape their future rather than be shaped by a decision at the
last minute. And we also find that it is not just about the pay
for them. There are opportunities where, depending on where
they are in their life, with their family, the opportunity to
perhaps get a preference for getting stationed somewhere or not
moving, that is an alternative for them. They value that over
the actual financial incentive.
And we are starting our second year of doing that. So we
are doing a longitudinal analysis. As the Secretary said, the
early returns are good, but we are finding out that we can just
find more creative ways to meet them where they are at. And it
is not just about the dollars and cents, because they love to
serve. We are going to continue to seek those to be able to
maintain the retention.
I will add that, while we do have retention issues, we are
still filling 100 percent of our combat cockpits. Those are
being filled as well as our training. Where we are taking the
risk in mitigating is in the rated staff positions and some of
the other, but we still do need to plus up and retain as many
of those pilots as we can.

PILOT TRAINING BACKLOG

Mr. Ruppersberger. On the other hand, there is also a
training backlog for pilots. What are the root causes of this
backlog, and how are you addressing it, and what additional
resources do you need from us?
General Allvin. Well, thank you, Congressman. As the
Secretary said, it really has been getting them through the
pipeline because of aging aircraft. So the T-38, much older,
and we had issues with the J85 engine. And, as the Secretary
said, getting that T-7 here as soon as possible with the
aircraft that we need is really what we are focusing on with
the contractor.
We also are looking at new ways of doing pilot training and
understanding ways that we can get them through the pipeline
faster. And those are things like, if you have a multiseat
aircraft where it is more like what the airlines do as far as
the training, you can do more in the simulator. If you can do
more in the simulator, you can preserve the pilot's time, fewer
aircraft hours.
So we are seeing those. We are seeing gains there. But,
unfortunately, they have been masked by the supply issues and
supply chain issues that are limiting the availability of the
aircraft. So, if we can get through those supply and supply
chain issues, I think that is where we are going to see the
fruits of the labor of these other initiatives that, on their
own, are increasing the number of throughput pilots that we can
get.
Mr. Ruppersberger. I yield back.
Mr. Calvert. I thank the gentleman.
Mr. Aderholt.

SPACE COMMAND LOCATION

Mr. Aderholt. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I just want to
mention, you know, that Congress has remained troubled about
how the Space Command location was selected and as you saw the
language in both the NDAA and the fiscal year 2024 budget.
Mr. Secretary, I just wanted to get your commitment that
you will continue to follow congressional intent, as expressed
by the laws that we passed, and especially let the independent
investigation run their course on this.
Secretary Kendall. I am obviously very familiar with the
issue, Congressman. And we will certainly follow the law and
cooperate with the investigation the entire way.

SPACE ACCESS, MOBILITY, AND LOGISTICS

Mr. Aderholt. Thank you. I appreciate that. And let me ask
about the Space Access, Mobility, and Logistics. In recent
testimony, General Saltzman, to the Senate Armed Services
Committee, you talked about $20 million in this year's
President's budget for Space, Access, Mobility and Logistics,
and said the funding would be, quote, ``used to study and
figure out if there is military utility for much-needed
capabilities like in-space refueling.''
According to public reports, China has already found
utility for in-space refueling and have demonstrated this
capability in 2021 and 2022, and have integrated lessons
learned into military doctrine.
So would it be accurate to say that the DOD is going to
study a capability that our adversary is already executing, and
could you talk about that?
General Saltzman. Yes, sir. Thank you for the question. I
have two things to say on that. One is we are evaluating the
military utility. As Secretary Kendall mentioned, we want to
make sure that our S&T budget goes as far as we possibly can.
And we want to make sure, if we are going to pursue a
technology, there is a pathway to fielding an operational
capability. So that is part of the assessment.
And then, from a mission standpoint, we are rapidly trying
to shift from large satellites in geosynchronous orbit whose
lifespan requires them to have a lot of fuel where refueling
could be valuable. We are shifting from that kind of
architecture into a proliferated low Earth orbit set of
constellations.
We are talking hundreds of satellites much smaller and more
easily to replace. So the idea is that you wouldn't need to
refuel them, because you are trying to replenish that
proliferated constellation on a more frequent basis. So 3 to 5
years on orbit, replace it with updated technology, wouldn't
necessarily require the same level of servicing on orbit. So we
are trying to get the balance just right and make sure that all
the dollars that we invest will be properly utilized.
Mr. Aderholt. Secretary Kendall, do you have anything you
want to add to that?
Secretary Kendall. I think General Saltzman had it just
right.
Mr. Aderholt. How would additional resources for the Space
Access, Mobility, and Logistics be helpful and ensure the
continued U.S. space superiority?
General Saltzman. Well, one area, of course, is the launch
infrastructure. A lot of this comes--when we talk about Space
Access, Mobility, and Logistics, one of the key pieces is space
lift infrastructure.
And the dramatic increase of commercial launches at our two
primary launch locations near Cape Canaveral, at Patrick's
Space Force Base, and out at Vandenberg, that is taking a toll
on its infrastructure, and we need to recoup that and keep that
up.
So keeping that infrastructure current and capable of
supporting the ops tempo is going to be a primary resourcing
concern.
Secretary Kendall. I would just add to that that the
biggest--and General Saltzman should comment on this too. Our
greatest regret, if you will, in the constraints that we had
this year was we couldn't more forward more quickly on counter-
space capability in particular.
Our pacing challenge is fielding a number of systems that
threaten the joint force and that essentially are targeting
assets like aircraft carriers. We need to have the capability
to do something about those assets so that they can't provide
that targeting service to the Chinese military.
And that would be the highest thing on our list of things
that we aren't able to move forward as quickly as we would like
to on.
Mr. Aderholt. I see my time has gone out. I yield back.
Mr. Calvert. I thank the gentleman.
Mr. Case.

BUDGET REDUCTIONS

Mr. Case. Thank you.
General Saltzman, your budget came to us at a reduction of
2 percent after, of course, 4 years of significant growth, but
we would expect that growth, given that you are 5 years old. So
we are trying to obviously ramp up as fast as possible.
And, although I guess you could say a 2-percent budget
reduction is--well, thanks for that, because we got a lot of
demands. Still, it begs the question of what risks we are
accepting in your trajectory to get you there as fast as
possible.
Now, I understand that, I mean, the reason advanced really
for the budget reduction has been a lower pace of space
launches. And one of the questions is, what kind of risk does
that present? But I also just took a look at your unfunded
priority list, because the real concern here is that, in a
budget-pressured environment, where the real consequences is
being taken is in some of the baseline infrastructure.
So, you know, staff training, infrastructure capability,
MILCON, training facilities, exercises. So, you know, your UPL
list does have some of that. It looks like some MILCON, some
training exercises.
So I guess my real question is, other than for us to just
say okay to the 2-percent reduction, I mean, what are we
actually doing here? What is this going to do to the direction
you are trying to take? Because we are trying to get you to
somewhere as fast as possible.
General Saltzman. Well, I think you got it just right. And
I think Secretary Kendall mentioned that the biggest regret, of
course, is the lack of counter-space capabilities.
So the budget includes a pretty substantial investment in
this shift to more resilient architectures. So we are on a good
path there. It has good investments in operational test and
training infrastructure. So I like the idea of training our
operators against a thinking threat.
What I am most concerned about is how fast we are able to
put those counter-space capabilities to hold that risk, the PRC
targets that Secretary Kendall mentioned, the ones that can--it
is space-enabled targeting of the joint force.
That is the biggest concern, and what this budget needed to
do was slow that acquisition down. So the programs are still
there. We are still making progress. We are just not putting it
in place as fast as possible.
Mr. Case. Okay. I am sorry. Secretary, anything to add?
Secretary Kendall. No.
Mr. Case. Okay. General, some of the same questions to you
just in terms of your budget and taking a look at your unfunded
priority list. Mr. Womack I think talked about your exercises.
You are not adding some exercises in PACAF, specifically in the
agile combat space, that you would otherwise want to do, right?
But the one that really kind of--and you have got a MILCON
of $1.115 billion. And I think we all know that your MILCON is
a huge gap right now, especially if you take a look at your
agile combat plans out in the Pacific. You just saw that again.
The one that really struck me when I took a look at it was
spare parts $1.566 billion. And it says here funds single
spares, restock for aircraft projected to be grounded due to a
lack of spare parts. I mean, that sounds pretty serious,
actually, to me, to be in a UPL list, number one. And then,
number two, we have had a lot of discussion on the committee
about just basic, you know, industrial base ability to produce.
Is this an issue of a supply chain disruption, or is this
the parts are available, we just don't have the money to buy
them?
General Allvin. Congressman, I think it was more of the
latter, but the Department of Defense did put an emphasis
during the budget submission and the contemplation about
readiness. So I did not want this committee to believe that DOD
ignored readiness.
But what happened is, this year, as we looked at some of
the continued erosion and we looked at the strategy that we
talked about, I went to our Air Force Materiel Command
commander A4 and asked him to do a sprint. Let's deep dive into
some data-driven analysis that can drive from inputs to
outputs, where you can say, if I put a dollar in here, in this
spare part, what can it deliver out there?
And we have really just developed the data platforms to be
able to do that with rigor. And so that happened during the
summer and the fall. And we focused on aircraft and weapon
systems that we had more control of all of the organic
aircraft, the C-130s, the B-52s, those where we had a lot more
control over that entire supply chain process and the supply
parts where we could visualize throughout the system, and then
looked at which of those which we knew had limitations because
of spare parts, because we have that across our Air Force,
which ones would drive the biggest change.
And, when we saw that, they came up with that analysis and
it was complete, but it wasn't complete in time for the budget
submission. My sense is, if it had been done earlier, I would
have gone to Secretary Kendall and said, ``Maybe perhaps we
could put this in.''
But, when I saw the potential output, it didn't seem like I
could wait another year for the next budget submission. So it
really was a matter of sequencing, because we didn't want to
just put in a wedge and say, ``Give us more money for parts.''
I wanted to be able to have some specificity to show the drive,
the input to the output.
And I feel like we had confidence enough to where I could
submit that in my unfunded priority list, because I would
rather not wait another year to fight in the submission.
Mr. Case. Okay. Thank you very much.
Mr. Calvert. I thank the gentleman.
Next, Judge Carter.

SPACE FUTURES COMMAND

Mr. Carter. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
General Saltzman, the Space Force recently announced the
creation of a Space Futures Command. Can you talk about the
goals of this command and its timeline, and can you give us
examples of what types of missions this command will look at?
General Saltzman. Thank you, sir.
I appreciate the question. The Futures Command came out of
our analysis associated with optimizing for great power
competition. And we became aware of the fact that, while there
was a lot of disaggregated activities across the entire force
and the entire Department, quite frankly, associated with
trying to build the force that we are going to need in the
future, it wasn't coherent enough so that we could understand
what the second and third order effects of any one decision
were.
So what Futures Command does is it aggregates all those
capabilities together. It will look at operational concepts,
which technologies will be most likely to be used against us or
that we can leverage against future threats. What are the
missions that are going to be expected of us in the future?
It will evaluate all those operational concepts, war game
them, do tabletop exercises, do some experimentation to
validate those concepts, and then finally do the real hard core
data analytics that results in a force design so that we can
build the requirements and buy the kinds of capabilities that
we know we are going to need in the future. All of that would
fall under one field command.
Mr. Carter. And when do you expect to stand this up?
General Saltzman. I am hoping that, from a process
standpoint, later this summer-early fall, we are actually
working through the processes. It is going to take me a while
to put a command structure in place.
There could be basing decision, and that will take a little
more time to put in place. But process-wise, because a lot of
these are already occurring across the Space Force, we will
pull them together coherently and work the processes later this
fall.
Mr. Carter. Is there going to be an issue of location?
General Saltzman. We are going to have to look at that as a
part of a basing process.

COLLABORATIVE COMBAT AIRCRAFT PROGRAM

Mr. Carter. The Air Force recently announced the next phase
of the Collaborative Combat Aircraft program. And I understand
that you are exploring international partnerships as part of
this program.
Can you elaborate on what it would look like and the
benefit that this partnership might bring to further
development of the program and the utility of it across our
partners and allies?
Secretary Kendall. The Collaborative Combat Aircraft
program is the uncrewed, you know, companions, wing men, if you
will, to manned aircraft. It started out as a companion for the
Next Generation Air Dominance platform, but also could be used
by NF-22, RNF-35 or RNF-15.
And we just down-selected, as you mentioned, Congressman,
to two companies for the first increment. The way the program
is structured, it has multiple increments. They are about 2
years apart. And the first one will go quickly to production.
We expect to have those aircraft in production within the
next few years and have deliveries before the end of the 5-year
plan. They are going to allow us to learn a lot. They will give
us an operational capability. I mentioned earlier that we are
trying to make sure we field meaningful operational capability
as quickly as possible.
So that first increment will give us some degree of
capability. There will be a second increment coming along a
couple years behind that one. And we are particularly looking
for international cooperation with that second increment.
We have had talks, General Allvin and I both have had talks
with several of our partners, our closest partners, who are
very interested. So it is early stages, but we would like to go
in that direction. We think this will be something that could
have great value to all of our partners and enhance our
capabilities, you know, particularly in partnership with our
closest allies.
Do you want to add anything to that?
General Allvin. The only thing I would add is the secret
sauce there that I think will enable us to be more rapidly
integrating with our allies and partners is part of this entire
concept is a government-owned reference architecture, something
that we control.
And so, as we are seeing advancements in the technology, we
can maybe set the pace for how we can integrate and work with
our allies and partners, and I think that is one of the big
things that can let us go faster.
Mr. Carter. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Calvert. Just following up on the Judge's question, on
this aircraft, the collaborative aircraft, what do you
envision? How many aircraft are we talking about here in the
next 5 years?
Secretary Kendall. We will have over a hundred on order or
delivered by the end of the FYDP. That is for increment one.
The planning figure I have given people to use is a thousand,
and that is just really to reflect the fact that we are serious
about this is going to be a significant part of our first
structure.
The ultimate number is going to depend upon cost,
affordability, and a number of other factors. But this is a
fairly transformative change to going away from individual
fighter pilots all out there at risk together to giving our
fighter pilots a wing man that can be attrited to a degree. It
is intended to be survivable, but attritable. That will give us
a wide range of tactics and techniques that we currently can't
utilize. So it is going to become a mainstay part of the force.
Mr. Calvert. So each, say, F-35, for instance, how many
collaborative aircraft do you think would be attached to a
single F-35?
Secretary Kendall. We won't do it for every single fighter
probably, at least not initially, but nominally two to five,
for example, under the control of an individual pilot.
Mr. Calvert. And the cost I read in the press reports are
approximately $30 million apiece. Does that sound about right?
Secretary Kendall. We are looking for something that is a
fraction of the cost of a fighter.
Mr. Calvert. So hopefully less----
Secretary Kendall. So on the order of $25 million or $30
million apiece would be kind of what I would consider
personally an upper bound.
Mr. Calvert. Yeah, I would hope so. I would hope that cost
could come down considerably. Thank you.
Ms. Kaptur.

UKRAINE THEATER OPERATIONS

Ms. Kaptur. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Secretary, Generals, welcome. And, to all your staff,
thank you for the patriotic job that you all do.
I wanted to go to General Allvin first, if I might. What is
the Air Force learning from the Ukraine theater and operations
there that would inform our posture toward future flight and
future fights?
General Allvin. Thank you. And I hesitate early on to talk
about lessons learned. We certainly want to learn what we can,
but understand the context is important.
I believe that there are a couple things. As an airman, it
reminds me I don't think you want to fight without some level
of air superiority, because that is where we are right now, and
that is painful for both sides.
But I think the advancements in the UAVs and the drones and
what that means for a change in the ability to retain air
superiority long enough to be able to have those, the overall
combat objectives, is a little different, depending on where
you go.
We want to make sure that, even though we have massive, you
know, swarms of drones, that works in the European theater.
When you have a different theater, you have to think of a
different context, because there is much more range and so you
wouldn't be able to use them the same way.
But I think that the idea that the electromagnetic spectrum
may be one of the biggest lessons. That still matters more than
we did before, because the ability for those crewed or uncrewed
aircraft to be effective in there really depends on how well
they can defend against--they can jam against--or defend
against jamming and survive in the electromagnetic spectrum.
That and the innovation that is happening within the
conflict I think are things that we need to be prepared for. We
need to solve for agility to make sure that we can adapt to
those maybe lower cost but asymmetric capabilities that pop up
early in wartime.
Ms. Kaptur. Thank you very much.

CYBER TRAINING

Let me ask any one of you if the Boards of Education that I
represent across northern Ohio and our community colleges
wanted to connect to any of your cyber training or cyber
possibilities for younger people that holds a potential for
recruitment as well as workforce development on the private
side, if we have interested teachers and their students, who do
we contact?
Secretary Kendall. We will get you someone to talk to about
that. We are very interested in that. You may not be aware of
it. We just created a new category of airman warrant officers
in the cyber and IT field.
So we are very much interested in expertise in that area
and having people come in who want to work in that area and
stay in that area during their career. So I will get you a
point of contact, and we will have someone work with you on
that.

FUEL CONSERVATION

Ms. Kaptur. I hear there might be a Cyber Command that was
established in Cincinnati. I am not sure who that is done
through, whether it was Wright-Patt or--I don't know the
university there, but it is not connected to the places that I
represent.
So I am just curious to be connected to the right place at
Air Force. Ohio is the State of flight, so we have to protect
our own, and we want to engage our educational community in
that effort as well.
Twenty years ago at the 180th Fighter Wing in western Ohio,
a biofueled F-16 was flown successfully.
I am interested in how you, Mr. Secretary, or any of you,
think about fueling the future and in craft that are airborne,
just curious how you think about that.
General Allvin. I think in general, Congresswoman, the idea
for us is fuel conservation is not only just good for the
planet; it helps us in our mission as well.
So anything that we can do that can preserve duration,
endurance, regardless of the type of fuel, that is what we are
looking for. But, before we transform sort of the fossil fuel
platforms that we have into something into the future, we need
to ensure that it is sustainable, and it is something we can
take with us into combat.
But the idea that we would always be looking at operational
energy and being able to better use that, it actually enhances
our combat effectiveness as well.

CURRENT AIR RESPONSIBILITIES

Ms. Kaptur. Should we be apprehensive about the Space Force
and the current air responsibilities that our region holds with
F-16s and potentially F-35s, because of the dawn of Space
Force, or do we have reason to be worried that we are going to
lose our fighter wing?
Secretary Kendall. I am not aware of any reason why you
would be.
Ms. Kaptur. All right. Well, that is good news. Finally,
what about the balloon that flew over the country? What did we
decide that was?
Secretary Kendall. There was a Chinese balloon that came
by. And I am not sure how much I can say without getting into
classified. You know, it was very visible. People, you know,
were aware of it. It was shot down. The Chinese claimed that it
was not intentional on their part. I am not sure that we
believe that.
I think we have raised the awareness of that kind of threat
quite a bit, and we are on the alert for that, because we have
seen some other cases where balloons have come close if not
come over the United States.
Ms. Kaptur. Thank you, Mr. Secretary.
Secretary Kendall. We could give much more at a classified
level.
Ms. Kaptur. Thank you.
Mr. Calvert. Thank you. Mr. Secretary, I don't know why
they don't just put that debris on display someplace and let
the American public look at it and make their own decision. I
think we all know what that decision would be.
Mr. Garcia.

T-7 ACCELERATION

Mr. Garcia. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I thank the three of you for being here today. Thank you
for your service to our beautiful country.
Mr. Secretary, congratulations on CCA, two outstanding
choices there with Anduril and General Atomics and looking
forward to seeing that program accelerate. And, actually, it is
a paradigm-breaking acquisition model as well as a source
selection. So really appreciate it.
Survivable but attritable was actually my call sign in the
Navy, so that is a good thing to see. Hopefully, that is not a
black cloud for CCA.
We are in a unique era right now where you are trying to
balance capability with capacity. I have been very adamant that
I don't know that we have a capability gap relative to China. I
think that is a fight we always keep fighting, but I think we
do have unique capabilities, high-end exotics, but the capacity
is the challenge with a force projection of, you know, three or
four thousand miles and not in our backyard, like what they
enjoy.
So now we are in an era where you see, you know, the first
flight of B-21 happened this year, but also the service life
extension of B-52 out to be a hundred-year-old platform with
new radars, new sensors. You see Teddy Roosevelt's vision of F-
35 finally being realized with a tech refresh, and now also F-
15EX capacity supplementing that capability. I think these are
good things. JADC2, ABMS maturation and some classified
programs.
So I don't envy your jobs, but I think overall, at the
macro level, the Air Force is doing a good job of executing
that pivot to the Pacific and maintaining the capability
advantage while also addressing the capacity challenges that we
have. So I just wanted to give you kudos for that.
My concern is around the T-7 and how we can go faster. I
have been asking this question for a few years. Mr. Ellzey and
I lost a good friend in the T-38 accident back in 2019 out of
Enid, Oklahoma, a 47-year-old Naval aviator who did an Air
Force transition. He was in the back seat.
That T-38 aircraft was not a good trainer in the sixties or
seventies. It sure as hell is not a good trainer today, and it
is the widow maker. I think it has killed about 149, 150
aviators--or pilots since it has come online.
So what are we doing? Is it a Boeing limitation? Is it a
materiel limitation? What can we in Congress do to help
accelerate the T-7 to avoid T-38 deaths in the next call it 2-
to 4-year period?
Secretary Kendall. I am not aware of anything you can do to
make the program move faster. We had to set production out a
year because of trying to negotiate and get the cost down and
deal with some difficulties that have occurred in development.
You may be aware we have had problems with the ejection
seat and the ejection system and with some of the controls. I
think that we are working our way through those. I could get
you a more detailed report. General Allvin may have more
information than I do.
General Allvin. I think some of it is in general. And I
don't want to speak for Boeing specifically, but there are some
growing pains when you start with sort of a new way of building
and designing, started with more digital engineering.
And so there may have been some things associated with that
that sort of hindered the pace of the development. I am
encouraged the fact that it is in flight tests now. I think
this is where we can perhaps accelerate.
But, as the Secretary said, it really is just about getting
it through its developmental testing and buying the first ones
next year.
Mr. Garcia. Okay. Well, I would just encourage you if you
see any opportunity to accelerate, either through parallel risk
reduction--I know there are going to be concurrency risks that
come with that. This isn't as exotic as the F-35 so those
penalties won't be as severe.
But, you know, Matt Kincade's widow is out there in
Oklahoma still, and she is looking at this very closely. And I
think it will save lives if we can go faster.
My last request, General Saltzman, if we can get in the
SCIF at some point. You mentioned a program today that we as a
committee have grave concerns over, but we can't talk about it
here, that is very relevant right now. And very timely
discussion I think would be needed in the SCIF if we can at
some point.
General Saltzman. Happy to do that.
Mr. Garcia. I took a brief at Space Command. I think
actually the chairman was there as well in El Segundo about a
year ago now when you were promoting Buzz Aldrin. And I want to
follow up on that if we can at some point.
But I think it would behoove, Mr. Chairman, for the whole
subcommittee to hear what is going on there.
But, with that, I yield back. Thank you.
Mr. Calvert. Thank you. I remember that meeting with
General Aldrin very well, as we can call him now, with the
Secretary's help, by the way. I appreciate that very much.
Mr. Ellzey.

V-22

Mr. Ellzey. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you all for being here today. It is nice to see you.
General Saltzman, are the lights in here in this windowless
room okay for a missileer? Okay. All right.
I would like to thank you and your fellow missileers for
what you do. There is no way in Hades I could do that. So thank
you for taking the strain. You are the perfect guy for this job
right now, expanding space capabilities.
And, Mr. Secretary, thank you for being here. We never met
before, but I just would like to ask what is wrong with the Air
Force Academy that they can't find the Secretary of the Air
Force for themselves that would require a West Pointer? It
defies logic, but glad you are here. And, of course, from your
years in acquisition, you are the right guy for these times as
well.
And, General Allvin, your history as a heavy guy hauling
logistics, you are the right man for that job right now too. So
it is a pleasure to be with you guys. Thank you very much.
General, I would like to start with you. And, by the way,
some day it is going to be Admiral because, you know, Star
Trek, it was the fleet, Star Fleet.
Mr. Garcia. We are going to make that change.
Mr. Ellzey. We are going to do that before I leave
Congress.
Sadly, on November 29, 2023, we lost a V-22 from AFSOC. And
then, on December 6, 2023, after watching the video, the AFSOC
commander downed the whole fleet. There were some issues with
it, which I won't go into here that led to that mishap and
varying mishap rates between the different services.
On March 8th, the Naval Air Systems Command deemed the V-22
safe to fly, based on a meticulous and data-driven approach
that prioritized safety. And then, just days later, the Marine
Corps and the Japanese started flying them, and the Navy has as
well.
We talked to the SOCOM commander a couple of weeks ago, and
he said their operations have been severely impacted--in this
room that is where I will leave it--because of the V-22
grounding.
So I have spoken to the AFSOC commander, and he can't give
me a timeline for return to flight. It has been 6 weeks since
the Marine Corps and Japanese started flying as well as the
Navy. That is a long time, considering the operational impacts.
And I want to know when the V-22 is going to start flying
again.
General Allvin. Well, again, I know--and the AFSOC
commander, General Bauernfeind, spoke with me as well, and we
keep in touch very frequently about this.
So I can tell you right now that three of the platforms
have gone through FCFs. They have gone through the functional
check flights. And so we are making a deliberate approach, but
it is a comprehensive approach because the manner in which, as
you know, the CV-22 used in the Air Force is really much
different.
And so he is in lockstep with the Joint Program Office and
his sister services in understanding how and why they are
returning theirs to fly, but he is taking AFSOC in a deliberate
manner to ensure every one of the maintenance records are
checked and every one of the crews are ready to fly.
And so he is taking a deliberate approach and a
comprehensive review on the weapon system, on the crew
complement, on the mission set, and how it is unique to the Air
Force and AFSOC.
Mr. Ellzey. Okay. Well, I got the same answer from him and,
quite frankly, how he downed it based on a video that was
preemptive to a mishap investigation. I was a mishap
investigator. I flew helos and jets.
Quite frankly, the decision to do that should not have been
approved, and it hurt our national security. That is my take on
it. We will move on to a different issue.

ACQUISITION REQUIREMENTS

Let's talk about acquisitions. And, like I said, Mr.
Secretary, you are the right guy for this, but it seems like we
keep making these mistakes over and over and over again. And,
you know, the B-21 is a great program. The F-15EX was a great
program. Future long-range assault aircraft is on timeline.
But, when we talk about Nunn-McCurdy and the 139 Gray Wolf, it
is a helicopter. The Sentinel, which I know is a lot more
complex. But, in our own service the FFG, the DDG-1000, the
LCS, the Presidential helo, Air Force One. The Ford is 3 years
behind. The F-35 got cut, F-22 got cut, and T-7 is behind the
timeline.
So my question--and I am asking this in a way that is
completely innocent. I have no agenda here, but I really want
to know that, after decades of doing the wrong thing do we have
a requirements issue? Because I think in my service, we do. Are
we underestimating supply chain issues, and we are just
catching up to them? Or is it a lack of business sense in
acquisitions? And I am not trying to lead you down the right
answer. I really just kind of want to know.
Secretary Kendall. How long do you have, Congressman?
Mr. Ellzey. Forty seconds.
Mr. Calvert. I will give you an extra minute.
Mr. Ellzey. Oh, good, we get a minute extension.
Secretary Kendall. I have got 50 years of experience with
new product development, basically, and I have seen us get in
trouble the same way over and over. And you have the list. It
is not always the same. But unrealistic requirements,
unrealistic schedules, lack of appreciation of technical risk.
I mean, all these things.
And there has been an effort to chase I think what I call
acquisition magic a few times, which is somebody comes up with
a new idea they think about how to do it. Usually, it involves
taking extraordinary risk, and then we pay the price for that.
Putting amateurs in charge doesn't work very well.
The things we ask people to do to develop new weapon
systems for the United States are hard things. We are asking
them to build weapon systems that are a generation ahead of
anything ever built before. There is inherent risk in that, and
you have to plan and manage that risk.
You have to take risk mitigation steps. You have to
understand deeply what those technical risks really are and
then what is appropriate to try to reduce that risk or to
manage it, so you have alternatives if you encounter it.
There is no substitute for professionalism. There is this
idea that we are--we can go much faster if we just, you know,
somehow waved our arms and create a different set of
structures. That tends to just get you in trouble.
You can be overly conservative, but I think that is the
exception. Most of our programs overrun in development by about
25 percent. That is the average. In early production, they
overrun by about 10 percent.
And, when I was running the acquisition for DOD, we were
able to drive that down. But, you know, you mentioned a couple
of programs. B-21 is one that Dr. LaPlante, who is now the A&S
Under Secretary, and I put together. But when we take wild
chances, we get the result you should expect. So that is very
in a nutshell.
So we don't want to be--I would tend to structure programs
to be somewhat aggressive but not so much so that you are
guaranteeing failure. That is really the key to success. But
you got to really understand what you are doing. There is no
magic answer.
Mr. Ellzey. Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Calvert. Just to put my two cents into this, and I have
been here for a while, 30-some years. And I was here when we
started the F-35 program. I remember the people bringing in the
PowerPoints and saying, ``This is going to be the Swiss Army
knife of all fighter planes. We are going to have a single
frame, three variants. They're going to use a single engine. It
is going to bring down our maintenance cost, our hourly cost,
our per-unit cost and all that. And we are going to get rid of
the F-16. We are going to get rid of the F-18. We are going to
get rid of the F-15. We are going to get rid of the A-10. You
know, this is going to be it.''
And we are building more F-18s. We are building F-15X. They
got an upgraded F-16. So it didn't quite work out the way we
thought.
And my thought on this is, and this is a serious question:
How many program managers have we had on the F-35 since the
inception? Does anybody know the answer to that question?
Secretary Kendall. Several, only one of which I can think
of that was fired.
Mr. Calvert. But, you know, years ago, and it may be not an
ample comparison. But Admiral Rickover started the submarine
program with a Nautilus program and stayed with it until God
knows he was how old and took responsibility for every single
submarine and every single submarine program, and everyone knew
who to call if there was a problem.
And, right now, you know, some of these programs, if we put
a young officer and say, ``Look, you are going to be with this
program until you leave, and you are going to get all your ups;
you are going to get all that.''
But I think there has got to be a better way to do this,
because what we have been doing hasn't been working. So I just
want to throw my two cents in on that. And I know you put a lot
of thought in that, and everybody else has, but it is a
problem.
Okay. Mr. Aguilar.

HYPERSONIC GLIDE VEHICLE TESTING

Mr. Aguilar. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Secretary Kendall, I understand there have been some
critiques of the Air Force's testing on hypersonic weapons due,
in part, to the low number of glide vehicle test events, along
with limited availability of hypersonic flight corridors,
target areas, and test support assets.
Is this true? And, if so, what resources are necessary to
increase the capacity for hypersonic glide vehicle testing?
Secretary Kendall. We do have issues with test capacity and
availability of ranges essentially to do some of our hypersonic
testing.
I don't have any details for you, but I know there has been
a substantial investment in improved infrastructure to support
hypersonic testing. I would have to get you an answer for the
record on the content of that. I haven't followed that that
closely myself.
Mr. Aguilar. I appreciate it.
General Saltzman, we are investing significant resources
into space-based tracking of hypersonic threats, and this is
critical for our defense capabilities.
It would be logical that such a system would be trained
against real world scenarios. Given what the Secretary has
indicated, how do we test these tracking capabilities under
your programs, and where do these priorities kind of reconcile
and where do they meet?
General Saltzman. That is a great question. I would say we
have a three-pronged approach to that. Anywhere we can use
digital simulations, we are leveraging that to the max extent
possible. There will be some range testing to try to calibrate
the systems as they go into orbit. And real world live events,
we never miss an opportunity to take advantage of those. And,
unfortunately, these days there are those events to look at.
So we don't have all the complement on orbit yet to be able
to fully test that as an operational capability, but we are
going to rapidly get there in the next year or so.
Mr. Aguilar. When do you expect a more robust kind of
launch ability to----
General Saltzman. The Proliferative Warfighter Space
Architecture that our Space Development Agency is putting
together is the sensors that will be able to track the
hypersonics.
We are going to start tranche one delivery later this year,
and by fiscal year 2026, we should have enough on orbit to be
able to demonstrate the capability.
Mr. Aguilar. And we will have enough data to make that
decision?
General Saltzman. We will be testing. Every time there is a
launch, in checkout we test that information. We test the data.
Mr. Aguilar. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Calvert. Since Mr. Aguilar brought up the hypersonic
program, just a real quick comment on that. You know, we have
the Navy program, obviously. We have the Army program. We have
the Air Force program. Lockheed has the interest in all three
of the programs.
And, obviously, from our perspective, it has been somewhat
frustrating. I think, so far, in all three programs, we have
been spending about $3.5 billion a year to get to a hypersonic
missile, and we have yet to get there on any of the programs.
And, as far as I know, it is a classified number, but the
Chinese, let's just say at least a thousand hypersonic missiles
that are maneuverable. And, you know, I was around when Mike
Griffin did the first test. I think you were around too at that
time on the hypersonic program back in 1996, when we did the
first hypersonic missile test and got to speed. It was a
successful test. We offered it to the Air Force. They turned it
down. The Chinese stole the technology, perfected it, and
deployed it.
You know, I had to get my frustration out, but here we are,
spent I think well over 10-, $12 billion, and we are yet to get
there. So it is not good.
Mr. Fleischmann.

LEGACY SYSTEM REPLACEMENTS

Mr. Fleischmann. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Secretary Kendall, General Allvin, and General Saltzman,
let me join my colleagues on both sides of the aisle for well-
deserved accolades to all of you all. Thank you for your
tremendous service to our Nation. It is a privilege to be with
you today.
Gentlemen, as you may be aware, I chair the Energy and
Water Subcommittee of Appropriations. And I am well aware that
the highest priority of DOD and NNSA is completing the Nuclear
Recapitalization Program of Record.
We recognize the Air Force has a tremendous role, with
responsibility for both the ICBM and strategic bomber legs of
the triad as well as the NC3 infrastructure, along with the
Space Force and the Navy.
I want to thank all the airmen, missileers, submariners and
guardians that protect our Nation and our allies every day.
Unfortunately, we are experiencing schedule delays and cost
overruns that have become all too common with major programs. I
recognize the greatest challenge we face is probably workforce,
as with military recruitment we have a shortage in the
necessary skilled personnel, from program managers to engineers
to technicians and tradesmen.
After decades of underinvestment, we are now paying to
relearn costly lessons. All the while, the Russians have
suspended New START. Even though they seem to be keeping to the
treaty limits for now, it expires in less than 2 years. China
is meanwhile rapidly expanding its nuclear forces and could
catch us within a decade.
We are entering uncharted territory, dealing with two peer
nuclear adversaries, as we are in the middle of recapitalizing
our entire deterrent with just a time of schedule.
Question: What is the Air Force doing to keep Sentinel and
B-21 schedules from slipping further, and how can Congress
better help ensure that there is not an unacceptable dip in
force structure once we begin replacing legacy systems?
Secretary Kendall. B-21 is roughly on schedule. It is still
in development. It is in test flight. I wouldn't make any
commitments or promises about what will happen going forward,
but to date it has executed fairly well.
Sentinel is the opposite story, basically. I am recused on
Sentinel. I will let General Allvin talk about that. It is
going through the Nunn-McCurdy. And General Dr. LaPlante is
running that process, and we will come out of that with a
recommendation about how to proceed on Sentinel. But I think I
am pretty comfortable, as much as one can be at this point in
time, with where B-21 is.
Mr. Fleischmann. Thank you, sir.
General Allvin. The only thing I would add is on Sentinel,
again, it is one of those--Secretary Kendall talked earlier
about some of the challenges in the acquisition process. And
some of those is maybe underestimating what some of the
complexity is. And I think perhaps we will discover that the
two parts of the Sentinel program, one is actually the
technology and the missile and all that, and the other was
actually the scope and scale of what is really the largest
civil works program that we have had in the Department of
Defense for a long time.
Maybe there was an underappreciation of that. So the
drivers of the cost is something that Dr. LaPlante is going
through in the Nunn-McCurdy review.
And, again, the point you made, your opening point is the
right one, Congressman. We have to be committed to a safe,
effective, and reliable triad. So, whatever the Nunn-McCurdy
review delivers for us, we are going to be supportive and we
are going to deal with that, because, as you mentioned, the
threats are not sitting idly by while we sort out what we do
with our triad.
Mr. Fleischmann. Thank you, sir.

NEW START COMPLIANCE

A followup question: With the expiration of New START in
less than 2 years, can you commit to this committee that the
Air Force is preparing contingency plans now, in cooperation
with NNSA, to upload Minuteman III and recertify more B-52s for
nuclear missions?
Secretary Kendall. There are some discussions happening in
the policy framework, what will happen if Russia does not stay
in compliance and also to react, as you mentioned, to China's
growing arsenal.
At this point in time, we don't have any specific plans in
place or any specific intentions. But I think we would have to
get into a classified forum to talk about those options in any
more detail.
Mr. Fleischmann. I understand. Thank you for your answer.
Mr. Chairman, I will yield back.
Mr. Calvert. Thank you.
Ms. McCollum.

SERVICE AUDITS

Ms. McCollum. Thank you.
As I mentioned in my opening statement, climate change is a
costly impact to our national security. It shows up in cracks
in cement, large temperature swings, from cold weather to warm
weather, soil erosion, leading to sinkholes, damage from
significant weather events. It is an environmental stressor on
our infrastructure, and the Department has long recognized
this.
In addition to the operational stress of more frequent
rocket launches at launch sites, General Saltzman, you are now
working through a plan to collect fees from industry to recoup
some of the indirect cost for operations at the launch pads,
and implementation could start as early as this summer.
Now, from an appropriations standpoint, we will want to
have visibility on how and where such funds are spent. The
chairman and I served on the Interior Committee, where there
are fees collected. I know that when they decided to collect
fees on passports, we have seen, except for during COVID and
some of the challenges we had with that, we have seen great
success in passport things.
So these can be a really good thing to happen. But I think
we need to clarify the language, and we need to work on that
together. I think it is important that those fees be clearly
reinvested in the facilities, both to improve their resiliency
and to handle the workload. And that is what the industry is
going to expect.
So that means transparency, proper accounting on these
collections and expenditures. So I would like to learn more,
and I am sure the committee would too on that. And along with
that comes when you and I met earlier talking about a clean
audit, this might be a great place to start to get a clean
audit.
So we have got the Marine Corps. We have got one of our
other intelligence agencies doing it. And I think Space Force
can be next. So any comments you want to make, sir?
General Saltzman. Yes, ma'am. We definitely owe you a plan
for how we plan to utilize those indirect costs, the
authorities that we have been given. It is up to $5 million I
think is the cap per provider. But we owe you that mechanism,
and we will come back to you and show you exactly how we plan
to exercise those authorities.
And I left the Hill the other day after you talked to us
about the audit. I went straight to the Vice Chief of Space
Operations, and I said, ``Tell me what it would take to give us
a clean audit.'' And so they are going through now in detail to
try to figure out what the LIMFAX (ph) might be.
Mr. Calvert. I almost forgot you, Mr. Joyce. I would never
want to do that. But you are recognized.

REOPTIMIZATION EFFORTS

Mr. Joyce. You are very kind, Mr. Chairman. After Mr.
Aguilar came in and took over, I figured that I was back to the
bottom of the list.
But thank you all for being here. And thank you, especially
the men and women in the back row as well, for your service to
our country. And I apologize. When I saw my wife texting me,
that is when--and then somehow I hit--I don't know what the
hell I hit, but it started playing that funky music. So I
apologize for that.
Secretary Kendall, Youngstown Air Force Reserve station is
in my district, and we also have four active Air National Guard
wings in the State of Ohio. In February, you unveiled your
planned reoptimization efforts for the Air Force and Space
Force.
Can you share your insight on how the Air Force plans on
incorporating the Air Force Reserve and Air National Guard
bases into the new proposed reorganization of the service?
Secretary Kendall. The overarching answer is that no major
changes should be expected, that what we are doing is to try to
ensure that we are focused on the pacing challenge, the threat
that is most dominant right now, and ensuring that we have in
place organizational structures, mostly in the active Air Force
and the Space Force, that are focused on keeping us competitive
over time and keeping us as ready with the current force as we
can be at all times.
The Guard and the Reserves are both very much a part of
that readiness equation. And what will probably happen is there
will be a look at how readiness is assessed for those units to
ensure that the right standards and so on are in place and the
right assessment mechanisms are in place.
We want to make sure that our units that are intended to be
deployable to support an operations plan have everything they
need so that they can go do that and that they are really ready
to go deploy. And that would apply to some of those units as
well.
So there are some things on the margin that might change
because of this, but I don't think anything fundamental is
expected to change.
General Allvin, do you want to add anything to that?
General Allvin. No, I think the Secretary has it just
right. I think when we look at the manner in which we are to
look at changing how we are going to present forces to the
combatant commands, it has been different. For the last 20
years, we have been sort of crowdsourcing our Air Force, and we
have sort of been privileging the preservation of the
installation at the expense of perhaps the combat unit they
sort of need over there in theater. We can't do that in the
Indo-Pacific.
And so, as we change that, we need to understand what
exactly is it going to take for a unit that sits together
behind the fence line in a given installation or a wing, what
do they need, as the Secretary said, to be able to pick up,
deploy on short notice, go someplace, generate combat power,
sustain that combat in a way we haven't done that before.
So General Loh and General Healy were there at the
inception of this. And I asked them. I said, ``How do you see
the Guard and the Reserves playing into this?'' And they said,
``We see ourselves perfectly, because we were designed to be
that.''
We all sort of were designed to be that way. We just sort
of started presenting forces differently. And so we are looking
as we start doing our exercises how we can include whole Guard
units with whole Reserve units in a manner that is consistent
with their volunteerism but will still enable them to do the
training just like the Active Duty force to be these deployable
combat wings and go and exercise against what we think the
pacing challenge is in the Indo-Pacific.
Secretary Kendall. One of the things we discovered we were
doing is we were crowdsourcing in order to deploy units. We
would send, say, a fighter squadron to the Middle East
somewhere. And all the supporting functions that had to go with
it to make it, you know, fully functional we would crowdsource
across the Air Force, including elements out of the Guard and
Reserves.
So we were picking a few people here, a few people there, a
few people there. That is not the way you want to go into a
combat zone, into a war. You want to have a unit that is
cohesive, that has trained together, that is ready to go deploy
together and fight together.
And we got away from that for efficiency reasons, because
the environment we were deploying into wasn't a combat zone. It
was essentially a relatively benign area. So that will be a
change that people may see, that those opportunities to do
individual or just a few people kind of deployments may not be
there anymore, because we are trying to have units that can
deploy as opposed to pickup games, if you will, that we put
together at the last minute.
Mr. Joyce. Fair enough.

FLEET FUNDING CUTS

Secretary, the Air Force is expecting its fleet to drop
below 5,000 aircraft in fiscal year 2025. Your budget proposes
cutting hundreds of aircraft and repurposing those funds for
research and development. Are you concerned that the Air Force
is prioritizing quality over quantity with aircraft and that we
can still deter our adversaries with a fleet of less than 5,000
aircraft?
Secretary Kendall. We are making some difficult tradeoffs,
and both capacity and capability matter. Congressman Garcia
talked about that earlier.
The aircraft that we are retiring or divesting are aircraft
that are generally reaching the end of their service life and/
or they are no longer effective against the pacing threat. And
so retaining those aircraft and carrying the cost of sustaining
them really would keep us from moving forward as fast as we
need to.
So I think we have got the balance about right. I will let
General Allvin add to that.
You know, if we had more resources, I think I would be
prioritizing modernization still over retention of older force
structure that is not going to be effective against the pacing
challenge.
General Allvin. I would just add numbers for numbers. This
year specifically, about 250 we are divesting. Of those, 56 are
A-10s, 65 are the F-15Cs and Ds, because those are sort of
running out of service life as well. Twenty-two are in the T-
1s. We talked about how we are shifting to simulator from the
aircraft to be able to increase velocity through the pipeline.
The C-130s are transitioning one for one. The KC-135s are one
for one with KC-46. And the EC-130, we are losing one EC-130.
We are gaining an 85 E-837 (ph).
So, as we look at the overall quantity for quality, I think
I would rather have a smaller number of aircraft that maybe can
win than a larger number of these F-56, A-10s that probably
aren't going to help against a China fight.
Mr. Calvert. I know who will take those A-10s.
Mr. Joyce. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Calvert. Thank you.
One quick comment and then I think I will wrap the hearing
up unless Ms. McCollum has any additional comments.
As you know, as we all know, back in the old days, the R&D
budgets were in the U.S. Government. I mean, that was where
everything happened. So all the bells and whistles were over
there. But nowadays the commercial side, quite frankly, are the
ones that are coming up with the primary innovations, and we
adopt those innovations in the Department of Defense.
So certainly in the communications, satellites, on down the
road--especially, I think this applies to the space side--I am
certainly encouraged by your emphasizing leveraging these
commercial capabilities, because we need to take advantage.
This Nation, we are still ahead on many things. And so we
need to do that. And I will be concerned about how much funding
we have in fiscal year 2025 in that commercial arena.
But, before we conclude, I want to thank the witnesses for
their testimony today.
The subcommittee members are welcome to submit questions
for the record. I ask that the witnesses respond in a
reasonable time.
And, with that, the subcommittee stands adjourned.
[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
