- DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR, ENVIRONMENT, AND RELATED AGENCIES APPROPRIATIONS FOR 2025

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

INTERIOR, ENVIRONMENT, AND RELATED
AGENCIES APPROPRIATIONS FOR 2025
_______________________________________________________________________

HEARINGS

BEFORE A

SUBCOMMITTEE OF THE

COMMITTEE ON APPROPRIATIONS

U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

_____________

Subcommittee on Interior, Environment, and Related Agencies

MICHAEL K. SIMPSON, Idaho, Chairman

MARK E. AMODEI, Nevada CHELLIE PINGREE, Maine,
GUY RESCHENTHALER, Pennsylvania  Ranking Member
MICHAEL CLOUD, Texas BETTY McCOLLUM, Minnesota
RYAN K. ZINKE, Montana DEREK KILMER, Washington
JAKE ELLZEY, Texas JOSH HARDER, California
CHUCK EDWARDS, North Carolina

NOTE: Under committee rules, Mr. Cole, as chairman of the full
committee, and Ms. DeLauro, as ranking minority member of the full
committee, are authorized to sit as members of all subcommittees.

Subcommittee Staff
Kristin Clarkson, Sarah Peery, Courtney Stevens, Maggie Earle, and
Scott Prutting

_____________

PART 1
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR

Page
Fiscal Year 2025 Budget Request for
the U.S. Forest Service.................
------
1

Fiscal Year 2025 Budget Request for
the Department of the Interior..........
------
55

Fiscal Year 2025 Budget Request for
Environmental Protection Agency.........
------
171

Fiscal Year 2025 Budget Request for
the Indian Health Service...............
------
229

Fiscal Year 2025 Budget Request for
the Arts and Hummanities................
------
271

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Printed for the use of the Committee on Appropriations

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
57-756                  WASHINGTON : 2025

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

HOUSE COMMITTEE ON APPROPRIATIONS

TOM COLE, Oklahoma, Chairman

HAROLD ROGERS, Kentucky,             ROSA L. DeLAURO, Connecticut,
Chairman Emeritus                    Ranking Member
KAY GRANGER, Texas,                  STENY H. HOYER, Maryland
Chairwoman Emeritus              MARCY KAPTUR, Ohio
ROBERT B. ADERHOLT, Alabama          SANFORD D. BISHOP, Jr., Georgia
MICHAEL K. SIMPSON, Idaho            BARBARA LEE, California
JOHN R. CARTER, Texas                BETTY McCOLLUM, Minnesota
KEN CALVERT, California              C.A. DUTCH RUPPERSBERGER, Maryland
MARIO DIAZ-BALART, Florida           DEBBIE WASSERMAN SCHULTZ, Florida
STEVE WOMACK, Arkansas               HENRY CUELLAR, Texas
CHARLES J. ``CHUCK'' FLEISCHMANN,    CHELLIE PINGREE, Maine
Tennessee                        MIKE QUIGLEY, Illinois
DAVID P. JOYCE, Ohio                 DEREK KILMER, Washington
ANDY HARRIS, Maryland                MATT CARTWRIGHT, Pennsylvania
MARK E. AMODEI, Nevada               GRACE MENG, New York
DAVID G. VALADAO, California         MARK POCAN, Wisconsin
DAN NEWHOUSE, Washington             PETE AGUILAR, California
JOHN R. MOOLENAAR, Michigan          LOIS FRANKEL, Florida
JOHN H. RUTHERFORD, Florida          BONNIE WATSON COLEMAN, New Jersey
BEN CLINE, Virginia                  NORMA J. TORRES, California
GUY RESCHENTHALER, Pennsylvania      ED CASE, Hawaii
MIKE GARCIA, California              ADRIANO ESPAILLAT, New York
ASHLEY HINSON, Iowa                  JOSH HARDER, California
TONY GONZALES, Texas                 JENNIFER WEXTON, Virginia
JULIA LETLOW, Louisiana              DAVID J. TRONE, Maryland
MICHAEL CLOUD, Texas                 LAUREN UNDERWOOD, Illinois
MICHAEL GUEST, Mississippi           SUSIE LEE, Nevada
RYAN K. ZINKE, Montana               JOSEPH D. MORELLE, New York
ANDREW S. CLYDE, Georgia
JAKE LaTURNER, Kansas
JERRY L. CARL, Alabama
STEPHANIE I. BICE, Oklahoma
SCOTT FRANKLIN, Florida
JAKE ELLZEY, Texas
JUAN CISCOMANI, Arizona
CHUCK EDWARDS, North Carolina

Susan Ross, Clerk and Staff Director

------

SUBCOMMITTEE ON INTERIOR, ENVIRONMENT, AND RELATED AGENCIES

MICHAEL K. SIMPSON, Idaho, Chairman

MARK E. AMODEI, Nevada               CHELLIE PINGREE, Maine,
GUY RESCHENTHALER, Pennsylvania          Ranking Member
MICHAEL CLOUD, Texas                 BETTY McCOLLUM, Minnesota
RYAN K. ZINKE, Montana               DEREK KILMER, Washington
JAKE ELLZEY, Texas                   JOSH HARDER, California
CHUCK EDWARDS, North Carolina

DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR, ENVIRONMENT, AND RELATED AGENCIES
APPROPRIATIONS FOR 2025

----------

Tuesday, April 16, 2024.

FISCAL YEAR 2025 REQUEST FOR THE U.S. FOREST SERVICE

WITNESSES

RANDY MOORE, CHIEF, U.S. FOREST SERVICE
MARK LICHTENSTEIN, NATIONAL BUDGET DIRECTOR, U.S. FOREST SERVICE
Mr. Simpson. The committee will come to order.
Good morning and thank you, Chief Moore, for being here
today to testify on the Forest Service fiscal year 2025 budget
request.
At last year's hearing, we were lucky to be joined by a
bird of prey that frequents our national forests, the bald
eagle. I think we all enjoyed hearing from the Peregrine Fund
about the work they are doing to conserve bald eagles and other
critical species. As a lifelong Idahoan, I have seen firsthand
how catastrophic wildfires can affect these birds and their
habitats, much like the devastating toll fires take on
communities across the country and other natural resources and
infrastructure. I have also seen where preventative measures
and sound management practices dramatically decreased the cost
of fire season, both in terms of taxpayer dollars and lives and
property loss. We must give our forest managers the tools and
authority to properly manage our Federal lands. Given these
widespread impacts, I am sure wildfires, their root causes, and
forest management practices will be the focus of the members'
questions today.
For fiscal year 2025, the President's request asked for
$6.5 billion for the Forest Service, an increase of $458
million above the fiscal year 2024-enacted level and,
approximately, a 7.5 percent increase. Notably, the budget
proposes shifting over $1.3 billion for wildfire preparedness,
suppression, and salaries from brace discretionary to emergency
funding. I have strong concerns about repeating the budgetary
gimmicks that Congress has just rectified in the fiscal year
2024 bill, so I look forward to discussing the Forest Service
decision to propose this change.
I was glad to see the Forest Service budget continues to
prioritize compensation for wildland firefighters, wildland
fire risk management, and access to all the resources our
public lands have to offer. As many of my colleagues may know,
the infrastructure bill provided a base pay supplemental to
wildland firefighters. Since those funds have run out, the
uncertainty of competitive pay has created challenges in hiring
and maintaining a Federal firefighter workforce. In 2024, this
committee fought hard to provide funding and authority for the
Forest Service to continue firefighter pay at the level
provided by the infrastructure bill. Forest Service and
Department of Interior wildland firefighters risk their lives
to protect our communities and deserve the stability of a
permanent pay reform. I am pleased the administration
recognizes the important work of wildland firefighters and is
continuing its efforts to address these issues.
Before closing, I would like to note that I generally
enjoy, and I don't just say this because you are here, not
generally, but genuinely enjoy working with Forest Service
employees in Idaho's region and across the country. I value the
important jobs that they carry out, and I have really enjoyed
working with them. They are trying to do a job that is
sometimes a very tough job because everybody in this country
knows that they could manage forests better than the Forest
Service can. It is the Monday morning quarterback sort of
thing. The Forest Service employees are trying to do a
sometimes difficult job, and I appreciate the work they do.
Your leadership at the Forest Service is vital to our public
lands and communities across the country. Thank you again for
joining us this morning. I look forward to our discussion and
continuing to work with you. Now I would like to yield to my
ranking member, Ms. Pingree, for her opening statement.
Ms. Pingree. Thank you very much, Mr. Chair, and thank you
so much for being here with us today. Chief Moore, thank you.
We are very pleased to have a chance to talk with you and hear
your thoughts on the fiscal 2025 budget request for the Forest
Service. I really appreciated our most recent call. Thank you
for taking the time to go over a few things with me. I know you
are very aware that I come from the most forested State in the
Nation. We are very proud of our forests in Maine, but we are
also well aware of the challenges that we are facing, from
invasive species to unpredictable weather, economic issues. We
have really been supportive of all of the things, which you
have also, around wood innovations, everything from biochar to
wood fiber insulation. I look forward to getting you to visit
our State sometime so you can see some of the work we are
doing, but I really appreciate your investment and support for
innovations in our forests and things that can be applied
across the country.
It is kind of hard to believe that it took us until last
month to finish the fiscal 2024, but I am very glad that we are
now starting 2025. We were forced to make some difficult
reductions in the Interior bill, and I understand that those
cuts will have impacts to the Forest Service programs. Your
budget also takes a constrained approach to stay within the
budget cap, so I hope that during today's hearing, you will
help us to better understand what resources are necessary to
ensure the Forest Service is able to meet its mission.
The administration's commitment to supporting wildland
firefighters and their families is commendable. Your budget
continues and expands the pay reforms that were first funded by
the Bipartisan Infrastructure Law. Providing equitable
competitive compensation, as we all know, is essential to
improving firefighter recruitment and retention. In the
recently-enacted bill, we provided additional funding necessary
to continue pay supplements for firefighters, but
unfortunately, the language authorizing pay reforms was not
included, so I hope that we can make more progress on that in
the fiscal year 2025. I look forward to discussing these and
other topics with you. Thank you again for being with us today,
and I yield back.
Mr. Simpson. Thank you, Ranking Member Pingree. With that,
Chief Moore, you may proceed with your opening statement. Your
official submitted testimony will be included in the record.
Mr. Moore. Thank you. Chair Simpson, Ranking Member
Pingree, and members of the committee, thank you for inviting
me to testify today. We are grateful for your continued
support.
The President's budget names three primary goals for us:
one, to modernize wildland fire management, to sustain
investments critical to our mission, and ensure equitable
access and benefits to America. Today, I will share our
progress as we put money to work to confront serious
challenges. I will share how our work will continue to be a
sound investment.
We directly stood 193 million acres of public lands. We
reach across boundaries to assist States, Tribes, communities,
private landowners, and others to keep millions more acres
healthy and productive. Together, these lands provide basic
needs for life, clean air and water, while they contribute to
energy production and support local communities.
National forests alone contribute more than 410,000 jobs
and $44.3 billion to the GDP. To sustain productivity and
health, forests must be able to withstand threats posed by
wildfire, climate change, drought, disease, and insects. We
invested resources to act and ensure that they do just that.
Foremost, we prioritize work to reduce wildfire risk, safeguard
communities, and create healthy and resilient forests.
In 2022, we launched a 10-year wildfire crisis strategy,
and we moved to implement it. Annual appropriations, coupled
with the historic Bipartisan Infrastructure Law and the
Inflation Reduction Act, provided an extraordinary opportunity
to take bold and strategic actions. We did just that. We
progressed to deliver on a promise to increase pace and scale
of our treatments. We are not just treating any acres. We are
treating the right acres in the right place and at the right
scale. We focused additional efforts on 21 priority landscapes
within Western fire sheds that propose the highest risk, and
they account for roughly 80 percent of wildfire risk.
These investments are paying dividends. Experts, basically,
our scientists, have reported roughly $700 billion worth of
housing and infrastructure that are at risk within these 21
priority landscapes. This includes about $6.5 billion of
municipal watersheds, which supply drinking water to 12 million
people. In the last 2 years, we reduced, on average, wildfire
risk to these assets by 8 percent for infrastructure, 8 percent
for housing, and 12 percent for watersheds. That means we
protected more than $175 million worth of homes that were at
risk. In the Stanislaus National Forest, for example,
communities are at lower risk, including towns of Cold Springs
and Strawberry. A million socially-vulnerable people are less
at risk. Nearly half of national forest lands and priority
landscapes are now considered unlikely to burn at high
intensity. We must remain on course and build on these gains.
We recognize the urgency of investing in a permanent and
comprehensive pay increase to provide a more livable wage,
enhance recruitment, and stabilize retention. We must also
improve housing conditions and provide better care for our
firefighters' physical and mental health. We look forward to
seeing an end to reports of firefighters living in cars with
few benefits and limited mental healthcare. Visitor use,
hunting and fishing, energy and minerals development, forest
products and livestock grazing generate 69 percent of the
contributions to the economy. Thanks to the great American
Outdoor Ag funds will relieve some of the pressure from the
$8.6 billion maintenance backlog. The budget requests $58
million to maintain critical recreation services with a focus
on offering welcoming and equitable opportunities.
We are also making a difference in our urban environment.
The Forest Service and partners are planting and maintaining
trees in cities and suburbs where about 84 percent of Americans
live. Trees combat extreme heat and climate change and improve
access to nature. The 2025 budget returns basic funding to most
programs. This includes forest products, which are vital to
sustaining rural communities. This includes sustainable timber
supply. We know it is a critical component and is part of a
complex, market-driven system. While we don't control markets,
we can support industry through forest products and wood
innovations, which help mills adapt and modernize.
In closing, we are fully committed to meeting the
challenges before us with resources that Congress has provided.
The people of America deserve nothing less than to see their
money put to work to benefit all. Thank you, and I welcome your
questions.
[The statement of Mr. Moore follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Simpson. Thank you, and let me say this is kind of one
of those unusual years, and seem to be more frequent than in
the past, but because of the shortened hearing schedule that we
have on all of our subcommittees, there are multiple
subcommittees meeting, and, of course, most members serve on
two or three. Mr. Amodei has to go chair his Homeland Security
Committee here at 10 o'clock and others have other meetings
that they are currently at and will be stepping in and out. It
is not due to a lack of respect or anything----
Mr. Moore. Sure.
Mr. Simpson [continuing]. For the Forest Service and the
job that you all do, but it is kind of crazy the way things are
going, the time period we are trying to get, because we are
actually trying to get a budget to you, dare I say, before
October 1. That is kind of a goal sort of thing. [Laughter.]
Mr. Simpson. I am tempted to ask how the 2024 budget is
working out, but that is kind of an unfair question because you
just barely got it. Anyway, let me ask a couple of questions
here. First, thank you and your team for the work that you have
put in to advance the Stibnite Mine Project in Idaho.
Mr. Moore. Yeah.
Mr. Simpson. This project is essential to ensuring the
United States has a domestic supply of antimony for national
defense purposes. In fact, some of the biggest proponents of
this moving along is our military. As we all know, in many
supply chains, we continue to be far too reliant on foreign
adversaries for critical minerals. It is important that the
Stibnite mines stay on schedule to meet the national security
demands that we are facing today.
When I visited the project, I was very impressed by how the
company is prioritizing restoration of the historic abandoned
mine, while simultaneously producing a desperately-needed
critical mineral for our national defense. I have to compliment
the Forest Service for the work that they have done there and
the cooperation that they have had. Have you had the
opportunity to visit the Stibnite Mine?
Mr. Moore. No, I have not.
Mr. Simpson. If you would like to come, I would be happy to
take you up there, and we would get away from all the
cellphones and all that kind of stuff.
Mr. Moore. I would love to take you up on that.
Mr. Simpson. It is a neat place.
Mr. Moore. Yeah.
Mr. Simpson. Let's talk for a minute, if we could, about
addressing the wildfire pay. It continues to be one of my, and
I think this committee's, top priorities. The President's
fiscal year 2025 budget includes a proposal to reform
firefighter pay with a permanent pay increase. As I previously
mentioned, this committee fought hard to provide additional
funding and authority in the 2024 bill for the Forest Service
to ensure the Federal Agency's ability to recruit and retain
wildland firefighters temporarily, but I recognize a permanent
fix is needed. What are the implications if Congress does not
enact a permanent pay solution for wildfire fighters? Along
that same line, what is the cost difference between the amount
needed to sustain the infrastructure bill's supplemental
payments and the amount needed to implement the permanent
salary table included in the request?
Mr. Moore. Thank you, Chairman Simpson. Let me respond to
your Stibnite question first. You may or may not be aware that
we plan to have a draft completed in the summer or fall of this
year, and we also are planning to have a final release toward
the end of this year. A lot of progress on the analysis for
that program.
In terms of the fire pay fix, it is a real challenge for
us. In many of our communities, and I know we feel that all
across America where it is getting more expensive to live in so
many of our communities. When you have firefighters who are
paid at the lower end of the Federal scale, it is really hard
for them to make a living on the previous amount, and so the
supplemental fund has been a real boost because at one time, we
were having a lot of bleeding in the organization of employees
leaving. The retention was low. We had a lot of declinations.
That has basically stopped just on the ideal that Congress is
considering a permanent fix.
Mr. Simpson. Yeah.
Mr. Moore. Now, if for some reason the fix does not go
through, we will continue to see what we were seeing prior to
the supplement. As we have looked at some of the analysis
there, the permanent pay fix is actually cheaper than the
temporary supplemental fix that we have now. It is in all of
our best interest to have a permanent pay fixture for a lot of
different reasons, one of those being is cheaper.
Mr. Simpson. Yeah. That kind of floored me when my staff
told me that, that it is cheaper to actually do a permanent pay
fix than the supplemental that we are currently doing is. How
is the recruiting for the upcoming fire season? Is it going
okay?
Mr. Moore. Yes. So far, the recruitment is going good, but
like I say, it is tenuous. A lot of our firefighters are a
little nervous about what to expect, but so far it is going
fairly well, and so we are on schedule to meet our goals in
terms of the number of additional firefighters. The one thing
that people may not notice, though, is that we have about
13,000 other firefighters that are not classified as
firefighters but also support the program.
Mr. Simpson. Yeah.
Mr. Moore. They are employees that work in other program
areas like timber, recreation, some of those types of things.
Mr. Simpson. Could you give me a brief what is it like to
be a wildfire fighter, a year-long sort of thing because they
come and work as wildfire fighters for a period of time when
the wildfires are going on, and then they go back to other jobs
that they have.
Mr. Moore. Yeah, I think it is morphing a bit. I will go
back to when I started with the Forest Service and I worked as
a firefighter, and the work is still dirty, hard, and nasty.
When you are at the bottom of the pay scale it is not rewarding
until you get your check, of course.
Mr. Simpson. Yeah.
Mr. Moore. After that, it is really hard work. If I look at
firefighters today, it is still hard work. It is still dirty
work. It is still something that is really necessary for
America.
Mr. Simpson. Dangerous work.
Mr. Moore. Dangerous, very dangerous. We have seen too many
times where our employees have been in situations where the
outcome wasn't so good. It is imperative, I think, for us to
find ways to look at the pay fix, for one, on this, and I think
we are headed in the right direction. I want to applaud
Congress for all of their efforts and attention to this issue
for us, so much appreciation from me as chief of the Agency.
Mr. Simpson. Well, I appreciate that. As you know, I don't
think the debate has been about whether firefighters deserve
this pay increase that they got. It is about authorization and
not stepping on other committees' toes. That is what we are
working on, but this needs to be fixed on a permanent basis, so
I appreciate that. Ms. Pingree.
Ms. Pingree. I want to start with a very parochial kind of
question. I know we have a lot of issues to talk about today,
but this one impacting my own State. The State private and
Tribal forestry account provides vital financial and technical
assistance to non-Federal landowners and resource managers in
my home State. The Maine Forest Service has a long history of
using these resources to provide services to small woodland
owners, loggers, and foresters, but the State and private
funding only goes so far. In the last few months, Maine has
experienced four major storms that caused widespread water
quality issues, washed out roads and bridges, and caused
negative impacts to the health of the forests. Maine's logging
industry suffered more than $2.6 million in losses for just one
of those storms, the December storm alone, and has a domino
effect on the Maine economy, with larger losses estimated at
over $5.5 million. Many of the companies will be unable to file
insurance claim because the losses aren't covered. I have seen
some of the devastating pictures of road washouts, and it is a
short season when you can move trees. It is not mud, it is not
snowed in, so it has been a huge problem for them.
How is the Forest Service taking into consideration the
impact of this extreme weather we are experiencing on the
management of partners' forests and related industry, and is
providing more resources for this simply a matter of increasing
the funding to State, private, and Tribal forestry accounts, or
are there some other funding possibilities that a partner, like
the Maine Forest Service could explore? We are just anxious to
help them, and we want to know what your thoughts are and any
resources we should be looking at.
Mr. Moore. Sure. Ranking Member, first, let me say that we
can and we do request funding through the congressionally-
required disaster unfunded needs report that is provided, and
so we have received funding there. To give you an idea of the
request versus the need is pretty significant. We have about a
billion dollars right now in backlog from requests that are
needed to respond to many of these disasters across the
country.
Ms. Pingree. Mm-hmm.
Mr. Moore. The request is one thing. Do we get enough to
repair the damage? The answer is no, we don't, but it is
helpful. We want you to know how much we appreciate Congress'
response to our request. It is just that more of them are
happening, it seems, and whether you believe that it is from
climate differences, climate change, or whatever the reason may
be, it is happening more often, and so the requests are asked
more often. We understand the budget situation, we fully
understand that, but I do want you to know that there is a lot
of damage out there. We did receive the 2023 funding requests
for prior years, and it still wasn't enough. Like I said, we
have a billion-dollar backlog on what is needed versus what has
been requested.
Ms. Pingree. Great. That is helpful to know and sort of
gives us a sense of where that funding could come from. Let me
just throw in one other quick question. I am very interested in
agroforestry.
Mr. Moore. Yes.
Ms. Pingree. It is a funny thing about this committee
because I also sit on Agriculture, and this is kind of
agriculture, but it comes under forestry, and so I got to ask
you here, but it is already an important tool in farming to
mitigate some of the effects of climate change. It helps us
sequester more carbon in the soil. It just has a lot of
benefits, particularly in hot weather where animals are better
off with some shade, so just all kinds of good reason for it.
The National Agroforestry Center plays a critical role in
facilitating the best practices by providing cutting-edge
science, technical assistance, the things that farmers need to
be able to use this funding in this program.
Is the current national agroforestry staff able to meet the
demand for the latest research and technical assistance? What
staffing needs do you have at the Center? I will just say that
from my conversations that I have had with groups from around
the country and people who are interested in this in my State,
there is just not enough out there right now. I am sort of
saying what do we need to be able to provide the resources that
farmers need to use these tools?
Mr. Moore. Yeah. Let me first acknowledge the accuracy in
your statement. The Agroforestry Center provides really
valuable research, and it really does a good job of translating
scientific knowledge into a support base on how we can use
that. If we had additional resources, for example, our top
priorities would be around supporting agroforestry training
developing technical assistance material, and then promoting
and facilitating agroforestry organizations, agencies, and some
of the producers. Looking at how the allocations happen,
though, if we use more money for the Agroforestry Center, it
would also have a negative impact on some of the other research
that is taking place in research and development. What we have
in our budget now is a balanced approach based on what we have
within our research and development budget. I would agree with
you, there is some outstanding work taking place in the
Agrocenter, and we would like to do more.
Ms. Pingree. Great. Great. Well, thank you for that, and I
will yield back.
Mr. Simpson. Thank you. Mr. Ellzey has got to get back to
CJS----
Mr. Moore. Yeah.
Mr. Simpson [continuing]. Thank you, Congressman Cloud, for
allowing him to go first. Go ahead.
Mr. Ellzey. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member, and
thank you, Michael, for letting me cut in line. I am sure I
will pay for it later. [Laughter.]
Mr. Ellzey. Chief Moore and Mister Lichtenstein--the name I
love to pronounce over and over and over again----
[Laughter.]
Mr. Ellzey [continuing]. Texas is comprised of 63 million
acres of forested land, approximately one-third of the State.
It is the most forested State in the lower 48, which I really
didn't know, but doesn't surprise me, with 95 percent of that
land privately held, and the entire value chain of that land is
$4 billion. Of course, in February and March, earlier this
year, several wildfires broke out across the Texas Panhandle
region, where I am originally from. Strong winds caused power
lines to fall, and dry conditions allowed these fires to
spread, and it was largely grassland--it wasn't forested land
that burned--with the Smokehouse Creek fire damaging more than
1 million acres, in Windy Deuce, 150,000. Of course, these are
devastating losses to landowners, but by the grace of God,
truly were not more people killed. However, it killed a lot of
livestock, and it took that land out of graze land capability
for many years.
Of course, we lost two folks in those fires. I want to
commend Forest Service's Region 8 personnel, leadership, and
responders for their assistance in managing those wildfires.
Their assistance to Texas and local responders in capacity
building and wildfire suppression was critical in controlling
and extinguishing these fires.
Every 5 years or so, the Panhandle has these wildfires. The
winds can get extremely strong. There are no trees there, and
there is nothing to stop that wind. That is why I live in the
Dallas area now. [Laughter.]
The wind, 30 miles an hour every day, and when it gets dry,
it is just going to catch fire and blow fast. As the threat of
wildfires grows and the cost of damages increases, and the
utilization rate of a firefighting capacity in the aerial
regime is increasing and it has been increasingly critical. In
the Wildland Fire Mitigation and Management Commission's Aerial
Equipment Strategy report of January 2023, the report
recommends that DOD surplus equipment and parts should be made
more readily available to State and local wildfire agencies and
the private contractor wildland fire community. Now, I happen
to know that the Air Force is getting rid of their D.C.-10s
quite quickly, and they are going to go to the bone yard. Can
you elaborate on the DOD's surplus equipment and what you
envision this partnership with DOD looking like?
Mr. Moore. At this point, I cannot comment on what DOD is
planning to do with their equipment. I have not been briefed on
that. I can talk from my experience, particularly working in
California and also looking at the possibility of owning a lot
of the large air tankers in the past. As we have done some
analysis on what it would take to put that within our
portfolio, it is more expensive for us to own and operate that
aircraft than it is to contract out the aircraft.
We have chosen to support the business sector by
contracting out. We have two basic contract options, exclusive
use or call when needed, and so far those options are working
fairly well for us.
Mr. Ellzey. Okay. You basically described how you are
building a long-term fleet, and I completely agree with you. As
a contract air services air provider after I retired from the
military, it is cheaper to you to go COCO than it is GOCO.
Mr. Ellzey. I am a big fan of that. Texas A&M Wildlife has
some aerial fighting capacity, but they are smaller aircraft. I
would love to see something that is centrally located in Texas
that can go after the wildfires in the Central Texas in
forests, the grassland fires in the Panhandle, the fires in New
Mexico, the fires in Colorado, and as well as Arkansas and
Oklahoma. It is clear that we have that need, and I would love
to work with you on hopefully accomplishing that mission.
Mr. Moore. Well, thank you, Congressman, and may I also add
that we are in the process now of working with all of our
Federal and State partners. We are in the process of doing an
inventory of what all equipment that each of the entities have
as it relates to fire suppression activities. Now that we have
an inventory of that, what our plan is, is to work
strategically in a collaborative manner so that no matter where
that fire starts, that we are going to approach it as a
collective group where we can get to fires quicker, more
effective, and more efficiently, and so that is the plan going
forward. We currently have an inventory. Now we are all working
together to develop a strategic plan on how we would work to
respond to fire activity.
Mr. Ellzey. Thanks, Chief. Thanks, Michael. Mr. Chairman, I
yield back. Thank you for your time.
Mr. Simpson. Mr. Kilmer.
Mr. Kilmer. Thanks, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Simpson. This could be the last hearing you have with
the Forest Service. Mr. Kilmer has decided to retire.
Mr. Moore. Oh no.
Mr. Kilmer. Indeed.
Mr. Simpson. We are going to miss you.
Mr. Kilmer. Thank you. Thank you, Chairman, and thanks,
Chief, for being here.
The issues that we are talking about are a big part of the
reason I am here. I grew up on the Olympic peninsula. I was in
high school when the timber industry crashed and saw a bunch of
my friends' parents lose their jobs and saw a bunch of my
neighbors lose their jobs. My brother actually worked in a mill
that has been a derelict site behind a chain link fence for the
last 30 years. The chairman is right, this is my last year
here, and I am tired of watching our rural economy struggle in
the way that they have.
I will start with the good news. I am pleased that the
Forest Service actually took some steps to achieve some modest
increases in harvest levels in Region 6 last year. We were at
589 million board feet for Region 6, which beat the target and
exceeded the 2022 offerings, which was one of the lowest in
decades. That is the good news. Now here is the bad news. The
numbers are still far below 2020 levels, more than 25 percent
lower. The Forest Service also changed course last year and
began using personal use firewood permits in their timber count
sales, and that is just very different than the commercial
timber sales that support rural economies, and Congress has
previously directed in that report language shouldn't be
included in those figures. If you back out the personal use
firewood, the Forest Service offered about 529 million board
feet for Region 6, which is, again, under target.
Every year that I have been on this committee, I feel like
I say the same thing to whoever is sitting in your chair and
say, gosh, could you please help my community, and here I am
again. This is not working, right? It is not working in terms
of producing meaningful harvest levels. It is not good for
forest health. It is not good for preventing wildfires. It is
certainly not good for supporting timber communities or
providing a reliable domestic supply of one of the most
climate-friendly building products around.
The impacts on our national forests and on communities like
mine are pretty clear. Our national forests are pretty clear.
Our national forests are overstocked. That is leading to the
buildup of hazardous fuels and increasing the likelihood of
fires. The increased stress also makes our forests more
susceptible to insects and to disease. Meanwhile, sawmills and
wood product companies that communities cannot afford to lose
are closing. Just since January, our region saw four more
sawmills close in the Pacific Northwest. I know that resource
limitations have impacted operations service wide, but that is
something our committee's been working on.
We got great people. Like, we love the people in our
region. We are lucky to have great partners. The Olympic Forest
Collaborative has actually united folks from the environmental
community and the timber industry, actually working together to
try to supplement some of the work of the Forest Service to
increase harvest levels and have actually produced some pilot
projects that have added a couple million additional board
feet. We have got Tribes and NGO partners that are working
diligently to find funding and staffing to complete restoration
projects and to remove culverts and provide additional capacity
to the Service. I have to just tell you, everybody is
frustrated. All of our partners are frustrated.
Not to ask the same questions that I ask every year, but I
am back and I am asking again what are we going to do to
address this backlog on the Olympic that is impacting the
maintenance backlog, is impacting recreation and timber harvest
and conservation projects? What are the plans to solve some of
the capacity issues and fill some of the vacant positions that
are contributing to some of our challenges? What are we doing
to improve increase partnerships and improve the contracting
process, and what are the plans to ramp up the Forest Service's
ability to implement collaborative landscape-scale management
programs and increase timber harvest? If we are not getting
there, what is the impediment?
Mr. Moore. Yeah.
Mr. Kilmer. Initially, we were told the impediment was fire
borrowing. We fixed that. Then we were told the problem was
lack of funding. We plowed a lot of resources into the Service,
so like, help me understand what we got to do to fix this.
Mr. Moore. Okay. Thank you, Congressman. The first thing I
want to acknowledge, there is frustration in the system, even
within the Forest Service, because it seems like we are being
asked to do more than what we are funded to do, and we know
that the need is there. Sometimes the budget don't support what
the public is asking us to provide, and so it is frustrating.
The other thing, though, I will talk to you about what we
are doing with what we have. You are right, we have increased
the amount of timber that we are providing even on the Olympic.
We have stabilized the program, and if you look at the outyears
on the Olympic, right now, we are providing stability all the
way into 2040 with a steady supply between 17 to 20 million
board feet, so that is the good news based on the budget that
we have.
Some of the challenges, though, on how you had looked at
timber, firewood, biomass, and sawlogs has always been a part
of the timber program and how we calculate board feet
accomplished, so that is nothing different now. There are
market conditions that are going on across the country now that
are also having some influence. When you look, and I am talking
globally now, so when you look at the type of material that we
have versus in the heyday of when we were providing large
timber, it is smaller diameter, low-value material. Even though
you remove a lot of small stuff, it is not as big as the big
stuff that you used to take.
The other thing is that the industry and us are working
together to look at how do we innovate the wood industry, and
it is in all of our best interests to look at some of the
opportunities that we are trying to pursue, and so far it looks
really promising. If you look at the Wildfire Crisis Strategy
and what Congress is asking us to do, we are looking at things
like biochar, biofuel, of course, cross-laminated timber, the
mass timber production, and we are looking at how do we
encourage our business community to invest in some of these
opportunities? Now, I said it looks promising because right
now, we have just under 2,000 facilities that are either
designed, being designed, or being built using cross-laminated
timber or what we call mass timber. We always want to talk
about one of the biggest successes, which is in Milwaukee. It
is a 26-story building using cross-laminated timber. We have a
few facilities here in the D.C. area. The market is taken off
and has proven itself.
The other thing, I met with a community yesterday that came
in to visit, and it was a community that was devastated by
fire. Looking at some of the science that we are working on
with some of the university systems, like in a forest products
laboratory, we are looking at material from biochar that you
can use for tile roofing on your house. Also, the same type of
material that you can begin to build homes and put walls in,
now that is more resistant to fire. The technology is being
really developed and refined, and so I am really optimistic
about that part of it looking into the future and how we
calculate what we are able to do differently, not just saw
logs, but some of the other material that comes from wood.
Mr. Kilmer. I am sorry, Chairman, if I can have your
indulgence. Our region has capacity issues and vacant
positions. Is there a plan to fill them?
Mr. Moore. Yeah. In fact, we have filled some of the
positions on the Olympic National Forest, and you know as well
as I do that we had a lot of employees leaving there for a lot
of different reasons, one of those being it was just hard to
live there. To OPM's credit, though, they have increased the
locality pay just recently, and so that will stop or stem the
amount of people that have been leaving, so that is the good
news in this. Then the second news is that there seems to be a
bit of stability there on the Olympic National Forest.
Mr. Kilmer. If I could. The other thing I asked, and I
would like to hear your comment on it, is we have had this
collaborative in place where the conservation community and the
industry are at the same table working together, but the
repeated request is to sort of increase scope and scale and
look at landscape-scale management programs. I can't figure out
why this isn't happening, because this is a success story, but
it just needs the Forest Service to embrace it.
Mr. Moore. Well, we do embrace it. In fact, when you look
at collaboratives all across the country, we are getting a lot
of our work done through the collaborative process. I actually
visited one of the collaborators there in your State, and I
looked at the large landscape approach that we are taking there
and the positive impact that it is beginning to have on that
community there. We are embracing the collaboratives and
working in a much larger way because the way we are going to
make the most difference of the landscape is treating it at
scale.
Mr. Kilmer. Let me just make a plea for you to look at what
is happening on the Olympic and see if you can have that
engagement and try to replicate the success you have seen in
other places.
Mr. Moore. Okay. Be happy to.
Mr. Kilmer. Thanks, Chairman. I appreciate the indulgence.
Mr. Simpson. Thank you. Mr. Cloud.
Mr. Cloud. Thank you, Chairman, and thank you, Chief, for
being here, and I appreciate the work that is being done
through the Forest Service and your time here today, and wanted
to thank the chairman and our committee chairman for at least
the good faith effort we are making to get this done in time to
get back on our regular schedule. I am always amazed that
September 30 comes around in Congress, and it seems like we are
surprised that September 30 is on September 30 every year, but
thank you for being here.
I wanted to touch on one thing, and that is controlled
burns. Flora and fauna have long lived alongside of wildfires.
There are a number of things that we see, fascinating ways
animals even adapt to what is going on with wildfires. Black
fire beetle has a pair of infrared-sensitive pits capable of
detecting wood burns a mile away. Spotted owl hunts animals
that are revealed after a wildfire. We see the black-backed
woodpecker feast on insects of trees that have been burned, and
we know that these wood burns are actually if we did nothing,
it is part of the natural life cycle of--I will spare you the
song--but the circle of life that would happen in wildfires.
Could you speak to the benefits of prescribed burns?
Mr. Moore. Yes. Actually, thank you for that question. When
I look at most of the landscapes across this country, and it
varies, the South is different than the West, and in some ways,
the South is maintaining ecosystems that they have created over
time with prescribed burning, whereas in the West, it needs to
create those conditions before we can begin to talk about
maintaining them.
To give you a kind of a difference between the two, in the
West, where you have the fire-adapted ecosystems and the fact
that we have not been able to go in and treat those acres at
the scale that it needs treating, then it has grown up. On
average, in the past, you had about, let's just say 40 to 60
trees per acre, particularly on the ponderosa pine, that type
of ecosystem. Now, you could have upwards of 600 trees or more
per acre on that same acre.
The fact that you have that much vegetation there, you
cannot introduce wildfire in those areas before you thin it,
and in order to thin it, and based on the type of material you
have, you need to have an industry that can utilize it, and it
helps to provide economic stability in a lot of our small rural
communities. It is a cycle that we have to look at if we want
to try and treat this issue in a way that there are multiple
benefits from it.
Now, the wood innovations approach is one of the ways we
are trying to help stimulate a new way of using the type of
material that we have, which is small diameter low value, and
so we are working with industry to look at different ways of
utilizing the type of material we have. We still will be
looking at saw logs and some of the large timber, but there is
so much more of the other type of material, and that is why I
mentioned some of the things that we are doing through wood
innovations and how promising it is looking.
Mr. Cloud. These prescribed burns are a key part of us
protecting life and property. My understanding is that the
current EPA regulatory apparatus can make it difficult to get
prescribed burns done that needed to be done. I am wondering if
you could speak to maybe recommended exceptions that you would
have us to look at that we could work with the EPA on, or put
in approps riders that could help you do the good work of
protecting life and property.
Mr. Moore. Yeah. I think you might be referring to our
particulate matter that EPA is looking at the real fundamental
question I think we have to ask ourselves is that, how do you
want your smoke, because unless we make some changes on the
landscape, no matter what the regulations or the requirements
are, you are going to get smoke just like you have been
getting. You cannot continue to operate the way that we have
been operating because it is having a negative impact, not only
on the communities that are in those areas, but also on the
resources.
We have to have an honest discussion about, whatever level
is there to be attained, are there opportunities to perhaps
exceed that on a temporary basis until we get the landscapes in
a condition where it is more healthy and resilient? That is the
discussion, I think, that needs to take place, and I don't
think it is taking place. It is almost like it is either/or,
and it is both. How do we have that conversation to talk about
what is going on because there are so many parts of our country
where we have that much vegetation. If a fire breaks out, you
are going to get just an ungodly amount of particulates in the
air. If we go in and thin those areas first and then run fires
through there as prescribed fire, that is the kind of smoke
that you can manage.
Mr. Cloud. Right.
Mr. Moore. Then the conversation becomes how do you manage
smoke from fires or how do you manage smoke from prescribed
burns, as opposed to trying to manage smoke from wildfires,
which you cannot.
Mr. Cloud. Right.
Mr. Moore. I think those are the conversations we need to
have.
Mr. Cloud. Certainly, environmental impact from a
controlled burn of forest is much better than homes burning as
well and obviously from a livelihood and a life because we care
about the people. I was going to ask you about the air support,
but I will just echo Mr. Ellzey's comments. It would be great
to have some air supports stationed in Central Texas. I know
the Northern part of my district has experienced wildfires and
really be wonderful to have that kind of support, especially
with the presence of forests in Texas.
I wanted to touch on one other area real quick, and that
is, one of the wonderful things about this committee and
especially the Forest Service, is the ability to come in here
and to work on what has typically been a nonpartisan issue. I
wouldn't even say it is a bipartisan. It is a nonpartisan
issue. We are working on forests. When I read through your
testimony and your plans, I am really concerned about some of
the language that is in the plan that would give me pause. Then
even when I have talked to people who have experienced, and
this goes a little beyond you, but Parks and Rec and just these
typically nonpartisan issues are becoming, and I can just read
some of this language to you.
It says, ``The Forest Service will activate its network of
environmental justice and equity subject matter experts who
have led and participated in environmental justice and equity
actions.'' Now, that sounds like we are mobilizing a partisan
political workforce to do political work, from where I sit.
Part of the language in your testimony said, ``prioritizing
activities that will provide benefits to certain peoples.''
Well, that would seem to me that we are using taxpayer money
that excludes other people from receiving these said benefits.
I would just encourage you as we continue to set policy, we
want our firefighters paid, we want to make sure our forests
are managed, and I have every reason to believe that in those
aspects, you are giving a good faith effort.
Mr. Moore. Yeah.
Mr. Cloud. Let's do everything we can to keep this a
nonpartisan effort so that we can come here as a committee and
make sure that we are able to support you wholeheartedly in
these efforts.
Mr. Moore. Okay. Congressman, can I give you an example of
environmental justice that, if I could use, that you may or may
not be aware of? There is a difference in how we look at urban
areas versus wildland areas. Our science is telling us, for
example, that in some of our urban areas, or any community, to
be honest with you, where you do not have trees, temperatures
could be as much as 17 to 18 degrees higher than communities
that does have trees. When you talk about environmental justice
and equity and some of those types of things, and as we look at
reforestation, there is also a need to not only reforest the
wildland, but also reforest urban areas where you do not have
trees for a lot of different reasons, but putting trees into
those communities reduces the utility bill. It lowers the
temperatures in that areas, and just overall----
Mr. Cloud. I will say that is something I think we can all
get behind for urban reforestation, if you want to call it tree
cities all over America.
I think that is something we can get behind. Labeling it
with Marxist terms, like ``environmental justice,'' assumes
that there has been some intentional injustice which plays into
the oppressor victim mentality of Marxism. That is the kind of
stuff that we do not need to see in Forest Service goals. Let's
plant trees, let's manage forests, let's do those kind of
things, but let's make sure that this stays a nonpartisan
department.
Mr. Moore. Okay.
Mr. Cloud. Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Simpson. Mr. Edwards.
Mr. Edwards. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Chief Moore, as you are aware, North Carolina's 11th
District, which I have the distinct honor to represent, is home
to the Pisgah and Nantahala National Forest, over a million
acres of the most beautiful, recreation-friendly land in this
Nation. Within the Nantahala Forest stands the Joyce Kilmer
Memorial Forest, a 3,800 acre tract with more than 100 tree
species, many that predate European settlement. In my view,
these are among the purest examples of old growth that we can
find anywhere.
In December 2023, an article in Park Science Magazine,
published by the National Park Service, the authors write, ``An
old growth forest is something foresters will say they will
know when they see it, yet when asked to create a formal
definition, many find that impossible. However, at the end of
last year, the U.S. Department of Agriculture announced a
proposal to and I quote ``amend all 128 forest land management
plans to conserve and steward old growth forest conditions on
national forests and grasslands nationwide.''
My question is, as the Nation's top forester, what is your
definition of ``old growth'' as not all tree species have the
same lifespan, and how do you tell when a given species is
considered old?
Mr. Moore. Each----
Mr. Edwards. Not congressman, but trees, so. [Laughter.]
Mr. Moore. A couple of things, and I will try to go back
where you started with the old growth there you have in North
Carolina, and I would agree with you, North Carolina has
beautiful areas. In fact, I lived there shortly for a while
there on that very forest that you mentioned. One of the things
that I have grown to appreciate is the differences across this
country from the South, the East, the West, and Midwest, and
there are differences that needs to be appreciated, and not
everything is equal.
In terms of the old growth that you may be referring to, I
think it is around the tulip trees, which are some really old,
beautiful trees. I happened to be briefed on that recently, and
in that briefing, it does acknowledge that there is a lot of
recreational use and even some root damage. It also talks about
the storm that went through there, which is creating most of
the damage to that old growth area there that you are referring
to. Now, I would love to visit with you on site there with some
of the staff there so we can walk through there, and we can
talk about what is really causing damage to that old growth
area. If you would like to, we can try and set up a time where
that could happen because I would like to see it again as well.
The other piece in terms of the mature and old growth
that's--the MOGs is what we refer to it--as I said, depending
on the species will determine what ``old'' is. Maybe I could
just refer to the intent behind the amendment, and it was
really looking at the differences across the country, which I
mentioned earlier, and how do we address those differences, and
we don't have a framework where there is a level of consistency
on how we would address this issue. The old growth amendment is
our effort or is a way to look at some level of consistency but
also providing that local influence on how that might end up
looking.
Now, the other misnomer about old growth is that it is
going to take away from some of the other project work that is
taking place across the country, and we don't believe that it
will. We initially did an assessment of old growth across the
country, and when we look at the old growth and the biggest
impact to old growth, it was really wildfire and disease and
insect. The amendment that you are referring to will allow us
to make amendments to the plan to really look at how we would
manage that old growth and the fact that wildfire, disease and
insect is the biggest impact on old growth. It says
specifically in there that you would have to manage that. There
will be timber sales coming out of the old growth areas to
getting at the right stocking level.
We see this as complementary to a number of things, but
most complementary to the Wildfire Crisis Strategy that we have
taking place across the country, but particularly towards the
West.
Mr. Edwards. Am I still on deck?
Mr. Simpson. Yep.
Mr. Edwards. I don't see a clock.
Voice. You got it.
Mr. Edwards. I will take you up on your offer to come and
visit the Joyce Kilmer Forest. I would consider that a treat.
It is always a pleasure to go up there and look at those huge
trees. I would just add, I think that this is important in my
district because I have visited the Joyce Kilmer Forest, and
the tree huggers literally are killing the trees. My office
worked with the Forest Service to try to get them to
voluntarily put some protections in place. They ignored our
request, and so I am working on a bill or an amendment now just
looking for the vehicle to insert it that would require
protection of those huge, huge yellow poplars that you
mentioned. We would love to have you in the district.
Mr. Moore. Yeah, and I think just walking the ground,
talking about what you are seeing, what you are hearing, and
just having a conversation about it might be a really good way
to approach that.
Mr. Edwards. Yeah. Thank you.
Mr. Moore. Thank you.
Mr. Edwards. I appreciate the invitation.
Mr. Simpson. Thank you. Yeah. I might enjoy doing that also
with them.
Mr. Edwards. Sure. [Laughter.]
Mr. Simpson. Ms. Pingree.
Ms. Pingree. Sure. Well, thank you. I just want to go back
to a little bit more about firefighting and, in particular, the
fire fix itself, which we sort of talked around a little bit.
As you know, suppression costs continue to outpace our
appropriations, and in 2018, Congress created the Wildland Fire
Suppression Operations Reserve Fund, which we all call the fire
fix. This, I think, mostly is due to our chair, so thank you
for that. He labored hard to get that done, and it has been
really valuable. It does make additional funding for wildfire
response and suppression available when we don't have the
regular funding, but the budget authority, I guess, is set to
expire at the end of fiscal 2027. I know that is a few years
away, but in Congress time, it is pretty much tomorrow, and we
sort of have to figure out what to do. Can you just tell us
about how it has benefited the operations, what the
ramifications might be if we don't extend it and sort of where
you see where we are right now.
Mr. Moore. Sure. First of all, thank you for the Fire Fund
and fix. It has been a godsend, and I would like to explain
just briefly how. If I look at what happened between 2020 and
2023, we would have needed an additional $5 billion for fire
suppression that this has provided us. As I look at the 2025
budget, we would have to request $1.5 billion in it to address
it.
I think more than anything, the Fire Fund and fix provided
stability in the operational areas of the Agency because it was
taking money that was targeted for other resource areas to look
at fire suppression. The 10-year average, as you know, was
going up every year, and every year, the requests, the movement
from some of the resource programs into fire was just really
having a devastating impact on the other program areas within
the Agency. This Fire Fund and fix was not only necessary, but
it provided us with the stability that we needed to do some of
the things that we have been talking about here this morning.
If that was not renewed, then we will go back in time and look
at the impacts and implications that it would have on the other
parts of our mission, which would be devastating to the Agency
as well to the American public.
Ms. Pingree. Well, thank you for that, and I think we just
need to say don't ever think of retiring until we have gotten
that. [Laughter.]
I know you are not retiring anytime soon anyway. You are a
young man here in Congress, but it is like we got to make sure
we reauthorize that whenever we can get it done. Yeah. The only
other thing I want to talk about is wood innovation, and you
have done that quite a bit. I would just say, as I mentioned
earlier, and kind of apropos of what my colleague, Mr. Kilmer
said, and I know it is a very different region out there, and
we would be blessed in Maine, I think, if we had the quality of
timber that you have so that we were strictly like a sawlog
industry. We do have some wonderful mills, but we have always
traditionally been more of a pulpwood kind of State, a lot of
spruce, fir, so we have always dealt with sort of a secondary
species, in a sense, and turned it into paper.
We went through the same level of devastating closures over
the last decade, plus everything from losing our paper industry
to China to people just not using paper, which I suppose is
good in the long run, but anyway. We have really had the
benefit of a lot of groups working together--our industry, our
workers, our State government--to kind of think into the
future.
Mr. Moore. Yeah.
Ms. Pingree. We have been fortunate to have some
replacements. One of our paper mills in Madison, Maine, is now
a wood fiber insulation facility that makes insulation that
goes into your home, that is made from wood products, not
fiberglass or some of those other materials. We have biochar
coming online. We would love to have a cross-laminate timber
facility in our State, and I know they have been actively
working on it. Just different kinds of wood products have
really helped to fill that gap, which isn't exactly the same.
We have been benefiting from that, but we have a long ways to
go.
Mr. Moore. Yeah.
Ms. Pingree. We are certainly not there. I am just curious
if you can update us a little bit what you are doing using the
fiscal 2024 funding as well as the money that was in the
Bipartisan Infrastructure Law, the Inflation Reduction Act, all
those things. How are you sort of pushing the
commercialization? You have talked about it a little bit today,
but anything else you can sort of shed on how we can do that in
more places and how we can ramp this up?
Mr. Moore. Yeah. I think it is really important that we
acknowledge that we need to bring the community into any
decision that we would make. I think they stand to benefit from
that, and so before we get too far out with a lot of ideas and
direction, we want to invite the community in to help us think
through this.
We are moving, and we think that it is essential that
industry with us and other partners, look at the wood
innovations as the opportunity into the future because we think
that that is where it is at, and we think that survival of the
industry needs to be looking at that. Before we do our own
thinking like perhaps we have done in the past, we want to sit
down and say, let's think together about how to address this
issue.
Ms. Pingree. That is a good way to look at it. Well,
thanks. Thanks for the work that you are doing, and I yield
back.
Mr. Simpson. Thank you. A couple of other topics that I
want to question you about. Congressman Ellzey brought up one,
and that was the aviation needs. The Forest Service, together
with Tribes and other partners, launched a 10-year Wildfire
Crisis Strategy in January 2022. Having a long-term, forward-
thinking, cohesive wildfire plan allows Congress to hold the
Forest Service accountable, and most importantly for this
committee, allows the committee to plan for expected budgetary
needs to carry out that strategy. This type of proactive
planning should also be used or applied to the Forest Service
approach on aviation assets.
For the 22 years I sat on this committee, this has been a
debate that goes back and forth with new administrations, new
Forest Chiefs. I don't have a bias one way or another of
whether the Forest Service ought to own some of their own
assets or whether we ought to do the exclusive use contracts or
the on-call contracts, or whether it ought to be fixed-wing
aircraft or helicopters. I have had a forest chief tell me if I
had an aviation demand or request, it would be for helicopters
instead of fixed wings because you can dip the water out of
other places, and you can put it right where you need it, so
there are differences.
What I want and what I think would be helpful for Congress
and for this committee is, can we create a 10-year plan of
where we want to go, understanding that administrations will
change and so forth. If I can look down the road and say, this
is what we are going to need in the future, and the main
question is, if you were king for a day and you didn't have to
answer to the administration or to Congress, what would you
have, or has anybody thought about that? What would it be like
10 years from now for the Forest?
Mr. Moore. Yeah.
Mr. Simpson. It may be best that it is so expensive to have
a small fleet of your own that it is best to do exclusive use
contracts.
Mr. Moore. I was smiling internally because I was thinking,
well, what if I was chair of the House Appropriations
Committee? [Laughter.]
Mr. Moore. I get your point that you are making.
Mr. Simpson. We wouldn't wish that on anybody. [Laughter.]
Mr. Moore. I get your point, and I was trying to mention
earlier on some of these things that we are doing because I
think we have reached a point in our country where we have to
stop looking at this thing from individual eyes. Part of
looking at the aircraft since it is so expensive to use. A part
of the future look, if you will, looking at a strategic plan, I
think we have to sit down with everyone that has aircraft
within their portfolio. I mentioned earlier, that is the
States, that is other Federal agencies, and that is us. I think
we do have to look at what would a strategic plan look like for
aircraft use moving into the future.
There is, I think it is today or tomorrow, a summit that is
taking place now to really look at this issue. It is designed
to get at exactly what you had mentioned is having, I don't
know if it is a 10-year, but having a strategy put together so
that we can manage what we see taking place across the country,
which is year-long fires now, so it is fire years rather than
fire season.
Mr. Simpson. Right.
Mr. Moore. We are acknowledging that, and we think this is
in the country's best interest that we put State resources
together with all the different Federal resources to develop a
strategic plan on how we would respond from an area standpoint
to fires that are taking place in this country, and so we are
working on that.
Mr. Simpson. I would encourage you to involve Congress in
that, also, whether it is the Resources Committee or whether it
is this committee, because we may have some interest in what it
is going to cost and all that kind of stuff. Keep us involved
and informed of what is going on there----
Mr. Moore. Be happy to.
Mr. Simpson [continuing]. As we look at the future. One of
the other things that I want to talk about is the number of
acres that we have done preparedness on and I guess that is how
we measure the success of the money that we have spent. That is
the performance matrix we have had. Is that the right way to do
it, or are there other ways we should measure the success of
how the Forest Service is doing in doing fire preparedness.
Getting a forest prepared for a fire out in the wilderness of
Idaho is a little different than doing it next to a community
that is going to burn to the ground if something happens.
Mr. Moore. Yeah.
Mr. Simpson. Is there a better way to measure our
performance metrics?
Mr. Moore. Yeah. Yeah. I wonder if you have been sitting in
on some of our meetings.
Mr. Simpson. I have got a wire. [Laughter.]
Mr. Moore. Well, it is interesting that you mention that
because one of the things that the Wildfire Crisis Strategy is
asking us, and it is asking us questions and I will share what
some of those questions are. Its outputs will always be
important to us, and they will always be a part of what we do,
but the Wildfire Crisis Strategy is asking us if you are asking
me to look at reducing the risk to communities from wildfire,
what is that performance metric? Is it protecting communities
from wildfire or is it treating a number of acres, or is it
both? How do we take a hybrid look at this?
I think that we have used, basically, outputs for the last
hundred years, and I think as we turn the corner to look at the
next hundred years, perhaps we need to look at different
performance metrics. Now because of the condition and the
situation that our country is in, maybe outcomes should be
given a bit more consideration. I will give you an idea of what
we are wrestling with and some of the questions that have come
up in the last 2 years since implementing the Wildfire Crisis
Strategy.
If you hold me accountable for treating a million acres, I
am going to find a million acres to treat.
Mr. Simpson. Right.
Mr. Moore. If you hold me accountable to protecting 550
communities, which is what we have in the 21 landscapes, then
that is different because there are some acres that are cheap,
and then there are some acres that are more expensive.
Mr. Simpson. Right.
Mr. Moore. Protecting communities are expensive acres.
While we may be protecting that community, we are not achieving
the number of acres that you may want to hold me to. I would
ask you, what do you want my performance metrics to be?
One of the beautiful things about the Forest Service is
that it will reach its goal or its targets regardless. It will
do everything it can. If that is the measure, then it may take
away from how effective we could be in protecting communities
from wildfires. These are the types of questions that I think
that we need to have some conversations around because there
are fundamental shifts in how we would respond to what Congress
or what our publics are asking us to do.
Mr. Simpson. Well, I appreciate that, and I think that is a
conversation we need to have because it is changing from what
it was 50 years ago as this urban wildland interface.
Mr. Moore. Right.
Mr. Simpson. We spend almost a majority of our money trying
to protect structures and lives.
Mr. Moore. I agree.
Mr. Simpson. It used to be years ago, we tried to put out
wildfires, now we try to protect and that is expanding.
Mr. Moore. Yeah.
Mr. Simpson. People are building homes, fantastic homes,
out where they want the boughs of the trees to be touching the
roof of their multimillion-dollar house and that is great. If I
lived out there, that is what I would want, too, but it is
dangerous.
Mr. Moore. Yeah.
Mr. Shapiro. We spent a lot of our resources trying to
protect that. I think we need to look at different performance
metrics of how it is going to be in the future.
Mr. Moore. Yes.
Mr. Simpson. I appreciate that. Mr. Kilmer.
Mr. Kilmer. Thanks, Chairman. When I got here 12 years ago,
one of the first meetings I had was with the Forest Service
because you all do stuff that really matters to my region. I
had asked because it had been, at that point, I think, around
20 years since the Northwest Forest Plan came out whether there
was a plan to do an update, and they said, yeah, probably
within the next 5 years. Then it became sort of like fusion,
right, where it is like it is in the next 5 years, and it has
been for the last 50, right?
Mr. Moore. Yeah.
Mr. Kilmer. Thankfully, you are actually doing it, so thank
you for that, this process of amending the Northwest Forest
Plan. I say that in part because I think we have learned a lot
about what is working and what is not working, what is working
from a forest health standpoint, and that there are some
changes that we can make that could better serve our
conservation goals and that could potentially help our economic
needs as well from a harvest standpoint, from a timber
production standpoint.
We have heard some concerns just about the sort of limited
scope of this because it is just an amendment process. We have
heard some concerns about the short timeline, and I think it is
important that we get this right because it may be another 30
years.
Mr. Moore. Right.
Mr. Kilmer. I think there is a real opportunity to increase
some of the forestry work, to improve some of the conservation
outcomes, to meet the needs of rural communities, but we have
to have something that is durable and effective.
Mr. Moore. Right.
Mr. Kilmer. I would love to just get a sense of what the
thinking is both in terms of the timeline, what the goals are.
Obviously, I have a parochial interest in terms of the Olympic,
and whether you think between where you see this landing in
terms of what are some of the goals, how you expect it to
impact both some of our conservation goals and our harvest
goals?
Mr. Moore. Yeah. Let me give context before I answer, and a
part of what you see that is different is that we want to look
at public engagement, public involvement in a different way.
Before we get too far out ahead of ourselves talking about what
this new forest plan is going to look like, we need to sit down
with people and the communities and talk about what they want
their forest to look like. At this point, we have gone out and
we released a notice of intent, which you may be referring to,
and we have invited public scope and comments, but we have not
developed any proposed actions or anything. We created this
Federal advisory committee, and this Federal advisory committee
is going to help inform us of what is next. We are going slow
in the beginning so that when we do get started, then we have a
vision and we have a goal that we are going to try and achieve.
Right now, I would just say stay tuned. We are trying to
engage our publics into this process. We know that the
Northwest Forest Plan has been, always and will be, pretty
significant even going again, but we are committed to it. We
are committed to engaging our publics in what we do and how we
do it, and that is where we are now. We are just waiting on the
Federal advisory committee to inform what is next for us.
Mr. Kilmer. Do you have a sense of timeline? I think the
interest on our side is to have something where there is
adequate opportunity for stakeholder engagement that can land
on some long-lasting, durable, and effective solutions.
Mr. Moore. Yeah. I have had a lot of experience with forest
plan revision, and I also know that if left on its own, it will
take forever to do a plan. I will use the example when I was in
the Eastern Region where I had 12 plans to do, but I looked at
two or three other plans and it had taken 5 and 7 years, and it
still wasn't completed. That is costing American taxpayers
money because we always see a way to improve it, and so we
start back over because we find things that make it better, and
that is a continuous kind of cycle. I think for us, the Federal
Government, we need to get beyond that.
To give you an idea, and this is my thought process, I had
developed a 2-year plan in the eastern region, and I had to do
12 plans in 2 years. People they were mad for a while, of
course, but after that, do you know we developed a plan, a
strategy, and we did all 12 plans in 2 years. I know that we
can do these plans in a much more abbreviated fashion. The
question is that does the public feel like they have had enough
time to be engaged and involved in the process? That is why if
we bring our public to the table in the very beginning to have
these discussions about what we want in a forest plan, and once
that is described and identified, then we move to make it
happen rather than allowing things to continue to trickle in,
which delays the completion of a forest plan revision.
That is the approach that we want to take with the
Northwest Forest Plan. That is also the approach we want to
take with forest plan revisions across the country. We develop
plan teams. We have developed three across the country--the
west, the midwest, and the east--and their goal is to reduce
the impacts on individual forests so that we can look at
planning as serious business. We do it, we engage our publics,
and then we do the work that we all agreed to do.
Mr. Kilmer. We had heard, and maybe it is not right, that
the plan was to wrap this up before the year is out. Is that--
--
Mr. Moore. No, we couldn't possibly wrap this up. I am not
sure what part of it you are talking about, but we want it to
take as much time as necessary in the beginning so that we have
input. I am saying once we have that input, then we go to work
to make it happen. We are not rushing through the beginning
because that is the most important part of it.
Mr. Kilmer. Great. I think people feel like we have learned
a lot, right?
Mr. Moore. That is good.
Mr. Kilmer. The whole idea of the adaptive management areas
is places for experimentation. Turns out we haven't really done
much of that, and there are things that we have learned that I
think it is appropriate to update, and I am glad you are taking
it on, so thank you.
Mr. Moore. Thank you.
Mr. Kilmer. Thanks, Chair.
Mr. Simpson. Thank you. Mr. Edwards.
Mr. Edwards. This is Appropriations, my eyes go to some of
the dollar amounts in your testimony that you had selected to
provide for us, and I had a couple of questions on that. You
mentioned $207 million for hazardous fuels reduction. What is a
hazardous fuel?
Mr. Moore. It is reducing that fuel that serves as kindling
for fires.
Mr. Edwards. All right. Forest management.
Mr. Moore. Yeah.
Mr. Edwards. Is there any plan for replacing any of that or
you are you just talking about cleaning it out?
Mr. Moore. Replacing----
Mr. Edwards. Any of the hazardous fuels, which would be, I
am supposing, old growth, dead limbs, that sort of thing.
Mr. Moore. Well, so how do we use the material that we take
off the forest, if that is what you are saying?
Mr. Edwards. Do you replace it with anything is my
question.
Mr. Moore. Replace the trees?
Mr. Edwards. Maybe.
Mr. Moore. No. In fact, we want to remove them so that they
are not serving as kindling for fires.
Mr. Edwards. Right.
Mr. Moore. We also want to create jobs out of it, if we
can, in the process.
Mr. Edwards. You reference $1.5 billion for National Forest
System salaries and expenses. What percent increase would those
salaries get, and would you be adding any FTEs with that $1.5
billion?
Mr. Lichtenstein. The only increase that those folks were
getting is the 2-percent COLA that we included in the creation
of this document. That would be their pay increase everybody
would be getting, not just those employees.
Mr. Edwards. Would that encompass the entire $1.5 billion
or----
Mr. Lichtenstein. Is a part of.
Mr. Edwards. What percentage?
Mr. Lichtenstein. Well, the actual increase to salary of
employees, again, is 2 percent.
Mr. Edwards. Okay. That is part of the $1.5 billion?
Mr. Lichtenstein. That is correct.
Mr. Edwards. What is the other part?
Mr. Lichtenstein. Their actual base pay, so we are paying
them their full salary every year.
Mr. Edwards. All right. I read that----
Mr. Lichtenstein. This is in addition to.
Mr. Edwards. I read that to be an increase to the $1.5
billion.
Mr. Lichtenstein. Oh no, no. That is the total amount. I am
sorry, yes.
Mr. Edwards. You reference $470 million for information
technology capabilities ``to allow the public to better access
our services.'' That strikes me as a bit odd. It seems like all
we need is a website that says, put your phone down, turn off
the TV, and get out here and see for yourself. Tell me just a
little bit more about how we would use information technology
to provide better access.
Mr. Moore. That is for all of our technology in the Agency.
That is not just for that part of getting outdoors.
Mr. Edwards. $316 million for forest and rangeland
research, which continues investment in, one of the things
mentioned is carbon accounting. What do we mean there? What
kind of research would we expect to conduct on carbon
accounting?
Mr. Moore. Actually, that is for the entire research and
development budget, which is kind of low, but that is it in its
entirety. Carbon accounting is just one small component within
that. To give you an idea on the carbon, right now, as you look
at carbon markets being developed across the country, the
United States doesn't have a standard method for calculating
carbon. A part of what we want to do with our partners is to
have a standard framework for calculating carbon. That would be
one of the goals that we want to achieve in this carbon
accounting, is to provide this country with a standard method
for calculating carbon.
Mr. Edwards. How would that be used, and how would that
apply to our forest land? It seems to me like when you are in
the forest, you are in the middle of the best carbon-reduction
facility on the planet.
Mr. Moore. I mean, trees do sequester carbon. Also, when
fires burn through there, it releases a lot of the carbon that
is sequestered. The challenge and the opportunities we want to
do, though, is how do you manage the forest in a way that it
sequesters carbon even in the products that are produced from
those harvested trees? When you make furniture or some of those
types of things, build homes, that carbon is stored in that
lumber, in that wood. If you were looking at removing some of
that carbon, locking it up, but creating the opportunity to
capture more carbon going into the future, that would be the
ideal. At some point, I think it is going to be really
fundamental for this country is that how should we look at
carbon, how should we be managing for carbon, and how does
Congress want to weigh into that discussion.
Mr. Edwards. Your description for this $316 million says,
``to continue investments in research priorities, including
carbon accounting.'' Since you are continuing that, I am
assuming that you already have some sort of research on the
carbon accounting.
Mr. Moore. Oh yes. Yes. Yes.
Mr. Edwards. Could you provide that to me or perhaps this
committee?
Mr. Moore. Yeah. I would be glad to.
Mr. Edwards. I would be very curious. Thank you. Thank you,
Mr. Chair.
Mr. Simpson. Mr. Zinke.
Mr. Zinke. Chief.
Mr. Moore. Congressman. [Laughter.]
Mr. Moore. Good seeing you.
Mr. Zinke. A few comments on carbon. You know how much
carbon was emitted in the atmosphere 2 years ago in the forest
fires in California?
Mr. Moore. I am assuming you do.
Mr. Zinke. Oh, I do.
Mr. Moore. I know. [Laughter.]
Mr. Zinke. If you put more carbon in the air, burn forest
fires----
Mr. Moore. Yeah.
Mr. Zinke [continuing]. All power plants combined in
California in one year.
Mr. Moore. Yeah.
Mr. Zinke. I love to talk about carbon, but to me, it is
about carbon capture in the form and let's not have these
catastrophic forest fires that are running millions of acres,
as we do all the time.
Mr. Moore. Yeah.
Mr. Zinke. A forest fire and health. All right. Montana,
Libby in that Forest, a new superintendent. We were very
excited to get him, and then when he came, the output was not
what we thought. In fact, in the Libby Forest, the sustainable
yield is 250 million board feet a year. That is by long-term
studies, and I can throw you in the books, and you are probably
familiar with it, too. Historically, the last 10 years, they
have been getting about 60 million board feet a year. We saw an
atrophy in the lumber mills. Smaller mills can't make
consistently.
Now, the Forest Service has released a document, 5 million
board feet. That is not enough for firewood. You got 250
million board feet out there of sustainable yield, cut forever,
we down to 60, we saw the disaster, now five. That means you
are going to have, by short calculation, you got 245 million
board feet of overgrowth a year. We are talking about carbon
capture because I know where that is going to go, and so do
you. It is going to go up in flames.
Then we have the environmentalist up there say bears don't
eat trees, right? You got a canopy now that everything below
the canopy is dead. It is dead. You can walk through it. You
will not find grass. The only grass is by a road someplace that
happens to be in there. You got a forest that is unhealthy. We
need to get the trees harvested, which is part of it.
Harvesting trees isn't the whole thing. We have prescribed
burning and a lot of things.
I get concerned because we talked about it. We talked about
until we are blue in the face, we get a new guy in place, we
think the superintendent is going to be good, and you know
what? Five million board feet. At what point does this end? We
are going to have to manage our forests so they are healthy.
Have you looked at the forest? You are a long-term chief, and I
have known you for a while, and I think you are one of the best
we have had, but how do we break the barrier of managing our
forests where we can have a sustainable yields so smaller
lumber mills can say, you know what? I am going to make this
investment based on a known raw material, because God knows a
forest has enough material to make those little timber mills
fine in an industry, which help. How do we break through this?
Mr. Moore. A couple of things. One, allow me time to check
into the specifics of what you are talking about because I am
not familiar with the specifics, I do know that when we talk
about regrowth on a forest, there are different ways that it is
calculated because you are looking at everything--steep slopes,
wilderness, by country areas--and that is not what is available
for us to manage. I want to look into the specifics of that,
and I will get back with you on that.
We don't remove timber off very steep slopes. We can't. We
don't have the equipment to do it. Usually the value is not
there if you helicopter log it, and so for a lot of different
reasons wilderness areas. Sometimes when the total volume is
calculated, it is looking at all of that. I want to look
specifically into the issue that you are talking about and get
back with you on it.
Mr. Zinke. Wouldn't you agree that from 250 to 60 to 5,
that is outside the norm.
Mr. Moore. Yeah, and I don't know the specifics around that
issue, and that is why I will look into it and be happy to get
back to you on that. That would be a significant drop, and if
that is accurate, I don't know what the rationale behind that
would be, but I will find it out.
Mr. Zinke. We have lost Pyramid. We have lost Roseburg. We
have lost a number of these mills. Not all of it has been raw
material input, so not all of it has been there.
Wages are up. Equipment needs to be. I get concerned
because as these mills fail, and if we have 5 million, there is
just not going to be a possibility of a mill there, and a mill
is not the answer. It is a part of the answer of a healthy
forest. Historically, we have had a lot more foresters in the
Forest Service than we do biologists. It seem like biologists
have grown; the foresters have atrophied.
The second thing is, I am concerned about aviation. I have
talked to you about the Boise Center, the aviation section,
pushing for military standards on civilian aircraft that fly
624S Deltas, which I am familiar with. There is not a chance
you can get the military standards because they don't make them
anymore, the parts. Someone is pushing there to push the
military standards on civilian fleet of aircraft. I have talked
to the military liaison on it, and they don't think it is a
good idea at all, and some went in there. I am absolutely
opposed to pushing these guys to mil spec on aircraft because
the parts and the supply chain can't support it. I don't know
who is doing it, but if you would look at that and get back to
me on it.
Mr. Moore. Yeah, I would be happy to look at that. I am
kind of confused since the military doesn't support that. We
took their standards and applied them, and so not that we can't
take another look and see what those standards should be, but
those weren't military standards that we put in place.
Mr. Zinke. Here is my concern, all right? When a military
flight takes off, there are different variables that commander
has to take in consideration of fighting a fire.
Mr. Moore. Yeah.
Mr. Zinke. He looks at training. He looks at the situation
as far as enemy, national security.
Mr. Moore. Sure.
Mr. Zinke. There are a lot of variables that you don't
have.
Mr. Moore. Right.
Mr. Zinke. Your variable is safety and make sure you get
out there. When you have a military standard, there are checks
and balances there that are necessary in combat that are not
necessary----
Mr. Moore. Right.
Mr. Zinke [continuing]. Especially civilians augmenting in
a fire.
Mr. Moore. Yeah.
Mr. Zinke. When we make these arbitrary hurdles, I can tell
you from the guys that fly, they won't fly.
Mr. Moore. Yeah.
Mr. Zinke. Then when all of a sudden, you got to have a
military spec on a 47 delta, if they don't train, if they don't
fly, then they lose their qualifications and standards, and now
you are not going to have any aircraft when you need them
because they are out of spec. That is a big concern in Montana
because we have, for some reason or another, maybe it is our
tax code on equipment or something, but we have Neptune, we got
Bridger, we got four or five different types of companies that
provide that service to the Forest Service and Department of
Interior, and all of them are in panic over this because they
just don't have the capability to move to a military standard
on parts.
Some of these parts aren't even made anymore. They are out
of the system completely. 47 Deltas haven't been in a while.
There is nowhere for the military to get the part, so then you
got to go out and you got find someone who can make it, and
they are not going to make it with the same military standard
because they are under FAA they're not under Mil.
Mr. Moore. Right.
Mr. Zinke. If you would look at that.
Mr. Moore. I will.
Mr. Simpson. I just want to say thanks. I appreciate what
you do. It is not easy to take the reins of a large institution
like that, but thanks. I appreciate your effort.
Mr. Moore. Thank you, Congressman.
Mr. Zinke. Mr. Chair.
Mr. Simpson. Thank you. Just a couple quick questions
before we wrap this up.
The Forest Service plays a vital role in public/private
forest restoration initiatives around the country. In some
instances, industry partners have committed hundreds of
millions of dollars in capital investments to support and
achieve the goals of these collaborative landscape-scale
initiatives to restore forest health and reduce the threat of
catastrophic wildland fires. In more than one part of the
country, we have seen frustration and concern over the slow
pace of the Forest Service approving additional acreage for
treatment. The fact is that without NEPA-approved acres, these
partners will not be able to stay in business, causing the
shutdown of mills, the loss of jobs, and the undermining of the
National Strategy to prevent wildfires.
What are the biggest impediments to the Forest Service
approving additional NEPA-approved acres for treatment in
regions prone to catastrophic wildland fires? Is it largely a
funding issue, a personnel issue, and how can the Forest
Service step up to access the NEPA-approved acres for these
partners? What steps can Congress take to assist the Forest
Service in expediting the availability of NEPA-approved acres
for forest health restoration and thinning efforts in regions
prone to catastrophic wildfires?
Mr. Moore. Chair, it is a combination of all of those, and
what we have right now is really a balance based on the budget
and what we can afford, whether it is NEPA or whether it is
personnel. I will tell you some of the things that we have done
over the last few years to improve our efficiency and our
effectiveness of the program.
Now about 87 percent of our NEPA is categorical exclusion,
which is the lowest form of that, and so we have about 1,130 or
so categorical exclusion that we implemented this past year. We
have very few EAs, environmental assessment, versus
environmental impact statements, EIS. We are looking at trying
to utilize the appropriate tools for the work. We have
increased the use of CEs by 7 percent from just 3 years ago, so
we are looking at that.
The other thing, Secretary of Vilsack has given us
emergency authority, and this past year, we had about 37
projects, which includes about a million acres of work to do on
the ground. The thing about the emergency authorities is that
it reduces the amount of time for us to complete projects
anywhere between 4 to 6 months. We have been looking at a whole
range of tools to help us manage and to find the right tool to
do the work that we are being asked to do.
Mr. Simpson. One more question, and this one is generally
asked by Mr. Amodei. I am surprised you didn't ask it. His mind
must have been on Homeland Security stuff.
The 2023 Wildland Fire Mitigation and Management Commission
report found that a lack of housing is a significant barrier to
the recruitment, hiring, and retention of Federal wildland
firefighters. Many Forest Service duty stations are in areas
where housing costs and availability are beyond the economic
means of wildland firefighters, the majority of which are paid
at the GS-3 and GS-4 level. The President's budget requested
for the Forest Service included a request for funding
specifically to address this. Is there a role for building
materials, like mass timber that is fire resistant, that could
be sourced from our own forest to support this initiative?
Mr. Moore. Yes, there are. In fact, I have been doing show
and tells lately, and I didn't think to bring some of the
material that is being developed from our forest products
laboratory.
Mr. Simpson. We have got to train you to do that.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Moore. Appropriate, but I wanted to do that. In fact, I
have been having some of those discussions, and you are right
about lot of different communities. It is getting tougher and
tougher for our employees to live in many of our communities
where it is just expensive to live, and there seemed to be more
and more of that. You have heard these stories about
firefighters sleeping in cars----
Mr. Simpson. Yeah.
Mr. Moore [continuing]. They can't afford. You also looked
at some of our government housing as another option, and those
houses, the quarters are located out where the work needs to
take place. I want to get a really good feel for what our
employees and what we were asking our employees to do. I had a
chance to stay in a couple of those quarters this past summer
just to experience what they are experiencing----
[Laughter.]
Mr. Moore [continuing]. There is a lot of work that needs
to take place in many of our quarters. That is why we were
looking at updating the quality of housing in many of just
really the remote, small, rural areas there where we are asking
employees to live and work, to suppress fires, but also do
other kinds of work that we do out there. It is really
important for us to be able to look at the government quarters
or the housing issues because, otherwise, our employees are not
able to live in many of those communities.
It is three-pronged, though. It is availability,
affordability, and then it is the upkeep, those three areas,
and it is not just our problem, of course. It is the
community's problem. It is America's problem, really. Somehow
we are going to have to come together because it is affecting
not only our recruitment, but our retention. As our young
people grow up and have families, in many of those locations,
it is not a place that they want to raise their families
because they can't afford to.
Mr. Simpson. Right.
Mr. Moore. The problem is just multipronged, but it is one
that I think we need to address because it is having an impact
on what we are able to do.
Mr. Simpson. Well, it is not only true of the Forest
Service. It is true of the BLM through National Park Service
and other areas. That is a challenge across the board. Anything
else?
Ms. Pingree. Thank you very much.
Mr. Simpson. Anything else? Why did I guess you would have
something? [Laughter.]
Mr. Zinke. Well, a couple comments, one on housing. I would
look at the Yellowstone park housing that we did. We had seen
issues, a lot there, very expensive, but we found a company
manufacturer. They are happy with the housing units we did. I
know there has been an effort to make it fleet-wide there, but
that is not bad to look across there and take a look at what
Cam is doing at Yellowstone.
What I am hearing a lot of times on seasonal workers, it
would be great if we could bust the hiring practice and give
the local superintendent some flexibility to hire because when
they do USA.gov, there are a lot of kids out there that you
don't have to worry about housing because they have a house.
They have family there in that area. It seems to be we have
created this barrier where local people can't go in, especially
in seasonal, because they are the local superintendent doesn't
have the capacity. I think, look, the local superintendent, at
least the regional office, should have the capacity because
they are probably more in tune what is going on. I would
encourage looking at that.
What I am also hearing is a lot of the contracts on the
private side--firefighters--they bid on the contracts, and now
I guess Department of Labor through your office has increased
the minimum wage for a firefighter in different categories, but
the gap between what they bid and now what they have to pay is
significant where now, we are going to send them out of
business because they can't make up that cost. When you bid on
something, you figure, well, I am going to pay the guy 20-22
bucks an hour. Now I have to pay him $37 with a contract, and
again, in Boise, they are not allowing any compensation for it.
I didn't agree with the Department of Labor's assessment on
it. I didn't agree with it. It doesn't mean it didn't happen,
so now it is in there. These companies, the same guys that we
are going to rely on this season, they just can't provide the
service under those contract conditions because they have to,
by law, pay the guys more, and there is no room in it. To say,
hey, absorb it, these private companies can't absorb it because
even the cost of labor will drive them under. That is going to
have to be looked at.
I understand Boise has some flexibility and compensation on
it, but it is also going to cost more money. Money is not free,
right, so if you pay these guys, then there is an upstream
problem on it, but I would like to work with you on figuring
out how to do that.
Mr. Moore. Okay.
Mr. Zinke. With that, Mr. Chairman, great hearing because I
was only here for half of it.
Mr. Simpson. Yeah. I was going to say you were only here
for the last part. I was going to say we got to close this
hearing down before you criticize Boise anymore. [Laughter.]
Mr. Simpson. I appreciate it, and I suspect with these
wildfires fighters, you are going to have some stiff
competition now from those flipping burgers and the $20-an-hour
minimum wage that they now have in California. If I am going to
go fight wildfires for about the same price, why not go flip
burgers where I am not putting my life in danger every other
day?
Anyway, thank you for the job that you do and thank your
employees. They do a great job. I love working with them.
Sometimes we have differences of opinion, but that is okay.
Sometimes me and my wife have differences of opinion, and guess
who wins in that one? [Laughter.]
Anyway, thank you for taking the time to join us this
morning. I think it was a productive session, and we look
forward to working with you over the coming months to put
together your budget for 2025, and hopefully we will get it
done within a reasonable time frame. The committee stands
adjourned.
[Questions and answers submitted for the record follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Wednesday, April 17, 2024.

FISCAL YEAR 2025 REQUEST FOR THE DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR

WITNESSES

HON. DEB HAALAND, SECRETARY, U.S. DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR
DENISE FLANAGAN, DIRECTOR OF BUDGET, U.S. DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR
JOAN M. MOONEY, PRINCIPAL DEPUTY ASSISTANT SECRETARY, U.S. DEPARTMENT
OF THE INTERIOR

Opening Statement of Chairman Mike Simpson

Mr. Simpson. Good morning, and welcome to Secretary
Haaland. Thank you for joining us today to discuss the
President's fiscal year 2025 budget request for the Department
of Interior.
Nearly two-thirds of the State of Idaho consists of Federal
land, which means that land management decisions made by
Federal agencies like yours have a profound and direct impact
on our State's economy and Idahoans who live, work, and
recreate on or near Federal lands. Indeed, most Idahoans
interact with the Department and its bureaus daily. The
Department and this subcommittee also have the important
responsibility of fulfilling our treaty and trust obligations
to Tribes. Addressing the greatest Tribal needs, including
education, law enforcement, and Tribal land management issues,
continue to be a top priority of this subcommittee under both
Republican and Democratic chairs, and I am sure newly-elected
Chairman Cole shares this sentiment. I have talked to him about
it. I appreciate your active involvement working with us and
our American Indian and Alaska Native brothers and sisters to
address these issues in the fiscal year 2025 budget.
In terms of discretionary resources, the President's
request for fiscal year 2025 asked for over $16 billion for the
Department of Interior, an increase of $1.6 billion, or 11
percent, above the fiscal year-2024 enacted level. Notably, the
budget proposes shifting more than $830 million from base
discretionary to emergency funding for wildfire activities. As
I said yesterday to the chief of the Forest Service, I have
serious concerns about repeating the budgetary gimmicks that
were just rectified by Congress in the 2024 bill. While I may
not agree with all the priorities in this budget proposal or
the recent rulemaking put out by the Department, I appreciate
that we can have a productive conversation about the land
management issues we are facing and the tools you need to
manage our lands effectively and efficiently.
My colleagues and I hope to cover a lot of ground with you
today. Now, I would like to yield to my ranking member, Ms.
Pingree, for her opening statement.

Statement of Ranking Member Pingree

Ms. Pingree. Thank you very much, Mr. Chair, and thank you
so much, Secretary Haaland, for being with us today to discuss
the fiscal year 2025 budget request for the Department of
Interior. I continue to be so pleased that you bring your
perspective to this position as the Secretary and just always
happy to work with you.
Your budget continues to build on this administration's
commitment to addressing climate crisis. It strengthens the
Federal Government's response to wildland fire, and it ensures
that we are upholding our treaty and trust obligations. As the
steward of our Federal lands, your Agency faces significant
climate-related challenges from drought, wildfire, floods, and
invasive species, so I am pleased to see continued investments
to advance science and enhance conservation efforts. The budget
also seeks to meet our responsibilities and legal obligations
to protect Indian trust assets and resources and to provide
direct services such as education, public safety, and justice.
A total increase of $651 million is proposed for Indian affairs
with targeted investments to address missing and murdered
indigenous people, continue the Secretary's Boarding School
Initiative and its comprehensive review of Federal boarding
school policies, and to support native language revitalization.
I believe these increases are appropriate and necessary.
Secretary Haaland, thank you again for appearing before us
this morning. I appreciate your testimony and your answers to
our questions. I yield back, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Simpson. Thank you, Ranking member Pingree. Secretary
Haaland, you may proceed with your opening statement. Your
official submitted testimony will be included in the record.

Statement of Hon. Deb Haaland, Secretary, Department of the Interior

Secretary Haaland. Yes. Thank you. Chair Simpson, Ranking
Member Pingree, and members of the subcommittee, thank you for
the opportunity to testify in support of Interior's fiscal year
2025 budget request. I appreciate all of the support this
subcommittee and your staff have consistently shown the
Department of the Interior. We appreciate that. I have
especially enjoyed visiting so many of your home districts.
Every trip informs my understanding of the issues important to
the American people, the impact of the work that we do, and how
our budget can support those interests.
Our 2025 budget totals $18 billion in current authority. Of
that amount, $16.4 billion is within the jurisdiction of the
Interior Appropriations Subcommittee. First, I want to
highlight several important proposals: permanent pay
legislation and reforms for our wildland fire workforce,
mandatory funding for future Indian water rights settlements,
and reclassifying contract support costs and leasing payments
to Tribes from discretionary to mandatory funding starting in
2026.
This administration has made a steadfast commitment to
strengthen government-to-government relationships with Tribal
nations. We are doing so thanks to significant investments from
Congress, which are helping address the deficiencies that
decades of underfunding have created. I am grateful to the
members of the subcommittee for working on a bipartisan basis
to champion Tribal priorities. With a total request of $4.6
billion for Indian Affairs programs, this budget will address
complex and difficult challenges, such as the missing and
murdered indigenous people's crisis, the legacy and continuing
impacts of Federal Indian boarding school policies, and native
language revitalization.
Public safety continues to be a top priority for Tribal
leaders across the country. The budget includes $651 million to
support critical public safety needs across all of Indian
Country. We also request $1.5 billion for Indian education
programs, with strong investments in the day-to-day operations
of schools. This funding is critical as we prepare the next
generation of indigenous Americans to lead their communities.
Turning to wildland fire, we continue to see the
devastating impacts wildland fires are having across the
country. I want to thank the subcommittee for your bipartisan
support for extending supplemental fire pay for another year.
The 2025 budget invests in reforms, including $75 million, to
support permanent pay increases for Federal and Tribal wildland
firefighters.
Stewardship of our natural resources is a core mission for
us. Interior manages about 20 percent of America's lands and is
responsible for protection and recovery of more than 2,300
endangered and threatened species. Our request includes $2.8
billion in annual funding for conservation efforts that support
key initiatives, such as wildlife corridors and implementing
the National Seed Strategy. I am proud of the proposal of $8
million for a mandatory funded Tribal land acquisition program,
a top priority for Tribes, as part of our implementation of the
Land and Water Conservation Fund Program. This proposal honors
the role Tribes play as stewards of the land and will help
ensure they have resources to ensure healthy lands for future
generations.
The 2025 budget invests $189 million to continue the
progress we have made in deploying clean energy, building a
resilient domestic-based supply chain, and creating thousands
of good-paying jobs. The demand for renewable energy has never
been greater, and Interior is leading the way to a clean energy
future. Regarding infrastructure, our request includes $2.7
billion to fund operations and maintenance for our more than
130,000 buildings and structures and 65,000 miles of public
roads. In addition, there is $1.6 billion in mandatory funding
available in 2025 through the Great American Outdoors Act
Legacy Restoration Fund. We are currently executing 326 GAOA-
funded projects with 83 additional projects requested for 2025.
We cannot address our major maintenance needs through annual
appropriations alone. I look forward to working with Congress
to reauthorize the GAOA Legacy Restoration Fund.
Overall, the President's budget request for Interior
invests in programs to strengthen our Nation for all Americans.
This great work would not be possible without the dedication of
career public servants at Interior. I look forward to our
continued work together on these important issues. Thank you
for your partnership and support for the important work of the
Department and its incredible employees. I am pleased to answer
any questions you may have.
[The statement of Secretary Haaland follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

WIND ENERGY: LAVA RIDGE

Mr. Simpson. Thank you, Secretary. Let me start off. This
is something you knew was going to come up and I was going to
have to comment on. The proposal to build a 400 turbine wind-
generating facility in Idaho's Magic Valley has been met with
almost unanimous opposition from local residents. These would
be the largest wind turbines on land in the United States. They
are taller than the Washington monument, they are taller than
the Seattle Space Needle, 400 of them. I have yet to talk to
one Magic Valley resident who supports it. As the voice of my
constituents, I have been a very strong, vocal opponent of the
Lava Ridge Wind Project and have advocated for the Bureau of
Land Management to listen to Idaho's concerns.
To force the BLM to slow down and acknowledge the concerns
of impact communities, I included language in the 2024
appropriation legislation, stopping the project from moving
forward until BLM consults with local elected officials and
stakeholders on alternative actions to reduce the impact to
wildlife, cultural resources, and other assets. Can you walk me
through what the Agency has done since the enactment of the
2024 bill to adhere to the requirements of the Idaho wind
provision? What elected officials or stakeholders have you
consulted with since March 9, and what feedback and concerns
have they shared with you, and how do you plan to incorporate
those concerns before moving forward?
Secretary Haaland. Thank you for the question, Chairman,
and I also appreciate the conversation that we had yesterday on
this issue.
Roughly 26 government-to-government consultation meetings
with Tribes have happened. We have had at least 19 meetings
with county commissioners from Lincoln, Jerome, and Minidoka
counties, 14 briefings for Members of Congress or their staff,
six meetings with local organizations, four meetings with
grazing permittees and other members of the agricultural
community, six public meetings on the draft environmental
impact statement, numerous engagements with the Japanese-
American community, and many more. We appreciate your concern
and your communication with us, and we are working to conduct
additional consultations with local elected officials and
stakeholders. This issue is not completed yet. It is ongoing.
There are still more conversations and work to be had, and we
will obviously stay in touch with you as it moves forward.
Mr. Simpson. I appreciate that, and I appreciate the
consultation with the local community. This goes without
saying, but I expect BLM to listen to the concerns of Idahoans
directly affected by the proposed Lava Ridge Wind Project and
give those concerns considerable weight in the development of
the final EIS. Local officials, affected farmers, Tribes, and
the Japanese-American community have raised serious concerns,
and their voices need to be heard. I support an all-of-the-
above approach to energy development, but this administration
cannot continue to unilaterally ram through renewable energy
projects with no local support and with no forethought for
their impact on these important land uses. The Lava Ridge Wind
Project is out of touch with Idahoans, and I remain committed
to taking significant actions to put the people of Idaho first,
so thank you for that.

SAGE GROUSE

Sage grouse management plan. Since 2015, I have included
language in the annual Interior spending bills prohibiting the
greater sage grouse from being listed under the Endangered
Species Act, and Congress has directed BLM to work
collaboratively with States, private landowners, and other
stakeholders to conserve sage grouse habitat. In 2015, Idaho
adopted the collaboratively-developed Idaho Sage Grouse
Management Plan as the State's official policy for sage grouse
management. The original plan has been updated to provide a
balanced approach for the species and the people of Idaho.
Since 2015, the State of Idaho has spent over $5 million to
increase data on sage grouse populations and enhance over
76,000 acres of sage grouse habitat. These efforts aren't
unique to Idaho. Other States have worked just as tirelessly
and dedicated significant State resources to avoid the need for
Federal rulemaking.
Despite these efforts, on March 15, 2024, the Department
published proposals regarding greater sage grouse habitat. The
threat of an ESA listing and overly-restrictive Federal land
use plans undermines the collaborative work being done to
manage sage grouse habitats at the local level by the
individuals who work, live, and recreate on Idaho's land. More
so, the proposals will have drastic effects on grazing
permittees, resource development, timber harvesters, recreators
whose livelihoods depend on responsible management of our
Federal lands.
Question one. Let me tell you how we got here because
people think that I don't care about sage grouse and the fact
that I don't want them to go to extinct or anything else. When
this became an issue, former Secretary Salazar came to me and
said what we need to do is have the States develop management
plans. All of the States, 11 Western States, put together these
collaborative efforts that included Federal land management
agencies, local ranchers, recreationists, others, stakeholders,
and they came up with what they believed to be good State
management plans that they could live with, and Idaho's plan
was actually rated as co-equal with the BLM's plan.
We all know that you are not going to save sage grouse
habitat if you don't get private landowners involved because a
lot of the habitat is on private lands. They had an interest in
this, and they worked very hard with the State and the
committee to accomplish that. Now we come in, and the reason I
include language to not list them is that if all of a sudden
you listed them, those people that participated in developing a
sage grouse management plan are going to say, I am done, I am
out of here, and that is going to hurt trying to save sage
grouse habitat and stuff. That is my concern with listing, and
that is why I put the language in there that I have had.
Is the Department's position that a one-size-fits-all
approach to conservation outweighs unique plans that consider
and incorporate the specific threats to that locality, and can
you explain the Department's process leading to the necessity
for this proposal, and what is the timing and plan for this
proposal?
Secretary Haaland. Thank you very much, Chairman, and it is
been my experience with the Department that we very much value
local input, State input. We feel those folks know better. They
live on the land and they know things that we don't know, so we
are transparent and very collaborative when it comes to that.
With respect to the plan itself, we published a draft EIS for
the greater sage grouse plan in March. The comment period ends
June 13. We aim to complete revised plan amendments by the end
of 2024. We are working with partners. BLM identified specific
greater sage grouse plan decisions to consider amending to
incorporate new science. All other existing decisions remain in
the plans unchanged, and DOI remains committed to reversing the
downward trend in greater sage grouse populations on BLM
managed lands.
Mr. Simpson. Let me suggest that when this comes out, you
need to incorporate not just the comments and stuff and listen
to the comments from, from people, but get together a working
group and say, okay, how are we going to implement that if that
is the way we are moving forward on this, and what are the
impacts going to be, and what are the impacts on onshore energy
production and mineral development because one of the most
critical problems we are facing in this country right now is
the supply chain for critical minerals that we get from our
adversaries, frankly. We have those resources in this country.
Most of them are on public lands, though. Trying to get access
to those resources is sometimes very, very difficult. All of
those things need to be taken into consideration if you are
going to change the sage grouse plan.
As I said, my biggest concern is that it involves local
people because you are not going to save sage grouse habitat if
you don't have private landowners involved in it.
Secretary Haaland. Thank you.
Mr. Simpson. Ms. Pingree.

CLIMATE RESILIENCE FUNDING

Ms. Pingree. Thanks, Mr. Chair. I brought this up in my
opening remarks, but I want to just talk a little bit about
Tribal climate resilience funding. I guess we know Tribal
climate resilience needs are as diverse as climate impacts seem
to affect each Tribe differently. I know a little bit about the
struggles of the Passamaquoddy Indian Tribe in Maine who are
confronting climate-related environmental threats, such as sea
level rise, which imperils important cultural sites, Tribal
member housing, including an elderly housing facility, as well
as wastewater treatment plant. The Bipartisan Infrastructure
Law, Inflation Reduction Act, and annual Tribal climate
resilience appropriated funds provide about $120 million a year
for Tribal climate adaptation and resilience projects. Can you
tell us sort of the nationwide need for these funds,
specifically in the lower 48, and how many Tribes are applying
right now?
Secretary Haaland. Thank you very much for the question,
and, yes, that is definitely an issue and we are paying
attention to it. We have had, of course, a very strong response
from Indian Country. We have received 166 proposals from Tribes
totaling over $150 million for the fiscal year 2023 funded
solicitation, and recently announced $120 million in awards for
146 projects for 102 Tribes and nine Tribal organizations. It
is historically high funding with the help of the Bipartisan
Infrastructure Law and the Inflation Reduction Act.
Ms. Pingree. Are you working with some of the other Federal
agencies to try to leverage more funds or see how we can
enhance the amount of money available?
Secretary Haaland. Pretty much everything we do with
respect to this issue and Tribes is an all-of-government
approach. That is the direction from President Biden, so, yes,
we are absolutely working together to make sure that we are
doing this very concerted effort.
Ms. Pingree. Great. Do you have an estimate of the universe
of need for funds to address the impacts of climate change on
Tribes, and how are you guys strategizing about funding once
the Infrastructure Law and the Inflation Reduction Act funding
runs out, which changed things a lot.
Secretary Haaland. Yes, of course, and as time goes on,
things seemingly get somewhat worse with sea level rise and the
like, but we are going to keep an eye on it and work to fill
the need as we see fit, but certainly that is a priority for
us, and it is a priority for Tribes. One of the things that I
feel very confident about is that we are making sure that
Tribes are leading their efforts themselves. We don't want to
tell them what to do. They will tell us what to do. With
respect to the other Federal agencies, it is FEMA and CEQ who
will help us identify other resources. The 2025 budget also
includes $49 million with a $6 million increase for Tribal
adaptation and relocation planning grants.
Ms. Pingree. Great. Well, thank you for that. I know we are
all anxious to work with you going forward because it seems
like, just what I have ascertained from one Tribe in my state,
that the need is significant, and as I said, we weren't even
talking about Alaska when we talk about that, and that is just
another big pool. Ask one more?
Mr. Simpson. Yeah.
Ms. Pingree. Yeah. Just one more other question right now.
Last week, Acadia National Park announced that the park will be
receiving $950,000 in funding from the Inflation Reduction Act
to create a model for addressing climate change vulnerabilities
of coastal archaeological sites, collections, landscapes, and
ethnographic resources, something we have a lot of in Maine,
including in my own community. Acadia will be using the two-
eyed seeing model to meaningfully integrate indigenous
knowledge with Western science. The project will build on 15
years of consultation at Acadia National Park. St. Croix Island
International Historic Site, and Roosevelt Campobello
International Park with the Wabanaki Tribes. This is just one
example of the amazing work the Inflation Reduction funding
will support to prepare parks across the country to be
resilient to climate change. The National Park Service just
announced projects to be funded by the full $195 million. I
know a little bit about what is going on in my own State, but I
would like to know what other types of work going on and how
the funding will work to support the work across the park
system.
Secretary Haaland. Yes. Thank you so much. We have been
extremely proud of the work we have been able to do with
Tribes. I appreciate you mentioning Indigenous knowledge. We
believe very strongly that the science is what we all need to
pay attention to, and with Indigenous knowledge they are really
helping us to steward these lands.
We are implementing Tribal co-stewardship agreements across
the country. We have signed probably 200 of those, and there
are probably 60 more that we are working on to ensure that we
are not missing anything because Tribes have the experience.
Yes, more than one-third of coastal parks are at significant
risk from sea level rise, coastal erosion, and storm surge that
is happening on all of our coasts. The NPS budget includes $4
million for additional climate vulnerability studies and $2.5
million for climate-related natural resource projects at the
parks. Both of those investments will help the National Park
Service make progress in addressing climate resiliency. We will
keep our eyes on that and continue to work as needed, and will
certainly bring Tribes into the fold when it comes to how we
steward those lands.
Ms. Pingree. Great. Thank you so much for that work. I will
yield back, Mr. Chair.

LEAD AMMUNITION

Mr. Edwards. Yeah, coming in loud and clear. Thank you,
Madam Secretary. I appreciate that you are with us here today.
Under your watch, on September 16, 2022, the U.S. Fish and
Wildlife Service issued a rule that included a ban on
traditional ammunition and later took additional steps to
further ban traditional ammunition. What scientific evidence
was used to support the 2022 final rule to put a ban on
traditional ammunition and subsequent actions?
Secretary Haaland. Thank you very much, Congressman, for
the question. I can start out by saying that the Fish and
Wildlife Service is taking a measured approach to evaluate the
use of lead on refuge areas. They committed in the 2022-2023
Hunt-Fish Rule to consider the future of lead use based on the
large number of public comments received on the issue. It is
our job to steward our national wildlife refuges, and we are
just making sure that we are doing that in a responsible way.
Mr. Edwards. No scientific research is what I think I heard
your answer to be.
Secretary Haaland. Yes, we have scientists all over the
country studying these things, Congressman, and I believe that
is what----
Mr. Edwards. Is there a specific report that you can point
this committee to that caused you to take that action?
Secretary Haaland. I would be very happy to get back with
the Fish and Wildlife Service and make sure that they can give
you the data that they used in evaluating this issue.
Mr. Edwards. I would be very interested to hear that from
an organization that is all about science and studies. Can we
count on your word to provide that data to this committee?
Secretary Haaland. We will be happy to get in touch with
your staff as soon as this hearing is over, sir.
Mr. Edwards. All right. Thank you.
Mr. Simpson. The committee will follow up on that.
Mr. Edwards. All right. I appreciate it.
[The information follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

ADHERENCE TO FEDERAL LAWS

Mr. Edwards. Next question. Secretary Haaland, just yes or
no, do you feel that it is prudent to provide funding to
localities that intentionally violate Federal law?
Secretary Haaland. I don't understand what the question is.
Mr. Edwards. Real simple. Should we provide funding to
entities or localities that intentionally violate Federal law?
Secretary Haaland. Could you be more specific, sir? I don't
know----
Mr. Edwards. Yeah. sure. Do you feel like it is prudent to
provide funding to localities that intentionally violate
Federal law, any Federal law?
Secretary Haaland. I couldn't answer that question unless I
knew the specific issue.
Mr. Edwards. I mean, there is a whole host of Federal laws.
Secretary Haaland. But----
Mr. Edwards. Would you not expect local----
Secretary Haaland. But of course, we follow the law,
Congressman. The Department of the Interior follows the law in
everything we do.
Mr. Edwards. Would you expect that localities would also
follow Federal law?
Secretary Haaland. I expect every American to follow the
laws.
Mr. Edwards. All right. Thank you for that. With that, do
you feel the Department of Interior should continue to provide
grant funds to Tribes that legalize marijuana against Federal
law?
Secretary Haaland. I suppose it depends, Congressman, on
what the grant is used for. If it is a grant to help them
combat sea level rise and move their communities----
Mr. Edwards. My question was in regard----
Secretary Haaland [continuing]. That is one issue.
Mr. Edwards. My question was in regards to legalizing
marijuana on Tribal lands. Do you think that we should continue
to fund Tribal entities that break Federal law by legalizing
marijuana?
Secretary Haaland. I would imagine if Tribes are requesting
funds and they fill out the applicable paperwork and make their
grant proposals, that they will be reviewed and decided upon
in----
Mr. Edwards. What other Federal laws would you be in
support of local entities breaking?
Secretary Haaland. Congressman, I am not in support of
anyone breaking any laws.
Mr. Edwards. Okay. I think by virtue of that answer, you
would not condone continuing to fund local entities that break
Federal law.
Secretary Haaland. I would also make the point,
Congressman, that the Justice Department is the Department to
handle any issues of lawbreaking, and we are happy to point you
in that direction, if you would like us to.
Mr. Edwards. I would just like to interject and let you
know my opinion on the topic. There have been several studies
from the National Institute on Drug Abuse that have linked
heavy marijuana use to lower income, greater welfare
dependence, unemployment, criminal behavior, and lower life
satisfaction. As our Nation continues to face an unprecedented
drug crisis and mental health crisis, I think it is more
imperative than ever that Federal agencies commit to upholding
Federal law and protecting our communities against the hazards
that are caused by marijuana production and sale.

PAYMENTS IN LIEU OF TAXES

Next question. I don't know if I am on the clock or not,
Mr. Chair. The President's budget includes almost $32 million
in cuts to the payment in lieu of taxes funding, and request to
transfer those funds from general provisions, which would
provide full funding to an appropriations account. Can you
explain why?
Secretary Haaland. Thank you. Yes, we will, if you give us
just 1 second, please.
Mr. Edwards. Yes.
Secretary Haaland. I beg your pardon, Congressman. Would
you repeat the question?
Mr. Edwards. Yeah, certainly, I would be happy to. The
President's budget includes almost $32 million in cuts to PILT
funding and requests to transfer PILT from general provisions,
which would provide full funding to an appropriations account.
I was just curious to know, why is that.
Secretary Haaland. What I can say is that we remain
committed to PILT while balancing these needs in a constrained
budget environment. The budget first funds ongoing operations
and services Interior provides directly to the public, and the
budget takes reductions in several grant and payment programs,
including PILT. The 2025 request will likely be short of the
final formula-driven authorized level. It isn't unusual or
unprecedented for the request or even CBO scoring to fall short
of the final payment, so we will continue to do the best that
we possibly can.
Mr. Edwards. Thank you, Madam Secretary. I appreciate that.
I would just also like to interject that the Department of
Interior's constant fluctuation in funding accounts and levels
means that counties with a large Federal acreage, like most of
those in my district in Western North Carolina, are continually
facing uncertainty and stuck in ongoing funding battles. I am
particularly interested in reevaluating the complex PILT
funding formula and providing greater certainty to communities
to better eliminate the negative fiscal impacts that federally-
owned land creates.
Secretary Haaland. Thank you.
Mr. Edwards. Would you commit to working with me on this as
we look forward to the 2025 appropriations?
Secretary Haaland. We are happy, of course, to be in touch
with you, Congressman, if you would like us to, and so, yes. We
will do our best.
Mr. Edwards. All right. Thank you very much. I do have a
couple of other questions, but maybe we will get another round.
Thanks.
Mr. Simpson. Thank you, and I will tell you, as is often
said, the President, whether it is Republican or Democrat,
proposes, Congress disposes. We will not end up with a budget
that reduces funding for PILT. He has 83 percent Federal land
in his district. I have 66 percent in mine. I don't see the
support for that, but there is also a habit that I have noticed
with, again, Republican governors, Democratic governors, or
Presidents, either one, is that they sometimes reduce the
funding for things in their budget proposal that they know are
important to Congress because they know we are not going to
allow that to happen, so then they can put resources into
something else. That is a game that is always played. Anyway,
Mr. Kilmer.

TRIBAL CLIMATE RESILIENCE

Mr. Kilmer. Thank you, Chairman, and thank you, Madam
Secretary, for being here, and I appreciate the ranking member
mentioning the impact of climate change on Tribes.
The President's budget includes a little south of $49
million for the Tribal Climate Resilience Program, including an
increase of $4 million for climate relocation grants. That
really matters in my neck of the woods, Madam Secretary. You
came and visited my district. If any of the members of the
committee want to Google ``Taholah,'' which is the lower
village of the Quinault Indian Nation, and flooding, you will
actually see photographs of people canoeing through the streets
of their village. I sat there with the former president of the
Quinault Indian Nation, and she said when I was a kid, the
ocean was a football field slant away, and she said, now it is
our front porch, and every time there is a severe storm, there
are seawall breaches, and they just fill up like a bowl.
Unfortunately, that is the case for a whole bunch of the
Tribes in my neck of the woods that are trying to move to
higher ground, and some of this costs money. For the Quinault
Relocation Project alone, we are talking a $400 million project
to move a village out of harm's way, but funding isn't the only
challenge. We also have this sort of complex jumble of
potential resources and programs across the Federal Government,
each with its own set of rules, and regulatory streams, and
cost shares, and deadlines, and other administrative processes
that kind of make it difficult and sometimes impossible for
Tribes to plan and execute a project.
I really appreciate the chairman. He has partnered with me
on a bill called the TERRA Act that would establish an
interagency framework under your Department, Madam Secretary,
for just coordinating the prevention and mitigation and
relocation efforts of Tribes. The idea under this bill would be
to work directly with Department of Interior to develop a
single comprehensive plan that would integrate and streamline
some of these Federal resources and programs across the Federal
Government. I think that really matters because time is of the
essence. These conflicting rules and deadlines and things like
that are not helpful to the folks who just need some help.
Would love to just get your thoughts on how that
streamlined authority that exists under the proposal that we
have introduced could help your Agency and could help Tribes
actually develop and execute a comprehensive and coordinated
plan for climate-driven relocation. I want to just invite if
there are other resources or approaches that you are pursuing
toward that end.
Secretary Haaland. Thank you so much for the question, and,
yes, we talked about this the other day. In fact, it sounds
like a very exciting idea, and, of course, if we can coordinate
and streamline things, that is a win for Tribes in this case,
so we appreciate that, as well as community-driven projects.
You know, when we use the word ``relocation,'' it is a
buzzword that gives me a little bad feeling inside when we
think about the other relocation for Tribes from years past.
These ideas for Tribes to relocate come from within their
communities, and so we want to be as supportive as we possibly
can. Of course, please feel free to reach out to us. Your staff
is welcome to call our staff, have a conversation about the
bill to find out details, and we are more than happy to work
with you as we move forward. I think when folks get together
and talk about things, they bring ideas to the table that they
didn't realize until they are there. We would love to have more
conversations about it with you.

HONORING PROMISE TO NATIVE NATIONS ACT

Mr. Kilmer. Thank you. Thank you. I know my team has in
touch with yours, and I would appreciate the guidance as we
work to introduce that bill together.
I know we have got a lot of folks with a lot of questions.
I just want to mention in closing a bill that Senator Warren
and I introduced last Congress that we plan to introduce this
Congress. It is called the Honoring Promise to Native Nations
Act, and it stems from the report from the U.S. Commission on
Civil Rights that lays out what has really been a persistent
underfunding, a chronic underfunding for issues faced by Indian
Country on all sorts of topics. The Federal Government's
failure to meet its trust and treaty obligations is
significant, and we are going to be working to introduce that
bill this Congress, and I would just love to stay in touch with
you and your team on that front. I know that is something that
you worked on when you were a member of this body, and we are
continuing to work on it.
Secretary Haaland. Yes. Thank you so much for that.
Mr. Kilmer. Thank you.
Secretary Haaland. Yes, that report is heartbreaking and
continues to be timely, if people haven't read it.
Mr. Kilmer. Thanks. Thank you, Mr. Chair. I yield back.
Mr. Simpson. Thank you. Mr. Amodei.
Mr. Amodei. Thank you, Mr. Chair. Madam Secretary, welcome
back to your old neighborhood.
Secretary Haaland. Thank you.

BLM PERSONNEL AND HIRING

Mr. Amodei. I want to start with personnel. In my district
and I think other ones, we struggle with meeting mission for
the Bureau of Land management. When we talk about filling up
those district offices, those field offices, people there can't
afford to take a job with BLM because they can't afford to live
in the communities where those offices are located. When we go
and say, what the heck is going on with the permitting, with
the range stuff, with the whatever, and it is like they are
doing the best they can, and I will say that none of them are
going, oh, yeah, we got enough to people, we will check back
with you in a few years, although occasionally that happens
over a countertop. I want to say you have got a great team in
Nevada. They are transparent, and I value that in terms of when
we are trying to solve problems.
As I look through this budget proposal, and you have got
your folks here on either side, I look at what is going on
there, and we have talked about this for a few years now before
you were here, and it is like, what are we doing so that we can
fill those positions and that we can pay those people a wage
which allows them to live in the communities in which those
jobs exist because they are not being filled. When I circulate
amongst my districts, district offices, and talk to the field
office managers, and it is like, well, not that the process to
go through to get hired is crisp--different topic--but it is
like nobody wants a job for what it pays.
Can you point me where in this budget proposal we are doing
something about that because I don't see anything. I mean, we
are doing a lot of stuff in there, but here is where we are
going to try to throw a dart at the problem of filling empty
positions because BLM personnel can't, and it is not the bottom
GS stuff. I mean, when you talk about district managers and
stuff, it is like, geez, I mean, it is getting tight. That is
not your fault, but I see the Agency over the last 10 years
doing nothing. Please tell me how fully--you know what, I am--
doing nothing to address that. There is no leadership message
coming through the budget process to these people, in my
opinion.
Secretary Haaland. Thank you very much for the question,
and thank you for recognizing the issue about housing and so
forth. That is something that we care deeply about and are
working to get our arms around. We appreciate, also, the
Committee's efforts to avoid significant staffing impacts in
2024.
What I could say is that DOI's work is staff intensive. We
are public facing in 2,400 locations. Staffing went up last
year by 2 percent, so we were able to hire 2 percent closer to
where we needed to be. We are close to 63,000 FTEs Department-
wide. I know you are particularly speaking of the BLM. I wish I
could tell you specifically what you need to know. We will have
to follow up with you on that. However, we appreciate knowing
your concern, and we will zero in on something that you can get
your arms around. We know that we need to make sure we are
paying attention.
[The information follows:]

Bureau of Land Management Permanent Workforce

The Bureau of Land Management has seen its permanent workforce
increase from 8,844 FTEs in February 2021 to 9,623 FTEs as of April
2024, an increase of 779 FTEs (9%).

Mr. Amodei. Well, and I appreciate that. Full disclosure, I
will be trying in a responsible manner through this committee's
work process, as we go through that budget stuff, to say, is
there some way we can provide a proposed solution. I will be
contacting your folks so that it is not like, hey, nobody made
you a doctor and your cure stinks or something like that, but I
just think the status quo has been a status quo for too long,
and I don't see anything changing. Thank you for that.

WILDLAND FIRE, FUELS REDUCTION, AND SAGE GROUSE

Now, I want to talk a little bit about fuels because it
touches on a whole bunch of other things. I know there was some
money for fuels in one of the President's infrastructure act or
something like that, but as we talk about Sage Hen and we talk
about fire suppression and how we pay those folks, and all that
other sort of stuff, I am looking at what we are doing in BLM
for fuels reduction as a regular thing because the
Infrastructure Act money isn't ongoing. It will run out.
As we talk about do we really care about greater sage
grouse or bi-State or any of that stuff, and you have said and
I think it is accurate, hey, the populations continue to drop,
and everybody else has said, since we are talking about
science, number one threat, fire. I appreciate once it is
burning, we got to do what we need to do to put it out and
rehab it, but stopping it from being hundreds of thousands of
acres, especially in the West, because I can tell you right
now, it is not a real big prediction. If we continue to judge
just by how many acres we lose to fire, then the whole Sachin
thing is a disaster.
I would like to see a real commitment, especially in the
context of Sachin Country to, if we really care about that
species, we need to do something to make those fires smaller,
and fuels is the thing. We won't get into grazing and all that
other sort of stuff, and I don't see a real big thing other
than the infrastructure piece, whether it is there because, and
you say, well, yeah, yeah, yeah, whatever. Why do we care about
that? We care about that because as the chairman intimated in
Idaho, that is a big deal.
I will tell you what. If you list the greater sage grouse
in my neck of the woods, you have shut the State down. You
don't own, but the Federal Government owns north of 80 percent
of it--grazing, mining, recreation, all that stuff. It is like,
whoop, endangered species, time out. It is like, have a nice
day with anything resembling multiple use. Oh, by the way, you
can still hunt Sachin in Nevada. They are not a threat for me
because I can't shoot very well. I can shoot at them all day
long and not hurt one. It is my time, please. [Laughter.]
Mr. Amodei. Therefore, it just covers so many things in the
West. When we look at what we went through with Secretary
Jewell to create this stuff, it really seems to me like what is
going on now is both sides of your mouth. There was a big hug
fest in Denver and State governors were there. Everybody loved
everybody. It is like, oh, by the way, we are taking this back.
None of it connects for me, and I am concerned about it, so
anything on fuels?
Secretary Haaland. Congressman, yes----
Mr. Amodei. I will end my rant with that.
Secretary Haaland. Well, I appreciate it, and, of course,
we understand and thank you for speaking so frankly with us.
As far as fuels goes, budget requests $288 million for
fuels, that is $74 million above 2024 enacted, and it includes
$25 million in base supplemental pay increases for
firefighters, together with funds that will treat 1.8 million
acres in 2025.

BIPARTISIAN INFRASTRUCTURE ACT

Mr. Amodei. I appreciate that. I would just say this. If we
are really worried about that species, then maybe that ought to
have some targeting language in it.
Secretary Haaland. Thank you.
Mr. Amodei. In other words, to avoid a listing----
Secretary Haaland. Thank you for that.
Mr. Amodei [continuing]. Or least do what we can.
Secretary Haaland. Thank you.
Mr. Amodei. The other side of that is rehab language
because if we don't start at Fish and Wildlife talking about
what we are doing to rehab and put that in, if we just look at
what is burned, that is a self-fulfilling prophecy in the West.
Secretary Haaland. Yes, I understand, and we don't want to
have big, huge fires that kill everything. We understand the
need to prevent them in the first place, and especially in
light of climate change, it becomes a super important issue.
Mr. Amodei. Thank you, and if there is anything to yield
back, I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Simpson. Oh, you passed that a long time ago. Mr.
Zinke.

COPYRIGHT INFRINGEMENT LITIGATION

Mr. Zinke. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman, and, Madam
Secretary, welcome back.
You know, as a Secretary, obviously you get used to big
issues, like public lands and access and climate change and et
cetera, et cetera, the big issues, but occasionally, smaller
issues come up. One small issue which has come up in my
district, which is very concerning to me and it may tip other
concerns. Madam Secretary, are you aware of a local minor
baseball team called the Glacier Range Riders.
Secretary Haaland. Yes.
Mr. Zinke. Well, are you aware of your Department's
litigation over the Glacier Range Rider's logo? Are you aware
that your Department is litigating over their logo?
Secretary Haaland. Congressman, I believe the name changes
go to the Board of Geographic Names.
Mr. Zinke. Nothing to do with name change. It is a logo.
Are you aware your Department is in litigation? Yes or no,
ma'am.
Secretary Haaland. No, I am not aware.
Mr. Zinke. All right. Are you aware that the arrowhead is
oftentimes used as a logo in many organizations?
Secretary Haaland. No, I am not aware of that.
Mr. Zinke. Well, let me give you an example of an arrowhead
being used in logos for those Kansas City guys, numerous, and
there are high schools, et cetera, et cetera, that all use the
logos. My point is, understand that the Government Patent
Office has twice ruled against your Department that the Glacier
Riders do not violate the patent. Are you aware of that,
``yes'' or ``no'', and I don't want to answer for you.
Secretary Haaland. Congressman, just to be clear, I am not
aware of anything with the Range Riders.
Mr. Zinke. Well, and this is the problem as a Secretary
because sometimes a large department does harm to local
entities like the baseball team, and I will go further. I am
going to read a missive from your attorneys sent to the
baseball team after the U.S. Patent Office said twice that it
is not a violation of the logo. What you demanded was a sample
of each label, tag, sticker, container, package, box, packaging
insert, point of sale, display, and brochure ever used, sold to
be considered for use, or sale bearing the Range Riders logo.
To be clear, the request would also cover production of each
and every item sold, contemplated for sale, as well as
packaging. Do you think that that is a reasonable thing to ask
of the Glacier minor league Range Riders Baseball team?
Secretary Haaland. Congressman, I am not allowed to comment
on ongoing litigation.
Mr. Zinke. Well, I am allowed to comment on this, is that
your budget has requested more funds, significantly more funds,
and yet that action has resulted in at least $500,000 of
expenses to a minor league team that is just trying to throw a
pitch. When you ask me for more money and yet you prioritize
this, I am going to question it, and it is my right and my duty
as a congressman to question it. Now I sit on Appropriations,
and I am not being hard on you. I am being serious. I will sit
on Appropriations and that budget's going to be scrutinized.

CLIMATE CHANGE

Lastly, a discussion, secondly, over climate change. You
have pointed out that you use science, and when I was
Secretary, I had the honor of making sure my director of the
USGS was an astronaut and had a Ph.D. in geology. You talk
about sea level change in science. Have you ever read the
multi-agency Department of Interior Climate Change report,
dated 2017?
Secretary Haaland. No, I haven't.
Mr. Zinke. Madam Secretary, I would suggest you read that--
--
Secretary Haaland. Thank you, Congressman.
Mr. Zinke [continuing]. It came from your Department. In
that, have you ever heard the term, ``glacial isostatic
adjustment?''
Secretary Haaland. I have not.
Mr. Zinke. Okay. Glacial isostatic adjustment on the East
Coast is because we had glaciers, large, thick, heavy glaciers,
on the plate to the north in Maine all the way down to Jersey.
When that plate moves and you have the glaciers on it and the
glaciers are removed over time, there is an isostatic
adjustment. If you had read that report, it would have talked
about it, and it also would have talked about sea level rise
versus depression. I know you are probably not aware, but the
sea level rise fully compensated for, also the shift, the
sinking, is about 1 millimeter a year. That would be in the
report. Mr. Chairman, I yield back.

GULF OF MEXICO: OIL AND GAS; RICE'S WHALE

Mr. Simpson. Thank you. Mr. Ellzey.
Mr. Ellzey. Thank you, Chairman Simpson and Madam
Secretary, for being here. I will get right to the questions.
Over the last several decades, the Gulf of Mexico has been
a multi-use basin. However, the Bureau of Ocean Energy
Management recently published its notice of availability of the
Area Identification, or Area ID, for the Proposed Gulf of
Mexico Lease Sales 262, 263, and 264, and is already
potentially excluding blocks for the not yet finalized Gulf of
Mexico rice's whale critical habitat, potential wind energy
area blocks, sand, sediment resources area blocks, and
topographic blocks. This signals a move away from multiple use
and, instead, looks to be arbitrarily excluding areas from
potential oil and gas lease sales, which is unprecedented.
Never happened before until now. What is different now to push
DOI to move away from multiple use?
Secretary Haaland. Congressman, thank you for the question,
and we do have a multiple use mandate for our public lands, and
that is what we do.
Mr. Ellzey. Okay. Why is DOI then moving to exclude the
proposed rice's whale critical habitat area, even though that
critical habitat has not yet been finalized?
Secretary Haaland. I am happy to get back with you on that
specific question, Congressman, if you are seeking data or
something of that nature, but I will say that we are very
careful about how we are moving our clean energy transition
forward. I also want to say that with respect to offshore wind,
we have a large number of conversations with stakeholders, and
we absolutely speak with many people before we make any
decisions of that kind.
Mr. Ellzey. Okay. Well, with the rice's whale critical
habitat area, the ruling has to be made before you can block
it. If you block it before the ruling is made, then that is
definitely not going off the science, and to do so preemptively
shows a bias against oil and gas production in that area,
barring none, because you just want to. I would urge caution in
blocking that area before the ruling has come out.
Secretary Haaland. I appreciate that.
Mr. Ellzey. Thank you. Following the court decision, the
BOEM was required to restore the 6 million acres that it had
initially excluded from Lease Sale 261 after claiming those
acres needed to be excluded due to potential impacts to the
rice's whale. Inexplicably, the OEM made this decision again
before the critical habitat determination was finalized. Are
you going to continue with this or is this mistake going to be
made again, because this is a mistake. You can't do it before
it is been finalized. It is basically the same question asked a
different way. Are you going to continue with that before it is
been finalized?
Secretary Haaland. Congressman, I apologize. We are happy
to get back with your office as soon as----
Mr. Ellzey. Okay. That is fine.
Secretary Haaland [continuing]. I have a moment to answer
that specific question.
Mr. Ellzey. Sure. Sure. You only have 8 billion topics that
you have to cover----
Secretary Haaland. Thank you.
Mr. Ellzey [continuing]. I don't expect you to have a
memory of those, but I would like to get those answers. Thank
you.
Secretary Haaland. Absolutely. We will be happy to comment.
[The information follows:]

The Department strongly supports safe and responsible domestic
energy production that relies on the best available science.
On April 1, 2024, BOEM published the Notice of Availability of the
Area Identification (Area ID) for proposed Gulf of Mexico (GOM) Oil and
Gas Lease Sales 262, 263, and 264. The Area ID includes all available
acreage in the Gulf of Mexico Program Area (approximately 94.1 million
acres) for consideration of leasing and environmental analysis. This
includes areas that have been proposed by the National Marine Fisheries
Service as critical habitat for the critically endangered Rice's Whale.
No exclusions have been implemented at this time.
Please note that the Area ID is not a decision to lease and is not
a prejudgment by the Department of the Interior on how or whether to
proceed with proposed Lease Sales 262, 263, and 264 under the National
OCS Oil and Gas Leasing Program. The Area ID simply identifies which
areas warrant further consideration and analyses as BOEM's leasing
process unfolds.
For more information about the 2024-2029 National OCS Program Area
ID, visit BOEM's website, https://www.boem.gov/oil-gas-energy/national-
program/2024-2029-gom-area-identification.

FIVE YEAR OCS LEASING PROGRAM

Mr. Ellzey. Okay. Well, one last question, Mr. Chairman.
The 5-year Outer Continental Leasing Program issued by the
Biden administration has the fewest lease sales scheduled in
the history of 5-year programs dating back to the 1980s, and
2024 will be the first year since 1965 without an offshore
lease sale. With offshore production accounting for 15 percent
of U.S. oil production in a time where the world is going to
need all of our energy production, do you think it is important
to continue offshore production?
Secretary Haaland. Congressman, as you know, we do follow
the law in all of these issues. I will say that with respect to
the National OCS Program, the three lease sales in the plan
have the greatest resource potential and net benefits with the
least potentially significant impacts and costs to society. The
proposed schedule will best meet national energy needs for the
next 5 years, and it meets all of the requirements that
Congress put on us. I also would like to say that U.S.
production on public lands and waters is at an all-time high
currently.
Mr. Ellzey. That doesn't really matter. What I am asking
about is 262, and I know you are getting a lot of papers, so
let's summarize this in one way.
Secretary Haaland. Mm-hmm.
Mr. Ellzey. Will you commit to a lease sale for 262?
Secretary Haaland. Congressman, we are going to operate
within the law and----
Mr. Ellzey. Get to ``yes.'' Come on, let me hear ``yes.''
[Laughter.]
Secretary Haaland. I----
Mr. Ellzey. Commit to the lease sale that is required on
the 5-year plan.
Secretary Haaland. We are going to do everything that we
are required to do with respect to our energy needs in this
country. I know Congress has mandated us to have lease sales.
We are going to have those.
Mr. Ellzey. Very well. Thank you. Mr. Chairman, I yield
back. Thank you, ma'am.

ENDANGERED SPECIES ACT RULE

Mr. Simpson. Sounded like a ``yes'' to me. Madam Secretary,
last month, the administration released a decision reversing
the critical Endangered Species Act reforms implemented during
the previous administration, reinstating the blanket 4(d) Rule,
which automatically provides for endangered level protections
to species listed only as threatened. I have heard concerns
that this change will lead to less flexibility for landowners
and stakeholders and could tie up landowners in mountains of
unnecessary bureaucratic red tape, ceasing any economic
progress for rural communities across the United States. Can
you walk us through what these changes are and how they will
improve the Endangered Species Act, and what resources has the
Department provided to private landowners to understand this
rulemaking, and did the Department consider the negative
impacts related to economic development associated with this
rulemaking?
Secretary Haaland. Thank you, Congressman. The Fish and
Wildlife Service finalized three rules to restore protections
for species in their habitats, strengthen processes for
listing, designating critical habitats in consultation with
Federal partners. The changes do not further impede on private
landowners rights. Rules are not expected to change the number
or frequency of listings and de-listings, the total amount of
area of critical habitat designated, the rate or frequency of
Section 7 consultation, or the resulting conclusion.
The rules do provide clear, straightforward regulations to
recover listed species and protect critical habitats for
Section 7 seven consultations, species classification, and
critical habitat. There is a separate rule finalized to
encourage participation in voluntary, collaborative
conservation with resource managers and landowners. I know that
we are always in contact with stakeholders whenever any of
these issues come to light, so I want to assure you that we
operate in a transparent manner and certainly do welcome those
comments.
Mr. Simpson. I appreciate that, but there is a difference
in being in contact with local stakeholders and listening to
local stakeholders.
Secretary Haaland. We listen.
Mr. Simpson. There's a difference----
Secretary Haaland. We do listen.
Mr. Simpson [continuing]. They ought to have some input in
this, but it sounds to me like it is not going to change
anything. If it is not going to change anything, then why the
hell are we doing it?
Secretary Haaland. Thank you, Congressman. We are doing it
because I think it will make things better.
Mr. Simpson. Okay. Well, we will have----
Secretary Haaland. It will clarify certain things.

CALDWELL CANYON MINE

Mr. Simpson. We will have a discussion on this later.
Southeast Idaho is home to one of the world's most significant
phosphate reserves, and these reserves have been in production
for many years. One such mine, the Caldwell Canyon Mine, is
currently under review by the Bureau of Land Management. This
mine is of great importance not only to my constituents and our
State's economy, but also to the country's agricultural
industry. When complete, Caldwell Canyon Mine will provide the
only source of phosphate in the United States, which is
critically important to our Nation and the world's food supply.
The BLM has been diligently working on this project for many
years. When can we expect the BLM to issue an updated record of
decision related to this project, and I welcome hearing any
related updates you can share.
Secretary Haaland. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. The
new EIS will address the issues identified by the court, and
the BLM plans to have a draft EIS available for public review
later this year. This schedule could result in a final EIS and
ROD in early 2025. Does that answer your question, sir?

TRIBAL LAW ENFORCEMENT

Mr. Simpson. Yep. Thank you. One last question for me here
before I have to step out and do another hearing for a minute
upstairs. I have to go to it for just a minute. I continue to
hear from Tribes across the country about law enforcement
issues on Indian reservations, whether there is jurisdictional
issues, a lack of police force, or slow response times. This is
a serious issue. Violent crimes continue to rise, and lethal
drugs, like fentanyl, run rampant in Indian Country, and, of
course, the drug cartels choose reservations because they know
there is not a lot of law enforcement out there.
While we worked to protect law enforcement accounts during
the tough budget year of 2024, I know it is not enough, and
more work needs to be done. I understand that this is a
continued joint effort across many Federal agencies, but what
is DOI doing to support Tribal law enforcement, bridge gaps in
coverage, and hire and retain police forces, and what else can
DOI and this subcommittee, in particular, do to keep Tribal
communities safe?
Secretary Haaland. Thank you so much, Chairman. Thank you.
I know we spoke about this yesterday, and I appreciate your
concern, and, of course, we recognize that there is an issue.
We want to make sure that we can hire folks. Some of these
Indian Tribal nations are very rural. We want to make sure that
BIA and Tribes can hire local folks so they can stay in their
communities. That is one issue. Sometimes we hire them, and
then they get swept away by another agency.
Mr. Simpson. Yep.
Secretary Haaland. I am more than happy to have Joan, who
works on this issue day in and day out, answer some specific
questions, if that is okay with you.
Mr. Simpson. Yeah, Joan. Go ahead.
Ms. Mooney. Sure. Well, it is a high priority for us, and
the request gives $651 million for BIA public safety and
justice programs, which is a $96 million increase, so we need
the strong increase. We have a long way to go to address these
needs in Indian Country, and without this budget, we would not
be able to fund roughly 222 Federal Tribal officers or add 120
Federal and Tribal positions to improve the operations of BIA-
funded detention and correction facilities. It would reduce
other programs to meet court-ordered requirements to Navajo
courts and delay needed maintenance and operating requirements
at Tribal courts. Very important that we get this funding.
Mr. Simpson. Thank you. I agree. I have talked to a lot of
Tribes, and I go to the Fort Hall Indian Reservation and talk
to them. Their police officers have to go through the same
training as every other police officer does in the State, and
the problem is, is they come back. They work on the
reservation. Then Blackfoot, where I grew up, is 20 miles
north, and Pocatello is 20 miles south of there, or actually,
it is only 12 miles each direction. The cities hire them and
pay them a lot more than Tribes could afford to pay them, and
so it is like a training ground for these officers and so
forth, and we have some issues about cross-jurisdiction and
memorandums of understandings with counties and all sorts of
stuff.
Every time I talk to one of the Tribes about the issue of
murdered and missing indigenous women, they will almost always
say we don't have enough law enforcement officers. You got a
reservation the size of Rhode island or Delaware or whatever,
and you got seven officers patrolling it for 24 hours a day,
you get a domestic violence call, it might be an hour, an hour
and a half, 2 hours before you can get there. By then, the
domestic violence is done. We have got to focus on this if we
are going to ever address this issue.
We lose 6,000 indigenous women to the murdered and missing.
With any other subpopulation within our country, there would be
public outrage, but nobody really knows this. I only learned
about it by watching a TV program one night. It came up, and
they discussed it with this lady from the Nez Perce Tribe that
is actively involved. We are going to hold a briefing on this
this year on this subcommittee, and part of it is also getting
the FBI involved because the FBI has jurisdiction on Tribal
lands and so forth. Sometimes it is hard to find an FBI agent.
Need to focus our attention on this, and we are going to
definitely do that this year.
I appreciate it. Thank you, and I have got to step out for
just a minute, and Mr. Zinke will take over for me for a few
minutes while I run up and try to ask the question of the Army
Corps of Engineers. Thank you.
Secretary Haaland. Thank you, Chairman.
Mr. Zinke. Good luck.
Mr. Simpson. Yeah.
Mr. Zinke [presiding]. The gentlewoman from Maine.

CLIMATE CHANGE AND SEA LEVEL RISE

Ms. Pingree. Thank you very much, Mr. Chair, and thank you,
Madam Secretary, for your answers. I guess I can't help myself.
I want to mention something about sea level rise since you
brought it up, our current Mr. Chair, and I really appreciate
your willingness to focus on this, whether it is the Tribes or
other States. I guess I just have to say I am happy to read
that 2017 report. It is 7 years, and a lot has changed. I think
maybe because you are in Montana, you don't see what I see on
the coast of Maine, so I would be happy to invite you out
anytime or anyone on the committee who would like to take a
look at this who has some concerns about whether or not this is
real. I don't know about glacial isostatic adjustment, but I am
going to learn all about it.
I just want to tell you, this year, we had two back-to-back
severe storms. I am sure in 2017, nobody in my community, a
fishing town 12 miles off the coast of Maine on an island,
thought there would ever be anything like we saw this year. Two
back-to-back storms. We have 180-year-old boatyard, basically,
in our district. In our little town of 400, everybody turned
out between the first and the second storm because they were so
worried that this building that has been there forever and the
fishermen depend on was going to wash away. They had block and
tackles and chains. They put cement blocks on the floor. They
did everything they could possibly think of to try to hold it
on land, to try to keep it there. Right now, we don't know if
it will survive. It got through that storm, it got through the
second storm, but we are probably going to lose it.
You can come visit the coast of Maine and see up and down
the coast of Maine, 150-year-old piers everywhere. Communities
like Stonington, Maine, fishing towns, they are washing away.
This was a tide like we had never seen before and storm surge
from the southeast, which is weather we used to never have
before. You can say that there is some kind of tectonic plate
shift going on or this isn't really real or whatever, but I
invite you to come to my communities. These are fishermen.
These are communities that are going to disappear, not to
mention the Tribal communities. I am just talking about our
fishing towns, our community piers. They are going away. This
tide is higher than we have ever imagined could happen to us,
and it is not even there yet. It is not even anywhere near what
the maps say, places that our peninsulas are going to turn into
islands. Communities are losing their sewer systems, their
infrastructure. It is all going away.
It is one thing to sit inland. In Montana, you got
mountains, you can run to the top, but we don't have those
options. However we want to describe why this is happening, I
just want to thank you, Madam Secretary, and your Department,
for putting this focus on because this is extremely real to us.
It is very emotional to us. It is the end of so many of our
communities, and we don't know where we are going to get the
money to deal with all this. We don't know how we are going to
move to higher ground when there isn't higher ground or it is
already filled up. Our island communities, our coastal
communities, this is really serious to us, so thank you for
your attention to us. I thoroughly invite anyone from this
committee come spend some time in my district and see the coast
of Maine. We would love to have you, but you are going to see
some tears in the eyes of fishermen and people, hardcore
Republican conservatives who don't always vote for me, but they
want to know what we are going to do about this, and I invite
you to join us in doing that.
Secretary Haaland. Ranking Member, if I could just say very
quickly, Maine was one of the first places I visited when I
came into this position----
Ms. Pingree. Thank you for that.
Secretary Haaland [continuing]. Acadia National Park. I
just want you to know that we care deeply about every single
community that is facing these issues. It is American
traditions, the fishermen. When we think about those fishermen,
we think about your State. It is heartbreaking when you think
that these are lives of people that are getting washed away,
and so we are doing everything we possibly can to address the
issues.
Ms. Pingree. I thank you for that, and I thank you for
visiting our state. The challenge is, and I think this is what
many of us saw this winter, that we never really had knowledge
in this visceral way. This is so much bigger than any one of
us. This is so much bigger than the budget that we have. This
is so much bigger than our petty arguments about what is real
and not real. You just got to come and see it to understand. If
it can happen twice this winter, you know, what is coming next
year? Who knows?

COMPACT OF FREE ASSOCIATION

Okay. I am going to completely change topics here. I want
to talk about the Compact of Free Association, which actually
does involve some island communities but, of course, a far cry
from the Atlantic Ocean. I was really pleased to see that the
second fiscal year 2024 Consolidated Appropriations Act
included amendments to the Compact of Free Association. This
allowed the United States to meet our commitments to freely-
associated States. The agreement will provide $6.5 billion of
economic assistance over 20 years to the Federated States of
Micronesia, the Republic of Marshall Islands, and Republic of
Palau. This is a major achievement, and I am curious about how
these funds will build on the previous successes of the
investments we made. Can you tell me a little more?
I just want to say one exciting aspect of the agreement is
that it restores eligibility for key Federal public benefit
programs for freely-associated State individuals while they are
lawfully present in the United States. Implementation is going
to require a multi-agency effort by the Federal Government.
Will the Office of Insular affairs help coordinate it with
other Federal agencies, like USDA and VA, in order to leverage
your expertise? I have had a chance to communicate with some of
the principals in the country, so I know this is a pressing
issue, and I just want to know how we can work together on
this.
Secretary Haaland. Yes, absolutely. Thank you so much for
your support. This was a long time coming. It took a lot of
conversations, a lot of traveling, a lot of really frank and
in-depth roundtable conversations with people to get this done.
I was very honored to visit the Pacific, and I understand what
this means to them.
Thank you for mentioning the citizens lawfully residing in
the U.S. issue. The new law also provides access to benefits
for U.S. military veterans who live in the freely-associated
States, and they can now receive the benefits they earned and
rightfully deserve. The DOI is working with the Department of
State and other agencies to thoughtfully implement these
changes, and we will continue to work with interagency partners
to ensure COFA implementation, including the changes and
allowable benefits, is as successful as the negotiations. The
initial work is underway to ensure new funds are in place and
appoint DOI's representatives to the interagency group for
freely-associated States and other implementation committees.
We are on this. It is a long time coming. There were many
hours of prayer and everything else you can think of to get
this across the finish line. I know that the freely-associated
States are very happy to have it done.
Ms. Pingree. Yeah. Well, congratulations on getting that
done. I know it is been a long time coming, and I am so happy
to finally have meetings about how to implement it, not when
will we ever get this done, so that is great. That is it for
me. I will yield back.
Secretary Haaland. Thank you, Ranking Member.
Mr. Zinke. Mr. Edwards.
Mr. Edwards. Thank you, Mr. Chair. Secretary Haaland----
Secretary Haaland. Yes, sir.

NATIONAL PARKS FUNDING

Mr. Edwards [continuing]. Thanks again. I appreciate you
taking time out of your schedule to be here and accommodate our
questions.
According to the National Park Service data, the Blue Ridge
Parkway in Western North Carolina was, unsurprisingly, the most
visited national park in 2023, with more than 16.7 million
recreational visits, and it has consistently been among the
most visited parks for the last 2 decades. Even better, if you
follow the Blue Ridge Parkway to its southernmost end, it will
bring you right into my district, to the Great Smoky Mountains
National Park. I wish our senior chairman were here now because
he was telling me the other day he thought that the Great Smoky
Mountains National Park was in Tennessee, but it is also very
much in North Carolina, for the interest of everyone in this
room. In fact, it is about evenly split between Tennessee and
North Carolina. The Great Smoky Mountains National Park was the
third most visited national park in 2023 and yet another one of
my district's greatest wonders.
In both instances, the Parkway and the park struggle with
deferred maintenance and repair projects. Without asking for
more money, Madam Secretary, can you explain how the Department
of Interior determines how much funding that each national park
receives annually? Is it formula based, or is there some other
process that you use to prioritize where the available funds
are distributed?
Secretary Haaland. Thank you very much, Congressman, and I
have been to both the Blue Ridge Parkway and the Great Smoky
Mountains. The Great Smoky Mountains from your State is
adjacent to the Eastern Band of Cherokee Nation.
Mr. Edwards. Yes.
Secretary Haaland. There is an entrance right there, and I
saw some wild turkeys running around. It was very, very nice. I
can give you an idea----
Mr. Edwards. Did you miss the elk?
Secretary Haaland. I didn't see any elk during my visit.
Mr. Edwards. We have replenished the elk population. You
would really enjoy seeing that.
Secretary Haaland. Well, it is truly beautiful. In my
travels, of course, you see that the funding that we give to
national parks is well spent, and it is needed and necessary,
and all of that. I can give you an idea of the type of funding
parks in your area receive. Our fiscal year 2025 budget request
for annual appropriations include $20 million for Blue Ridge,
$23.7 for Great Smoky Mountains, which is $1.5 million above
2023. Also, through the Great American Outdoors Act Legacy
Restoration Fund Program, $185 million was provided for
multiple projects at Blue Ridge, $35 million to replace the
Laurel Fork Bridge, work is underway; $150 million to
reconstruct sections of the Parkway, work is underway; and $35
million to rehab park roads at the Great Smoky Mountains
National Park.
Of course, different parks require different types of
funding or different levels of funding due to what their
infrastructure needs are, and so I can't tell you how
everything is figured out. That is a question for the National
Park Service director. However, we do take those under
consideration, and the superintendents themselves make sure
that we know exactly what is needed in each park, and we
respond accordingly as best we can.
Mr. Edwards. There are a lot of needs.
Secretary Haaland. Indeed.
Mr. Edwards. I gather from that there is no set formula.
Perhaps the old adage comes in, and I am sure you have heard,
the squeaky wheel?
Secretary Haaland. Yes, I have heard that.
Mr. Edwards. Meet the squeaky wheel.
Secretary Haaland. Indeed.
Mr. Edwards. All right.
Secretary Haaland. Well, we welcome you to be the squeaky
wheel. We welcome you to call us every day, if you would like
to, and let us know how much you care about these parks, and we
appreciate that.
Mr. Edwards. All right. Thank you very much. Mr. Chair, I
yield.

INDIAN COUNTRY LAW ENFORCEMENT

Mr. Zinke. Madam Secretary, so let's talk about Indian
Country. When I was Secretary, we established a multi-agency
task force to address drug trafficking and Indian human
trafficking. It was comprised of elements from your Department,
BLM, U.S. Park Service, U.S. Park Police, FBI, BIA, and the
idea was to augment and supplement in coordination with the
Tribes--the Tribes requested it, and we provided the service--
in coordination with the Tribes to go after exactly what we
talked about: drugs, human trafficking, where are the kids
going. When you took office, you discontinued that, even though
it was incredibly successful in the numbers and the amount of
fentanyl and drugs confiscated is not in dispute. Why?
Secretary Haaland. Congressman, I appreciate the question,
and I recognize that perhaps we have different leadership
styles. I appreciate your service to our country as the
Secretary of the Interior.
Mr. Zinke. Was it because of the Trump administration,
because almost everything the Trump administration did, you
immediately ended, whether it was good or bad or indifferent.
Why?
Secretary Haaland. Mm, that is not altogether true,
honestly. That is not true. We----
Mr. Zinke. Are you aware you discontinued this?
Secretary Haaland. However, we----
Mr. Zinke. Madam Secretary, were you aware that the task
force was discontinued when you took office?
Secretary Haaland. I was not aware of the task force, your
task force, Congressman. However, we are working very hard to
ensure that we are providing the necessary services to Indian
Country.
Mr. Zinke. Would you agree that perhaps a task force that
had the FBI, BIA, BLM, U.S. Park Service together----
Secretary Haaland. I really appreciate that is----
Mr. Zinke [continuing]. Would you agree that such a task
force would be helpful to Indian nations?
Secretary Haaland. Congressman, would you like us to
contact your office and have a conversation about this?
Mr. Zinke. I am just asking you, do you think it would be
helpful.
Secretary Haaland. I----
Mr. Zinke. You can't answer whether a task force with
multiple law enforcement agencies, in coordination with Indian
Country, wouldn't be helpful in addressing some of the issue
about drug trafficking, child traffic, indigenous, personnel
missing, or killed.
Secretary Haaland. Thank you. I truly do appreciate that
suggestion, Congressman, and we appreciate it.

SEA LEVEL RISE

Mr. Zinke. First of all, the science is the same in Maine
as it is in Montana, and I follow the science. I always have.
Sometimes you look at it, and the science, for those that have
read the 2017 multi-agency Department of Interior Climate
Change report, there are 200 models, a thousand variables. Some
people that don't look at science manipulate those variables
for an outcome. That is not science. The science will say in
Glacier Park, which the glaciers are melting, absolutely. I
have been on the glaciers eating lunch. I have witnessed the
recede of the glacier. It started 10,000 years ago. Sea level
rise has been the same for about 7,000 years, more or less.
Hurricanes, the frequency. Madam Secretary, are you aware that
the frequencies of hurricanes has neither increased nor
decreased in frequency and number of times in the last 400
years?
Secretary Haaland. Every time a hurricane happens, yes,
seemingly----
Mr. Zinke. Are you aware that the frequency has gone up or
down, or do you believe it has? I am just curious.
Secretary Haaland. I believe that the storms have gotten
more intense, stronger storms than----
Mr. Zinke. I will give you that data, and it is science. Do
I agree that erosion and tides have an enormous effect on Maine
and its beautiful coastline? Absolutely. Do I think that our
older buildings are at risk because it is changing and should
we address them? Yeah, because there are buildings and
structures are absolutely worth saving in this country, and
tradition is part of that. I will work with you, but science is
science, and science is the same in the great State of Maine is
in Montana.
With that, thank you, Madam Secretary, and if you would, I
am going to scrutinize your legal department to see where you
are spending. I think having to get a major league baseball
team at $500,000 to spend money over a logo that has been
twice--twice--been ruled by the governing authority not to be a
logo infringement, I think is atrocious, and unless I was
sitting here, I don't think you would know it, and that is a
mistake of us all. Madam, do you have anything further?
Ms. Pingree. No. Thank you.
Mr. Zinke. Thank you for appearing.
Secretary Haaland. Thank you. Thank you.
Mr. Zinke. Thank you for all taking the time to join us
this morning. We look forward to being with you over the coming
months. Questions have been no doubt delivered, and we would
appreciate an answer in a timely fashion.
Mr. Zinke. This committee stands adjourned.
[Questions and answers submitted for the record follow:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Tuesday, April 30, 2024.

FISCAL YEAR 2025 REQUEST FOR THE ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY

WITNESSES

HON. MICHAEL S. REGAN, ADMINISTRATOR, ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY
FAISAL AMIN, CHIEF FINANCIAL OFFICER, ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY
Mr. Simpson. The hearing will come to order. We are here to
discuss the President's budget proposal for the EPA for fiscal
year 2025. I care about protecting and preserving our land and
water resources to guarantee their long-term sustainability,
but there also needs to be an appropriate balance between
protecting our environment and promoting economic growth.
Unfortunately, I fear that this EPA, with its rush to regulate,
is making it harder for investors to thrive here at home and
threatening the reliability of the electrical grid. Just last
week, EPA finalized four power plant rules that severely
threaten affordable, reliable power in this country.
When I am home in Idaho, I often hear from farmers,
ranchers, small businesses, and many others who are concerned
about their very existence given the growing cost to comply
with EPA regulations. Of particular interest and relevance to
my district is the Waters of the United States rule, which we
have discussed with Mr. Regan in the past. The Supreme Court
ruled that it was too broad. I will cover this and other EPA
regulations during my questions, but I will just point out the
clear overreach of the administration on some of these
regulations.
The President's fiscal year 2025 budget requests totals
just under $11 billion. The Fiscal Responsibility Act forced
the Agency to reduce its budget request by $1 billion compared
to last year's request, but I am still astounded by the
proposed increase of over 2,000 FTEs, which is more FTEs than
what was proposed in last year's budget request. This is a
glaring sign of the Agency's priorities. Compared to last
year's request when the Agency was forced to request less, it
chooses to take hits to programs that go directly to our States
and Tribes. Even still, the fiscal year 2025 request of $10.99
billion is $1.8 billion or 20 percent above the enacted level.
If enacted, this would be the highest level of funding for the
EPA in history. Not included in this request is the more than
$100 billion EPA received from several large spending packages
outside of the annual appropriations process. Already the
Agency has hired an additional 1,200 FTEs using this
supplemental funding, but this money is temporary, not
permanent, and I am concerned that the Agency is going to be
pinning Congress with a hiring cliff down the road.
Lastly, it is concerning that the budget proposes to reduce
or eliminate many bipartisan popular programs and grants that
go directly to States, Tribes, and local governments. I know
many of my colleagues have questions for you today. We are
ready to have tough conversations about how best to spend our
limited Federal resources to ensure our natural resources are
protected and preserved while still promoting economic
development and job creation. Thank you, Administrator, for
being here today to have this discussion with us. Now, I would
like to yield to my ranking member, Ms. Pingree, for her
opening statement.
Ms. Pingree. Thank you so much, Mr. Chair. Welcome back to
the subcommittee, Mr. Regan and Mr. Amin. Thank you both for
being here with us today.
The EPA budget request totals $11 billion, an increase of
1.8 billion over the enacted level, to support its mission to
protect human health and the environment. The request proposes
substantial increases to address the climate crisis through
robust funding for the EPA science and technology and
environmental programs. It makes important investments in
environmental justice so that we can continue to address
historic underinvestment in underserved and overburdened
communities. The budget request also makes significant
investments in the EPA's workforce, including funding for 2,000
new staff. Not only has the need for EPA's expertise expanded
tremendously over the last decade, but the growing challenges
around climate change require more expertise and more staff.
I want to acknowledge some of the important work the EPA
has done over the last year. You have established for the first
time a national and legally enforceable drinking water standard
for PFAS. This is a very big deal, and it will go a long way in
keeping families safe from these harmful chemicals. The EPA so
far has invested $9 billion to address PFAS, and it has issued
guidance on how to dispose of and destroy it, but there is more
work to be done, particularly when it comes to PFAS in
agricultural settings, which is a big issue for our farms in
Maine and I know in farms across the country. I hope we can
talk more about those efforts today.
The EPA has also made significant progress in environmental
justice, awarding millions in grant funding to communities all
around the country. This will help communities from Alaska to
Maine to lower energy costs, improve drinking water, breathe
cleaner air, and become more resilient during times of extreme
weather. I also appreciate how you are continuing to hold
polluters accountable. These efforts reduce our community's
exposure to hazardous waste and toxic chemicals.
Thank you so much for appearing before us today. We
appreciate your testimony, answers to our questions, and with
that, I yield back. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Simpson. Thank you, Ranking Member Pingree. With that,
Administrator Regan, you may proceed with your opening
statement. Your official submitted testimony will be included
in the record.
Mr. Regan. Well, thank you, and, Chair Simpson, Ranking
Member Pingree, and members of the committee, thank you all for
the opportunity to appear before you to discuss the bold vision
laid out in the U.S. EPA's proposed fiscal year 2025 budget
request. Our partnership and open dialogue with Congress is
invaluable for EPA to carry out its mission to protect public
health and the environment.
Over the last year, we have been hard at work at EPA. Under
President Biden's leadership, my Agency has finalized
protections that will bring 100 million people cleaner and
safer drinking water free from PFAS, and we have worked hard to
right many of the historic wrongs communities have faced for
generations. Through our critical rulemaking, we banned the
last remaining kind of asbestos use in our country and issued
final technology-based standards that will eliminate more than
6,000 tons of toxic air pollution from chemical plants each
year, slashing cancer-causing pollution from covered processes
and equipment by 80 percent, and reducing elevated cancer risk
for those living near these facilities by an astounding 96
percent.
EPA is committed to protecting public health and the
environment for the American people, but more than just
powerful health impacts we are undertaking, my Agency is
working hard to implement the historic laws that you have
passed in President Biden's Investing in America agenda.
President Biden's Investing in America agenda has not only
directly invested in communities nationwide, but it has
generated nearly $700 billion in funding for private sector
manufacturing and clean energy projects, creating good paying
jobs and enhancing our global competitiveness. Together,
President Biden's Investing in America agenda and EPA's 2025
budget requests will continue to invest in environmental
actions that will promote cleaner communities and produce
economic benefits for years to come.
President Biden's proposed fiscal year 2025 budget request
for EPA provides nearly $11 billion to advance key priorities
for the American people, including protecting air quality,
cleaning up pollution, upgrading the Nation's aging water
infrastructure, urgently fighting the climate crisis, and
advancing environmental justice. Millions of people across the
country are still grappling with the effects of poor air
quality, perpetuating harmful health and economic impacts. In
fiscal year 2025, EPA will improve air quality for communities
by reducing emissions of ozone-forming pollutants, particulate
matter, and air toxics.
The President's budget includes $1.3 billion to improve air
quality for communities across the country to reduce exposure
to dangerous levels of radiation and to leverage regulatory
tools and public and private sector partnerships that promote
environmental stewardship and encourage the adoption of cost-
effective technologies and practices. EPA's work to set these
standards provides certainty to industry, builds on
advancements in technology, and reinforces market movement that
reduces power plant emissions without sacrificing reliable and
affordable energy.
Clean and safe water is the foundation for healthy
communities and a thriving economy. Although substantial
progress has been made, many areas across our Nation still face
significant barriers and challenges to achieving this goal.
Aging water infrastructure, the effects of lead pipes,
cybersecurity threats to our water system, climate change, and
emerging contaminants, such as PFAS, all pose dangerous health
risks to our Nation's water supply and to the American people.
EPA's budget request includes a total of $101 million for two
EPA grant programs dedicated to remediating lead contamination
in drinking water. Back in February, I joined Vice President
Harris in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania to announce that EPA would
invest over $5 billion in drinking and clean water
infrastructure upgrades nationwide. This investment builds on
the historic funding for lead pipe replacement through the bill
and underscores the President's commitment to ensuring access
to safe drinking water and creating good-paying jobs in the
process.
From investing in clean air to cleaning up contaminated
land and water, there is no shortage of important work to be
done, but, members of this committee, I assure you EPA is up
for the task. We are eager to work with all of you to deliver
for our fellow Americans and to secure our Nation's global
competitiveness, but we need your support. The fiscal year 2025
President's budget continues the historic progress and
investments made by the Biden-Harris administration and
positions EPA to advance our vital mission of protecting public
health and the environment, while championing environmental
justice and tackling the climate crisis.
Thank you all for the opportunity to be here today to
submit testimony for the record, and I look forward to our
continued partnership to achieve these ambitious yet necessary
goals. Thank you.
[The statement of Mr. Regan follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Simpson. Thank you, Administrator, for that opening
statement. I will start off by saying I was pleased that the
Supreme Court reined in the EPA with the Sackett decisions on
the Waters of the United States rule, a rule that has been
changing, and no one seems to be able to come up with a final
rule that we are going to be using. The decision narrowed what
waters are federally regulated under the Clean Water Act. I
have long been concerned that the Biden administration's
definition of ``Federal waters'' are overly broad and took
control away from the States. In fact, a lot of people don't
understand it. If the EPA doesn't control the waters, the
States regulate the waters. It is not that they are
unregulated. It is that the States regulate them, and the
overbroad rule that was written by the EPA takes that power
away from the States in many cases.
I was also concerned of the impact of the rule on farmers,
business developers, and even property owners, and I am glad
that the Supreme Court provided needed clarity on this issue,
but now the Agency needs to do its part to appropriately
implement the Court's decision. There are 27 States, including
Idaho, under the injunction. The remaining States are operating
under the Waters of the United States conforming rule. In both
cases, the Agency says it will implement the definition of
``WOTUS'' consistent with Sackett, but I have heard a lot of
questions and concerns about implementation, and I know you
have, too, which, by the way, I hope you will commit to
substantially responding to the letters you have received from
the regulated community.
How many requests have been submitted to the Agency for a
jurisdictional determination since the conforming rule was
finalized in September, and how many of those have been
approved? I understand that many of the requests are being
elevated to the headquarters for a decision. What percentage of
the requests are being elevated, and how long are those reviews
taking? Finally, what guidance is the EPA staff using to make
jurisdictional determinations under both the pre-2015 framework
and the conforming rule? Aside from what is already public on
your website, are there other guidance documents or memos that
have been issued or that you are planning to issue, and can you
make those documents public so that the regulated parties can
understand how you are implementing WOTUS?
Mr. Regan. Well, thank you for that question, Mr. Chairman,
and, yes, this has been an issue that has ping ponged for a
number of years, decades. I will say this, that I committed to
following the science and following the law when I took this
role, and when the Sackett the decision came from the Supreme
Court, that is no different. We are following the law. The
Sackett decision was very proscribed, and so we issued guidance
quickly after issuing our revised rule last fall and continue
to work with the Army Corps to be sure that we are following
the implementation desires of the Supreme Court.
What I will say is, with the finalization of that rule in
2023, the Army Corps of Engineers has resumed issuing
jurisdictional determinations that were previously paused in
light of the Sackett decision. We have codified the
clarifications, codified and clarified exclusions in support of
farmers, like prior converted cropland, and for ranches, like
the artificial ponds used for drinking water. There were a lot
of good things that were preserved as well.
What I can do is circle back with you on the specific
number of requests that we have received and what those
percentages look like. I can tell you that there is agreement,
whether it is in our regional offices or headquarters, that we
are following the proscribed direction of the Supreme Court and
want to ensure that we provide certainty to our States as soon
as possible.
Mr. Simpson. Thank you, and I would appreciate circling
back on that with us.
Mr. Regan. Absolutely.
Mr. Simpson. Ms. Pingree? I should say also that we are
going to have a vote apparently at about 11:30. I am going to
move relatively quickly. Ms. Pingree.
Ms. Pingree. Sure. Thanks. As I mentioned in my opening
statement, I want to congratulate you on all the work that you
and your team have done on PFAS. I know how complicated this
is, and it is a long time in coming.
I want to ask you a little bit about EPA's risk assessment
on PFAS in biosolids. As you know, I think Maine is ahead of
the Federal Government on this issue, and our State is
currently looking into alternative disposal options.
Additionally, with the recent regulatory action on PFAS some of
the requirements can be difficult on the States. I have a
couple of questions about this. First, can you give us a quick
update on your risk assessment of PFAS in biosolids?
Mr. Regan. Yes. We are working on finalizing that risk
assessment this year. That will include a specific focus on
certain PFAS that help us understand better the specific risks
that it poses to farmers and the uptake in crops and livestock,
so, you know, we are working on that for this year. I will say
that I have personally been engaged on this issue with
Secretary Vilsack, and I am very proud that we are co-leading a
workgroup on PFAS with both USDA and the FDA. I can assure you
that this is top of mind, and it is something that not just
EPA, but multiple agencies are taking a serious look at.
Ms. Pingree. Thanks. Can you talk a little bit more about
the impact to the States of your recent regulatory actions on
PFAS? I am just going to say for everyone on the committee, you
know, sometimes when you talk about biosolids and all this
stuff, it just sounds like a lot of jargon. This is basically
the issue for decades in our State and probably in yours, too,
biosolids, which is just sewage sludge, has been, basically, a
fertilizer that gets spread on farms. It is a good way to
dispose of it, and it has enhanced the fertility of the soil,
but because PFAS are contained within it, now we have,
unfortunately, multiple farmers who have found that their land
is contaminated. They can no longer grow crops, and we don't
really know what to do. Do we buy them out? Is there a
remediation for it? It is a significant issue, and it is an
issue that USDA is tackling, but it is something, and everybody
is going to have to deal with this in your home State.
We, unfortunately, were just a little bit ahead of the
curve and started testing, and now our State legislature has,
you know, had to spend tens of millions of dollars already just
to support the issue of farmers going out of business or having
land that they have worked on forever that are just no longer
usable. Not only is their land contaminated, these are family
members, little kids, you know, people themselves are
contaminated by their own soil and water. Like, it sounds sort
of what are you talking about, PFAS, biosolids? This is an
issue of small farms and farms of all sizes.
Mr. Regan. Yeah.
Ms. Pingree. Sorry. Go ahead. I guess I am telling you what
the impact is on our States, but I don't know if you want to
say more about the regulatory actions that you are taking?
Mr. Regan. Well, we are very sensitive to this issue, and
number one, thank you for securing that $16 million in research
grant funding so that we can better understand how it is
impacting our food supply. I will say that FDA, USDA, EPA, we
are doing the proper research, again, to properly understand
what the risk is for this biosolid application, but to cut to
the chase, two things. The first is we are intent on holding
the polluters accountable. We do not want our farmers, we do
not want our water systems, we do not want taxpayers and
communities bearing the burden of some of these unfortunate
situations.
In terms of our regulations, we are tightening down our
regulations to ensure in our drinking water that these forever
chemicals are not making it into the bodies of our parents, our
children, our grandparents, while also pursuing enforcement
action for those who have put these into the environment. At
EPA, we have worked really hard to look to our enforcement
discretion opportunities there, and what we are doing is we are
again looking at how we enforce the laws and ensuring that our
farmers and our water utilities are not the unintended victims
of any of EPA's actions to contain and regulate this pervasive
and longstanding chemical.
Ms. Pingree. Well, thank you, and I really appreciate the
work and the research that you are doing because, again, we
don't know yet how to clean it up in the soil when it is
already contaminating a farm. We don't know how to determine
exactly what is an acceptable amount in a carrot or a head of
lettuce or some hay that dairy cows might eat. Now, since we
are no longer allowing sewage sludge to be spread on
agricultural soil, which was the best way to dispose of it, we
have a landfill issue. Now we are accumulating it in landfills,
and our landfill operators are saying what do you want us to
do, and we don't know how to deal with it or handle it.
Again, like, Maine, we are just a tiny little State, but we
weren't the only ones that had to deal with PFAS. It is
everywhere. When it sounds like sort of an abstract notion, if
it hasn't hit your State, you are going to learn about it, and
if it hasn't hit your small farmers, you know, that is a hard
conversation when you have to talk to a family that has been
contaminated or somebody who has been working the land their
whole life and now finds out that the stuff they are selling to
their customers is no longer acceptable, that it is toxic.
Anyway, I appreciate it very much. Sorry for going on on that
one question, but it is a really tricky issue, and I know you
guys are working on it, but thank you for that.
Mr. Regan. Thank you.
Mr. Simpson. Thank you. You are right, that is a tough
issue. Mr. Zinke.
Mr. Zinke. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you for
being here, and thank you for your service.
Mr. Regan. Thank you.
Mr. Zinke. On your comments, one, the impact to States. You
know, Montana, through either Bidenomics, which is inflation,
or higher energy costs for the last 3 years, has cost Montanans
$28,000, on average, a family. That is how much EPA and the
Bidenomics have cost. You said impact to States. I think we
should look at that. I got to ask upfront, climate change. Have
you ever read the 2017 multiagency climate report?
Mr. Regan. No, I can't say I have.
Mr. Zinke. You know, it is amazing that no Secretary has.
That wasn't my report. It just happened when we signed it, but
no Secretary has actually read the multiagency definitive 2017
report, so let me ask you this. Since you are not aware of it,
I will just enlighten you. It has 200 models and 1,000
variables, according to the report. You can paint it as no
impact or global nuclear combat depending on the model, so I
caution, Mr. Secretary, to be careful.
Secondly, are you aware that China is the world's largest
producer of CO2----
Mr. Regan. I am.
Mr. Zinke [continuing]. Nearly twice as much as the U.S?
Are you also aware that 90 percent of the plastic in the ocean
comes from four rivers in China? Are you aware of that?
Mr. Regan. I was not aware of that.
Mr. Zinke. When you talk about environmental justice, do
any of these regulations have anything to do with the world's
largest polluter, both on sea and land and in the air?
Mr. Regan. I can say that I am not basing our decisions or
aspiring to be China.
Mr. Zinke. Right. Right.
Mr. Regan. We are not aspiring to be China.
Mr. Zinke. You are globally conscious?
Mr. Regan. I am very globally conscious.
Mr. Zinke. All right. Well, I am also conscious of----
Mr. Regan. I want to be competitive.
Mr. Zinke. Right. Competitive?
Mr. Regan. Yes.
Mr. Zinke. That is a funny term. Competitiveness as far as
manufacturing goes, how important is energy cost to that?
Mr. Regan. Oh, it is very important.
Mr. Zinke. Okay. Your recent rule that you did on mercury
toxins, are you aware that that target is Colstrip in Montana?
Page 80.
Mr. Regan. I am aware that 93 percent of our coal
facilities will be----
Mr. Zinke. Page 80, is targeted.
Mr. Regan [continuing]. Compliant with that rule. The coal
facility that you referenced, it is the highest emitter in the
country.
Mr. Zinke. It is at 98.3, I think, as far as toxins goes.
This new rule that you put up, do you think it will have an
effect on cost of power in Montana?
Mr. Regan. Is this the mercury test rule?
Mr. Zinke. Yeah. Yeah.
Mr. Regan. We have taken a look at, number one, I will say,
for all of the rules that we announced----
Mr. Zinke. Are you aware that energy costs will go up about
$1,000 a family? You add $28,000 is what the Bidenomics has
cost, and then another $1,000 a year. Where are you going to
get the power? When you take that offline, where are you going
to get the power?
Mr. Regan. I think we just disagree with the $1,000 number,
and I am not quite sure of the underpinning of the $28,000, but
our analysis shows that that rule will have over the years less
than a 1-percent increase in energy costs. We have done
specific analysis on the combination of the mercury rule, the--
--
Mr. Zinke. You are saying that taking power offline will
decrease power costs?
Mr. Regan. We don't intend to take any power offline.
Mr. Zinke. Oh, okay. You know, Montana Power--no, I am
sorry--the Colstrip is a significant producer of power in
Montana. You take it off, it is going to cost about 1,000 bucks
in there. You say, well, clean up. Since you are on the
cleanup, and I do agree cleanup is a problem. What are you
going to do with your administration's push on EV, the fact
that 90 percent of the solar cells in this country go to some
landfill that are past their lifecycle? Does EPA have a plan
for that?
Mr. Regan. We do, and I will say----
Mr. Zinke. Where is the rule for that because you have a
rule to take down our power system so we are less competitive,
and you pointed out that we have to be competitive. I can
guarantee that energy costs make America competitive, so when
you take power offline and there is no plan to put more power
or substitute the power, that is going to raise energy costs.
That is basic economics. When you say about we want to be
globally competitive, labor costs, commodity costs, and power
and innovation, those are the costs that drive manufacturing.
We can't pay the same cost as China in labor, even though China
is the largest polluter, so we are not going to be competitive
on labor. The cost of steel is the same in Pennsylvania as it
is in South Korea. Where America's competitiveness is, is
innovation and power.
Mr. Regan. I agree with that.
Mr. Zinke. When your administration and you attack
America's power without having a reasonable accommodation and
replacement, it is going to make power costs go up, and my
concern from a Montana perspective is this. Montana gets a
little cold. One of my co-ops said we already have a power grid
problem, and then when you are dictating where the power comes
from, Montana, our power system itself can't handle it. When
winters become 20 degrees below zero, it is a little problem
out there, and I can tell you part of being upset is that D.C.
doesn't listen to outside the Beltway. When you put regulations
that target our number one power producer, and you know that
China is producing them all the time. They are making new coal
strips. They are the biggest polluter in the world, and yet we
are focused on Montana, and 20-degree winters, I get concerned.
Do you share that same concern?
Mr. Regan. Well, I will say that, you know, we are not
targeting Montana, and in all honesty, the investments----
Mr. Zinke. Page 80 of your rule specifically targets
Colstrip, so you are targeting Montana.
Mr. Regan. Colstrip can make the same investments in
controlling mercury that North Carolina does, that West
Virginia does, that North Dakota does.
Mr. Zinke. Are you an engineer?
Mr. Regan. It is the largest----
Mr. Zinke. Are you an engineer? Are you aware that plants--
--
Mr. Regan. I am the administrator of the EPA. I have got
to----
Mr. Zinke. All right. That plants were designed----
Mr. Regan. I understand how they work.
Mr. Zinke [continuing]. Manufactured during different
periods. You realize that?
Mr. Regan. Yeah. Yeah.
Mr. Zinke. You take one plant----
Mr. Regan. 93 percent of the coal facilities in this
country have magically figured out how to control mercury at a
level that doesn't produce this toxic for our children, and I
will tell you this. There are 4 years to comply with this rule.
My folks have talked to the people at Colstrip. We know that
there can be investments that can be made to meet this rule.
Colstrip has said that they are going to be online through the
2040s. All we are saying is if you are going to be online
through the 2040s, make the same investments that 93 percent of
coal plants across this country have made.
Mr. Zinke. Just so I have this straight. You talked to
Colstrip on the record and Colstrip said that they can comply
with this toxin rule and be competitive and be in function and
running until 2040s. Is that what Colstrip told you because
that is what you just told the committee.
Mr. Regan. Our analysis shows that Colstrip----
Mr. Zinke. No. Did Colstrip say because you said that
Colstrip----
Mr. Regan. I said we have talked to them. I said we have
talked to them.
Mr. Zinke. Okay.
Mr. Regan. We have engaged.
Mr. Zinke. All right.
Mr. Regan. We have listened.
Mr. Zinke. Has Colstrip said this?
Mr. Regan. Well, I don't know exactly if Colstrip agreed--
--
Mr. Zinke. I know you don't know exactly because I have
notes from Colstrip what they said exactly. They----
Mr. Regan. Well, if Colstrip has been cheating the system
this entire time, then----
Mr. Zinke. Colstrip has been cheating the system.
Mr. Regan. Well, 93 percent of coal plants have complied
with EPA regulations and will comply with this new MATS rule.
Colstrip is the highest-emitting facility in the country. It is
the highest-emitting facility in this country. I believe that
the children in Montana deserve the same protection as the
children in North Carolina.
Mr. Zinke. Have you ever been out to Montana? Have you ever
been out to Montana?
Mr. Regan. In all fairness, this is a joke? You----
Mr. Zinke. No. Have you ever been out to Montana?
Mr. Regan. You said you were going to invite me last
meeting last year. I did not get an invitation.
Mr. Zinke. Well, you know what? I think we should go out,
Mr. Chairman. I am going to invite you to Colstrip post-haste.
Mr. Regan. Yes.
Mr. Zinke. You can explain how Colstrip told you that they
can comply with the mercury and they can be in business up to
2040, according to your testimony.
Mr. Regan. I didn't say Colstrip said that they would do
it. I said that our analysis shows that they can, and they need
to be.
Mr. Zinke. At what cost?
Mr. Regan. They need to be.
Mr. Zinke. At what cost, sir?
Mr. Regan. Our analysis shows that it is a cost-benefit
investment, that this is a cost-available technology. Again,
this is important. Ninety-three percent of coal plants across
this country are going to be shown to comply with this rule.
Colstrip consistently is the highest emitter in the country.
Mr. Zinke. Does Colstrip meet the Clean Air Act, and does
Colstrip also remove 99.6 percent of hazardous air pollutants,
and are they in complete compliance with the American Clean Air
Act?
Mr. Regan. Hey, listen, I didn't paint Colstrip as a bad
guy.
Mr. Zinke. I mean, you just did.
Mr. Regan. All I said was----
Mr. Zinke. You just did.
Mr. Regan. All I said was in terms of the mercury air toxic
standard, they were the highest emitter----
Mr. Zinke. I will invite you back, but on record, you have
said that Colstrip have talked to you and they can make the
adjustments to be in business until 2040.
Mr. Regan. No, you have added a ton of words. I said that
our Agency has engaged----
Mr. Zinke. What did Colstrip actually tell you?
Mr. Regan. Our Agency has engaged with Colstrip. We are
listening to the industry. Our analysis shows that they can
make cost-effective investments to reduce mercury to protect
children in Montana just like North Dakota, North Carolina,
West Virginia----
Mr. Zinke. That is your analysis, and does Colstrip agree
with your analysis? Does Colstrip agree with your analysis?
Mr. Regan. It appears to me that Colstrip is----
Mr. Zinke. No, because you don't listen. Mr. Chairman, I
yield back.
Mr. Regan. Colstrip appears to be the only utility in the
country that wants to continue to be the highest emitter of
mercury and these emissions in the country. Those are the
facts. Those are facts.
Mr. Zinke. The fact is they meet the Clean Air standard.
The fact is your new regulation no one can meet. The fact is
that you are going after coal and you have been. The fact is
you don't understand America's competitiveness----
Mr. Simpson. Mr. Ellzey.
Mr. Ellzey. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Administrator,
thank you for being here.
Mr. Regan. Thank you.
Mr. Ellzey. We are going to get some tough questions.
Mr. Regan. Sure.
Mr. Ellzey. Ethylene oxide is a colorless flammable gas
with a sweet odor that is used to produce other chemicals,
mainly that do everything we need, and they clean medical
equipment. I would like to discuss two recent rules under the
Clean Air Act, sterilizers NESHAP rule and the hazardous
organics NESHAP rule. These rules have an impact on a building
block chemical that has a variety of critical applications,
including sterilizing medical equipment. They both rely on the
Integrated Risk Information System, or IRIS, value for ethylene
oxide, which demands a level of 19,000 times lower than what we
have in our own bodies, 19,000 times lower than what naturally
occurs in our bodies.
The first question I am going to ask because it is kind of
a stump the chump, and I don't want to do that, so I am going
to ask for an answer down the road from your staff. That is,
why has the EPA decided to rely on the IRIS rule for ethylene
oxide and ignored other credible and readily-available
assessments on the State level, like the Texas Commission on
Environmental Quality, which does what you do at the State
level? I know that is hard to find that information, so if you
could reply in writing later on.
Mr. Regan. Absolutely.
Mr. Ellzey. For me, it is how do you justify using a
program that is not authorized by us, by Congress, lacks
transparency, and doesn't have any statutory backing to replace
the scientific requirements, which you have stated is very
important to you, in the congressionally-authorized Toxic
Substances Control Act? If you can make this a quick one.
Mr. Regan. Listen, IRIS is a well-founded, strategic,
scientifically sound program that we have used for the
underpinning of a number of our rules. I think it does comply
with all of the statutory authorities and all of the
transparency that we believe it should. I will say this because
we have had a lot of conversations with the FDA and with the
industry and understand the importance of ethylene oxide,
chloroprene, and others. We don't want to see any disruptions
in sterilizing and the like. The decisions that we have made we
believe do a good balance of, you know, providing a controlled
technology that can reduce the cancer risk of neighboring
communities by 96 percent while also costing the industry less
than 1 percent of their annual revenue. Again, I think that
there is a scientific approach, a cost-effective approach to
reduce what we see as a highly cancerous or cancer-causing
chemical exposure.
Mr. Ellzey. While that may be in high doses, what we are
talking about is your limitation is 19,000 less than what we
have in our own bodies right now. What you are going to do is
you are going to kill the patient because that which we use to
sterilize medical equipment can't be used because it might be
cancer causing in high doses. That is not going to work, and
more people are going to die because of that rule.
Let's move on to something else. Let's talk about national
security real quick. No secret here, irrefutable, China
controls the vast majority of critical minerals mining,
processing, and manufacturing for EVs. They control the
majority of Africa's largest lithium projects, which I might
add is extremely important in Ukraine, which is part of why
Russia wants Ukraine. From the upstream supply chain of these
minerals, China controls 80 percent and 66 percent of refining
for lithium and cobalt, respectively. The Chinese Government
has used its mining companies to take control of cobalt mining
in Africa, which is this picture behind me.
[Chart]
Mr. Ellzey. A number of these foreign-controlled mines have
faced allegations of extremely low pay, long hours, child
labor, and physical abuse of workers. This is from a cobalt
mine that is controlled by China in Africa. Would a government-
mandated transition to EVs perpetuate these human rights
violations abroad because it seems like we want to outsource
our sin. We don't want to produce any of this stuff here
cleanly with American jobs in the American way. We would rather
outsource it and act like it doesn't exist. It seems
hypocritical to me to force us to use foreign materials using
child labor in Africa. This is going to harm them. This is
cobalt. These kids are going to die. They are using it for the
batteries that are producing EVs that are used in EVs in this
country. I am assuming you know why cobalt is used, right?
Mr. Regan. I do.
Mr. Ellzey. Would you explain?
Mr. Regan. Listen, let me just say something, because we
agree----
Mr. Ellzey. No, no. I am asking you a specific question.
Don't answer the question I am not asking. We have limited
time. What is cobalt used for in these batteries?
Mr. Regan. There are a number of critical minerals that
make up the need and necessity of effective batteries.
Mr. Ellzey. It is okay if you don't know. It goes in the
batteries. It prevents fires in the batteries. I am not trying
to put you on the spot. I assumed that you knew. However, using
this to force us into an EV world that the American public is
rapidly rejecting, 2,700 workers in Austin just laid off at
Tesla, which is the best-selling vehicle in the EV community,
but this seems like it conflicts with your equity action plan
because we are outsourcing our sin. It is almost like we act
like when China pollutes, that the air just stays over China.
It doesn't. It flows over the United States. While we are
harming American jobs, American production, and American
national security, we are also violating the very tenets of
what you have said is very important to you as administrator of
the EPA, and that is environmental justice. This is not a
picture of environmental justice.
I don't get upset about many things. I keep pretty stoic
about stuff, but this is not made up. This is a legitimate
picture of children being used to mine cobalt for batteries for
EVs that we use. I ask you, does this not conflict with your
equity action plan?
Mr. Regan. I think the question is ridiculous. All of us
agree and think that child labor is abhorrent, okay, number
one. Number two, there is no such thing as a EPA EV mandate. If
you read the rule, you will see that in consultation with the
industry, that there are numerous options for meeting the
emissions goals: plug-in hybrids, advanced biofuels, cleaner
burning fuel or efficiency vehicles, and EVs. Number three, I
think that under the Bipartisan Infrastructure Law and
Inflation Reduction Act that there are billions of dollars that
have been invested in domestic manufacturing, which we are
seeing in States like North Carolina, West Virginia, Georgia,
Nevada. I also know that EPA is part of a government-wide
approach to look at how we expedite the mining and the
procurement of these critical minerals both domestically and
encouraging this in other countries that will help us remain
globally competitive.
China is going to produce its cars, its batteries. The goal
is for us not to be reliant on these technologies that, quite
frankly, we are seeing the market uptake continue to move
forward on. I would also argue that, as you see companies like
GM and Ford and Stellantis and Toyota run $7 million Superbowl
ads, they themselves are saying the future is electric. They
themselves are saying give us some certainty so we can compete
and develop some of these technologies domestically for
American jobs. I just sort of reject the premise that as the
market demand encourages new technologies like EVs, like plug-
in hybrids----
Mr. Ellzey. That is not true. No, it doesn't.
Mr. Regan. Oh, it very much is true.
Mr. Ellzey. Tesla just laid off 2,700 people because they
are not selling their cars, so don't talk about the market.
Mr. Regan. Well, Tesla now can't compete with GM and
Chrysler and Stellantis.
Mr. Ellzey. If you pay these companies to build something,
they will do it until the money runs out, just like the
windmills. If you pay them money to build it, they will come.
Let's move on just a little bit. I am about out of time.
It seems that in the last few years the EPA has transformed
from an agency that is responsible for cleaning up PFAS, which
years ago we didn't know was as bad as we know now. I think
that is admirable, and partnering with States to do that is
good, but what you have done in the last few years is become a
super Congress, a super governor in our federalist system. We
have elected officials in our States, in our cities, in our
legislatures that do this job. We have our own agencies in
Texas which does a great job of doing this. You have taken
extraordinary power, which is not granted by Congress and only
by executive order, not by law, to do the things you are doing,
and it is time we wheel you back. Thank you. My time has
expired.
Mr. Simpson. Mr. Harder.
Mr. Harder. Thank you. Thank you so much, Mr. Chair, and
thank you, Administrator, for being here today. I am going to
focus my comments on an issue that we have talked about before,
which is air quality in the Central Valley and especially air
quality monitoring.
The American Lung Association released their 2024 State of
the Air report, and they found that last year was the worst
year for air quality in 25 years for the number of days with
hazardous or very unhealthy air quality. As you know, my
district is ranked one of the most polluted in the entire
country. This is a major issue. I had childhood asthma as a
kid. My brother had it. I don't want my two daughters to grow
up with the same challenges that I had. One source of this air
pollution is catastrophic wildfires, and as you know, Congress
put together a Bipartisan Wildfire Mitigation and Management
Commission that came out with a report last year that
highlighted some issues of what we can do to deal with air
quality and specifically air quality challenges coming from
these wildfires.
One of the Commission's recommendations was to improve the
EPA's air quality monitoring so people had real-time alerts,
that there was a nationally consistent smoke monitoring system
that could convey real information on poor air quality to the
public. I am working on bipartisan legislation right now to
expand those recommendations into law, but I would love to hear
from you about what you think we could do to help give
resources to the EPA to improve AirNow's capacity to be a real
state-of-the-art resource for the public during smoke events?
Mr. Regan. Well, thank you for that question, and, yes, I
think that the Commission's report has been very instructive to
us. We do have a very complicated air monitoring system across
the country. We do have the AirNow system, which, you know, is
on mobile apps or laptops where parents can take a look at that
and see what the air quality is to know if they want to send
their kid to a soccer game or go out jogging and such, and so
we feel really good about a robust air quality monitoring
system. One of the things that we have requested in this budget
that seems to be continually ignored or getting struck down or
saying EPA is trying to grow itself is developing the
technological capabilities, right? We know we are going to have
wildfires. We know that our forestry system needs to use
prescribed burns, so we have to do a better job of
understanding where the air pollution as a result is coming
from and how we protect public health.
This Commission that you refer to has been extremely
helpful, and you will see in our budget a resource request
specifically to enhance our air quality monitoring capabilities
and our ability to share that information nationwide. It used
to be that these wildfires were just on the West Coast. Now we
are seeing them in North Carolina. We are seeing wildfires come
from Canada. We need those investments, both technology and
people, to keep the American public safe.
Mr. Harder. Thank you. While I look forward to advocating
for those resources to go to the EPA, I think it is absolutely
imperative that we upgrade AirNow's capacity to be a real-time
resource. I think it is great what the mobile app does today,
but as the Commission highlighted, it is not enough.
Mr. Regan. Yeah.
Mr. Harder. There are opportunities to improve. I think EPA
can be a real leader towards getting that real-time information
directly to the public so folks can make informed decisions
about when they go outside where they go and making sure they
are keeping their kids safe.
The second question that I wanted to focus on is, in my
district, we have a national laboratory experimental test site
known as Site 300. This was created many, many decades ago when
it was all just a bunch of farmland around. Now there has been
major residential development over the last few decades. In
fact, my own home is just a few miles away from this
experimental test site. To protect some of the workers and
nearby residents, EPA came out and commented on the draft
environmental impact study for Lawrence Livermore Lab to add
air quality monitoring facilities so folks had a good sense of
some of the radiological constituents and criteria pollutants.
Can you walk me through the timeline for implementing those air
monitors? What is actually necessary to make sure that they are
procured and installed so cities like Mountain House and Tracy
have real information about what is going on in this
experimental test site?
Mr. Regan. Well, thank you for that question, and, you
know, there are air monitors currently at that site. I do want
to be clear that EPA is providing oversight over the Department
of Energy's long-term investment and cleanup of the site, so
they are in the driver's seat. We are in that advisory
capacity. The timeline question and those next steps, I would
say that DOE is in a better position to answer that question.
Mr. Harder. We will follow up with them, but you did
recommend or the EPA Region 9 did recommend additional air
quality monitoring facilities for the EIS that came out pretty
recently. Do you have any sense of when that would happen, or
that is a DOE----
Mr. Regan. Yeah. I know that Secretary Granholm and I have
a great working relationship. They have been very receptive to
our recommendations. I am quite certain that we are, as I
understand it, working in full partnership. Again, in terms of
the total receipt of those recommendations from one agency to
the other and the timing for the implementation of those
recommendations, I would have to leave that to DOE. I would not
want to get in front of them on that.
Mr. Harder. Okay. Well, I agreed with the EPA
recommendations. I think additional air quality monitoring
makes perfect sense in that site and will look forward to
working with you to make that happen. Thank you, and I yield
back.
Mr. Regan. Thank you.
Mr. Simpson. Mr. Edwards.
Mr. Edwards. Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you, Mr. Regan. I
appreciate you being here. It is always good to see somebody
from North Carolina back up here in D.C.
Mr. Regan. It is good to see you.
Mr. Edwards. You mentioned in your earlier comments or at
least your budget request is asking for 2,000 additional
Federal employees. Was that right?
Mr. Regan. Yes, it is.
Mr. Edwards. I heard a couple of times through, I think,
your comments and some of the others that a portion of those
would be dedicated towards addressing climate change. Help me
understand how many positions of those 2,000 would go towards
climate change?
Mr. Regan. Well, what I will do is I will circle back with
you on that breakdown because it is sort of looking at how
those positions would help us develop some of these technology-
based standards that we use to regulate some of these
greenhouse gases. As we think about the ones that we are
currently regulating from natural gas, from cars, from trucks,
we also have a remit that is focused on cement and other
places. As we look at how we build up that capacity to design
these technology standards to be, again, completely competitive
on a global standpoint, but also reduce the levels of pollution
that we want to see here domestically, I can get you the
specific breakdown of how many FTEs would go to which
organizations in EPA that focus on various technology
standards.
Mr. Edwards. All right. Maybe it is me. I am new to this
committee. I don't understand what you just told me. How many
positions would be dedicated towards climate change--let's
start with this--in any capacity? I am looking for a number----
Mr. Regan. I will get you----
Mr. Edwards [continuing]. Zero to 2,000?
Mr. Regan [continuing]. That specific number because some
people work on technology standards that regulate a public----
Mr. Edwards. You don't know? You can't----
Mr. Regan. Well, there are co-benefits there. Someone who
may work on a standard that is controlling a certain aspect of
a power plant, and there are co-benefits. We might get
NO
X
reductions, but we also may get some
CO
2
reductions based on the technology that the
power plant chooses or any of the regulated community might
choose.
Mr. Edwards. I certainly don't want to be combative----
Mr. Regan. Sure.
Mr. Edwards [continuing]. In asking my questions, but it
seems to me like you are passing rules for companies to adhere
to certain standards, and now we are hiring people to go back
and see what the effects of those rules are.
Mr. Regan. No, no, not at all. I think what we are doing is
we are focused on designing technology standards in a way that
the industry can make investments, long-term investments. I
will give you a good example. The power plant rules that we
just announced, there were four rules that focused on carbon,
mercury, water, and coal ash cleanup. When I spent time with
the utility industry 2 years ago, they said, hey, instead of
dying by a thousand paper cuts, just present these regulations
in bundles so that we can make longer term investments because
there are co-benefits in some of those investments and the
like, and so what we are doing is trying to do more of that. We
have a slew of rules. We have hundreds of rules that by law and
by Congress we are required to put out. We have been asked by
the various industries can you work on some of these rules in a
simultaneous manner so that we know what we are getting and
investing in. That is why we are asking for some of these
additional FTEs.
Mr. Edwards. How many unfilled positions are there
currently in the EPA?
Mr. Regan. About 700 positions.
Mr. Edwards. Seven hundred?
Mr. Regan. Yes.
Mr. Edwards. Wouldn't it make sense before you ask for
2,000 more employees to fill the 700 that you have already got
appropriation for?
Mr. Regan. Well, listen, we are ramping up in some of this
hiring. Some of these skill sets are very hard to ascertain.
Obviously, there is some matriculation going on, so it is not
necessarily a full 700 people on every given day, but----
Mr. Edwards. Well, it is the answer you just gave me.
Mr. Regan. Well, right. That is the number that we have
today, but we have people going out and coming in.
Mr. Edwards. All right. Let's shift gears just a little
bit. Less than a week ago, on Thursday, April 26th, your Agency
issued a new regulation that expedites the requirement for
coal-fired power plants to reduce their greenhouse gas
emissions by 90 percent by the year 2039. What is your
instruction to them? What is the plan? What actions will they
take do you think to reduce their emissions by 90 percent?
Mr. Regan. You know, it will vary. I think what Duke Energy
will do in North Carolina will be drastically different than
what happens in West Virginia or Texas. There is a process that
we have in place. They have a number of years to comply. As a
former regulator, I will tell you each State secretary will
work with their utility to design a State implementation plan.
Mr. Edwards. What are the possibilities?
Mr. Regan. There are a number of possibilities ranging from
the choice of running their plant differently from an
efficiency standpoint because they may be shifting more their
demand from coal to natural gas or some other generation source
that they have chosen. There are technologies like CCS that
they may choose. There are fuel, there are technology switches.
There are new technologies that they may be adding. As a matter
fact, some are looking at retiring some asset and bringing some
new assets online. Obviously, nuclear energy and other things
will be in play, so----
Mr. Edwards. Stop using coal is the plan?
Mr. Regan. No. I think that the plan offers controlled
technologies that will reduce emissions if a plant decides to
continue with coal.
Mr. Edwards. Yeah. With all due respect, I just asked the
question what would be your instructions to them to reduce
emissions by 90 percent, and in your explanation you said
switch to natural gas and nuclear and some of these other
things. That effectively is an order to not use----
Mr. Regan. There is a coal plant in Texas right now using
CCS technology. What I don't want to do is what you are asking
me to do, which is tell them what to do. I think we have given
them a suite of options. We have talked to a lot of these
utility CEOs. There are a number of ways that they can meet the
emission reductions that we have laid out. Without being too
prescriptive, I think the rule lays out a plethora of options
and routes that they could choose.
Mr. Edwards. One more question, Mr. Chair, if I may. The
EPA's new Endangered Species Act Herbicide Strategy adds
significant cost and new regulatory burdens to the agriculture
community. I am hearing that from farmers in North Carolina
especially. Many farmers say that they might go broke trying to
comply with these new restrictions, while others wouldn't even
have a choice. Can you detail to me how the EPA plans to make
these proposals workable for agriculture so that they don't put
family farms out of business?
Mr. Regan. Yeah. I will say that you and I are probably
talking to the same folks in North Carolina. I think we share
those relationships. Now, no farmer should wake up in the
middle of a growing season and have to choose or take a tool
out of the toolbox. I think who is taking those choices out
have been the courts. I think EPA's administering of the
Endangered Species Act for 30-plus years proves that. What I
will say is a number of farm groups have spoken positively
about these new strategies and updated plans that we have laid
out, including groups like American Soybean Association and Ag
Retailers Association.
What I would say is we are trying our best to put this
pesticides program back on track, and in one place, I will say
that, unfortunately, Congress just cut our pesticides budget.
When I talk to the Farm Bureau of my folks back at home, what
they are asking us to do is increase the staff there so that we
can put some of these newer products on the market because we
are seeing the courts consistently both tie the farmers hands
and tie EPA's hands. I think we have seen that with dicamba and
I think we have seen that with some other pesticides and
herbicides that, quite frankly, many farmers rely on.
Mr. Edwards. Okay. Thank you. Mr. Chair, I yield.
Mr. Simpson. Mr. Kilmer.
Mr. Kilmer. Thanks, Chairman, and thank you for being back
with us, and thank you for your leadership and partnership on
the work specifically related to Puget Sound.
Mr. Regan. Yes.
Mr. Kilmer. I really like this job. I like when we get to
learn things in this job. I have now been at it long enough
that I get to see how science changes and how our views on
issues change. I still remember, I think, in my first term,
university researchers in my State showed a video of salmon
dying when exposed to storm water runoff, and they weren't
entirely sure why. Then as time has progressed, they were able
to distill it down and realize that it was a chemical in tires,
that, when it wore down, it became basically poisonous to fish,
and it was called 6PPDQ. I feel like now I get an advanced
degree in chemistry or something, but it is fatal to several
salmon species. Last year, we had several Tribes in our region,
including the Port Gamble's S'Klallam and Puyallup in my
district that petitioned the EPA to regulate 6PPDQ under the
Toxic Substances Control Act, and I appreciate EPA granting
that petition. I am glad that you are committed to working
across the Federal Government and with State agencies to
understand how 6PPDQ gets into our water and what we can do to
keep it out.
This is not just a sort of an environmental issue. It is
not just a moral issue. It is a legal one. There are 17 Tribes
that have treaty rights in Puget Sound to harvest shellfish and
to do fishing. The first question I have for you is, when EPA
granted that petition, you indicated that the Agency planned to
issue the advanced notice of proposed rulemaking under the
Toxic Substances Control Act by the end of 2024. Is that
timeline still accurate, and is there anything we can do in
Congress to support that work?
Mr. Regan. Well, yes. Well, thank you for your leadership
on this issue. In all sincerity, you have been a champion
there. I think we are going to do a little bit better by the
end of the year, and we will have that ANPR done by the fall of
2024----
Mr. Kilmer. Great.
Mr. Regan [continuing]. To gather this important
information. It is really important that we make this step,
thanks to your leadership and thanks to the original vision of
all of Congress with the TSCA legislation. These are the types
of things that we were asked to do, and we are going to try to
get those done.
Mr. Kilmer. Great. The 6PPDQ issue is not the only threat
facing Puget Sound. I appreciate the chairman's partnership in
securing funding for the geographic program for Puget Sound.
Even in a tough budget, we were able to maintain funding for
that, and it really matters. I also want to express gratitude
for the work that EPA is doing in the rivers that feed into the
Sound. Restoring these riparian habitats is critical for
species recovery, it is critical for clean water. It is
critical for climate resilience. I am excited to see the
funding for the Climate Resilient Riparian Lead go out into our
communities over the next 4 years. Are you able to give any
additional information about the work you are doing to restore
estuary and riparian habitats in Puget Sound?
Mr. Regan. Yes. I can tell you that we continue to work on
the Puget Sound and enjoy those partnerships we have. I think
we just funded the Kitsap Conservation District, which is
providing that strong technical assistance and funding to help
agricultural landowners employ the best management practices
and improve the water quality there as well. I will say
specifically for Puget Sound, we have successfully followed
through with our new statutory requirements to stand up the
Puget Sound Recovery National Program Office and the Puget
Sound Federal Leadership Task Force. These are very concrete
steps that we are taking to look at the entire system, not only
how we reduce 6PPDQ, but, as you say, all of these toxic
impacts to our precious water systems that we all rely on for
food, for recreation, and for just economic stability.
Mr. Kilmer. Thank you. I really appreciate your leadership
and partnership on this. I would love to invite you out to see
Puget Sound. I recommend August and September are really nice
months, and the rest of the year it rains, but we would love to
have you out.
Mr. Regan. Thank you so much.
Mr. Kilmer. Thank you, Chair.
Mr. Simpson. Thank you. Last month, the EPA finalized the
rule lowering the standard for particulate matter. Aside from
my concerns with the Agency revising this rule outside of the
standard 5-year cycle, I am more concerned that you are
shutting down industry and manufacturing in America. In
addition to the new counties that will be non-attainment with
this lower standard, including counties in Idaho, most of the
country will not be able to permit new or expanding
manufacturing projects. Then what? We will be forced to import
products and become even more dependent on our foreign
adversaries, and we will drive jobs overseas and turn our back
on American workers, as Mr. Ellzey was talking about earlier.
A particular issue concerning attainment in our Western
States is the impact on wildfire smoke. Unfortunately,
wildfires will continue to happen and intensify, and our
Federal and State partners need to be able to continue using
prescribed burns as a forest management tool. It is imperative
for the EPA to work with the Western States to accurately
account for these events when determining attainment with the
new stricter standards.
Just a few weeks ago, the governor of Idaho joined 21 other
governors in writing a letter to the Agency, outlining these
wildfire-related concerns, and I would ask unanimous consent
that that letter be included in the record.
[The information follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Simpson. Recognizing the far-reaching impacts of this
rule, the fiscal year 2024 House interior bill included a
provision blocking the rule, but at the very least, the States
are asking the agencies to pause implementation of the rule
until their concerns are addressed. Are you concerned that this
rule will prohibit new economic growth throughout the country
and will drive jobs and industries overseas? Hopefully, you
will surprise me with your answer. Do you think the Agency has
a solid, fair plan on how to handle events like wildfires and
prescribed burns, and tell us what your coordination has been
with the States thus far and what you are planning for the
future.
Mr. Regan. Well, thank you for that. I will say that
hopefully it is not a surprise, but maybe it is. You know, the
earliest that it can come into place is around 2032. We believe
that 99 percent of all the counties will meet the new standard.
The reason we believe that, the first is, is that we have got
an incredible working relationship with a lot of our State
environmental regulators, and so there are resources coming
from both the Bipartisan Infrastructure Law and the Inflation
Reduction Act that is going to infuse some capital in to help
with some of these PM concerns that we have.
The second is we have absolutely listened to our Western
States and our Western governors and taken a lot of advice on,
from a data standpoint, how we calculate the monitored data
from wildfires and from prescribed burns. We have a great
strategy for differentiating that particulate matter data that
is coming from a very sophisticated air monitoring system that
points to wildfires, prescribed burns, and those emissions that
we are actually targeting. I believe with the infusion of
capital from IRA, from listening to some of the concerns that
we have heard from some of the western governors, and looking
at my conversations with the Secretary of Commerce and the
President and others, who want us to continue to be a beacon of
light for jobs and creativity, I think we can meet that goal.
Mr. Simpson. Just remember that prescribed burns are how
you prevent, hopefully, in the future, catastrophic wildfires.
If we put too many restrictions on prescribed burns, you are
increasing the chances of catastrophic wildfires.
I am very concerned about losing fire retardant as a tool
to fight wildfires. Our firefighters should not be out in the
field without the means to fight the fire. They are already
putting their lives at risk. Can you provide an update on how
the EPA is working with the Forest Service to ensure the
continued use of fire retardant?
Mr. Regan. Absolutely. This is a conversation that
Secretary Vilsack and I together have been looking at and
monitoring. I will say that we both want to be very clear that
we do not want to take any tools away from our firefighters,
and so we will not do that.
The first is, the EPA and the Forest Service have a signed
Facilities Compliance Agreement that allows the Forest Service
to continue fighting fires exactly the way they are so that we
can be on the right side of the law. We are working with USDA
and the Forest Service and looking at how we can issue a Clean
Water Act permit as soon as possible. That is very clear and
concise and really in a very transparent way demonstrates that
the Forest Service can use these tools and do it in a way that
is protective of the Clean Water Act.
Mr. Simpson. I appreciate that. I am not opposed to trying
to find more environmentally-friendly fire retardants, but we
can't ban what we currently have if we don't have the
replacement in place. Right now, we don't.
Mr. Regan. Agree.
Mr. Simpson. One last question for me. For yet another
year, the budget request proposes to zero out funding for the
rural water technical assistance grants, which is currently
funded at just over $30 million. It is unfortunate that we play
games with this program by zeroing it out to make room for
other priorities because you know Congress will put the money
back in. It just doesn't send the right message to the folks in
our States, who are working very hard every day to help ensure
our rural communities have access to safe drinking water. That
is why I will work with my colleagues to ensure the program is
continued and not zeroed out, as is proposed in this budget.
The Agency has been trying to change the way funding is awarded
under this program. I expressed my opposition at the end of
last year and will reiterate it again now.
Can you commit that the Agency will continue to operate
this program on a 1-year funding cycle, and can you commit that
the Agency will follow the congressional direction to award
funding to organizations that are most qualified and
experienced in providing training and technical assistance to
small public water systems?
Mr. Regan. I can absolutely agree that we will follow
congressional direction 100 percent, and I can tell you that I
have been briefed on the budget games that have been played for
a number of years. I will say that the thing that I am
heartened by is there was $43 billion from the Bipartisan
Infrastructure Law to invest in water infrastructure. Our plan
is to invest up to $500 million in water technical assistance
programs through just 2024, including increasing funding for
the National Rural Water Association and Rural Community
Assistance Program. What we have done at EPA, we focused on the
ability to have a concrete, consistent stream of revenue going
to our rural communities, recognizing that there are lots of
budget maneuvers that happen, have happened in the past. This
is a way to make sure that the money gets to these rural
communities.
Mr. Simpson. Well, I appreciate that because this Rural
Water Technical Assistance Program has been working, frankly.
When I talk to small communities that have a water system that
maybe it is a town of a thousand people, they don't have the
ability to go out and hire somebody with the technical
assistance to really meet the Clean Water Act and the Safe
Drinking Water Act and all those different acts. Who do they
turn to? They turn to the people they know.
Mr. Regan. That is right.
Mr. Simpson. That is the people in the local, rural
communities, the rural water assistance programs that give them
great advice. That is how it has worked in the past, and I
think it is working very well, and that is why Congress
continues to support it. I suspect you will see some money put
back into that program in this budget when we finish it.
Mr. Regan. Thank you.
Mr. Simpson. Ms. Pingree.
Ms. Pingree. Thank you, Mr. Chair, and thank you again for
your testimony this morning. I just want to reinforce that I
wholeheartedly support the work you are doing related to
climate change, reducing our dependence on fossil fuel,
removing the toxins from our environment, making sure that we
don't have kids growing up with childhood asthma, and the
issues that we are dealing with today. Thank you. I am very
grateful for the work you are doing and the work this
administration is doing.
Mr. Regan. Thank you.
Ms. Pingree. A lot of my questions are about waste. I am
very concerned about whether it is PFAS or this one. I just
want to bring up textile recycling. Fast fashion is something I
have learned about fairly recently just in terms of a topic,
and at first, I was like, well, okay, fine, that is just, you
know, a trivial matter. It turns out, even in 2018, the EPA
estimated that 100 billion garments are produced annually, most
of which end up in incinerators, generating about 17 million
tons of textile municipal solid waste. So 85 percent of the
garments more or less end up in our waste stream. This
sometimes is plastics in the ocean because of the synthetics
that they are made of, but right now, our National Recycling
Strategy doesn't address this critical source of pollution and
waste.
Can you provide a little bit of an update about the work
you are doing around fast fashion, and what kind of resources
would the EPA need to make a significant impact?
Mr. Regan. Well, thank you for this. I was telling you, I
believe, a while back that fast fashion wasn't something that
was on the tip of my tongue either. As I have traveled the
country and traveled the State, this is something that
especially young people are adamantly focused on, and so we are
taking this very serious. We released our part one of the
National Recycling Strategy in 2021, and as you pointed out, it
did not have enough in that focused on this specific topic, so
we have gone to work since then. I will say that we anticipate
releasing new data specifically on textile waste and recycling
this year, so that is on the way.
I would just say that in our budget, we are making a
request so that we can focus on these waste issues, these new
emerging issues that are not only waste issues from a municipal
standpoint, but that they tie into these municipal landfills
that contribute to methane, that contribute to climate change.
This is why I had such a, not a difficult time, but not a
straightforward way of answering Congressman Edwards' question,
which is, we are hiring people to work on climate change. We
are coming at climate change from so many different angles----
Ms. Pingree. Right.
Mr. Regan [continuing]. It is not very easy just to say
this person is focused on that, but we are focused on the
textile waste. We are focused on reducing that textile waste,
and, again, later this year, you will see new data as part of
our National Recycling Strategy.
Ms. Pingree. Great. Well, thank you. I look forward to
working with you on that, and I know it is a variety of
factors. Some of it has to do with, you know, a plethora of
garments that are made in China using kids, using, you know,
not the environmental controls that we have. Some of it has to
do with how they are shipped into our country. There are a lot
of different things we need to get at, but understanding what
is in our waste stream, I think, is important.
Mr. Regan. Absolutely.
Ms. Pingree. I want to bring up one other waste topic that
I have been working on for quite a long time, and that is food
waste. Once again, the first time I heard about this several
years ago, I thought, okay, good. Everybody's grandmother told
them not to waste food. Of course, you shouldn't, but it turns
out we waste somewhere around 30 to 40 percent of the food in
this country. It is not only food that doesn't go to people who
are actually hungry, that doesn't get to the right places, but
it is also the land that we are using, the water that we are
wasting, the transportation. It starts to add up to a pretty
significant environmental issue, not to mention the same thing.
When food ends up in a landfill, it turns into methane gas, and
so you are just contributing once more to some of the
challenges we have around climate change.
I appreciated your Agency extending the comment deadline so
more groups could provide feedback on the national food waste
draft strategy that you are doing with the USDA and FDA. Can
you tell us a little bit more about the timeline for finalizing
the strategy, and can you talk more about how EPA will further
support efforts to reduce food waste?
Mr. Regan. Well, we were excited to expand that timeline
because we received so many comments. That gave us more time to
process those comments, and in that timeframe we expanded, we
got new comments. That being said, time is of essence, and so
we are hoping to have the final strategy out later this summer.
That direction will be out, and it will be stamped by USDA,
FDA, and EPA.
We also intend to invest around $83 million of the first
round of bill funding under the Solid Waste Infrastructure for
Recycling Grants Program to support programs that are directly
focused on organic recycling, composting, and anaerobic
digestion. We have got that strategy coming out, and we have
that $83 million that is focused solely on this issue.
Ms. Pingree. That is great because I know a lot of
municipalities would like to move towards composting their
solid waste, take it out of the waste stream, reduce the cost
to those municipalities, but they often need assistance or
grants. As a country, we are way behind in our biodigester
capacity and certainly in what other countries are doing to
reduce food waste at all levels. Anyway, I appreciate the work
you are doing and I will continue to stay in touch, and I yield
back, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Regan. Thank you.
Mr. Simpson. Mr. Zinke.
Mr. Zinke. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. On your FTEs, do you
know what the force is in D.C. as far as your EPA?
Mr. Regan. I am sorry?
Mr. Zinke. How many personnel you have in D.C.?
Mr. Regan. About 16,000 of that total workforce in D.C.
Mr. Zinke. I looked at this----
Mr. Regan. Oh, I am sorry. Across the Agency, 16,000. You
are looking for just here in D.C.?
Mr. Zinke. In D.C.
Mr. Regan. Okay.
Mr. Zinke. Well, the reason why I ask is I looked at the
Department of Interior, Department of Ag, and in office, they
are about 21 percent. I am just curious what the occupancy rate
is in EPA. You know, Interior is eight storeys and a couple of
blocks, and Agriculture is about the same. If we are at 21
percent occupancy rate, there seems to be an opportunity to
look at building space in D.C. You know, I know the FBI wants a
new building, et cetera, et cetera, et cetera, but it is
interesting among the bigger agencies within D.C. how many
people are actually in the office as opposed to remote. You
know, I just ask that if you can get that number.
Mr. Regan. Absolutely we can get you that number.
Mr. Zinke. Recycling strategy, and I agree with the
gentlewoman from Maine that we need to look at recycling. It
disturbs me that China is producing 90 percent of the plastics
in our ocean. It disturbs me. It disturbs me we have toxins
that we never really thought about a lot of times, and
methodology of extracting minerals, we have changed over time.
I see a lot of regulation on the energy side, and while we may
agree to disagree on energy source and fossil fuels and those
types of things, I don't think we disagree on pollution, and we
can do it better. You look at the supply chain from the
beginning to the end, and let's take solar cells, for instance.
When solar cells are past their lifecycle, 90 percent of the
solar cells are being dumped into some landfill across this
country, and as you know, what is in a solar cell is not good.
Then we had the battery issue. You know, we are doing toxins
and the battery technology.
Is there an idea of when a regulatory push is going to be
to solar cells and batteries? You know, I don't disagree with
making things cleaner and better, but what I disagree with is
making sure the supply chain both on the production side is
competitive globally and the recycle side is well thought out
so we are not creating a problem.
Mr. Regan. Yes.
Mr. Zinke. Is there regulation coming on solar cell
recycling and toxins, because it seems to me that seems to be a
problem that we need to address in the short term.
Mr. Regan. Yes, we agree that we need to always stay ahead
of any potential pollution. I will say that from a policy
standpoint and looking at all of our authorities, we are
examining this issue. We are having some very constructive
conversations with the private sector because on a voluntary
basis, they are beginning to claw back these panels, these
batteries. They are comprised of so many critical minerals, it
is cheaper for them to get those minerals, extract those
minerals, and reduce that waste profile. I will say that
currently we have done some analysis because I share your
concerns. Less than 1 percent of municipal waste is comprised
of batteries and solar panels that have been used, but as we
see more in the system----
Mr. Zinke. That 1 percent happens to be highly toxic.
Mr. Regan. Yes.
Mr. Zinke. There is a difference between burying a 2-by-4
and a battery that will come back.
Mr. Regan. We are strongly looking at this to the point
that----
Mr. Zinke. Another question. I was asked about locomotives.
Even though Montana is far away from California, what happens
in California affects Montana, especially on locomotives. You
recently just closed the comment period on a request from the
State of California to begin enforcing their own emission
standards on locomotives. Locomotives don't generally stay
inside a Stat, so they transit. By the way, Montana is the same
size as from here to Chicago plus 45 miles, and Montana is a
pretty big State.
Mr. Regan. Yeah.
Mr. Zinke. Locomotives are a big deal to me. When you close
the period, just so you know, that between shippers and
agricultural groups and labor and construction, all are opposed
to this. My comment to you is will you commit to fully and
carefully reviewing each of these comments filed by the ag
groups or rail labor, construction, trade unions, and shippers
to make sure that any decision you make is rooted in legally-
sound analysis, both legally and within the constitution, is
mindful of the supply chain impacts, because if this goes in,
and I will show you the numbers. Twenty-eight thousand dollars
is what an average family is paying for inflation and the
higher energy costs. The energy cost makes manufacturing costs,
and it is out of control on housing. A lot of difficult issues,
you know, outside the D.C.
Mr. Regan. Sure.
Mr. Zinke. Then coupled with taking down Colstrip, that
adds another 1,000--I can show you our statistics on that--and
then locomotives on top of it. You know, it is real hard for
States that live outside the beltway to be competitive when
shipping costs more money, energy costs more money, and just
living out there costs more money. Will you commit before you
make a decision on that to fully review and make sure that we
have the right science and the impacts?
Mr. Regan. Yes, you have my word on that.
Mr. Zinke. Again, I thank you for your service, this not
being easy, but I get it. I appreciate all the work you do.
Mr. Regan. Thank you.
Mr. Simpson. Mr. Kilmer.
Mr. Kilmer. I am good. Thank you.
Mr. Simpson. Mr. Harder.
Mr. Harder. I am good.
Mr. Simpson. Let me ask a couple of concluding questions. I
guess we are going to get this done before we have to vote. I
told you this would be fun.
The EPA has obligated nearly all of the $27 billion from
the Greenhouse Gas Reduction Fund. Twenty billion of it went to
only eight recipients to run green banks. That is quite a lot
of money going out the door, especially to so few participants.
A less suspecting person than I might think that the reason
that this was done was to make sure that the money was
obligated so Congress couldn't resend it. We had to get it out
the door and get it obligated, and so we picked eight
recipients to receive $20 billion. Do you agree that there
needs to be appropriate oversight on how this money is spent,
and should we increase the funding for the IG to oversee how
this money is being spent in this Inflation Reduction Act?
Mr. Regan. I can assure you that I meet with my IG
frequently, and we have had a number of conversations about
oversight. Let me just say from an oversight perspective, $20
billion is a lot of money. The way the Inflation Reduction Act
was written, we were to create a competition and choose
individuals who we knew knew how to leverage capital and knew
what to do with resources. I hope the IG would agree with this
that it is much better to choose eight strong candidates that
you know can leverage those resources than have 30 different
organizations that you are trying to have oversight of. We
developed very strong metrics, very strong criteria. We had a
really robust competition. You know, eight candidates emerged
as the strongest, and I have confidence that they know how to
handle capital, they know how to invest capital, and they know
how to get that capital to the people that Congress intended
for them to receive those resources.
Mr. Simpson. Okay. Ms. Pingree.
Ms. Pingree. Just one quick question. This is quick. I was
glad to see there has been the establishment of the new Office
of Agriculture and Rural Affairs. Can you tell me a little more
about the office, and will you be engaging through that office
on the PFAS issues impacting farmers?
Mr. Regan. Absolutely. This is an office that I am
extremely proud of. The President committed to agriculture
having a seat at the table, and I want to follow through on
that, which is why I created this new office. You know, the
issues faced in agriculture are so complex and so wide, from
climate change to PFAS, to drought, to food, fiber, and fuel. I
am excited--Rod Snyder is leading that office--that we have a
very capable group of people who are going to help us not only
manage the Federal advisory committee for ranchers and farmers
and rural America, but to begin to think about how the Agency
can be more responsive to our agriculture community, whether it
is biosolids or whether we are looking at how we are managing
the Endangered Species Act and getting the new products on the
market. This is a proud point for me at EPA, and I think it is
the right kind of history we need to make.
Ms. Pingree. Great. Good work. Thank you.
Mr. Simpson. Mr. Zinke, do you have another one----
Mr. Zinke. Just a follow-up on your question. Yeah, $20
billion is a lot of money, and I am curious if you would share
in writing the metrics you used. I just got to ask, was ESG
protocol and a score used in determining----
Mr. Regan. I will respond to you specifically in writing
the criteria for getting those resources.
Mr. Regan. I don't want to get ahead of myself and go down
that specific list, but we put forward a very transparent
process that laid those criteria out.
Mr. Zinke. Yeah. Thank you for your indulgence.
Mr. Regan. Yeah.
Mr. Zinke. I am just curious of the metrics used.
Mr. Regan. Yes, and 14 percent of our staff are working
remotely now. I want to get you that answer as well.
Mr. Zinke. Fourteen percent working remotely, so you have
70, 80 percent in office. That is good, so you are much, much
higher than your group of other agencies. Congratulations.
Mr. Simpson. Well, thank you, and just a little bit of a
follow-up on what Ms. Pingree was talking about. Last fall, EPA
submitted a reorganization plan for reprogramming. I thought it
went beyond what a reprogramming plan should be, and
consequently, I kind of rejected it. Sorry. I said you ought to
put it in the budget. I know that as we put together this
budget, we are going to be very interested in what the purpose
of this reorganization is, what we will hope to accomplish by
it, and why we are doing it, why we created the Office of
Agriculture, whatever it is. I know there is actually some
kickback to that because Agriculture doesn't directly want to
be associated with the EPA, if you know what I mean, so----
Mr. Regan. Times are changing a little bit.
Mr. Simpson. Yeah. I am starting to hear some questions
from other members about did you know they were doing this, so
you are probably going to get some questions about that. You
need to explain to Congress and to the authorizing committees
why the reorganization, what we hope to accomplish by it, and
that kind of stuff.
I am also worried about the employee cliff that we are
going to come up on when these short-term funds used to hire
people run out. Then Congress is going to be sitting here
looking, you got to lay off how many people--2,000 or whatever,
you know. I hope you are taking that into mind, and I know you
are. Beyond that, I hope to see out in Idaho at the Water Test
Bed.
Mr. Regan. Awesome. Thank you, sir.
Mr. Simpson. It sounds good. Thanks for being here today.
If there are no other questions, the committee is
adjourned.
Mr. Regan. Thank you, everyone.
[Questions and answers submitted for the record follow:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Wednesday, May 1, 2024.

FISCAL YEAR 2025 REQUEST FOR THE INDIAN HEALTH SERVICE

WITNESSES

HON. ROSELYN TSO, DIRECTOR, INDIAN HEALTH SERVICE
JILLIAN CURTIS, DIRECTOR OF THE OFFICE OF FINANCE AND ACCOUNTING,
INDIAN HEALTH SERVICE
Mr. Simpson. Good morning, everyone. I would like to extend
a warm welcome to the Indian Health Service director, Roselyn
Tso. Thank you for your leadership at IHS and for being with us
today to discuss the administration's fiscal year 2025 Budget
Request. We were all really looking forward to Congressman Tom
Cole joining us today in his new role as the full committee
chair. However, the devastating tornados across Oklahoma have
required that he stay back in his district, and without
objection I ask that his prepared remarks be included in the
record.
[The information follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Simpson. Chairman Cole is the first Native American to
ever chair the Appropriations Committee, and he has made it his
legacy in Congress to advocate for Indian Country and ensure
that Tribes receive the resources they need to take care of
their communities.
Under both Republican and Democratic leadership, this
committee has continued to prioritize and support healthcare
services for American Indians and Alaska Natives, and as you
look across here, we have Chairwoman Pingree and we have former
chairwoman of this committee, Betty McCollum. Ken Calvert was
chairman here. All of us have put a priority on Indian Health
Services and the needs and trying to keep our treaty
responsibilities that we have. I have no doubt that Chairman
Cole will continue to advance this critical bipartisan effort
as he leads this committee. There is no one better for that
job, and I as well as Ranking Member Pingree stand by ready to
help.
In 2023, Congress provided advanced appropriations for the
Indian Health Service for the first time, and that was because
of the tireless work of Chairwoman Pingree along with the rest
of the committee. She was the leader in making sure that we got
that done, and I thank you for that. Advanced appropriations
provide the Indian Health service with the certainty needed to
properly serve communities, provide stability for healthcare
providers, and improve long-term planning for services, even
during continuing resolutions and government shutdowns. I know
this funding does not begin to meet the full need, but it is a
step in the right direction, and it is a signal of our
understanding and commitment to upholding our trust and treaty
responsibilities.
For fiscal year 2025, the President's budget requests $7.96
billion in discretionary funding for IHS, a 14-percent increase
over the fiscal year 2024 level. Notably, the request does not
include advanced appropriations but instead requests that all
funding for IHS be moved to mandatory starting in fiscal year
2026. I will continue to advocate to provide certainty to
healthcare professionals and programs in Indian Country, but I
do have some technical questions about shifting IHS programs to
mandatory, so in the meantime, I look forward to hearing how
advanced appropriations can continue to support planning and
operations of IHS programs.
Director Tso, your leadership at IHS is vital to not only
upholding our trust and treaty agreements, but ensuring
adequate and accessible healthcare to all Tribal members. Thank
you again for joining us this morning. I look forward to our
discussion. Now I would like to yield to Ranking Member Pingree
for her opening statement.
Ms. Pingree. Thank you very much, Mr. Chair, and good
morning, Director. Thank you for being with us today to discuss
the fiscal year 2025 budget request for the Indian Health
Service. The Indian Health Service provides healthcare to
approximately 2.8 million American Indians and Alaska Natives
to a network of over 600 hospitals, clinics, and health
stations on or near Indian reservations. With 70 percent of
Alaska Natives currently living in urban areas, the IHS funds
41 healthcare organizations in urban areas.
IHS relies on annual discretionary appropriations for its
funding, and sadly this has not kept pace with need. The
statistics on health disparities in Indian Country are
sobering. This subcommittee has been dedicated to finding
solutions, both through investments in the IHS and through
improvements in how funding is delivered, namely through the
enactment of advanced appropriations. It is critical we
continue our efforts.
Your budget requests discretionary funding in fiscal year
2025 and proposes a shift to mandatory funding beginning in
fiscal year 2026. Though I note that mandatory funding is the
jurisdiction of the authorizers, I am interested to understand
how this would improve the health and well-being of American
Indians and Alaska Natives. I look forward to discussing your
request and know under the leadership of Chairman Simpson, this
subcommittee will continue to work in a bipartisan fashion to
honor the United States' treaty responsibilities to Tribal
nations.
Director Tso, thank you again for appearing before us this
morning. I appreciate your testimony and answers to our
questions. I yield back.
Mr. Simpson. Director Tso.
Ms. Tso. Good morning, Chairman Simpson, and Ranking Member
Pingree, and members of the committee. Thank you for the
opportunity to testify on the President's fiscal year 2025
budget request for the Indian Health Service. Before I turn to
the budget, I first want to acknowledge and thank each of you
[Audio malfunction] advanced appropriations. IHS made 100
percent of payments to eligible Tribes through compacts and
contracts in the first 2 weeks of the fiscal year.
I also appreciate the opportunity to share with you the
steps I have taken as the IHS director to improve transparency,
accountability, and oversight of the Agency. As we seek
additional funding and new funding authorities, it is crucial
that the Indian Health Service improve its internal operations
to ensure safe, quality healthcare and protect and support its
relationships with Tribes and urban Indian organizations. To
ensure that I fully understand the challenges and
accomplishments throughout Indian Country, I value the
opportunity to visit with Tribal leaders across Indian Country
to gain their input and perspective.
To move the Indian Health Service to a high-performing
organization, I implemented the first Agency work plan in
January of 2023 that achieves three major accomplishments
including total system safety strategies, the IHS patient
safety policy, and improving Purchase and Referred Care
Program, such as establishing new medical priorities,
establishing a financial monitoring system and staff training,
and to obligate PRC funding in a timely manner. Our 2024 Agency
work plan outlines steps that IHS has taken to address
priorities as well as mitigate risks. The Agency work plan
addresses a wide range of issues, including patient safety,
human capital, operations, finance, and compliance. This work
builds on our effort to meet the GAO's criteria for removal
from its High Risk List.
With your support, the IHS budget has grown 69 percent in
the last decade. We know this type of growth is challenging to
accomplish in a constrained discretionary funding environment.
Over the years, the work with our Tribes and urban partners
underscore our shared goal to improve health outcomes for all
American Indians and Alaska Natives. With this shared goal in
mind, the administration acknowledges the 2025 budget request
for Indian Health Service.
We know that despite our shared efforts, IHS is still
underfunded. This underfunding of the Indian healthcare system
directly contributes to the stark health disparities in our
Tribal communities. American Indians and Alaska Natives born
today have an average life expectancy that is 10.9 years fewer
than U.S. all races population. Longstanding health disparities
were complicated by the pandemic, with American Indians and
Alaska Natives experiencing disproportionate rates of COVID-19
infections, hospitalizations, and deaths. Addressing these
inequities is a moral imperative for our Nation, and it will
require bold actions from all of us to ensure we are upholding
our commitments to Indian Country. That is why the budget
proposes to build on the enactment of advanced appropriations
by funding the IHS as discretionary in fiscal year 2025.
Beginning in fiscal year 2026, the budget will move to all
funding to IHS mandatory. The administration continues to stand
behind mandatory funding as the most appropriate long-term
funding solution for IHS. We know it is a significant change
that will take time and collaborations with Congress and Tribes
to accomplish. We believe that a change of this magnitude is
overdue, and we must deliver for Indian Country. As we work
towards securing stable, predictable, and adequate funding to
meet the needs of Indian Country, we are committed to working
closely with our stakeholders.
Again, thank you for the opportunity to speak with you
today, and I am happy to answer any questions the committee may
have.
[The statement of Ms. Tso follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Simpson. Thank you, Director. Let me ask a couple
questions first. As I said, Chairman Cole was looking forward
to being here today and wanted to ask about changes to contract
support costs, and he asked me to ask a couple of questions. I
am going to ask those because he is my chairman. How does the
IHS plan to go about developing an accurate estimate for the
Tribal contract support costs that are associated with Tribal
third-party funded operations serving Native American patients
and other IHS beneficiaries? Will there be Tribal consultation
involved?
Ms. Tso. Thank you for that question. Absolutely we have to
integrate Tribal consultation into any work that we do at the
Indian Health Service, particularly of this magnitude for CSC
on third party. With regards to that, IHS already has
established methodologies for calculating CSC today. We are
building on that to try to make sure that we incorporate what
our strategies will be, depending on the decision that is
forthcoming from the Supreme Court. We are prepared to have
those conversations as soon as possible with Tribes as we move
forward.
Mr. Simpson. Okay. We have both consistently heard from
Tribes about critical problems resulting from staffing issues
across the Indian Health Services, especially in the Purchased
and Referred Care Program. Director, what is IHS doing to
address staffing shortages and the subsequent problems, delays,
and financial impacts resulting from these shortages and
barriers to hiring and retaining employees as I just
identified, and what is being done to address that?
Ms. Tso. Thank you, again, for that question. If there is
one thing that keeps me up at night, it is our workforce, how
fragile it is today. That is the same thing across the Nation
in our healthcare system that we are all being stretched to the
limits with regard to staffing. At the Indian Health Service, I
have taken great efforts to try to address this issue. Some of
the examples that we are doing right now, as I see the
challenges growing every day, I was out in an Indian Country
last week and heard from one healthcare facility where we have
17 vacancies for pharmacists, and we know the value of our
pharmacists and the work that they do in any healthcare
facility. In IHS, pharmacists do a lot more than go beyond just
dispensing medication. They actually do patient care. In this
particular space, having those kinds of vacancies creates these
risks that we are talking about, and we have to get in front of
that.
I have been working very closely with the Commissioned
Corps, the Public Health Service at HHS, to make sure that we
maximize all of these resources that could come to any country
as we move forward and taking strategies about how do we keep
the staff that we have at the Indian Health Service. In this
particular space, we are making some strides here with
Commissioned Corps and making sure that, again, we have what we
need.
We are also taking a whole approach at Indian Health
Service to streamline HR. We have 12 regions within IHS, and so
o before, every region was sort of doing their own thing. We
are not big enough to be able to continue that kind of an
operation. We have to bring our resources together, and
bringing resources together to be able to address the system
wide issue that we have is critical right now. We are in that
space right now to try to figure out and what we are learning.
Again, as you can imagine that 12 different organizations
trying to do the same thing, we have inequities and we have
disparities and we have inconsistencies. It is hard to
understand if you are even building towards success, so looking
at that and helping us to try to figure out how do we maximize
resources. In that one example in there is we are taking the
workload and lining it up with the workforce instead of trying
to figure out who is doing what and so forth.
Building this alignment, and we did this, I used the same
strategy for PRC, the same strategy for the bill work that we
need to do. In addition to everything that we are doing, as I
shared yesterday, all of the work that we are doing for the
infrastructure bill $3.5 billion that Indian Health Service
received about 3 years ago. I need 500 engineers today to
complete that work. Everybody needs engineers, too, because a
lot of other people got infrastructure dollars. How do we do
that? I have written a letter to every engineering school
across the Nation to let them know, number one, about Indian
Health Service; number two, here are the ways that we can get
you into the Indian healthcare system as we move forward to do
the work that we need to do. We have also looked at additional
strategies there. I am also working very closely with Tribal
schools and Tribal colleges to let them know, again, we are a
workforce that needs you. How do we do that?
Taking these different strategies and running with them as
fast as we can to make sure that, again, we have to tell the
story about IHS, we have to also let people know that we are
simplifying and streamlining our process so it is not so
complicated to come into a Federal system. Additionally, we
have looked at some administrative changes as well as we have
requested A-19s that help us streamline. I will give you a
couple of examples in that space that with regards to loan
repayment, for example, or scholarships.
If you look at within just HHS, you have IHS that has a
loan repayment program, and then you have HRSA that has a loan
repayment program. HRSA's money is not taxed. IHS' money is
taxed. If I am an applicant, I am probably going to go look at
HRSA first because I am not going to be taxed. These kinds of
discrepancies and these kinds of inequities continue to
minimize our efforts and our work at Indian Health Service.
Then lastly, there are authorities. Working very closely
with my partners at the Veterans Administration, they have
maximum Title 38 and maximum Title 5 with respect to hiring and
retention of their staff, and those are the kinds of
authorities that IHS needs as well. We need to make sure that
we have the ability to compete with the VA, and right now we
kind of just have our staff going from IHS to the VA, from the
VA to IHS, depending on that, and that is not addressing the
inequities for the people out in any country.
There are a number of things that we are looking at, and
there are a number of things that we also know that need to be
adjusted on [Audio malfunction.]
Mr. Simpson. Yeah, I don't know what it is, but I do have
one final question from Chairman Cole. It is about something
that both he and I are very interested in, the development of a
behavior health pilot program. We all recognize that there is a
growing need to increase support for behavior health programs
in Indian Health Services. Each year, Tribes are realizing a
greater need to provide services for prevention, treatment, and
recovery from mental health and substance abuse disorders. What
can the Agency do to help address this growing need and what
additional resources are needed in fiscal year 2025 to ensure
Tribal members can receive the quality care and behavior health
services they need?
Ms. Tso. Yes, yes, absolutely. At the Indian Health
Service, this is definitely an area that probably on every
single day we are looking at strategies about mental health,
behavior health, but we are looking more beyond that. We look
at all the social determinants of health that our people deal
with, and when I travel out to Indian Country, when I meet with
Tribal leaders, food security is always at the top of the list.
Transportation, being able to get from point A to point B, is a
problem. Looking at all of this holistically to try to find out
how do we address these issues because, particularly with
patients that need mental health, behavior health services, if
there are other factors that are impacting their ability to get
the care that they need and moreover to seek the services, our
window of opportunity is so small when these patients are ready
to get care, so looking at all of the social determinants of
health is absolutely critical.
Then in this particular space is facility infrastructure
that I am hearing from Tribes all the time that, yes, Indian
Health Service focuses on hospitals and clinics. Those
treatment facilities, those detox facilities are becoming so
much more important to try to address, to get people into a
facility and a facility close to their home that they can get
the services that they need, so in this particular space, we
know that there are additional resources that need to be had.
In addition to that, we also know approximately 60 percent of
the Indian Health Service has been contracted or compacted by
Tribes, which means that they have taken the resources from IHS
and they operate their own healthcare system. In that space, it
makes it even more of a need there is how do we now look at the
resources that we have at the Indian Health Service, and really
the 40 percent that we have left and then the 60 percent that
additional resources need to be had to address facility
infrastructure.
We track now, on a regular basis, the issues that we have
with opioid in our IHS healthcare facilities, and we have seen
a huge reduction in that by looking at different strategies of
how we can address this. On a regular basis, we also deploy
services and support and resources when we have suicide
clusters that we hear from time to time. Our system is now
better able to address some of these things that are happening
in real time that allows us to, even in spite of the limited
resources of staff that we have, that we now have teams
available that can go out to any Tribal or our IHS healthcare
facility to help with these crises that are happening. There is
definitely the facility side is huge on IHS.
We are looking at the joint venture model that has been
extremely successful in Indian Country. Joint venture, again,
is where the Tribe builds the facility and then the government
staffs and equips that facility and what can we do in this
particular area because we can't just focus on the healthcare
side without looking, again, at the behavior health and mental
health needs. Looking at facilities and how can we spread that
to look at those opportunities to look at facility
infrastructure. There is a huge need in this area.
I will also say the vacancy rates that I have at any health
service today, which is the 40 percent that remains, is at 40
percent. I have a 40-percent vacancy rate for mental health and
behavior health. I cannot address healthcare needs in Indian
Country [Audio malfunction] of challenges that we have with the
workforce. Really requires us to be very creative, looking at
telehealth, telemedicine, and looking at what we are learning
more and more about is the community health aid program, which
is a program that was born in Alaska where we train individuals
that are part of the community, that can then help us
strategize and be able to address the needs in each local
community.
Mr. Simpson. Thank you for the answers. Ms. Pingree.
Ms. Pingree. Let me take off from this issue about your
vacancies, and thank you for explaining to us the sort of
comprehensive way you are going about this. One thing I wanted
to mention in this vein is a graduate medical education just as
a tool to use to get more people engaged in the services. I
know from other experiences that when people are able to do a
residency, either related to a Tribe or in the same community,
you are more likely to keep them we know because in Maine we
have a lot of issues having enough rural physicians, and so
enhancing our residency program has been important. I just want
to talk to you a little bit about that.
What is the Indian Health Service doing to support the
development of residency programs and rotations for Federal,
Tribal, and urban sites? Specifically, how are you working with
both HRSA and Veterans Affairs on this, and what are some of
the challenges that you are dealing with in trying to set up
residency programs? I know it is not a simple thing, maybe
takes a long time, but just let's talk about how we could sort
of move forward in that direction.
Ms. Tso. Thank you for that question. This is something
also that we have leaned into over the past few months. I think
it was shortly after January, I was out in Washington State
meeting with a Puyallup Tribe, and they have a very nice
residency program there. One of the things that I learned from
that was that we weren't quite tied together like we should be
or could be, so how do we make sure that, again, that Indian
Health Service is embracing all of these opportunities for our
students to go for residency. We also know that a person that
goes through residency generally stays within 100 miles of
that, so getting them into these residency programs is very
important.
Our follow-up in that example was how do we make sure that
we are not only supporting the residency program that is
operated by the Tribe, but, moreover, how do we make sure that
we are integrated into their system so we can also look at the
providers that are coming out of that facility. The same thing
in Shiprock, New Mexico. We have a residency program there that
we, you know, again, doing everything that we can, that is at
one of our IHS facilities. We have a lot of visibility on that,
but still, there are many opportunities.
I have been able to visit the Cherokee Nation Hospital. Our
medical school that is on Tribal land. Again, what do we need
to do with Cherokee Nation to make sure that we are partnering
with them to get students in there, but also be able to do
that. I also meet with the American Indian coalition of medical
students, and they have said the same thing. Going back to the
A-19s, one of the things that I am hearing very loud and strong
from our medical students is they want different options. Like,
for example, on the loan repayment, they don't want to have
full time, can we do part time, and so that is one of the
changes that we are trying to get into.
I think really taking a step back and looking at all of
these flexibilities, all of these opportunities that we need to
be trying to adjust where we have more options for Tribals that
are coming on school to be able to come with us. Just tied to
that also is what we are calling any 2,080 at any health
services, that in our emergency room departments, of course, a
Federal employee works 2,080 hours a year. We are negotiating
with our providers, how they can work any 2,080, especially in
emergency room, it is very, very helpful, they can do it all
and whatever works for them in those schedule.
What I have seen as a result of COVID is our providers, not
just doctors, but their priorities have changed, probably all
of our priorities have changed, as a result of COVID. What do
we need to do so our system can adjust to that so we can build
in these flexibilities, get our needs met, the providers' needs
met, and if they want to do other things in their personal
lives, and so forth. Again, trying to look at all of those
things to be able to make sure that we are doing everything
that we can. Very recently, I also visited Morehouse Medical
School, and I was able to have a conversation with them. I am
leaning into every opportunity that I can find and I can get to
talk about new health service opportunities out in Indian
Country because there is still a lot of work that we need to do
in that space to be able to make people aware that we offer
them that there are so many opportunities in IHS.
Ms. Pingree. Great. Well, we are happy to support you in
that [Audio malfunction] for working and leaning into that.
Mr. Simpson. [Audio malfunction], let's take a 10-minute
recess.
[Recess.]
Mr. Simpson. The committee will come back the order. Ms.
Pingree, you have the floor.
Ms. Pingree. Okay. Thank you very much. I want to talk a
little bit about the Produce Prescription Pilot Program. We
know that access to healthy food can impact overall health,
especially looking at development and maintenance of chronic
disease like diabetes. About 1 in 4 Native American people
experience food insecurity compared with one in nine Americans
overall. I helped secure funding for the Produce Prescription
Pilot Program at the Indian Health Service, and I am so pleased
that IHS has implemented the program with awards to five Tribal
communities to increase access to fruits, vegetables, and
traditional foods in American Indian and Alaska Native
communities at risk for food insecurity.
Can you talk a little bit about how the program will
empower and support Tribal communities to build food systems
that support Tribal sovereignty and well-being, and what is the
current plan for expanding the program, and what resources
would be helpful to you? How will the Indian Health Service
select additional native communities to participate?
Ms. Tso. Thank you very much for that, and thank you for
securing those resources for us. It is huge in Indian Country,
as I already talked about, the food insecurities across Indian
Country. What I have seen, though, again, our partnership with
USDA and bringing all resources together to try to figure out
how can we support more homegrown types of foods in our Tribal
communities and as, of course, many of the Tribes understanding
that food is medicine, and understanding that going back to our
traditional foods is better and more healthy for us as we move
forward. Using the $6 million that we receive and certainly the
awards that we have made, we are really looking at the outcomes
of those. Those five grants is great, but five grants for more
than 500 Tribes, it is hard to quantify what that is, but I
think as we start to move forward and really pull all of the
resources together, and using the examples that are already out
there in Indian Country.
Last year at the Tribal Nations meeting, I met with a young
lady from the Omaha Tribe and just a young lady that was saying
she had worked with her Tribe to build out, to do some
agriculture and farming of their foods in their Tribal
community. That is what we need to build on, and how do we
continue to do that? What we want to do is use the successes
out of the five grants that we have to be able to tell more.
As I shared, I was just at a food distribution center last
week in Arizona. What I am hearing in that particular space,
what I heard in that space was that our Tribal people are
choosing to get food boxes versus using their food stamps
because, again, the food boxes have more value for them than
food stamps. I was blown away by that because I saw the size of
the food box, and that is supposed to last them a month, and so
we have some serious issues here with regards to this. Then on
top of that, many of those things in the food box, while they
were great, were processed foods. How do we make that
adjustment here? How do we work with Tribes to use what they
are building, what they are farming, what they are doing in
their own Tribal communities, whether it is fish, whether it is
beef, or any other opportunities that we have?
In that particular example, we walked away saying we are
going to put them in touch with one of our nutritionists so at
least we can help a family maybe understand how you could use
this box of food to make it as healthy as we possibly can,
understanding there are still challenges and limitations. There
is a lot of work that needs to be done in this area, but there
are also many great examples across Indian Country that I would
like to see us capitalize on.
One last thing I would say, I visited a Tribe in Oklahoma
where they have their own grocery store. They get to have a
say-so in what they put in those grocery stores, and then they
take some of those same ingredients and then build their
recipes and tying it with our diabetes programs, and how do we
build that out for everyone to make it simple. Also with the
larger families, how do we make sure that you use what you have
to make as much as you can for your family?
Ms. Pingree. Great. Well, thank you very much for that, and
I will follow up with you. I also sit on the Agriculture
Committee and Ag Approps, and I am a little confused about the
whole SNAP benefits or food box choices, so I want to dig in a
little bit about that. Anything we can do in cooperation with
the USDA just to make sure that all the aid that is coming in
to deal with food deserts, lack of available healthy food. I
mean, it is, as you said, this is nice that we are doing some
pilot projects here, and hopefully we will get some good
information that helps to inform us going into the future. With
the challenges that people are facing based on health-related
disease, we could do a lot more, so we will work on that. Thank
you very much for the work you are doing on it, and I will
yield back.
Chairman Simpson. Mr. Zinke.
Mr. Zinke. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I want to say thank
you. You asked me what you could do to repair relationships
with the great Blackfeet Nation. Thank you for coming out, and
I think the relationship began to repair itself, and thank you
for everything. I don't want to rehash what happened to
Blackfeet Nation and IHS. I think we all agree when we look at
what happened, it was atrocious. Moving forward, a bipartisan
way, this committee and this body funded the $20 million
necessary for a youth center in Browning. That is funding. It
is underway. What we talked about is a commitment on the IHS
side to make sure that facility has a nurse practitioner there
and that position is prioritized. I am asking you for your
commitment, make sure, You Honor, if you would, your
commitment.
I think as we all recognize on Indian Nations, we have
always not kept our promises, but in this case, your promise
and my promise and this body's promise and this House's
promise, I think has been met. If I can have your assurance
that that position will be prioritized, and we will do our part
on this side as well.
Ms. Tso. Thank you, Representative, and thank you again for
taking those steps to help me work with the Blackfeet Tribal
Nation. Absolutely I think we have really good examples of what
we are doing out in Indian Country to collaborate more with
Tribes, and we have got to be listening to the Tribes on
meeting their needs versus what we think maybe their needs are,
and so moving to those types of strategies and being able to
maximize the resources that we have. Having a nurse
practitioner in a youth facility is the best thing that we can
do because most times those kids are probably not coming to the
healthcare facility anyway, so meeting them in their spaces are
absolutely the place that we should be. Yes, thank you.
Mr. Zinke. I think it is particularly helpful for young
women that have difficult choices because sometimes the school
is not the right venue to seek help or the IHS facility, and
the Tribe agrees and thank you for that commitment.
Next is the fentanyl. I don't think the Montana Tribes are
any different than many. We have a fentanyl crisis across, and
it seems to be hitting the Tribes at a disproportional rate.
When I was Secretary, we formed a task force to do drug
interdiction in coordination with the Tribe always, but it
consisted of the FBI, consisted of law enforcement under
Interior, which is significant, but those operations,
undisputed, were helpful. On IHS, how much are you seeing of
fentanyl, and what proportion do you think, a guess, fentanyl-
related issues are costing IHS? It is a big question, but how
big of a problem is it, and can you put a monetary cost on what
it is costing IHS?
Ms. Tso. I don't have, and I will circle back with you on
the actual cost of that.
Ms. Tso. I do know that whether it is a dollar value or a
family impact value, it is high in terms of the impacts to our
Tribal communities that are being impacted by this. I will say,
though, that we are doing more collaboration with the
Department of Interior with regards to law enforcement, what is
our role, what is their role in this type of space, what can we
do in Tribal communities that help us leverage. One of the
requests and conversations that we are having right now, for
example, is in their detention centers or in Tribal jails, what
is the health role in that. Over the years, it has always been
the BIA role versus the IHS role kinds of things, so we need to
come together on that to make sure that we are addressing and
do, again, better coordination for that patient or that
individual while either they are incarcerated or in the care
that they are in right now.
In the Gallup, New Mexico area, again, there is a lot of
work going on in that area, which I think is a great model,
where we are looking at using data to help us drive the use of
not just fentanyl, but alcohol and other drugs that are in that
community area. Using a State, a Federal, city, and county
approach to it, and where they are building a system, again,
that allows us to deal with the issues versus just incarcerate
people because they are doing this and that. How do we get to
the issues of the individuals that need the care that they had?
Again, that is comprehensive, but we need to be looking at
that.
I was also out at the Crow Nation about 2 months ago
meeting with them with the Attorney General of the United
States, and we talked about that. Again, that is dipping into
the missing and murdered indigenous people, but the concept is
the same. How do we build systems, and not just health and not
just the justice part, and how do we bring it together to make
sure that everyone is informed of these issues that are
happening across the country, and we do need the data that
helps us build that. We do need to make sure that our teams at
the local level understand and have the information they need
to act when we need to act.
Mr. Zinke. I look forward to working with you to make sure
that the multiple agencies talk to each other, that we don't
get so stove-piped that we can't get out of our way. Thank you,
and, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Simpson. Ms. McCollum.
Ms. McCollum. Thank you, Mr. Chair. I was thinking as you
were going through the numbers, and as we were all----
I guess maybe it is me. It started again.
--when you were going through the numbers and what this
committee has tried to do, and I take it a step further and say
in a nonpartisan basis when it comes to Indian Country, there
are two things that really impact what we can do to keep those
Tribal obligations that we have, and also some of the
obligations that we have to our national parks, our water, our
public lands and that.
There are two things that PILT payments coming out of this
committee, which is the payment in lieu of taxes, never used to
come out of this committee. It was dropped in before I served
on this committee, before I got elected to Congress. The
decision was that that wasn't a mandatory payment that needed
to go to the counties and those local units of government
anymore. Somehow it was the Department of Interior's, this
bill's obligation to do it. Medicaid, Medicare, other health
things in this country are all mandatory, but for some reason,
Indian Health is not. There is resistance to doing that, and I
was so glad that Ms. Pingree, while she was chair, was able to
do the advanced appropriations. That saved lives. We were close
to another government shutdown. That saves lives.
I think we still need to have conversations with our
leadership, with the administration. These are big picture
things that I think people need to come to the table and really
lay it out why this committee and why these two things that are
mandatory are thrown in here. It keeps us from doing the job
that we want to do, not only for Indian Country, but for people
when it comes to public lands and water. One other thing. The
loan payment thing that you were talking about that is
different, could you provide the chairman with that? We are all
lobbyists here on this side talking, and it is probably
something that we might be able to easily fix. It is just an
oversight, so thank you for bringing it to our attention.
When you were talking about how to do the workforce part of
this, one of the things that I heard you say is going to
Morehouse, one of the African-American higher education
institutions, an HBCU, which we fund some money into that, too.
When you are doing this, what has been the selling point when
you talk to doctors or colleges or universities? Then what
about the graduate medical training programs as people come out
of the Department of Defense hospitals? Some of them are
wearing uniforms, and they will have an enlistment. Some of
them won't. As well as the VA, we have fewer and fewer and
fewer teaching hospitals. Tell me a little more about working
with teaching hospitals and what should we be doing in that
regards.
Ms. Tso. The one thing that IHS must do a better job is
talk about IHS. I think that as I travel across the country,
there are people that have never even heard about Indian Health
Service, so what do we need to do to get out there to really
market Indian Health Service? Number one, we need to do that
because there are many opportunities, like we said, over 600
facilities across the country that the Indian healthcare system
operates. Moreover, we are now the 17th largest healthcare
system across the country, the Indian Healthcare System, IHS
Tribal and urban programs, so we are competitive. We should be
competitive across, but the collaboration that we are doing
with the Veterans Administration is critical. I have worked,
again, extensively with them that they have had some really
good promising changes that they made on the recruitment side.
What are they doing? When we dig into it a little more,
again, these opportunities that they have with Title 5 and
Title 38 are some of what they can do. They have a lot more
flexibility to be able to get in front of things versus the
Indian Health Service and where we are located right now.
Streamlining those application processes is so important right
now. It cannot take months and months for us to clear people to
get through our healthcare system. Some of that is our problem,
but some of it is just the system that we are trying to work
into, so that is another thing.
Then the last thing I would say is that within HHS, we are
the only healthcare system within HHS, and systems were not
built for healthcare systems at HHS, necessarily. We are
constantly trying to come up with creative and innovative ways
to do our jobs, but we have to build a system to try to track
things that we are trying to do. That makes it immediately
inefficient, but the collaboration that we can do more, whether
it is with Morehouse, whether it is with the Veterans
Administration, or even our Tribal partners that now some of
them are ahead of us, like Cherokee Nation, for example.
Having a medical school on Tribal lands, that is where we
need to send our people to. Navajo Nation, over the past years,
have negotiated with the University of Arizona that says we
want so many slots for our native students to be first in line
for medical school. Those types of things we need to lean into
more and really make sure that we are part of those
conversations as well to foster students that want to go into
those.
Ms. McCollum. I would love to talk to you more about the
University of Minnesota because they are doing a reconciliation
right now for some of the land and working through the State,
even though it is a land grant institution. We have a large
medical school there, too, along with 11 Tribal Nations, 11
Tribal Nations in Wisconsin, so there is lots to draw from.
The last point I just want to touch on, and when we rolled
out the Affordable Care Act, one of the things that was in it
was the First Foods. I was part of the Native American Diabetic
emphasis we were doing for healthy eating, healthy outcomes,
know your numbers, all of that. I visited a couple of Tribal
Nations and healthcare facilities, and it was like rice, fish,
buffalo, those types of things. I am interested in what I can
do to work with you, Ms. Pingree, on figuring out how to get
this First Foods, and it was hugely popular. They had
nutritionists out there. They did it multigenerational with
grandmothers and grandfathers with their grandchildren cooking
together, coming up with the old recipes, and even going out
and hunting and gathering for things. When those dollars are
gone, sometimes that program goes away, and I don't know if you
have the numbers to find out how successful that was, and maybe
that is something we could reinstitute.
Last thing I will just close with is, when you think about
the number of Native Americans proportionally that serve in our
military, for our VA, for our DOD to be reaching out in ways
that we can to honor back their service through healthcare is
something that--Mr. Ellzey and I both serve on the Defense
Committee--would be happy to do. We are trying to get more
First Foods occasionally introduced into our mess halls, too,
because of the number of Native Americans that proportionally,
far and away, outnumber any other group that serves this
Nation, and they do so even though we haven't kept our
promises. I yield back.
Mr. Simpson. Mr. Ellzey.
Mr. Ellzey. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you all for
being here today.
I live in the Dallas-Fort Worth area, and there are 20,000
Tribal members in the urban area of DFW. Those in my district
and the surrounding Dallas-Fort Worth area are served by the
Urban InterTribal Center of Texas, which is part of the Urban
Indian Health Institute. Can you explain how the research and
data that is collected through those programs and the Tribal
epidemiology centers helps to better serve American Indian and
Alaskan Natives?
Ms. Tso. Thank you. I was just out there in Dallas when
they were reopening their healthcare facility out there, so
that was great to be able to see what they do. It is pretty
impressive when I travel and visit our urban programs, all of
them. The resources that IHS gives them is so little, but they
make it work somehow, and they do some amazing things out there
in our urban communities.
With regards to the data and the studies that they are
doing, this is something that we also are leaning in to try to
do a better job at streamlining how we maximize the data that
is gathered, not just at our urban facilities, but across
Indian Country, looking at making sure that we are doing the
research that we need to be able to tell our story better, and
where we are making strides and where we still need to do more.
On the data side, there are challenges, though, that we are
working through. HHS last year did a consultation with regards
to data and research and trying to figure out how we make sure
we maximize those resources. I know in talking with our urban
programs, this is something that they need. They rely on,
especially in the Dallas area, that number, the 20,000, that is
the same number that I am hearing about, that they need more
facilities. They need more services to be able to meet the
needs of those people and the people in those areas, but there
are more that we can do in the research area and also the data
sharing area as well.
Mr. Ellzey. Okay. I always am fascinated by the chairman
who has been doing this for a long time, and I am new to this
subcommittee and have no Tribes in my district, so I appreciate
the ability to learn about Tribal issues. The food insecurity
issue, which I think has become pretty vogue over the last 5
years, which I am sure is, it seems like a somewhat amorphous
term. My question is kind of threefold. Is there malnutrition
in some of the Tribal lands that we see? Are there Tribes or
areas that have a higher susceptibility to diabetes? Are those
in correlation with food deserts and a lack of grocery stores
because a year ago, we talked about how the difficulty in the
legal and insurance realm doesn't allow somebody to put a
grocery store that has got fresh fruits and vegetables in a res
and they have to travel. That is a wide-ranging question. If
you can answer any of it, it would help me.
Ms. Tso. Yeah. I will give you a couple of examples. I have
visited Alaska several times. I think one of the things I
remember about one of my visits to Alaska was the fact that a
Tribal community in a small village that always relied on
salmon and for fish didn't have those anymore. They don't have
those abundance of fish anymore, and so what do you do, and
especially in, again, the very remote locations of Alaska,
where, again, if they can't get what they would normally get
there, like the fish, then it has to be flown in. That is the
only way that it can come in, and then you are hoping and
praying that the flight will be on schedule. You are hoping and
praying that there are no delays because if there are delays,
anything that you are buying fresh from the city is not going
to be fresh when you get it to the Tribal communities.
Understanding, and that is just a food. You are thinking
about that on the healthcare side, and you are talking about
how does that work. I was out in Minnesota, the same thing. The
challenges that they are having with what they normally used to
be able to have abundance of their traditional foods is not
available anymore. It is not easily available anymore. Whether
it is a food desert, but that is where they are going, were
people's traditional. I worry, and that is where it goes back
again to the data and the research, what happens to the Tribe
that always relied on salmon, which is a healthy food, for
their primary food and it is not going to be there anymore?
They have seen that for big animals, too, in Alaska. Again,
relying on the rice and what our Tribal people in the Minnesota
area are accustomed to, that is not there.
As we move forward, I think that we are going to start to
see more and more of these, but it does go back to these
innovative ways that what else can we do in this space to make
sure? I think that many of our Tribal communities were
stretched to think about ways to, during COVID. Again, we had
those same challenges, so using some of those things that we
learned during COVID to try to figure out, how do we, number
one, share that information. How do we, number two, use those
foods that we have available to us to make it as healthy as we
possibly can?
Mr. Ellzey. Forgive my question here, I may just not know.
In the military, we have a commissary system, so no matter
where you are, you can be in Virginia Beach, and there are all
kinds of great grocery stores around there, but we have a
commissary that has discount prices for military members and
veterans to go shop for groceries. Does any kind of system like
that exist anywhere in the Tribal system, and if it doesn't,
would that be a decent way to avoid the food desert issue that
we have?
Ms. Tso. Thank you for that. I think we are certainly open
to anything in terms of making sure that we improve what we do.
When you talk about like this small village in Alaska, if the
commissary is still going to be a ways away and you still have
to fly that food in, then that is the challenge, the cost of
that. Not only do they pay for the food, but they have to pay
to transport it in. If it is healthy, it is good, and they do
have what I guess we could refer to as a small commissary. The
prices in those small commissaries, it is not even imaginable
to me when you are talking about diapers, and when you are
talking about formula, and when you are talking about just the
basic needs that a person, a family might need, the prices are
outrageous.
Mr. Ellzey. Like I said, the DOD offsets the price of a lot
of those things, and so that is kind of what I am suggesting is
that there be a commissary system for Tribal lands, especially
where we have identified a food desert, where the government
will offset. We spend a lot of money trying to figure this
problem out. The government will offset the cost of some of
these issues. It wouldn't be an extremely high cost. It goes,
hey, we recognize where we are going, and we can offset the
cost of some of these goods and services, these goods at a
grocery store that is assisted by Interior and this
subcommittee. Just an idea.
I am sure my time has expired. I don't see a clock
anywhere, but I yield back, Mr. Chairman. Thank you.
Chairman Simpson. I always let members finish their ideas.
That is something I hadn't really thought about that may be
worth investigating, so I appreciate that. I was always
interested that when I found out that Native Americans had the
highest diabetes rate of any subpopulation of Americans, and
that what they were finding is getting back to traditional
foods is the best way to treat that diabetes. It is amazing,
and that is what Tribes are trying to do again. Mr. Harder.
Mr. Harder. Thank you so much, Mr. Chair, and I am going to
follow up on exactly that point. I would love to hear a little
bit more about the Special Diabetes Program within IHS. It is a
big deal in my district, as it is in many districts across the
country. About half of my district is diabetic or pre-diabetic.
Of course, as the chairman mentioned, it is even more common
among our Indian population, especially Buena Vista Rancheria
and some of the other places of Tribal Indian Country around
our community. It has been a real focus of our office to do
work to try to make sure that we are focusing on some of the
prevention efforts, trying to make sure that we have healthy
food available to folks and also some of the treatment.
Can you help me understand how the Special Diabetes Program
has changed over the last couple of years? The $260 million
that you are looking for this year, how exactly will that be
invested? What type of innovation have we really seen there?
Ms. Tso. Thank you very much for that. I love our Special
Diabetes Program. It is just the amount of work and the
innovation that has come out of that, and the data that
supports the work that is coming out of that program, is
actually equating to, again, the prevention that is happening
in Indian Country. We look at, again, as many of the places
that I visit with respect to, again, how do we just do a better
job at eating. Moreover, how do we make sure that our kids are
getting outside?
I was just out, again, last week, out in Indian Country.
They are building these bike units, these bike ramps, that they
are using these resources so children can get outside and ride
their bikes in a safe. These are all sort of temporary modular
units, if you will, but they were pretty impressive to see that
there is a lot of creativity out there. I think also looking at
the food part, really focusing on how do you take what you can
go to a grocery store and simplify it. Again, most of our
families are multi-generational, so you are talking about a
grandma and then maybe a toddler, and how do you find foods
that everybody can eat?
Trying to make sure that, again, the menus are being built
for those Tribal communities, by the Tribal communities, and
utilizing, again, our elders all the way down to the young
people. How do we do this? That is what I see. I have seen that
absolutely change over the years, and making those funds
permanent, I think, is absolutely something that I have seen
the data, I have seen the progress. Probably one of the best
examples in Indian Health Service about prevention of diabetes,
prevention of heart disease, again, all of that equates to less
cost, less hospital visits, and those kinds of things.
Mr. Harder. It is great to see some of the evidence around
how that saves us money. You know, an ounce of prevention is
worth a pound of cure., and I think the Special Diabetes
Program is estimated to save Medicare over $500 million over
the next 10 years. Congratulations on the good work and on all
the evidence that backs up that it is working. What is the
breakdown of how that program is operating in the field? Do you
have a sense of how much is on prevention, how much is on
treatment? What are the programs that have really had the
highest ROI, and what do you think the unmet need is out there
today?
Ms. Tso. Thank you, again, for that question. With respect
to the Diabetes Program and majority of those funds are going
to Tribally operated programs, so, again, each Tribal community
has to have the resources they need to build what is best for
them. Again, not the government or not Indian Health Service
saying it needs to be this way or that way. Those decisions are
made locally in terms of what do they need to do to, as I said,
very creative things in terms of just basic things of upgrading
their kitchen so they can do more education, for example. What
can they do in this space of weight loss? What are the
activities there? What are opportunities that they can do in
their infrastructure?
Again, many of our facilities don't have the infrastructure
where people can go to exercise, if you will, or go to places.
Especially in Minnesota, it gets very cold there, there has got
to be a location for people to go because you can't just tell
people go exercising, go move around outside. It is just not
practical. Again, Tribal governments making decisions for their
people of what is best is so important.
Majority of the diabetes funds goes out to Indian Country,
probably, I would say, 90 percent. The remaining is associated
with our IHS-operated programs. That 40 percent I was talking
about, that is still IHS, so very important. I see Tribal
governments, Tribal leaders, Tribal communities making the
decisions for themselves and their community because we are not
all the same is what works best.
Mr. Harder. Thank you for that, Director, and one last
question. Do you see any unmet need? Are there applications
that are going unfilled? How do you quantify how much demand
there is for this program that you are not able to meet with
the current budget?
Ms. Tso. Yes. The one thing that I would see as a barrier
is that this funding is going out in grants. I understand that
there is always a need to make sure that the money is being
spent wisely, but if the money were to go out in either our
contracts or compacts or a different method, again, that gives
them more flexibility to do that. When you are running a grant,
then you are sort of having to limit what you think you can do
versus what I have seen other Tribes do when we do give them
the resources, so they make those choices. There is more
flexibility there. The unmet need is still that we still have
diabetes numbers going up, we still have opportunity to build
those prevention programs that have not quite been met by the
budget that we have.
Mr. Harder. Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Simpson. Thank you. Something came up that was kind of
interesting that you mentioned. You said that the Navajo Nation
reserve seats at University of Arizona Medical School?
Ms. Tso. Yes.
Mr. Simpson. That is important that we get Tribal members
into medical school, dental schools, nursing schools, those
kinds of things because they are more likely to come back to
their reservation and provide those services, so that helps
with the staffing issue that we have around here, and it got me
thinking. In Idaho, we have programs called WICHE and WWAMI.
One of them is for dental students, one of them is for medical
schools. We can't afford a medical school or a dental school,
so we reserve many seats at the University of Washington, as
does Alaska, Montana, Idaho. Then at the dental school at Case
Western in Omaha, we reserve many seats for Idaho dental
students, and the State pays for the out-of-State tuition when
a student gets accepted to those programs, and most of the
time, those students graduate and come back to Idaho. It is a
lot cheaper and makes sense for us to do that rather than try
to go out and build a medical school. Does IHS do anything like
that, or is this individual Tribes doing it?
Ms. Tso. A majority of the time, it is individual Tribes
that are doing that, making those types of commitments that we
do, but we also pay for long-term training for some of our
providers if they want to go. Like, if we have a dentist and he
or she wants to get advanced schooling and whatever, we do pay
for that. In return, they stay with us for a longer period of
time, so there are those opportunities on that.
I know that we work very closely with the University of
Washington. We can do more to make sure that we are tied in
very closely with these universities out there. Our unit, OHSU
out in Portland, Oregon, Oregon Health Sciences University,
those are the ones that I know. I also realize that many of our
Tribes and our Tribal organizations are already tied in with
these universities that are close to them, so they can tap
these resources that are available.
Mr. Simpson. Well, and for a large Tribe like the Navajo
Nation or some of the others, that would probably be easier to
do, but you have got some small Tribes that probably don't know
how to go about that. I think that is something we ought to
explore. Talking to medical and dental schools, nursing
schools, and seeing if I can be active in reserving seats for
Tribal members at some of these schools because I think that
would help us address our staffing issue.
Now, I want to ask another question that I told you I was
going to ask. This is not a criticism of IHS or anything else,
but I have heard from several Tribes that they believe we would
do better to eliminate IHS and give direct appropriations to
the various Tribes. While that might work for some Tribes, it
might not for other Tribes because all Tribes have different
needs and they have different sizes and different abilities.
What I hear is that because of the overhead costs that IHS has,
they could do better delivering the services directly to their
Tribal members if they had a direct appropriation. That might
be true for some and not for others.
My question is, and I am not prejudging this. I am trying
to find out. I want the same thing you want, as does this
committee and the Tribes want. That is to deliver the best
healthcare that we can for the dollars that we have to Indians
across this country. Is this model the best model? What is your
overhead cost, and is there a different model that we ought to
be looking at? I am not suggesting that we would do it this
year or anything else. I am looking at the next 10 years about
how is the best way to do this, so I would appreciate your
thoughts on that.
Ms. Tso. Thank you for that, and I thought about this a
little bit after I left your office yesterday. A couple of
things that I would say is certainly the Indian Self-
Determination Act, as I said, 60 percent of these Tribes have
made those decisions and say we are going to run our own
healthcare program. A majority of those funds or most of those
funds that they have taken from the Indian Health Service, 40
percent today still say, we want IHS to continue to----
Mr. Simpson. Let me ask you on that. If you were a Tribe
that you were upset with Indian Health Services and you said,
we can run our program better and cheaper than going to IHS,
could they choose----
Mr. Simpson. To go outside of IHS and deliver the services
themselves?
Ms. Tso. Sixty percent already do.
Mr. Simpson. Okay.
Ms. Tso. Yeah. The Indian Self-Determination allows them to
do that. Then so what remains are the dollars that support the
remaining 40 percent of the Tribes. As they continue to choose
to go on their own and be self-determined, then IHS will keep
shrinking like it is right now. The overhead costs that we are
talking about here is minimal in terms of the 40 percent of the
dollars that we have left, a majority of those are supporting
these healthcare facilities that we have out in the Indian
Country. Those are staffing dollars. Of course, as always, the
majority of the funds that IHS is asking for, staffing dollars
and operation of healthcare facilities, so that is already
happening.
Eventually, you know, the theory was way back when these
conversations were had in the late 80s and early 90s, was that
eventually Tribes would be operating all of their own
healthcare system. At that point, then you would have only what
we will call residual or what are federally inherent functions
that remain of the IHS. I believe, to some degree, we are
already going that direction.
Mr. Simpson. Okay.
Ms. McCollum. Mr. Chair, can I ask a question on top of
that?
Mr. Simpson. Yes.
Ms. McCollum. I hear what you are saying, and I will just
speak, not for the Tribes, but for myself. I look at Net Lake
or Fond du Lac or Bois Forte up in the Northern Tier. They
don't have the population to support a hospital, they are far
away from other hospitals, so one of your early comments about
transportation becomes really important. Technology becomes
important, having different levels of medical ability and
flexibility within the systems becomes important, and that
would include Red Lake, too. Then we look at like, you know,
White Earth, Leech Lake, kind of in the central part of the
State, not too far from Brainerd, not too far for Bemidji. You
know, it would be having those hospitals then because here,
again, not enough to support a hospital. I am talking hospitals
right now, having a hospital, having a contract with payment
and support and everything else, and transportation, and then
here again, having healthcare clinics that are really state-of-
the-art.
I like your idea about thinking into the future, and that
is going to be a challenge because you have run into different
cultural appropriate healthcare, even within Tribal Nations.
Also just in my State alone, I am thinking of all the different
sized Tribes. Then when I look at the land mass, and we have
had the Dakota Tribes in here talking, a huge landmass spread
out all over, extreme poverty. Transportation was something
that is becomes critical in delivering healthcare. What is your
transportation budget? I mean, do you really have anything in
there?
I know when I was in New Mexico--yeah, it was in New
Mexico--they don't deliver enough babies, and we were losing
moms and babies, so they plan a C-section and all of that, you
know, but who pays for that transportation? Who pays for that
healthcare cost for the family to have somebody be with them?
We are thinking about this model. I am thinking about new lines
of what you are going to have to add. I love what you said
because it is going to look different, and it is going to look
different everywhere. In my State I see three or four different
models alone.
Ms. Tso. Absolutely. Thank you for that. Again, I will add
to that, is that in many of these very rural locations,
particularly in your area because I visited up there, we are
seeing where the other facilities or other healthcare systems
are not successful. Our Tribal health programs have now become
the safety net in some of these areas. They are seeing
everybody--everybody--in those communities, not just Tribal
people. They are seeing more and more people because they are
the only game in town, if you will.
With regards to transportation, this is huge for us right
now. I have met with the Department of Transportation and
looking at a whole Federal approach to what is it that we can
do to address this where we know that they have programs that
Tribes can tap into in terms of maybe transportation systems in
Tribal communities and so forth, and then how do we leverage
that? How do we make sure, again, that people can get what they
need? Moreover, as I was talking about earlier, the
improvements that we have made to purchased and referred care,
we have now integrated travel into that because it wasn't there
before, so we are bringing, again, more flexibilities that
Tribes have the latitude to do what they need to do. We learned
this as a result of COVID when we were flying people out, and
we are just sending people all over the country but no way to
bring them back when they were ready to come home. That was a
whole gap in our system.
We are trying to look at how do we at least provide that
flexibility for Tribal communities to make sure that people can
travel here and there. We have even gone as far as I looked at
how do we address ambulance, for example, EMS program services,
almost one of our lowest funded programs, but has become so
critical in Indian Country. When we talk about fentanyl, when
we talk about these issues, are the safety issues for
everybody, not just the patient, but the drivers and all of
that. How are we looking at that more holistically to make sure
that we are doing everything we can? The transportation, again,
I will go back to Alaska, where they have told me that they
don't either have flights anymore or they have been
significantly reduced, so how do you take a patient from point
A to point B for the services that they need?
Trying to look at all of the strategies of looking at the
whole healthcare system, not just Indian Health Service or not
just the BIA, but Department of Interior, EPA, all of these
programs is what I have been working with, to say, hey, there
has got to be a full government approach to Indian Country when
we are talking about health. I think taking a little bit
different look at how we do that instead of everybody being in
their own, whatever, is what we need to do so everyone is aware
of this.
Ms. McCollum. Love it. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Simpson. Thank you. All I am trying to do by asking
this question, and I am going to ask the Tribes when they have
Tribal days here is that I hate the saying ``think outside the
box,'' but we need to be thinking about what we want Indian
Healthcare Service to look like 5 and 10 years down the road
because the decisions we make there are going to be making it.
None of this would be easy to do overnight, and should we be
moving to a different model or modifications to the current
model that we have, and could that deliver better healthcare
service to Indians? I know that is what we all want, so I
appreciate you looking at that. It sounds like you have been
thinking about things that can be done even with Indian Health
Services to make it operate better, so I appreciate that.
One other question. Modernization of the electronic
healthcare record system continues to be an extremely
significant cost driver for IHS. The President's budget request
includes $245 million increase for the total of $435 million
for fiscal year 2025 for electronic healthcare records. That is
more than all dental health programs, all mental health
programs, and all alcohol and substance abuse programs and
nearly doubled all preventative healthcare programs combined.
Can you please justify this investment? How will this help
provide better healthcare in Indian Country?
As you know, Veterans Affairs has endured significant
challenges transitioning to this new system that have
contributed to patient safety risks. What is IHS doing to
provide timely and adequate training to prevent some of the
issues that the VA has faced during this transition? What
conversations have you had with VA to learn from their
challenges?
Ms. Tso. Thank you again. Another very important topic at
the Indian Health Service. You know, I understand and hear that
this is a huge price tag for the Indian Health Service, but the
price tag of patient care and safety and all of those things
are equally important as we are moving forward with this. When
we look at electronic health records, you know, our system is
more than 40 years old, so while we have made investments over
the years, we have never made the kind of change that we need
to make today.
Again, when we are talking about complexities of healthcare
system across the country, let alone Indian Country and where
we have very remote locations where we have limited
connectivity at times and all of these other challenges,
finding a way to allow us to move forward in this space. The
$27 million decrease in 2024 was a huge hit to us because we
are on a schedule, we want to make sure that we deliver to
Indian Country the best healthcare system before we are
documenting patient care. Why is it so important? Our veterans
now, you know, there is no easy way when a veteran comes into
an IHS facility, and they have to go to a VA facility, that
information is not being shared.
When we talk about the opioid issues and mental health
issues, there is no way to transfer to say, hey, this is a
patient that saw me yesterday, I am now referring them to you.
It is mind-boggling to think that we don't have enough of a
system that allows us to do this. What I have seen Tribes do,
and probably most of us experienced that, we can text with our
provider. Our system doesn't allow us to do that. We need to
move to a system that allows us to have more direct contact
with our providers or with our patients.
With regards to the cost, you know, we want to stay on
schedule with the cost. The money that we are asking for, I
realize, is a lot, but it is a huge game changer for Indian
Country. We have been working very closely with all of our
Tribes to make sure that they are informed of every step that
we are taking. Moreover, that award that we made late last year
to General Dynamics was not challenged by anyone, unlike some
of these challenges that you raised about the VA, and so we are
learning from the VA. We are working very closely with the VA
in some of the things that they did that we have done totally
different. We went out on a wide competition to find the best
contractor that we could have, a VA just went with this all
sources. That is one of the challenges that they have.
We have communicated broadly with our partners across any
country of what we need, what will it look like. We are not
going to agree to make any changes to the electronic health
record until it is in place. We are not looking at trying to,
you know, come up with something that we have to live with
forever. We want to make sure that what we build is going to
work for us, and then we can look at how we make changes down
the road as we move forward.
Mr. Simpson. You would think it would be relatively simple.
I had my hip replaced just recently. They took X-rays of it
here at GW. My orthopedic surgeon is in Idaho. He called up the
X-rays from GW and looked at them. It is mind-boggling to me
that this is as complicated as it is to get. It is amazing, and
we have been working on that. I know Betty has on the Defense
Committee.
Ms. McCollum. You don't want to know.
Mr. Simpson. Ms. Pingree.
Ms. Pingree. Thank you, Mr. Chair. Okay. I am really pretty
much done with my questions, and my last question was going to
be about the electronic health records, so thank you for
bringing that up and covering it. You and I had an opportunity
to talk over many of the things that you are talking about
today, and thank you for going over those again because it is
so critically important that you go into this eyes wide open,
that you do the thorough research you are doing now, that you
learn from the mistakes that the VA has made.
I sit on MilCon-VA. I have listened to that for quite a
long time now about, you know, the challenges that they face,
so it is helpful to hear you go through, you know, is it about
the sole sourcing? Is it about changing how the system is going
to work? I think, and I agree, it is mind-boggling that you are
dealing with systems that are, you know, over 40 years old, and
that you have no ability to do this, and particularly in light
of the earlier question about, you know, you have got some
people in Indian health centers, and some Tribes are working on
their own. Then obviously, you know, people move between
places, and just the idea that there aren't, you know, easily
exchange records is really tragic for people's healthcare. I am
glad you are tackling it. I think it is going to be very hard
to deal with the cost and just make sure that it is available
because you have so many great needs. It is going to feel
frustrating to say, like, we have to put all of this into a
computer system when you want to be giving patient care. You
want to be hiring more practitioners. That is just hard.
I think the most important thing will be working really
closely with you as you are going through this transition
process. The one thing we don't want to have happen is, you
know, 5 years down the road, somebody saying like, oh yeah, we
spent all of that money, and it actually didn't work, you know,
or the things that you might learn in retrospect, so sort of
following this closely and monitoring it and thinking about the
pitfalls along the way. Hopefully, if there are challenges that
we are not anticipating, we can get ahead of them and figure it
out as we are budging it. I will just say, you know, well, we
are all committed to working with you and making sure we get
this level of modernization done and feel back. Thank you, Mr.
Chair.
Mr. Simpson. Thank you. Mr. Ellzey.
Mr. Ellzey. No.
Mr. Simpson. Ms. McCollum.
Ms. Pingree. Why don't you just leave it on?
Ms. McCollum. I would be interested if you would provide to
the committee because I know you have been working on it in
maternal child health statistics, both for urban and for rural,
and I mentioned a little bit what I saw when I was in New
Mexico. You need to deliver a number of babies in order to have
something. I was in one of the Dakotas--I won't mention which
one--and they were so excited that they were maybe going to
start delivering babies again. I asked the question, how many
babies do you think you deliver, and it was well under 30. I
don't like the idea of planned C-sections. It is something we
are definitely trying to get away from.
What kind of ideas in that that you have for maternal safe
delivery and what we are doing on that? You can get it back to
the committee unless you want to make a brief comment. It is a
big topic, and it is a tragedy, what continues to happen. It
happens to Native Americans in urban settings as well, too. I
was just with our Family Center in Saint Paul.
Mr. Simpson. One last question before we adjourn, and,
again, thank you for being here today. I want you to know that
this committee is committed to helping you do your job and
making sure that we get the care for our Indian brothers and
sisters that they need and deserve and are entitled to, and so
if issues come up, then contact us. Let us know. We want to
help.
Your proposal is for mandatory funding for Indian Health
Services for coming years. We did advanced appropriations and
that, the main reason behind that was so when there was a
threatened government shutdown services were suspended for
everything else, we didn't shut down Indian Health Services. To
me that was a smart thing to do.
I guess my question is, mandatory funding at what level?
How do you determine the level, and what does mandatory funding
mean in terms of we don't really know what is going to be spent
on healthcare next year in Indian Health Service. We don't know
what the need is going to be. How do we determine that to make
it mandatory, and why is that more important than advanced
appropriation?
Ms. Tso. Thank you for that question. Again, first of all,
I cannot say enough about advanced appropriations, which is a
game changer for us this year to be able to, again, have Tribes
in IHS be able to plan and have a predictable budget, but we
believe that mandatory will grow for us the way that we need it
to grow. It is already built in for inflationary costs that are
in there and the expenses that we need for staffing and those
sorts of things. It is critical in that area that we believe
the growth over the 10-year period will be significant and more
than what we are going to see in the discretionary funding
source. We are needing that. We are needing the mandatory
funding.
When I talk with Tribal leaders across Indian Country and
even within HHS, Tribal consultation, the price tag that Tribes
tell me is that $63 billion is what we need to fully fund the
Indian Health Service. The gap is large and huge when we talk
about this, but it is also very real. When I travel out to
Indian Country, when I meet with Tribes on just how do we do
this differently? How do we do it better to be able to meet the
needs of our people? We believe, again, because of the
automatic growth that is incorporated into mandatory funding,
that that will be what will build that foundation for Indian
healthcare across Indian Country.
Mr. Simpson. Well, I don't know how they came up with $63
billion, and I would be interested in knowing that, especially
when our entire budget in this Interior is about what, $38
billion. If it is just money and let's say that they said they
needed next year an additional $3 billion, if we appropriated
it to the advanced appropriation at a $3 billion increase, it
wouldn't make any difference whether it was mandatory or
advanced appropriation, would it?
Ms. Tso. I am going to ask Jillian to answer that.
Mr. Simpson. Okay.
Ms. Curtis. Sure. You know, I think the point you are
making is right on, sir. I think a key component of the
mandatory proposal is also being able to have that 10-year view
of what the budget is going to look like. When we talk about
what is the future of the Indian Health System, when we talk
about, you know, what do we need to have to be able to meet
that obligation over that period of time, being able to plan
for a 10-year funding window and know what your resources are
going to be over 10 years, would, frankly, kind of
revolutionize the way that both IHS and Tribal healthcare and
urban Indian care is being provided right now.
I think, you know, we are already looking at costs that are
well above what we know can be achieved in the discretionary
space, EHR. We just had that conversation. We have backlogs for
facilities that need to be addressed, that are in the billions
of dollars, again, very difficult to achieve in a discretionary
budget. In addition to that is really the ability to look to
the future and plan to the future through that clear 10-year
budget window of what we would expect in for resources.
Mr. Simpson. Okay. Well, I appreciate that, and I know that
getting mandatory funding is like becoming a tenured professor.
It used to be that about 70 percent of the Federal budget was
discretionary spending and 30 percent was mandatory. It is just
the reverse now. It is about 28 percent discretionary and 72
percent mandatory programs. As we move more and more, I think
you are trying to get us to not have a job anymore because as
we move more and more into mandatory, we won't need an
appropriations committee. It will just automatically go to
these different agencies, so I get very concerned about moving
more and more programs into mandatory funding, although I
understand the need and the desire to do that. That is
certainly something we will look at along with the other
proposals in the budget, and I would be very pleased if we can
keep the advanced appropriation because I think that has been
very important, and I am pretty sure we will be able to do
that.
Thank you for being here today. If there are no other
questions.
[No response.]
Mr. Simpson. Appreciate it very much. As I said, we really
do want to help you do your job. Be sure and get us the
difference in how HRSA is treated tax wise on any health
services. That might be something that we can fix in our bill.
Mr. Simpson. Thank you for taking the time to join us this
morning. I think it was a productive discussion, and we look
forward to working with you over the coming months. The
committee stands adjourned.
[Questions and answers submitted for the record follow:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Wednesday, May 1, 2024.

FISCAL YEAR 2025 REQUEST FOR THE ARTS AND HUMANITIES

WITNESSES

KAYWIN FELDMAN, DIRECTOR, NATIONAL GALLERY OF ART
DR. MARIA ROSARIO JACKSON, CHAIR, NATIONAL ENDOWMENT FOR THE ARTS
SHELLY C. LOWE (Navajo), CHAIR, NATIONAL ENDOWMENT FOR THE HUMANITIES
Mr. Simpson. Oh, I am supposed to turn on the light or turn
on the mike, yes. Kaywin Feldman, director of the National
Gallery of Art, Dr. Maria Rosario Jackson, chair of the
National Endowment for the Arts, and Shelly Lowe, chair of the
National Endowment for the Humanities, thank you for being here
to discuss the budget priorities for your agencies for fiscal
year 2025. Originally, we also had the Smithsonian scheduled
and we were going to do two panels, but apparently the
administrator is not feeling well, and so I understand that.
Preserving our culture, art, and history is essential to
protecting the legacy of our Nation and preparing us for the
future. The National Gallery of Art is one of the most renowned
and visited institutions tasked with this responsibility. Each
year, millions of visitors, both in person and online, access
your collections. Through your exhibitions, educational, and
outreach programs, you encourage children and scholars across
the world to discover new knowledge, experience art, and
explore the world around them. The NEA and NEH are tasked with
similar responsibilities, bringing incredible opportunities
through art, history, and education to rural communities.
Whether it is healing through the arts, arts education,
research on artificial intelligence, or promoting historical
research amongst middle school and high school students in
preparation for the 250th anniversary of the signing of the
Declaration of Independence, I have seen firsthand the impact
that the NEA and NEH dollars have had in my district in Idaho.
For fiscal year 2025, the President has requested $250
million for the National Gallery, $210.1 million for the
National Endowment for the Arts, and $200 million for the
National Endowment for the Humanities. I appreciate the
opportunity to understand how the budget supports your
agencies' priorities and reasonably builds on the investments
Congress has made in 2024. We must ensure that the Gallery's
facilities are protected to reduce risks to the collections,
visitors, and employees, and that we continue to support the
NEA/NEH efforts to expand access to the arts and humanities to
all Americans. I look forward to our discussion and appreciate
you all being here and now yield to the ranking member,
Pingree.
Ms. Pingree. Thank you, Mr. Chair. I am so happy to have
you all here today to discuss the fiscal year 2025 budget
requests for arts and humanities agencies. I am lucky enough to
also be the chair of the Arts Caucus, and I know the arts have
an incredible value as a positive tool for economic
development, education, and community building.
I am very proud that over the last few years, we were able
to increase funding for the National Endowment for the Arts and
the National Endowment for the Humanities to historic highs,
and that we were able to protect their funding in the
challenging fiscal environment of fiscal year 2024. While I am
glad we protected it, it is still not enough. At $270 million
each, the endowments are small, but they are mighty
powerhouses, and this modest investment has a far-reaching
impact, with funding benefiting every single district in
America. I am sorry the Smithsonian wasn't able to participate
today, but I am so glad the National Gallery of Art is with us.
These institutions inspire, challenge, and educate us through
their collections.
We know that operating facilities in a constrained fiscal
environment is challenging, yet it is essential that we
continue to share the Smithsonian Institution and the National
Gallery collections with the Nation and the world and maintain
them for future generations. I am pleased one way the
Smithsonian Institution does this is through the Smithsonian
Affiliate Program that affords museums, such as the Abbe Museum
in Bar Harbor in my State, access to the Smithsonian resources.
I look forward to discussing the fiscal year 2025 budget
requests for the Arts, Humanities, and the National Gallery and
learning more about the goals you have outlined for fiscal year
2025. Thank you again, Director Feldman, Chair Lowe, and Chair
Jackson for appearing before us this afternoon. I appreciate
your testimony and your answers to our questions. Thank you,
and I yield back.
Mr. Simpson. Thank you. Director Feldman, we will start
with you.
Ms. Feldman. Chair Simpson, Ranking Member Pingree, members
of the subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to testify
today. It is my great pleasure to talk to you about the
National Gallery of Art and address our fiscal year 2025
Federal budget request. I would also like to thank you for your
support of our fiscal year 2024 budget, which provided the
critical funds to keep the National Gallery operational as we
emerged from a very challenging time to set new attendance
records. In my time with you, I will share just a few examples
of how the National Gallery is serving growing audiences
regionally, nationally, with inspiring experiences made
possible by our beautiful facilities and the masterpieces that
we hold in trust for the Nation.
American generosity has been at the core of our identity
since the beginning. In 1936, in a very populous gesture, our
founder, Andrew W. Mellon, wrote to Franklin Delano Roosevelt,
suggesting that America needed a major museum to expose her
citizens to the best works of art across time. He proposed a
public-private partnership and offered to donate his collection
and the necessary funds to build a world-class museum. The gift
was accepted by the President and Congress with the pledge of
Federal support and the work began. Here on the table, you see
the original letter from FDR written on New Year's Day in 1937
accepting Mr. Mellon's offer for the American people. President
Roosevelt presided over the dedication of the museum on March
17th, 1941 when he stated that works of art matter because they
are ``symbols of the human spirit.'' I have to say it moves me
profoundly that during some of humanity's darkest hours during
the Second World War, the President and Congress recognized
that art was central to our democracy.
Last year, the National Gallery welcomed 3.8 million
visitors, making us the second most visited art museum
nationally and the eighth most visited globally. At our 25-acre
campus on the National Mall, all people are invited to explore
artistic wonders through our permanent collections and special
exhibitions.
A major attraction is our stunning portrait of Ginevra de'
Benci by Leonardo da Vinci. Painted 25 years before the Mona
Lisa, our portrait is Leonardo's only painting in the Americas
and is a treasure that people flock to see. In case you haven't
visited her lately, I do have, not the original. We couldn't
bring Ginevra today, but we are fortunate to have two masterful
drawings by Leonardo, one of which I have brought with me. His
``Grotesque Head of an Old Woman'' is one of several drawings
he made that explores human physiognomy. In these tiny
grotesque drawings, Leonardo combined real-life observation
with outlandish imagination, preparing him for the
unprecedented range and subtlety of human expression for which
he is so famous. Although this drawing is one of the smaller
works of art in our collection, it is among the most
significant and fascinating. All three works by Leonardo were
gifted to the Nation by patriotic Americans. Archival
materials, such as the FDR letter and any work of art on paper,
including Leonardo drawings, are part of our Make an
Appointment Program. Literally, anyone can make an appointment
to see these objects in person in our supervised study rooms.
Our commitment to inviting all people to explore and
experience art extends beyond our walls. To share one example,
our massive open online course, known as a MOOC, offers free
and dynamic virtual classroom experiences to educators of all
grade levels, subjects, and locations. Since the program's
launch in 2019, we have hosted nearly 37,000 participants
joining us from every single State, and because our collections
and resources belong to the American people, we have plans to
share more of our original works of art beyond our Washington
campus. Already a generous institutional lender, we will lend
more of our collection to museums located in communities
outside of major urban centers all across America with long-
term loans and exhibition partnerships.
Of course, none of this service to our Nation would be
possible without the support of this committee and Congress. I
am happy to answer your questions, expanding on our fiscal year
2025 budget request and our work to serve the American people.
I extend my heartfelt gratitude for your commitment to the
National Gallery of Art and its mission to serve the Nation by
welcoming all people to explore and experience art, creativity,
and our shared humanity. Thank you.
[The statement of Ms. Feldman follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Simpson. Thank you, Director. Dr. Jackson.
Ms. Jackson. Good afternoon, Chairman Simpson, Ranking
Member Pingree, and distinguished members of subcommittee. It
is an honor to be with you today to discuss President Biden's
fiscal year 2025 request of $210.1 million for the National
Endowment for the Arts. Thank you for your tremendous support.
Separate from my written testimony, in the few minutes I have,
I would like to highlight key elements of how we are seeking to
fulfill our mission and why it matters.
The NEA is a small, but mighty agency. Our staff has worked
tirelessly to help make arts participation possible for all
Americans, and I am proud to work with such devoted public
servants. The art sector continues to be a remarkable economic
driver/contributor to the well-being of our communities, an
important element of our social fabric. The most recently
available data showed that in 2022, the arts and cultural
industries generated $1.1 trillion and supported 5.2 million
jobs. However, larger portions of the creative economy
throughout the country still face hardships. For example, data
showed that in several arts realms, the economy and employment
have not fully returned to pre-pandemic levels and arts
workers' wages have faced a slow recovery, and there is
tremendous need. Year after year, the number of applications to
the NEA continues to rise.
The President's budget meets this critical moment. It
supports and strengthens the NEA's core funding opportunities
and partnerships, bolsters the creative economy at a
significant time of need, expands opportunities for arts
participation for all, including arts education in rural,
Tribal, and other historically underserved communities, and
advances work at the intersection of arts and health and well-
being. Research demonstrates that the arts lead to positive
outcomes. For example, the arts are shown to improve social and
emotional learning amongst students. Arts participation
benefits brain health for seniors and helps address the
invisible wounds of war for veterans and active military and
more.
The President's budget reflects what we know to be true: we
cannot reach our full potential without access to the arts. The
budget continues to invest in initiatives with broad reach and
strong bipartisan support, such as Creative Forces, the Arts
Education Partnership, Poetry Out Loud, and Big Read. It
continues the longstanding practice of awarding 40 percent of
NEA's grantmaking dollars to State and jurisdictional arts
agencies and regional arts organizations for re-granting. From
Idaho Falls to Portland, Maine, local arts agencies extend the
reach and impact of Federal investments, and we are grateful
for these mutually beneficial partnerships.
The President's budget also bolsters our obligation and
commitment to serving indigenous communities, informed by
indigenous artists and leaders, who are making additional
investments to better serve, including hiring our first
director of Native Arts and Tribal Affairs. The Arts Endowment
is fortifying relationships with minority-serving institutions
of higher education, which provide valuable educational
opportunities, prepare new generations of workers and
entrepreneurs, and enrich the cultural fabric of our country.
We recognize the importance of engagement in rural
communities. Working with rural leaders, we are finding new
ways to help ensure longstanding programs have greater benefit.
For example, the Arts Endowment is strengthening its Citizens'
Institute on Rural Design, which has operated for decades, and
Shakespeare in American Communities now supports touring
programs with expanded geographic coverage in rural places.
Through these and other programs, this budget will allow us to
strengthen connection to rural America and support local
leaders. The President's budget supports ArtsHERE, a
partnership-based national initiative launched in fiscal year
2024, which bolsters programs and services for all types of
historically underserved communities.
We are also strengthening our work on arts and health. We
are proud of our longstanding record of supporting service
members, veterans, and military-connected populations, and we
continue to expand the Creative Forces program. We are also
building on a robust body of research that demonstrates
connection of the arts to our health and well-being. Consistent
with this progress, the President's budget will support a new
initiative focused on healing through the arts, emphasizing
mental health and recovery from trauma and disaster. This will
create new opportunities for arts workers to be fairly
compensated, while contributing to our well-being.
In closing, thank you again to Chairman Simpson, Ranking
Member Pingree, and to all members of the subcommittee, and I
am happy to take your questions.
[The statement of Ms. Jackson follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Simpson. Thank you. Chair Lowe.
Ms. Lowe. Thank you so much, Chairman Simpson, Ranking
Member Pingree, and distinguished members of the subcommittee.
[Speaking native language.] My name is Shelly Lowe. I am
Navajo. I am originally from Coronado, Arizona, and I am chair
of the National Endowment for the Humanities. I just want to
thank you for the opportunity to provide testimony on the
President's fiscal year 2025 budget request for NEH.
NEH is the Nation's largest Federal funder of the
humanities, which includes history, philosophy, literature,
language, ethics, law, archaeology, political theory,
comparative religion, anthropology, sociology, and media and
cultural studies, which I knew you knew all of those. Since its
founding in 1965, NEH has awarded nearly $6 billion in grants
to support museums, historic sites, colleges, universities, K-
12 teachers, libraries, public television and radio stations,
research institutions, independent scholars, and State and
jurisdictional humanities councils nationwide.
NEH approaches its 60th anniversary in fiscal year 2025,
and now more than ever, NEH is vital to fostering a strong,
resilient, and thriving democracy, and to sustaining the United
States' role as a global leader in the humanities. NEH's fiscal
year 2025 appropriations request of $200.1 million reflects the
resources needed to continue NEH's support for American civil
society, helping us to advance research and development in the
humanities, examine the human condition, understand our
cultural heritage, foster mutual respect for diverse beliefs
and cultures, develop media and information literacy, and
promote civic education. The President's budget includes $60
million or approximately 40 percent of NEH's programmatic
funding for NEH's State affiliates, the State and
jurisdictional humanities councils, to support humanities
programming at the local level in all 50 States, the District
of Columbia, Puerto Rico, the U.S. Virgin Islands, Guam, the
Northern Mariana Islands, and American Samoa.
NEH's 56 State and jurisdictional humanities councils are
essential partners to ensuring the Agency reaches audiences of
all ages and in every community across the Nation. One example
is through NEH's longstanding partnership with National History
Day, which engages more than half a million middle and high
school students annually in a national historical research
competition. NEH recently launched a program with the
humanities councils to extend National History Day's reach to
underserved communities. Funded projects include support for a
2-day workshop for Idahoan teachers on primary source research
and place-based learning at the Idaho State Historical Society,
a free 3-day educator workshop in Georgia at the Nation's
largest consortium of historically black colleges and
universities to reach educators and students in underserved
urban communities in Atlanta and teachers in training at HBCUs,
and efforts to expand National History Day's impact in Maine in
the three most rural counties through partnerships with local
and Tribal educators as well as cultural community leaders.
NEH's fiscal year 2025 appropriations request also includes
$74.4 million for NEH's flagship grant programs to support
research and development, preservation, capacity building, and
educational and public programming in the humanities in all 56
States and jurisdictions. As the largest and most prestigious
funder of advanced humanities research in the United States,
NEH invests in scholarship and complex research projects by
individual scholars, collaborative research teams, and
institutions in all disciplines of the humanities and
humanistic social sciences.
While this work may sometimes seem distant from everyday
life, humanities' research and development, or R&D, is
foundational to American life. For example, NEH's support for
humanities' R&D has resulted in the publication of more than
16,000 books and academic monographs since NEH's founding in
1965, including 20 Pulitzer Prize-winning books. This includes
``American Prometheus: The Triumph and Tragedy of J. Robert
Oppenheimer'' by Kai Bird and Martin J. Sherwin, the biography
that inspired the Academy Award-winning film, ``Oppenheimer.''
NEH also supports the building blocks of humanities' R&D by
ensuring the public can more easily find and make use of
cultural heritage collections at libraries, archives, museums,
and historical organizations across the country, and by
fortifying under resourced collecting organizations, such as
small and midsized libraries, archives, and museums.
Another core aspect of NEH's work is its support for the
teaching and study of humanities at K-12 schools and colleges
and universities around the Nation, including Native-American
and indigenous institutions, historically black colleges and
universities, Hispanic-serving institutions, community
colleges, rural colleges and universities, schools with a
majority and minority undergraduate enrollment, and schools
with significant numbers of first generation students.
NEH's public programming grants support opportunities,
support the production of documentary films, museum
exhibitions, and discussion programs that engage public
audiences of all ages in questions with the humanities, such as
the ``Civil War,'' the landmark documentary series by Ken Burns
that was viewed by 4 million Americans when it first aired.
NEH's leadership role in digital humanities has been widely
acknowledged in the humanities field and has helped set the
pace for research funders around the world.
NEH's fiscal year 2025 appropriations request also provides
$8.75 million in Federal matching funds for NEH's grant
programs to help stimulate and match non-Federal donations in
support of cultural and educational institutions across the
nation. This includes support for a new pilot program that will
focus on workforce development through matching funds for the
hiring, training, and retention of humanities professionals at
museums, libraries, archives, colleges and universities, and
other cultural organizations across the country. The humanities
are more essential than ever.
The President's fiscal year 2025 budget for NEH provides
$14.6 million for the Agency's American Tapestry: Weaving
Together Past, Present, and Future strategic initiative, which
emphasizes the role of the humanities in strengthening our
democracy, advancing equity for all, and addressing our
changing climate. Of note, NEH's fiscal year 2025 appropriation
request includes $7.1 million for humanities perspectives on
artificial intelligence, NEH's new agency-wide research
initiative that supports humanities R&D to understand and
address the ethical, legal, and societal implications of
artificial intelligence or AI. AI is one of the most powerful
technologies of our time and will have profound consequences
for civil rights and civil liberties, safety and security, and
democratic values. Questions about the ethical, legal, and
societal implications of AI are fundamentally rooted in the
humanities.
NEH's founding legislation tasked the Agency with making
the American people masters of their technology and not its
unthinking servants. Created in response to President Biden's
Executive Order 14110 on safe, secure, and trustworthy
artificial intelligence, NEH's AI initiative features a new
grant program that supports the creation of humanities research
centers focused on AI at universities and independent research
organizations. NEH's appropriations request for fiscal year
2025 includes funding to include emphasis on equity, privacy,
and human rights, as well as educational and public programming
that enhance AI literacy and public awareness of human
perspectives on AI, such as support for the nationwide AI
literacy program with all 56 States and jurisdictional
humanities council.
NEH's fiscal year 2025 appropriations request also includes
$2.8 million to continue the Agency's activities as part of
United We Stand: Connecting Through Culture, an initiative
launched in partnership with NEA that aims to combat hate-
motivated violence, promotes civic engagement, and achieve
better mental health outcomes in the United States through the
arts and humanities. Since the launch of this initiative in
fiscal year 2022, NEH has invested more than $13 million to
support humanities projects that foster cross-cultural
understanding, empathy, and community resilience, and promote
civic engagement, information literacy, and social cohesion.
Furthermore, NEH properly contributed to the formation of the
White House's first ever U.S. National Strategy to counter
Antisemitism through commitments to offer research, teaching,
and convening opportunities for humanities scholars to study
the origins and history of antisemitism in the United States,
as well as support the development of K-12 educational
materials on countering antisemitism in partnership with
National History Day and the U.S. Holocaust Memorial Museum.
NEH will continue to support these activities in fiscal year
2025.
The President's fiscal year 2025 budget for NEH also
includes $1.5 million for the development of a new program to
support the revitalization and reclamation of native languages
and cultures. This program will complement NEH's partnership
with the Department of the Interior on the Federal Indian
Boarding School Initiative, a comprehensive effort to recognize
the troubled legacy of Federal Indian boarding school policies,
with the goal of addressing their intergenerational impact and
shedding light on the traumas of the past. To date, NEH has
allocated nearly $5 million to support the digitization of
records from the United States' system of over 400 Federal
Indian boarding schools, the creation of a permanent oral
history collection to document the experiences of the
generations of indigenous students who were raised in the
Federal Indian boarding school system, and new humanities
projects that deepen the public's understanding of this chapter
in our Nation's history.
NEH's fiscal year 2025 appropriations request will also
further the Pacific Islands Cultural Initiative, an NEH
initiative that aims to strengthen the cultural and educational
sectors in the U.S. Pacific islands, Hawaii, American Samoa,
Guam, and the Northern Mariana Islands, which face unique
challenges due to their remote geography and the historic
underinvestment in the region by the Federal Government. NEH's
work in the U.S. Pacific islands includes emergency relief for
cultural and educational organizations devastated by the
wildfires in Maui in 2023. NEH's recent disaster recovery
efforts also includes support for cultural organizations
affected by natural disasters in Florida, Mississippi, New
Mexico, and Vermont.
Finally, the President's budget for fiscal year 2025
provides $42.35 million to operate NEH in an efficient and
effective manner. This includes dedicated resources for two new
offices formed as part of NEH's equity action plan to embed
equity across its programs and operations, the Office of Data
and Evaluation and the Office of Outreach, which will evaluate
NEH's impact on the humanities field and deepen the Agency's
engagement with underserved communities. The budget also
supports the continued implementation of executive orders,
directives, and administrative priorities involving
organizational health and organizational performance and
information security modernization.
Chairman Simpson, Ranking Member Pingree, distinguished
members of the committee, thank you again for supporting NEH
and for your consideration of the Agency's fiscal year 2025
appropriations request.
[The statement of Ms. Lowe follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Simpson. Thank you. Thank you all for your testimony.
Your full testimony will be included in the record. We have had
hearings in the last few days on things like the EPA and the
Forest Service and the Department of Interior and Indian Health
Services and all those things that we need to do and like to do
or are required to do. These are kind of things we like to do,
so I am glad you are here today and to be able to talk about
the budget requests.
Director Feldman, this past year, the National Gallery lent
397 artworks to 43 museums across the United States. This
partnership allows Americans across the country to see some of
the Gallery's collection and original works without necessarily
having to travel to Washington. How have you utilized the
Gallery's lending program to expand the Gallery's reach and
impact, and what plans do you have to expand this practice to
additional museums? What are the challenges to bringing them to
more rural America, and have you been able to partner with
museums in smaller communities in rural areas?
Ms. Feldman. Thank you very much, Chair Simpson. We take
our role serving the Nation very seriously. I like to say that
I was hired with one very firm mandate from our Board of
Trustees at the Gallery, which is to expand our service to the
American people. I never speak to our staff at the museum
without reminding them all that we have an obligation and also
a privilege to serve the American people. We spend a lot of our
time thinking about how to expand that service.
As you mentioned, we are very, very generous, lending works
of art from our collection for exhibitions that travel around
the country and globally as well. Our answer is always yes when
we are asked for a loan, unless there is some reason why that
work of art, usually, because of condition or other
commitments, can't travel. We do a lot of that. We are in
discussions right now about really expanding our loan program
and lending works from the collection to smaller institutions
that serve their regions and doing it with long-term loans. It
is not just a 3-month exhibition, but actually enabling the
national collection to be in communities for a couple of years,
and also doing that with exhibitions.
I think I have a relatively unique position as the director
of the National Gallery, particularly, according to my
predecessors, because I have run really small museums across
the country. This is my fourth museum that I have directed, and
I often say that I know what it is like to have to go out and
raise money for a lawnmower because one broke and there just
isn't a budget to replace it. I know what the challenge is for
our institutions around the country, and we are dedicated to
serving them. We do it with all humility. We recognize that we
have as much to learn from our regional partners as we have to
share, so we are really excited about expanding that.
In addition, if you will indulge me, put together a list of
some of the other things we do to serve the American people who
maybe don't necessarily come to Washington. Although 50 percent
of the National Gallery's attendance comes from domestic
tourists from outside of our region. Through visitation we
serve the Nation, and we are really proud that we, over the
last year, served close to 20 million people through our
website and our social media programs. With our website and
those programs, of course, we are focused on art education and
human creativity, and so we use our collection as the vehicle
in all of those systems that we distribute through the website.
We have a Summer Teacher Institute that last year reached
teachers from 27 different States, so we bring them here to
Washington. We are pausing this year so that we can figure out
how we can actually do more to impact rural teachers in the
future. We share traveling exhibitions. We have a show that
just opened in New Britain, Connecticut of contemporary Native-
American art. We are also working with Jackson, Mississippi,
Portland, Oregon, Denver, and Milwaukee in the coming year,
year and a half. We have over 25,000 participants who join us
for our virtual lectures, educational programs, programs for
children and parents, and our art activities.
I mentioned that we have a MOOC that has reached nearly
37,000 participants from every single State. We have something
at the National Gallery of Art called the Center for Advanced
Study in the Visual Arts. I always liken it to having a sort of
educational institute within the National Gallery. We bring a
series of scholars and fellows to the National Gallery and to
Washington. I am proud to say that we have alumni in 39
different States right now from that program. We also
distribute films that we have created about artists for
exhibitions over the last number of years to local affiliate TV
stations around the country. We had 49 million views of those
films over the last year, 12,000 schools receiving our
materials, with 125,000 students with access to posters and our
print materials in 42 different States. This year we had a boom
in applications for our internship program. We have a paid
internship program, and we had applications from 43 different
States.
Then the last thing I will mention is a new series on our
website we have started that is called From West to East. With
that series, we are highlighting institutions, communities, and
artists working all across the country and showing that, again,
our role as the national museum is to highlight the great
artists and creatives and institutions across America and not
just what we have in Washington. That is, I am sorry, a very
long answer to your question, but we are very proud.
Mr. Simpson. You do a lot.
Ms. Feldman. Yes.
Mr. Simpson. Thank you, and thank you for bringing the
Franklin Roosevelt letter and Leonard.
Ms. Feldman. The Gallery has three Leonardo da Vinci works,
one painting and two drawings, and this is a drawing da Vinci
did around 1490. He would walk the streets of Florence and
Milan where he lived and come back and make these drawings.
These grotesque figures were not people that he saw
necessarily. They come out of his imagination. They are sort of
studies that prepare him, and I have to point out one of my
favorite things. In addition to her sort of grotesque face, you
can see how her cheeks are sunken in because she has lost her
teeth. With all of that, she has a little carnation tucked into
her breast that is just peeking out there, so you get that
sense of sort of liveliness that Leonardo is so famous for.
Mr. Simpson. I always get Michelangelo mixed up with
everybody else because the first date my wife and I went on
when we were juniors in high school was the Agony and the
Ecstasy about Michelangelo.
Ms. Feldman. Bring your wife back to the Gallery and we
will show you Leonardo.
Mr. Simpson. Well, I will tell you right now, I know this
might sound like a threat and it is, but I don't know that we
will be able to do an appropriation for the National Art
Gallery. The staff and the members haven't had an opportunity
to go visit it, do a little tour of it, and that kind of stuff,
so.
Ms. Feldman. Please come.
Mr. Simpson. Yeah. One other question. The fiscal year 2025
request includes $5.65 million for the Gallery's share of the
cost to finish construction of Pod 6, the new shared art
storage facility at the Smithsonian Museum Support Center.
Could you provide a status update on the finishing Pod 6
construction this fiscal year and explain how the shared
storage center will help the Gallery save on storage cost in
the long run?
Ms. Feldman. Yes. Thank you for asking that. I have to
start by saying how incredibly grateful we are for your support
of our storage facility. This is a facility that we are doing
jointly with the Smithsonian. The National Gallery will have 42
percent of the space in Pod 6 and the Smithsonian the rest. I
am happy to say that it is on schedule and on budget. We expect
to finish construction in the next fiscal year, and the money
in the budget, the $5.6 million, is for storage equipment and
outfitting it so that we can then move the collection in. We
currently spend just shy of a million dollars a year leasing
space offsite, so we will have future savings of that rented
facility. You know, one of my worries as a museum director is,
of course, that the National Gallery is located in a prime
flood zone, and I am hesitant to have any of the collection
below ground. Having a state-of-the-art storage facility really
enables us to care for these works of art that we hold in trust
for the Nation.
Mr. Simpson. Thank you. I will save the humanities for a
next shot. Ms. Pingree.
Ms. Pingree. Gosh, I don't know which one of you to start
with. It is so great to have you all here. Thank you so much,
and thank you, Mr. Chair, for your questions. Why don't I move
to Chair Jackson and give you a break, Director Feldman.
Actually, I don't have to tell you this. You know so well
that the arts have an incredible value as a positive tool for
economic development and education, community building, and you
have shown so many good examples of that, and I just want to
thank you. It was a real pleasure to have you come visit the
State of Maine, and I highly recommend to my colleagues, if you
haven't had either of our two endowment chairs come to visit
your State, it is a really great experience. I was able to show
you, probably not unlike Idaho, a lot of the small towns that
have really benefited from revitalizing through the arts,
places like Waterville and Rockland. I know it meant so much to
have you visit, and I think that just is a really important
sort of exchange that we all do.
You know, as I said, we never get the numbers as high as I
think they should be for the endowments, but we have been
trying to at least hold our own in the last budget and eke it
up a little bit. Can you talk a little bit about your vision
for the arts, what you have been able to do with the increased
support and sort of how you see your role going into the
future?
Ms. Jackson. Thank you for the question, Ranking Member
Pingree, and, yes, it was wonderful to be in Maine with you. I
want to start by again reiterating thanks for the support over
the years and a deep gratitude for what it has enabled us to
do.
The work at the Arts Endowment, I think, right now is
really making sure that we are meeting mission and that we are
up to date with the times. Part of that includes looking at our
programs, the longstanding programs, and ensuring that they are
truly reaching all Americans, that they are truly benefiting
everyone, and making adjustments related to those. I think
acknowledging and engaging a sector that is beleaguered as a
result of the pandemic and issues that preceded the pandemic,
and having close proximity to people in all parts of the sector
to understand what that requires and how we can show up as a
Federal agency.
I am very excited about the work that we are doing to be
intentional about making sure that we are having closer
relationships and stronger impact in communities that have been
underserved, including rural, Tribal communities, with
disability communities that have been historically marginalized
as a result of geography, race, socioeconomic status, et
cetera. The work that is focused on the intersection of arts
and health and well-being is something that is also really
exciting and builds on the Creative Forces work. It builds on
research that is gaining momentum that is showing all kinds of
value and impacts of the arts, active arts participation as
well as engagement as audience, having to do with the social
fabric, with social cohesion, mental health.
Making sure that we are able to talk about the arts in
their fullness and how, at their best, they contribute, not in
a silo or a bubble, but throughout people's lives in all
different kinds of communities. The funding has allowed us to
make progress and make sure that we are meeting mission in
considering the context and times now.
Ms. Pingree. Thank you. Thank you so much. I might as well
pick on you, too, Chairwoman Lowe. Thank you. I am looking
forward to getting you to Maine as well, and thank you for your
very comprehensive overview of all the work that you do at the
National Endowment for the Humanities. It is such a critically
important part of what we do.
One of the things I am excited about that you are doing--I
really don't want to single anything out because I think it is
all so good--but I just want to talk a little bit about the
American Tapestry initiative. I was really pleased when earlier
this year the Penobscot Nation Museum and the Hudson Museum at
the University of Maine received a significant NEH grant to
create a visual directory of Wabanaki basketry. We are very
proud of our basket makers in Maine. We are really excited to
see increasing recognition for artists like Jeremy Frey, Teresa
Secord. There was just a great story in The New York Times
about how basket makers are sort of moving from a obscure craft
to, you know, front and center art, and the Portland Museum of
Art will be hosting an exhibit of Jeremy Frey.
This grant will fund the creation of an online lexicon with
images and terminology, and the work will help reduce errors in
identification and preserve ancestral knowledge. I think it is
an excellent example of preserving our heritage. Can you just
tell us a little more about the American Tapestry initiative
and how you have been able to use the increases that the NEH
received for programs like this over the last few years?
Ms. Lowe. Definitely. Thank you so much for that question,
Ranking Member Pingree, and my understanding is I have Maine on
my schedule to visit before the end of the year. I will be very
much looking forward to it because I have been to the Native-
American Maine basket maker show and sale, and there is nothing
quite like seeing the work that the artists put into everything
that they bring forward and the culture that they share.
American Tapestry: Weaving Together Past, Present, and
Future was an initiative created with joint effort from all of
our program directors to really assess the work of the Agency
and to think about ways that we can extend our work into those
areas and communities that we had not already been reaching. We
focused on three major areas: strengthening our democracy,
equity for all, and addressing our changing climate. In this,
our program directors really thought very hard about what we
were funding now, what grant opportunities we had available,
and how we could extend that to ensure that we really were
reaching all communities and all individuals across the United
States and bringing humanities to all.
For instance, in some of our equity work, it meant
developing new grant lines to allow smaller organizations to
apply with projects that are a little bit less costly. The
funding would be lower. The management of those funds would be
a little bit easier. This is something that we learned through
the pandemic with our CARES and ARP funding, that some smaller
organizations that we had never worked with before started to
receive funding from us through CARES and ARP, and the process
that we were able to go through to support them, including
reporting lines that were not as extensive as when you have
very large grants. This was a very encouraging sign for us to
be able to say that we could do some of our grant lines,
specifically for smaller communities, organizations, but also
to bring forward those stories that we haven't heard from
before or those organizations and communities that were doing
fabulous and amazing work in States and regions but were not
getting funding at the national level.
Like the example that you shared, in addition to other work
with small communities to really bring their culture forward,
to be able to share that amongst themselves, but to share it
more locally in their regions and then to share it nationally.
We have been very excited about how well this has been received
by communities across the States and across the country, and to
how many organizations and community members are coming to us
now and saying, you know, I am really excited NEH is actually
doing something that supports the work that we do and can help
us to get this work moving forward.
We will continue to do that work. We will continue to focus
on strengthening democracy through the National History Day,
like I mentioned, which was really an effort on our part to
ensure that those communities that were not yet participating
in National History Day, maybe hadn't even really known about
it. We are having resources and contacts that could help them
to reach those students and teachers and communities and bring
them into this national competition and national conversation.
Of course, to think about how we are looking at artificial
intelligence, not just at the national level, but also at the
local level, what do we do to support that and to have these
conversations about, what it means for our future as human
beings as we move forward.
Lastly, I would just like to say the climate aspect of the
initiative also reaches those smaller communities and
organizations who have really been able to assess their own
resources in terms of how they are preserving their cultural
heritage, especially in small organizations and communities
that are in older buildings and are having to say, you know,
our building is not going to be able to preserve this material.
We need to be able to think about how we make some changes,
start some plans, and move that forward. We have provided the
opportunity for organizations to be able to do that. We are
very excited and we are looking forward to seeing how we can
continue to fund organizations through this initiative.
Ms. Pingree. That is great. Thank you, Mr. Chair. I will
yield back.
Mr. Simpson. Mr. Ellzey.
Mr. Ellzey. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you all for
being here. I love being on this subcommittee. I see
Washington, D.C. as our Nation's Paris for so many reasons--
architecture, art, performing arts--and I am glad that you all
are here. I did hear you say that Pod 6 was on time and under
budget?
Ms. Feldman. On.
Mr. Ellzey. On budget?
Voice. I would think on budget.
Mr. Ellzey. Is there another department we can send her to
run? That is fantastic. Good for you. Since this place was
built on a swamp, I understand the need for external storage
everywhere else. I don't understand 16th century Flemish art.
Is that what you studied?
Ms. Feldman. Yes. Actually, my first degree was in Greek
and Roman, and then in graduate school, I studied 16th and 17th
century Dutch and Flemish art.
Mr. Ellzey. You were a brat, right?
Ms. Feldman. Yes.
Mr. Ellzey. Okay.
Ms. Feldman. Some might say I still am a brat, yes.
Mr. Ellzey. Sorry. She is a military brat. I am a military
guy. When did you decide archaeology? What museum did you go
see that influenced you to now the door is open and now you are
here?
Ms. Feldman. Thank you. That is such a great question
because it is, proven in our field that people who visit
museums and, you know, take their families to museums are the
ones who went with their parents. My father, who had a Ph.D. in
electrical engineering and was a captain in the Coast Guard,
when we were stationed in England, he took us all over Europe
to go look at Roman engineering, and my father would geek out
about a Roman aqueduct.
Mr. Ellzey. Yes.
Ms. Feldman. When I went to the University of Michigan, I
went as a political science major and I took a Greek
archaeology class for fun, and I think that is where I decided
to switch and become an art historian.
Mr. Ellzey. A world of discovery, and that is what the
three of you do for this country. My son, we went to Gettysburg
3 days in a row last year, but he also loves to go to the
museums in town here, not quite the art one, but my daughter is
the artist. What you do is very important, and I am glad that
you are here and we can help out.
I did have one question and actually an ask, is, on the
Mall with millions of visitors every year, political events in
a time of rising security needs, we need your help. I would
love to talk to you offline about perhaps getting some--not to
interfere with the aesthetic of the building--an opportunity to
strengthen the FirstNet receivers, if we could discuss that
later. It won't come out of your budget, but maybe an
opportunity because as you all know, Steve Scalise had to fly
over the Mall in a Park Service helicopter after he was
wounded, and that ability to communicate on the Mall with so
many visitors here is extremely important.
Ms. Feldman. Understand. Yes.
Mr. Ellzey. Anyway, I love what you do. I don't take up too
much time, I am going to move on to Dr. Jackson. Thirty-five
percent of grants reach low-income audiences in under-resourced
populations. I would argue that District 6 of Texas, south of
Dallas, is a very rural location. How do these grant programs
especially help more rural communities like mine, and then
elaborate on how the arts can serve and heal our veterans.
Ms. Jackson. Happy to take those questions. Thank you.
First off, you know, the focus on rural communities is
something that we have been very serious about and intentional
about in the last few years, and understanding through
proximity to these communities what they actually need seems
really important, as Congresswoman Pingree recounted the site
visit that we did. Getting close and talking with leaders in
communities and understanding how their cultural ecosystems may
look different from others and being able to be responsive to
that is really important.
We are looking at all of our programs to understand how can
they better show up with communities that require additional
attention and require particular understanding of how they
work. The Citizens Institute on Rural Design, for example, is a
program that we are expanding. I am especially excited about
how that expansion happens because it builds capacity locally.
It builds local leaders and helps them to understand the
utility of design methods and the importance of the arts in
their communities on their terms, not in a way that is
helicoptered in, but in a way that feels organic to what they
have to offer and what they aspire to. There is that kind of
review and adjustments that are happening throughout the
agency.
I think in terms of working with our military community,
certainly Creative Forces is something that we have so much
pride and respect for. We are really excited about the
expansion of that program to now not only serve in clinical
settings and on military sites, but in communities. As military
personnel go back into communities and civilian life, there is
an opportunity to continue to benefit from the kinds of
experiences that allow them to heal. Creative Forces has
adjacent to it some research programs that help us understand
the benefits of both individually and collectively, and that is
something that I think is beneficial not only for the military
community, but for the whole country to understand how health
can be improved, how well-being can be improved. Certainly
paying attention to the military population as a first starting
place is the right thing to do, and there are so many benefits
that flow from that and we are eager to capture those.
Mr. Ellzey. Well said. Ms. Lowe, when you opened up, I
assume, in your native tongue, I have a question about the
preservation of indigenous languages and how we are losing
those at a very quick rate. How is the Endowment for the
Humanities working to preserve our native languages?
Ms. Lowe. Thank you for that question. We have had two
longstanding grant lines, one in our Research Division that is
a collaboration with the National Science Foundation to
document endangered languages. These are large grants for
researchers who come in and really look at the lexicon and the
makeup of languages to document them and to put them into
writing to preserve them. We also have a grant line through our
Preservation and Access Division that allows communities to do
grants that create things like dictionaries and online lexicons
or online resources for community members. I was recently in
Mississippi at the Mississippi Choctaw Nation, and I met the
current Ms. Choctaw, and she talked about how she uses the
online Choctaw dictionary in her work, especially when she goes
out and she speaks to communities. It is a resource that now
students can get online and they can look up words. They are
starting to learn the language, but they can at least look up
words and figure out, you know, what is grandma or grandpa
saying, what are they talking about, right? All of those things
that they hadn't known before.
We have been really focused on making sure that we are
supporting communities to revitalize and document their
languages. In our 2025 budget, we have got 1.5 million
earmarked to really support this work, and this follows up with
our work with the Department of the Interior on the Federal
Indian Boarding School Initiative.
Mr. Ellzey. Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Simpson. Thank you. Ms. McCollum.
Ms. McCollum. Okay. I am going to finish up with what you
were talking about, you know, languages, and a language that
everybody is kind of talking about now is the language of AI
and GPChat, right?
Ms. Lowe. Yeah.
Ms. McCollum. I noticed in your full statement, you talk
about an initiative that was started on how to figure out human
perspectives on AI. AI could be amazing in calculating and
getting things going together faster, but it can also do a lot
of misinformation, a lot of harm. How is the Humanities going
to look at having public engagement to talk about the benefits,
the pitfalls, and possible, I am just going to say it, evils of
AI?
Ms. Lowe. Thank you so much for that question. Well, we
began this work specifically on AI under the American Tapestry
Initiative with a grant called Dangers and Opportunities of
Technology through our Office of Digital Humanities. This was
to take projects specifically from researchers, independent
scholars, teams within institutions to really assess what are
the dangers, but also what are the opportunities of technology
so that we have a better sense ourselves as a national
community where technology does great things for us, but also
where we need to be watching out for dangers of technology.
This has grown into a new initiative that we are calling
Humanities Research Centers for Artificial Intelligence, and
this is specifically to look at AI, artificial intelligence, as
it is being used across our society.
This will be a collaboration between university,
institutions, or between researchers within institutions or
independent research organizations to look at the topic, to
really delve into it and to think about how do we assess our
ethical, legal, societal concerns when it comes to our use of
artificial intelligence. The information and research that will
come out of this will help us to create information that our
State and jurisdictional humanities councils can create
training programs under, that can create educational materials
under. This will be material that can be used in the future to
really think about how we educate ourselves and how we inform
ourselves about artificial intelligence and our use of
artificial intelligence.
Ms. McCollum. Well, you might have to come help Congress
understand how to use artificial intelligence because we are
really kind of grappling with it. People like to put it in a
can and put a lid on it and kind of ignore what is going on or
just pull one thing out and just focus on that, so it will be
interesting to do the follow-up on your work.
Ms. Lowe. We would be delighted to come and give you a
follow-up.
Ms. McCollum. All right. To my friend down at the other end
of the table, it is 58 degrees in Minnesota. You are missing
it? I thought what was interesting, and I had similar
experiences when my father was stationed with the air bases and
spent a lot of time in Dallas-Fort Worth. I could even sing the
right words to the right Texas State song. It is where you are,
and one moment in time can transport you past, present, and
into the future. COVID really kind of kept us from doing a lot
of those things, so I was interested to see how your attendance
has sprung up from COVID.
As you pointed out, you know, we have a lot of people
coming through the Mall, a lot of people confused where the
Smithsonian ends and starts with you, the Library of Congress,
all kind of jumbled in together. Have you noticed anything
different now as people are coming into the art gallery and
viewing things, questions, I mean, still the same first-time
people coming through, tourists coming through. I am glad the
attendance is back, but has there been a change since COVID
because we have noticed in the Twin Cities with arts,
humanities, theater, that people are just like soaking it in,
glad that they have it, but it is still part of a healing
process. Can you maybe speak to that a little bit?
Ms. Feldman. Absolutely. Thank you, Ms. McCollum. I do
agree with you that the arts have been a critical part of the
recovery of the United States, globally, but also the United
States after COVID. I also think that in our sort of fraught
world today, the arts provide a real moment of centering for
people. I started my comments with President Roosevelt's note
that the importance of the National Gallery was that works of
art are the symbols of the human spirit. He also spoke about
shared humanity, and shared humanity is a part of our mission
statement at the National Gallery.
It is proven that people come to museums in part because it
is a social event. They usually come with somebody else, and
they are there because they like being around with other
people. Our earliest painting is from the 13th century up to
some things just created this year, and that you can see that
spectrum chronologically and globally, I think, helps to center
people. I firmly believe that in the years ahead, the arts and
humanities are only going to become more important to us as a
society for our democracy, and we are really proud at the
National Gallery to be a part of that.
Ms. McCollum. I want to kind of dive back into what Mr.
Ellzey was talking about, your work within the DOD with the
arts and humanities. When we were at the height of injuries
from the Iraq and Afghanistan war, the National Endowment for
the Arts stood up, and they stood up in a big way to heal our
soldiers. I am on both committees, the Defense Committee, and,
you know, the Endowment was selflessly giving their precious
dollars to the Department of Defense, so now we have a program
within the Department of Defense to do that.
Are there more opportunities to expand? We had other
opportunities of collaborations where we were talking about
mental health and drug and substance abuse and that. With all
the challenges in society right now and the isolation that
sometimes people are feeling, the reach-out that you did for
veterans and for members currently serving was significant, and
for their families as well. Have you been approached about
other ideas? Do you have other ideas we should think about? We
need to be careful with your dollar, so I am always looking for
other opportunities to have people come to you for ideas and
then pay for it themselves.
Ms. Jackson. Thank you. Thank you for the question and for
the acknowledgement, and I should say we continue to be really
proud to continue standing up with DOD and making sure that
that program is strong and continues to evolve and grow. One of
the expansions, as I mentioned earlier, has to do with being
able to offer the services that our military personnel, which
they have come to rely on, within community settings. I think
that there is a lot to learn from how that rolls out and what
implications there could be for other populations that are
suffering from trauma of different sorts. The intersection
between the arts, whether it is active engagement and actually
making art, which is what happens with the----
Ms. McCollum. They were making themselves.
Ms. Jackson. Yes. Yes.
Ms. McCollum. Yeah.
Ms. Jackson. That has evolved to other kinds of engagements
with other art forms as well. Whether it is active engagement
or, you know, participating, to experience a concert or to go
to a play or what have you, all of that speaks to healing
processes, whether it is a healing process for a society and a
community to come together again or whether it is for
individual health, an individual wellness. The more we learn
about how that works and how the programs that we support might
intersect with that intention, I think the better off we will
be as a country.
Certainly, in travel that we have done over the last couple
of years as we have talked with people about why the arts
matter in their communities, coming out of the pandemic, there
is a hunger to be together again. There is a hunger to satisfy
that human need for connection. There is, in many communities,
interest in understanding what the arts have to do with mental
health and substance abuse, and there is, I think, appetite and
will to look to other ways or other modalities of addressing
these issues. The arts come up over and over again as assets
from which to build in those cases. I am excited about that,
and it is part of why we are being intentional about looking at
the intersection of arts and healing and wellness. If we are
going to understand the power of the arts and their fullness,
that is a very important area to focus on and be able to grow
really.
Ms. McCollum. Well, as a social studies teacher, I could go
back to the humanities, but I am not going to. Mr. Chair,
before I yield, this weekend, there is another military family
program that connects this committee to the DOD, and that is
the Blue Star Families.
Ms. Jackson. Yes.
Ms. McCollum. I was down in Old Town, Alexandria, watching
kids set a hook on a line to go out maybe catch something,
maybe some weeds, I am not sure, but it was just wonderful to
see the joy on their faces. Alongside of that, they had art
exhibits, creativity places for the kids to go.
Ms. Jackson. It is a really wonderful program.
Ms. McCollum. I just want to thank all three of you for
what you do to heal our Nation because right now we need some
healing.
Mr. Simpson. Mr. Harder.
Mr. Harder. Thank you so much, Mr. Chair, and I echo all my
colleagues' comments. We are so excited to see you here, and we
are very supportive of the work that you do to tell the stories
of our Nation. I just got back from our congressional art
competition last week, and it was so exciting to see artists
from across my district and just to see how talented they were
and to see the next generation of leadership ready to take the
reins, and the arts and the humanities was really thrilling.
They seem to get better every year.
I am really encouraged to hear your comments about work to
make sure that resources for humanities and the arts goes to
rural and low-income districts, but, frankly, I don't think we
do a great job of that right now. Unfortunately, I think the
trends nationally are going in the opposite direction where it
feels like a lot of the resources that exist are being
centralized more and more in a handful of areas, a handful of
institutions, and that arts and the humanities are increasingly
becoming more accessible to the wealthiest and the most well-
connected and less accessible to folks in districts like mine.
I think of the University of the Pacific, our one university
that hasn't gotten an NEH grant for almost 10 years, whereas we
have lots of resources going to great universities across the
country. Obviously, that inequity exists in many areas, but if
you tell me for NSF or NIH funds that Harvard or MIT has a
better biology lab, I think we can probably grant that they do
great work. If you tell me that that exists and there is a
monopoly for creativity or art, I am not sure I quite see that,
and yet I am not sure I see that reflected in your budget.
Ms. Lowe, you spent time at Harvard and Yale, which is
great. Do you have a sense of the research budget for the NIH?
How much goes to R1 research institutions versus R2, R3
institutions today?
Ms. Lowe. Thank you for your question, and you mean NEH,
right, and not----
Mr. Harder. NEH, yeah.
Ms. Lowe. NEH, okay. I can get those numbers for you. I
don't have those off the top of my head.
Ms. Lowe. What I can note is that we have made very
specific strides to figure out how to reach our rural
communities. We created a new Office of Data and Evaluation,
and this office can give us information on exactly where our
money is going, where we are funding, the districts we are
funding, the types of institutions we are funding, but more
importantly, I have asked for information on where we are not
funding. You know, I see very similar things that you do, that
money has been going into very large institutions, and I want
to see money going into small institutions. I want to see them
applying and thinking about NEH as a resource for the work that
they do.
Our Office of Data and Evaluation has begun to start that
work and to pull our data together so we can answer those kinds
of questions. We then have just started our Office of Outreach,
and this office will ensure that we have the information from
our Office of Data and Evaluation to be able to do outreach
into those communities so we can tell them that NEH is a
possibility for them, that we have grant lines that we have
created that are specifically for rural communities and smaller
organizations, that we can answer their questions, that we can
connect them to staff within our office when they have a
project that they are thinking about applying for.
I agree with Chair Jackson that part of this work means
being on the ground and listening and hearing what the needs
are and having a better understanding directly from these
communities what have been their limitations, what have been
the barriers to successful applications, and how we can think
about the work that we do to make their process a little bit
more easy, but also in a manner where they can be successful in
their applications. I am really looking forward to continuing
this work and moving that forward.
Mr. Harder. That is great. I know you all have a hard job,
where, you know, if you give one grant to an organization
somewhere that people can misconstrue or use for their own
political means, you get roasted for it. In my experience,
smaller institutions like the ones in my district that aren't
as well resourced, you know, they don't have an army of
lobbyists, and it is really a struggle to put together a grant
application. I think that is why we haven't seen quite the
resources from your agencies come to places in the country like
mine. What I would really encourage you to think about is, you
know, simplifying and making that grant process much easier. I
understand there are tradeoffs there, but there is no degree of
technical assistance that can really fix a complicated grant,
and to think about where those cracks are.
Just going through the list of looking at some of the NEH
organizations that have been funded, it feels like the vast
lion's share of those resources are going to the wealthiest
institutions in America, and there is great folks that work
there, but I think we would love to work with you in
democratizing that and understanding that a little bit better.
Dr. Jackson, any thoughts on what we can do to support that
effort and make sure that those resources go where they are
delivered?
Ms. Jackson. Sure. At the NEA, certainly, I think it is
true, as is true with the NEH, there is a big commitment to
reducing barriers, and getting clear about what the barriers
are from the people who face them is really important. Again,
having that proximity to communities is something that I have
certainly prioritized in travel, and trying to understand how
we have been showing up and how we need to show up going
forward.
I think in rural communities especially it is important to
not just think of the arts in a silo, and I think that is true
everywhere, to not only think of the arts in a bubble, but
there are so many examples of organizations that serve
communities that are often isolated that are multifunctional.
They are the youth development, they are senior centers, they
are all of these things, and recognizing that that can be a
very viable cultural center and we need to take them seriously
as potential applicants and partners, that is something that we
are certainly committed to, is to recognizing what are the
circumstances, what are the realities in communities and how
can we be responsive. There is a commitment to continuing to do
that, and happy to work with you on how to double down on that.
Mr. Harder. Yeah, we would love to work with you. In my
experience, world-class excellence for the humanities and for
the arts aren't only found in the Ivy League, and, in fact, are
often found really in areas of the country like mine that are
often ignored. It has been disappointing to see some of the
grant applications that have been rejected or not accepted in
previous years, and I think we are probably not the only
district that sees that. Part of it is the limited resources
and the tough decisions that you have to make but would love to
brainstorm what we can do to try to----
Ms. Jackson. Absolutely.
Mr. Harder [continuing]. Make sure that that is a fair and
equitable and democratic process to make sure that districts
that maybe don't have those institutions are still making sure
that those are competitive. Thank you so much for the work you
are doing, and, Mr. Chair, I yield back.
Mr. Simpson. Mr. Kilmer.
Mr. Kilmer. Thank you, Chairman, and before I kick off, I
actually just want to acknowledge we have got a group of
students from an Ivy League school. Sorry about that.
Voice. Oh, the worst.
Mr. Kilmer. From Princeton. They have been looking at how
to reform Congress and make the institution function better. We
have got in the audience, Kelsey, Lauren, Braden, Oscar, Avi,
Cole, Don, and Emma, if they can all wave. Thanks. There you
go. We are a tough crowd, so thank you for being here.
I have got three questions and not a lot of time, so I am
going to start, Dr. Jackson, with you. I represent 12 Native
American Tribes, and the NEA has been extraordinary, I think,
in providing grants that have made a real difference in terms
of celebrating their culture, sustaining their culture. We have
seen grants to the Quileute Tribe for the expansion of Tribal
culture and language programs, the Lower Elwha Klallam Tribe
for the creation of regalia and traditional ceremonial attire,
the Port Gamble S'Klallam Tribe for crafting supplies for youth
to create regalia, Makah Days for the Makah Tribe. They
actually do dance gear and do ceremonial dances with help from
the NEA. The NEA actually also named a National Heritage
fellow, Ed Eugene Carriere, from the Suquamish Tribe, who
learned basket weaving from his great grandmother, Julia Jacob,
of the Suquamish Tribe. I hope you might start by just sharing
your long-term vision for expanding these opportunities for
Tribal communities and for Native artists.
Ms. Jackson. Thank you. Thank you for the question, and
thank you for the acknowledgement. We take our commitment to
Native populations very seriously. As I said earlier, one of
the things we are really proud of is that we are hiring for the
first time a director of Native Arts and Tribal Affairs. The
idea there is that we have a dedicated resource that is
insightful and knowledgeable about how best to serve Native
populations, recognizing that there is history and complexity,
and we want to be able to meet that need, and as well as not
only meet needs, but fuel aspirations. It is wonderful to see
not only the reclamation of culture, but the advancement of
living culture.
To the previous point about, you know, where does art and
culture live, it lives in all communities. The Arts Endowment's
role is to help to bolster the cultural ecosystems that allow
for all people to deliver their cultural gifts to the country.
I think these are examples of places where intention and
attention is necessary, and I am happy that we are able to
provide that.
Mr. Kilmer. Excellent. Thank you for that. Chair Lowe, I
have got two questions for you if time permits. We love
Humanities. In the State of Washington, they do an
extraordinary job, including on things like trying to address
literacy rates. They have been leading the Primetime Family
Reading Program, which helps families bond and develop a
relationship with reading and books. We actually got a
statement from the Pierce County Library System that said,
``Students in the Primetime Family Reading Program see
themselves in readers and lovers of books. They are beginning
to read more fluently and more often. What more could we ask
for?'' Each session includes a complimentary meal and
storytelling, and Humanities Washington has now expanded the
program to include preschool age studies as well. To date, they
have served over 10,000 individuals and nearly 3,500 families
and only made possible because of grants from the National
Endowment for the Humanities. I am very grateful for your
partnership on that front. Just interested in hearing you share
more about the NEH's vision for expanding programs that support
literacy among young people.
Ms. Lowe. Yes. Thank you for that question, and thank you
for acknowledging Humanities Washington. Our State and
jurisdictional humanities councils in all 56 States and
jurisdictions do amazing work on the ground, with local
communities addressing the needs that are very specific to
their States and the populations of their States. That
particular program is just one example of a literacy program
that is being offered and run by one of the State and
jurisdictional councils. We have a number of them, of the
councils that do these programs that are very specific to
connecting teaching literacy to young children, but also
teaching literacy to the adults that are in their household who
maybe are not fluent English speakers so that they can have
literacy within the home to support the youth who are going to
school. The other avenues that we support literacy projects are
through funding to libraries, both State libraries and local
libraries, many of them that do their own literacy programs for
various populations across their regions and across their
communities.
We also do major funding. We did a grant to the American
Library Association for Great Stories Club, reading and
discussions for at-risk youth in particular. These are more
national programs that really bring literacy projects and
programs to individuals that might not get them otherwise, and
we are very proud of this work and really interested in
supporting this kind of work across the country.
Mr. Kilmer. Super. Chairman, do I have time for one more?
Okay. I am moving from reading to writing. I appreciated that
the NEH intends to carry out a program model on the original
Federal Writers' Project, which was outlined in the budget
justification. The original Federal Writers' Project produced
books describing American life in 48 States, 40 cities, 18
regions and territories, provided the curation of invaluable
oral histories, including an accounting of more than 2,300
first-person accounts from formerly enslaved people. It enabled
great American authors to produce great and really truly great
American works, and we are approaching the 250th anniversary of
the Declaration of Independence. We have this opportunity to
show future Americans who we are now and what our values are
now, how we live our lives now, what we hope for now, what
unites us now. To that end, I was hoping you would just share
what the vision is by the NEH for the Federal Writers' Project
as we approach the 250th anniversary of our country.
Ms. Lowe. Sure. Thank you so much for that question as
well. I will have to say that NEH, you know, one of the visions
that we have and the mission that we have is in 250 years, when
Americans have a question about who we were 250 years ago, the
material to answer those questions will be available and they
will have access to it, and that is exactly the type of
projects that we fund.
We have already been doing some of this work through our
Preservation and Access Division, supporting communities who
are taking oral histories and written documents from
individuals who are talking about their experiences over the
pandemic and dealing with COVID-19. We have a model for
starting this program and for really thinking about how this
work will move forward. We have also supported some of this
work at our State and jurisdictional humanities councils,
working very specifically in small communities, particularly
those communities that unfortunately lost a number of their
community members to COVID-19. We are very interested in
continuing this work. We are actively looking at what that
project will look like as we go into celebrating the 250th, and
we are delighted to be able to support it.
Mr. Kilmer. Thank you. Thank you, Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Simpson. Mr. Edwards.
Mr. Edwards. Thank you. All right. Well, thanks all of you
for being here with us this afternoon.
Dr. Rosario, going through your testimony and the
President's budget request for fiscal year 2025, I appreciate
that the request for funding increases are relatively minor. As
we all know, like many American families, we are all having to
do more with less in the most recent years. During the fiscal
year 2024 appropriations cycle, I voted on an amendment that
would have cut all the funding for both the National Endowments
for the Arts and Humanities, the NEA and NEH. I voted against
the amendment that would have cut all of that. I voted no, and
I am confident that there are a lot of folks back in my
constituency that disagree with that vote.
My request to you or question to you now is simple, and I
open it up to anyone that would like to take a shot at
answering it. Can you explain why the NEA and NEH are deserving
of hundreds of millions of dollars of hard-earned taxpayers'
money each year and why my colleagues and I should oppose
efforts to strip such funding, as I am sure that we will most
likely have to take that vote again this year?
Ms. Jackson. Thank you. Thank you for your support and
thank you for the question. I think that the most comprehensive
answer is that the arts are foundational to all that we want to
achieve as a Nation of opportunity and justice. The arts allow
us to be fully human, to express our humanity, to see the
humanity of others, and I think that in and of itself is a
precondition for all of the other things that we say we want to
accomplish. We can get more specific and talk about the impacts
of the arts on the economy and recognize that it is an
important economic driver. Increasingly, research tells us that
it has a lot to do with our well-being and our health. It is
part of what makes for a viable democracy. It is essential to
our social fabric and to re-knitting that social fabric.
I think that more robust understanding of the arts and
humanities is the kind of understanding that is necessary for
us to recognize that this is one of our wisest investments in
our country.
Mr. Edwards. I appreciate that response. There are a lot of
folks back at home that would not agree with that since we have
so many other priorities in America right now, so I am sure
this committee is going to be faced with another such vote. My
next question is for you, Ms. Lowe, and, again, I appreciate
you being with us today. I know that colleges and universities
benefit every year from NEH grants to support humanities
education, including those in my own district. We know that in
recent days, we have seen some institutions like Columbia in
New York City and George Washington University just up the road
become horrific epicenters of antisemitism in the guise of
protests against the war between Israel and Hamas terrorists.
Do you believe, and if so why, that institutions that fail to
make Jewish students or any culture or race feel safe to go to
school and rally against different types of racism should be
eligible for NEH grant funding?
Ms. Lowe. Thank you so much, Committee Member Edwards, for
that question, and I am like most Americans. I am very aware of
what has been occurring on college campuses, and I think there
are a number of important American values that are at stake in
what has been happening, one, the right to attend a college or
university free from unlawful discrimination, the right to free
speech, and the right to assemble and protest peacefully.
With that being said, I am not in a position to be able to
comment on the events or incidents as they are sensitive and
fact-specific matters that are addressed best by college and
university leaders where they are taking place on their
campuses. What I can assure the committee members today is that
in my role as chair of the National Endowment for the
Humanities, I take very seriously the full enforcement of the
vast body of Congress' antidiscrimination laws, and that
includes Title VI, Title IX, and Section 504 of the
Rehabilitation Act of 1975. In the event that NEH may receive
reports that a recipient of our funds has or is violating any
of Congress's nondiscrimination laws, we will act very quickly
to investigate, and if we find that discrimination has
occurred, we will terminate the funding to that recipient and,
if appropriate, refer the matter to the Department of Justice
for corrective litigation.
With that being said, our grant opportunities are open to
institutions across the United States. They are reviewed under
a very rigorous peer review process. They are awarded based on
the strengths of their applications and what has been
presented, but we take very seriously if the institutions are
doing something that is a violation of the law.
Mr. Edwards. Thank you. I appreciate your candid answers,
and, Mr. Chair, I yield.
Mr. Simpson. Thank you. Let me ask a question that is kind
of spurred by, Mr. Edwards' question. Years ago, when I first
came here, there was a congressman, Jim Leach, who was from
Iowa, and I think it was President Bush during his first term
appointed him chairman of the National Endowment for the
Humanities. He started a program called Civility. Apparently,
it wasn't very successful judging by the result, but he went
around the country with panels and they talked about civility
and how do you create civility in this country. We are in dire
need of that today. Do you still pursue that program that he
established? Is that still part of the NEH's mission and stuff?
Ms. Lowe. One of the things that we are very focused on is
civic education, particularly among young people. This is part
of the work that we are doing with National History Day and
supporting that work across all 56 State and jurisdictions, and
bringing students into that work to help them really understand
what it means to be a part of a democracy, a very strong
democracy. Where did that democracy come from? What informs
that democracy? How do they take that information, share it
among their peers, and then share it on the national stage in a
national competition? You know, we really think that creating
civic engagement and civic education opportunities at a young
age is really going to foster a better understanding of what it
means to be civically engaged as you become an adult.
We do a lot of work that ensures that we can fund civics
education, that we can have these opportunities for young
people, but also to ensure that we can have dialogue programs,
that our State and jurisdictional humanities councils can
create those exact opportunities. We have a number of them, if
not all of them, who have dialogue conversations to bring their
community members in together, particularly to talk about
opposing views or things that are going on nationally that they
feel are important to have conversations about. This work
includes bringing in speakers that have been vetted through a
speakers' bureau that communities can bring in and have
present, and then open up questions for community members to
have. We are very, very interested in supporting that work and
continuing that.
Mr. Simpson. Okay. Thank you, and I have said it for the 22
years that I have been on this committee. One of the things
that is important to me is getting the humanities and the arts
out to rural America. I am not really worried about the art
program in Washington, D.C. or New York City or Los Angeles.
They have the resources to be able to develop their own
programs, and I don't think they are short of resources to do
it; Jerome, Idaho, Salmon, Idaho, a different story. As you
know, some of the money that we appropriate goes to local
humanities councils and art councils in the States and then
down to local art councils. I know that because my wife serves
on the Idaho Falls Art Council, has for a number of years. As I
look at this budget, the request, Chair Lowe, includes $60
million for State humanities councils. That is a reduction
below 2024 levels. Why is that, and is it not important? I
think we ought to be increasing the amount that goes to the
State humanities council and the art councils, frankly, because
they do great work out there in those States.
Ms. Lowe. Yes, I agree. We love our State and
jurisdictional humanities council. The decrease is based on the
proportion of the decrease in the overall budget. Our State and
jurisdictional humanities council receive a portion of our
programmatic funds, and a decrease in the overall programmatic
funds will decrease the State and jurisdictional humanities
council.
Mr. Simpson. Is that statutory?
Ms. Lowe. It is based on a formula that has been created,
so it is a formula. We would have to change it in order to
change that funding level.
Mr. Simpson. Is the same true with the arts based on
statute?
Ms. Jackson. What is required is a minimum amount to re-
grant what for a number of years has been agency policy.
Mr. Simpson. Okay. Chair Jackson, I am always very
supportive of our veterans and their honorable service. I
understand the Creative Forces Program has had great success
over the years. Can you please elaborate on how this program
has grown and the impact that it has on veterans and their
families?
Ms. Jackson. Sure. The Creative Forces Program, now in its
12th or 13th year, continues to expand in terms of how many
military personnel it serves. The realms in which it is
available has now expanded from just clinical settings and on
military properties to communities, and we are very excited
about that. I think that there is continued evolution and
innovation in the modalities that are offered to personnel. We
are seeing also an adjacent growth in the research that helps
us understand what is happening from a health perspective, from
a medical perspective what happens when military personnel or
people are engaged in creative process, what that does in terms
of making healing possible. There is evolution on a number of
different fronts, I think number of people served as well as
places where it is available, as well as evolution of the
modality itself.
Mr. Simpson. Thank you.
Ms. Jackson. Yes.
Mr. Simpson. Let me just say before I move on, Chair Lowe,
that I agree fully with what Mr. Ellzey was saying about
preserving native languages. If we are going to preserve native
heritage, it starts with preserving their languages. I have had
the opportunity, as you know, to go to Fort Hall and go to one
of the smallest schools where they were teaching young students
how to speak Bannock, and it was fascinating to sit and watch
this. We need to do that across country because we are going to
lose these native languages if we don't preserve them, so I
appreciate the work you are doing in that arena. Ms. Pingree.
Ms. Pingree. Thank you, Mr. Chair, and thank you really.
You have answered a lot of great questions, and I appreciate
your answers very much. Let's see. I can't explain why the
administration did in their budget a $210 million endowment for
the arts and $200 for the humanities.
Mr. Simpson. It is not given.
Ms. Pingree. Yeah. They both do incredibly good work. When
you were reflecting the cut to the State agencies, and I agree
that State agencies are really important way that these are
structured. It is because of this proportional cut. I mean, I
love seeing the 4210 little bump up there from $207, although
207 is the area code for Maine, so I have been, you know, kind
of, you know, comfortable with that number for a while.
Mr. Simpson. 208 is the area code for Idaho.
Ms. Pingree. Oh, there you go.
Mr. Simpson. We are actually a little higher than you.
Ms. Pingree. Yeah, there you go. Wouldn't you know? Anyway,
I just wanted to reflect that as part of the reason for that
cut, so I hope we can even all that out.
Anyway, I have had a chance to ask you guys both questions,
and I just want to go back to Director Feldman, you know, back
to the kind of museum culture or whatever, and you have done so
many interesting things there. You are the first female
director. I know you have really thought a lot about diversity
and inclusion in your exhibit. I just want to hear a little bit
from you about how your perspective now on, you know, what
should be included in museums and galleries has influenced the
Gallery's practices and the collections and how some of the
things you have been thinking are to sort of better reflect
what America has impacted the visitor experience.
I will just editorialize a bit. Actually, when Chair
Jackson came to me, we took her to a couple of different
exhibits. I thought it was interesting to see traditional
museums, very small museums, but still saying, no, we are not
going to just put the kind of old masters of our collection.
You know, how do we lead with things that are about indigenous
people and the multiplicity of cultures that live in our State,
or even talking about some of the tougher issues that we need
to address through art. Anyway, I am interested, not to lead
you into a complicated issue. You know, your perspective is
different. You are the first female director, and have you been
thinking about this and what goes into the collection?
Ms. Feldman. Thank you, Ms. Pingree. Actually, I often tell
a story that, when I was contemplating the opportunity at the
National Gallery, I had breakfast with one of my mentors in
Minneapolis, Richard Davis. I told him that I had only ever
worked for museums that were deeply embedded in a community and
that were responsive to their community, and I didn't know how
to approach a Federal institution. Richard leaned across and he
said, yes, but the Nation becomes your community, and what does
that mean? I immediately got excited about that and realized it
was a new challenge for me. After arriving at the Gallery, we
drafted a vision statement, which says, ``Of the Nation and for
all the people,'' and that really is what drives our work. We
think constantly about the plurality that is America and how we
are sure that we are an institution that enables people to find
themselves broadly. There isn't one answer to that.
We love our collections and our historic collections, and
we are thinking about how we do represent the Nation. For
example, when I arrived, the museum didn't have any major works
by Native-American artists, and we are the National Gallery of
Art. We have added the acquisition of works by Native-American
artists to the work that we are doing at the Gallery and just
trying to be a place where all people can find themselves. By
diversifying the staff and our program, we have been able to do
that but not at the detriment of any one group. We really are
here to serve all people and trying to tell new stories with
the collection.
For example, we recently acquired a painting by an artist,
Mattia Preti, who was an Italian artist from the late 17th
century. It is not a portrait, but it shows probably a real man
who was sitting on the ground. It was painted when the artist
was in Malta in the late 17th century, and the man is sitting
on the ground and he is cutting tobacco. Most of our Italian
pictures are of religious subjects, and this painting enables
people to see somebody who was perhaps enslaved at the time
because of where Malta was located. Certainly, a working class
person, and he is cutting tobacco. It also tells the story of
tobacco coming into Europe in the 17th century, and it is a
fantastic work of art that meets all of our requirements of
being an important work. We are trying to tell new stories so
that we, you know, broaden exposure and the attraction to the
public.
Ms. Pingree. Thank you for that. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Simpson. Mr. Ellzey.
Mr. Ellzey. No.
Mr. Simpson. Ms. McCollum.
Ms. McCollum. We just went through a process, and Chairman
Cole is not here, and I totally respect him a great deal, and
the people that I am sitting here with know I don't toss the
word ``my good friend'' when I am on the House floor. Tom Cole
is a great friend. Within the constrictions of getting us to be
able to continue funding projects in our communities, we had to
cut out nonprofits. You work a lot with nonprofits or you are
working with nonprofits to get school children in or reach
rural communities. I just wanted to give an example of how the
NEA and the NEH do nonprofit work. I am going on the other side
of the river. I am going to St. Paul.
The Ordway is a nonprofit theater and it engages in the
Kennedy Center's Partnerships in Education. The Ordway provides
arts education to all students K-12, ensuring that there are
affordable tickets available to local shows. Sometimes it is
free. They also do things at children's hospitals. We have
children's hospitals that draw children in from treatment from
a five-State area, so sometimes very rural areas. Part of what
ends up happening is, you know, they take some of the funding
from you and then they cobbled something together from a
nonprofit. We are not going to be able to do anything this
year, and maybe we do need to look at the way nonprofits are
funded into the future.
I have got a letter into Mr. Cole saying that, you know, I
would love to talk to him about some of these things. I even
landed up with a fire department that couldn't apply the way it
should have been able to because of the way that they do a
joint powers agreement. They qualified as a not-for-profit,
right? As your grants go out, could you maybe talk about how
you are really there matching community dollars, and it is
often the community raising the dollars themselves, to get a
magnifying effect of what you do, and that might even be true
when you are lending some of your art out.
Just take a second and help inform me so when I get an
opportunity to talk to Mr. Cole, you know, in the coming months
about next year about this.
Ms. Feldman. Thank you for that question, Ms. McCollum. We
recently agreed to lend a work of art to a small regional
museum, and the director, who I know quite well, sent me a
letter and said that he found our requirements for transport
and crating onerous. In his letter he said we small
institutions are not going to survive if you big ones don't
help us out. I was really struck by his comment, and as I said
earlier, from my past experience, I know what that is like.
Much of our work now at the National Gallery is thinking
about how can we leverage our collection, our resources,
support from our patrons so that we can help because it is not
just lending the works of art to these institutions. They need
help with shipping and insurance and security officers,
education programs, and so we are taking a really long look at
that because I do feel that we have, as the National Gallery,
the obligation and opportunity to serve regional institutions.
Ms. Jackson. Thank you for the question. As I said earlier
today, we are taking very seriously the charge of reducing
barriers as much as we possibly can. We know that there are
many viable and stretched organizations that are important to
communities around the country. Being able to, I think, do two
things, work with them to remove some of the barriers, whether
it is through webinars or technical assistance in terms of
filling out grant requirements and similar, that is something
that we are committed to, but also taking a look at what can we
do differently that actually removes barriers to organizations
that, frankly, we have to rely on. We need to understand their
importance in helping us meet mission. The notion of removing
barriers, I think, isn't only about how can we help
organizations meet the match, do the paperwork, et cetera, but
can we also look internally to see if there are things that we
can change.
I know that the staff is really committed to being an ally
in helping people apply. When we go around the country, one of
the things that I am very proud of is that people often say
that when they engage with staff that they have had good
experiences, and I hope to continue to promote that. Certainly
working with the small organizations and getting to a place
where we can do that easily is something that we also I think
need to work with State arts agencies of local arts agencies
on. That coordination at the different levels to relieve
barriers is something that we are taking seriously.
Ms. Lowe. Yes, and thank you for pointing that out, and
kind of some of the challenges that we see in entities that are
trying to apply to us, we fund nonprofits. We have an Office of
Challenge Programs that is specifically built to help leverage
non-Federal funding for projects. We find that applicants who
apply to NEH who are successful, who get an award from NEH,
will often say, you know, this allowed us to apply for grants
from other organizations, private foundations, and funders
because they see that an award from NEH is a seal of approval
that we are doing great work. We have such a rigorous peer-
review process and we, you know, fund on the strengths of the
applications, they have been able then to say we can take this
funding from NEH and tell a private funder we have got this
money, and say, okay, we are really interested in the work that
you are doing, you know, is there something that we can do to
help? That is what our Office of Challenge Programs is set up
to help organizations do. They are required to do fundraising,
to do some cost sharing, cost matching for the amount that they
are looking for.
We have also had the opportunity in fiscal year 2024 to
fill our assistant chair for strategic partnerships and
initiatives, which is a position that had been vacant for a
number of years. With this individual in place, we have been
able to really start working on developing conversations and
partnerships with private funders to inform them about the work
that our applicants are doing, the needs that are still in
those areas. Within those either regions, communities, or in
those specific topical areas, that private funding could then
come in and help support. They have been very interested in the
work that we are doing, the topical areas that we are
supporting, and are very interested in having conversations and
understanding what is the best way that they can also support
the work that these communities are doing.
This also goes to our State and jurisdictional humanities
councils, who serve oftentimes as kind of a capacity-building
entity for these organizations, particularly small ones, to
connect them to other funding opportunities, to fund them
themselves and sometimes with smaller amounts, but to make
those connections to ensure that we have the opportunity to
bring more funding into these organizations.
Ms. McCollum. Well, thank you, because I bring it up that
the Playwrights Center was one of my community funded projects,
and it is the National Playwrights Center. In that Playwrights
Center, there was funding that came through the Federal
Government, our tax dollars. Minnesota is a donor State. The
State did a match. You know, there were other nonprofits who
were all involved in coming together as a community to do that,
and this is going to be a facility where you are going to have
some folks that you have given grants to performing in and
doing pieces in. I totally respect the chair's decision, the
full chair of the Appropriations Committee. I am glad we were
able to keep our community projects, but we need to figure out
a way that we can kind of knit things together, I think, in a
better fashion, and I look forward to doing that in the future.
Thank you.
Mr. Simpson. Mr. Kilmer.
Mr. Kilmer. Thanks, Chairman. I am going to keep it brief,
but I actually really appreciate you asking about civility. I
think it is one of the things we have just got to get better
at. The capacity to disagree with each other without it having
to be a mess in our communities has become challenging. I went
to a YMCA in my district thinking they were going to talk to me
about gymnasiums losing money during the pandemic, but the one
that they talked to me about was fights breaking out at the Y
over politics, and it has been so rough, they have actually
hired a consultant to train their staff and train their board
in conflict resolution. They are hosting bridging events to try
to get people to talk about their differences rather than, you
know, having to worry about getting on the elliptical and
getting punched in the face.
I know actually a lot of the work that you all do is sort
of in that arena, right? When we talk about the Federal
Writers' Project, that is about, you know, sort of the best of
us, what are our values, how are we sort of collectively
Americans. Humanities Washington actually I participated in.
They have a speakers bureau, and they did an event focused on
political polarization, and they had Amanda Ripley, who was
just cracker jack, and Eric Liu, and I thought it was just
excellent. It was really well done and I think an important
dialogue that we should do more of, so I guess that is just
encouragement.
I will mention Andy Barr and I have a bill called the
Building Civic Bridges Act to sort of support some of these
hyperlocal efforts to get folks talking to each other and
building some of those devices and to support colleges and
universities that are doing research in this space. The NEA
also, in your budget justification it mentioned funding to
combat hate-motivated violence and to promote civic engagement
and to promote media literacy. I actually think that is super
important because the media often sort of amplifies the
tensions and the conflict rather than helping us work through
that.
Mostly I just want to affirm the importance of what the
chairman raised, but if you have anything further you want to
share with members of the committee about the work you are
doing. I think that members of Congress, you know, listen. We
are a diverse 435-member organization. Some people are conflict
entrepreneurs who profit off of the conflict, and some people I
think are genuinely worried about it and actually want to see
the institution function better, and we would love to hear how
we can be partners with you in that endeavor.
Ms. Jackson. Thank you for, again, that affirmation. I
think that the arts need to be understood as a base from which
that kind of civility might be possible. When someone
experiences, whether it is a play or an exhibition or there is
a collective effort to make something together, the dynamics
change, and what we see is barriers may disappear or become
something else. It is through those experiences I often say
that that engages head, heart, and hand, you know,
intellectually, emotionally, and physically that we are
available for breakthroughs and opens up our prisms in ways
that allow us to see things differently, in ways that allow us
to be curious and lead with a question and be open to hearing
and learning from different points of view. I think that that
is one of the great benefits of arts participation, is that it
becomes a pathway for that.
Mr. Kilmer. Thank you for that.
Ms. Lowe. You mentioned the State and jurisdictional
humanities councils who do dialogue programs, who also train
facilitators to help do these dialogue programs, because they
need facilitators in these instances, but our State and
jurisdictional humanities councils also often serve as centers
for the book in each State. You mentioned, you know, literacy.
Part of talking about civility and talking about the ability to
speak with other individuals is reading books, is reading books
that are picked by the States, and they will do a book for
adults. They will do a nonfiction. They will do a book for
young readers. They will pass these books out. They will make
them available to communities. They will bring in authors. They
will have discussion series. A lot of them will do book
festivals, where, you know, parents come with their children,
hundreds of people come to see the books, to get copies of the
books, just like we do here at the National Book Festival.
Then to also have these really in-depth conversation with
authors, who come from across the country to have these
conversations to talk about the resources that they provide
through their books. These individuals, families can walk away
with that and can walk away with some ideas on how to think
about what they have read, how to think about the discussions
that they have had. I mean, we have seen just great success
with book festivals across the country.
Mr. Kilmer. Great. Thank you.
Ms. Feldman. I will just throw in that I think that your
question is really another way of asking Mr. Edwards' question,
which was why the arts matter.
Mr. Kilmer. Yes.
Ms. Feldman. I go back to saying that it is about bringing
people together. It is about feeling that you are part of
something bigger than yourself. It has been proven by social
scientists that when people gather together and feel some kind
of awe in the presence of a work of art or a performance, that
they become less narcissistic. They stop checking their phone
and worrying about other things. They become more generous,
more conscious that they are part of something bigger than
themselves. What happens so often with the work that all three
of us do is that you are bringing together people who may not
normally be together. That is best way to break down barriers,
is when you can see another human being as a human being with
shared thoughts and ideas and create empathy for one another.
Mr. Kilmer. Yeah.
Ms. Feldman. I think that is why this work matters and why
we need to make sure that it is a backbone of what we do in the
United States.
Mr. Kilmer. Thank you. Maybe you will work with us to
organize a field trip of members of Congress. Come do that.
Ms. Feldman. I would love to.
Mr. Kilmer. Great. Thank you, Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Simpson. Thank you, and thank you all for being here.
Thanks for bringing the toys.
Ms. Feldman. I am not going to tell our curator that you
called Leonardo a toy, though.
Mr. Simpson. I have got one final question. If you could
just answer it, Director Feldman. The fiscal year 2025 request
includes $7.7 million and 91 FTEs for guard contract security,
which is an increase of 21 FTEs over last year. I also
understand that of all your staff vacancies, contract security
guards are the highest percentage of vacancies across all job
functions. With the rising incidents of protesters defacing and
ruining precious works of art around the world, has the Gallery
changed its security posture and protocols to better protect
the collection, and have you seen an uptick in security
incidents, and did that prompt the increase in the budget
request for security guards?
Ms. Feldman. Thank you very much, Chair Simpson. Yes, one
of the reasons we are requesting more guards is because we have
been, thanks to your support, fixing the roof in several
quadrants of the West Building, which means galleries have been
closed, and we haven't needed as many officers because of those
closed galleries. We will be finishing that work and we want to
open up all of our galleries for our visitors, so it is partly
that. Yes, it is also the fact that we used to focus more on
the magnetometers at the front door looking for guns and knives
and metal, and we continue to do that. You would be surprised
how many guns and knives we pull off people every year.
What has changed now are the activists who are coming with
paint and food and substances to throw at works of art, or they
are hard to find, which means more bag searches and longer
lines. As all of you know, the security environment just keeps
changing for us, and we are determined to protect the people
who come to the museum and the people who work at the museum
and volunteer, and also these incredible works of art that we
hold in trust.
Mr. Simpson. Thank you. I appreciate it, and, again, thank
you all for being here. I love the NEH and I love the NEA and
the work that you guys do, and I will make sure that we contact
you so that we can set up a thing for the members and staff to
come over and visit because I really don't want to defund you.
I appreciate your willingness to do that.
Thank you all for being here today, and with that, this
committee stands adjourned.
[Questions and answers submitted for the record follow:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
