- MILITARY CONSTRUCTION, VETERANS AFFAIRS, AND RELATED AGENCIES APPROPRIATIONS FOR 2025

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

MILITARY CONSTRUCTION, VETERANS AFFAIRS, AND RELATED AGENCIES
APPROPRIATIONS FOR 2025

_______________________________________________________________________

HEARINGS

BEFORE A

SUBCOMMITTEE OF THE

COMMITTEE ON APPROPRIATIONS

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

_____

SUBCOMMITTEE ON MILITARY CONSTRUCTION, VETERANS AFFAIRS, AND RELATED
AGENCIES

JOHN R. CARTER, Texas, Chairman

DAVID G. VALADAO, California      DEBBIE WASSERMAN SCHULTZ, Florida
JOHN H. RUTHERFORD, Florida       SANFORD D. BISHOP, Jr., Georgia
TONY GONZALES, Texas              SUSIE LEE, Nevada
MICHAEL GUEST, Mississippi        HENRY CUELLAR, Texas
RYAN K. ZINKE, Montana            CHELLIE PINGREE, Maine
STEPHANIE I. BICE, Oklahoma
SCOTT FRANKLIN, Florida

NOTE: Under committee rules, Mr. Cole, as chairman of the full
committee, and Ms. DeLauro, as ranking minority member of the full
committee, are authorized to sit as members of all subcommittees.

Justin Masucci, Jason Wheelock, Arianna Delgado, and Emma Lou Ford
Subcommittee Staff

___

PART 1

Quality of Life in the Military....................................
1
Navy and Marine Corps Military
Construction and Family Housing......................................91

Department of Veterans Affairs.....................................201

GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT

___________________________________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Appropriations

_______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
57-916          WASHINGTON : 2025

PART 1--MILITARY CONSTRUCTION, VETERANS AFFAIRS, AND RELATED AGENCIES

APPROPRIATIONS FOR 2025

COMMITTEE ON APPROPRIATIONS

----------
TOM COLE, Oklahoma, Chairman

HAROLD ROGERS, Kentucky,                         ROSA L. DeLAURO, Connecticut
Chair Emeritus                                 STENY H. HOYER, Maryland
KAY GRANGER, Texas,                              MARCY KAPTUR, Ohio
Chair Emeritus                                 SANFORD D. BISHOP, Jr., Georgia
ROBERT B. ADERHOLT, Alabama                      BARBARA LEE, California
MICHAEL K. SIMPSON, Idaho                        BETTY McCOLLUM, Minnesota
JOHN R. CARTER, Texas                            C. A. DUTCH RUPPERSBERGER,
KEN CALVERT, California                           Maryland
MARIO DIAZ-BALART, Florida                       DEBBIE WASSERMAN SCHULTZ, Florida
STEVE WOMACK, Arkansas                           HENRY CUELLAR, Texas
CHARLES J. ``CHUCK'' FLEISCHMANN,                CHELLIE PINGREE, Maine
Tennessee                                      MIKE QUIGLEY, Illinois
DAVID P. JOYCE, Ohio                             DEREK KILMER, Washington
ANDY HARRIS, Maryland                            MATT CARTWRIGHT, Pennsylvania
MARK E. AMODEI, Nevada                           GRACE MENG, New York
DAVID G. VALADAO, California                     MARK POCAN, Wisconsin
DAN NEWHOUSE, Washington                         PETE AGUILAR, California
JOHN R. MOOLENAAR, Michigan                      LOIS FRANKEL, Florida
JOHN H. RUTHERFORD, Florida                      BONNIE WATSON COLEMAN, New Jersey
BEN CLINE, Virginia                              NORMA J. TORRES, California
GUY RESCHENTHALER, Pennsylvania                  ED CASE, Hawaii
MIKE GARCIA, California                          ADRIANO ESPAILLAT, New York
ASHLEY HINSON, Iowa                              JOSH HARDER, California
TONY GONZALES, Texas                             JENNIFER WEXTON, Virginia
JULIA LETLOW, Louisiana                          DAVID J. TRONE, Maryland
MICHAEL CLOUD, Texas                             LAUREN UNDERWOOD, Illinois
RYAN K. ZINKE, Montana                           SUSIE LEE, Nevada
ANDREW S. CLYDE, Georgia                         MICHAEL GUEST, Mississippi
JAKE LaTURNER, Kansas                            JOSEPH D. MORELLE, New York
JERRY L. CARL, Alabama
STEPHANIE I. BICE, Oklahoma
SCOTT FRANKLIN, Florida
JAKE ELLZEY, Texas
JUAN CISCOMANI, Arizona
CHUCK EDWARDS, North Carolina

Susan Ross, Clerk and Staff Director

(ii)

C O N T E N T S

----------

QUALITY OF LIFE IN THE MILITARY

Page
Bentivenga, John F., U.S. Space Force, Chief Master Sergeant of
the Space Force................................................    54
Prepared statement...........................................    56
Flosi, David A,, U.S. Air Force, Chief Master Sergeant of the Air
Force..........................................................    43
Prepared statement...........................................    45
Honea, James M., U.S. Navy, Master Chief Petty Officer of the
Navy...........................................................    21
Prepared statement...........................................    23
Ruiz, Carlos A., U.S. Marine Corps, Sergeant Major of the Marine
Corps..........................................................    30
Prepared statement...........................................    32
Weimer, Michael R., U.S. Army, Sergeant Major of the Army........     4
Prepared statement...........................................     6

NAVY AND MARINE CORPS MILITARY CONSTRUCTION AND FAMILY HOUSING

Banta, Lt. General Edward D., Deputy Commandant, Installations
and Logistics, U.S. Marine Corps...............................   116
Prepared statement...........................................   118
Berger, Hon. Meredith, Assistant Secretary of the Navy
(Installations, Energy and Environment), Chief Sustainability
Officer, Department of the Navy................................    93
Prepared statement...........................................    95
Answers to submitted questions...............................   152
Jablon, Vice Admiral Jeffrey T., Deputy Chief of Naval
Operations, Installations and Logistics, Department of the Navy   105
Prepared statement...........................................   107

DEPARTMENT OF VETERANS AFFAIRS

McDonough, Hon. Denis R, Secretary, Department of Veterans
Affairs........................................................   206
Prepared statement...........................................   208
Answers to submitted questions...............................   253

(iii)

MILITARY CONSTRUCTION, VETERANS AFFAIRS, AND RELATED AGENCIES

----------

Wednesday, March 20, 2024

QUALITY OF LIFE IN THE MILITARY

WITNESSES

SERGEANT MAJOR MICHAEL R. WEIMER, U.S. ARMY, SERGEANT MAJOR OF THE ARMY
MASTER CHIEF PETTY OFFICER JAMES M. HONEA, U.S. NAVY, MASTER CHIEF
PETTY OFFICER OF THE NAVY
SERGEANT MAJOR CARLOS A. RUIZ, U.S. MARINE CORPS, SERGEANT MAJOR OF THE
MARINE CORPS
CHIEF MASTER SERGEANT DAVID A. FLOSI, U.S. AIR FORCE, CHIEF MASTER
SERGEANT OF THE AIR FORCE
CHIEF MASTER SERGEANT JOHN F. BENTIVENGA, U.S. SPACE FORCE, CHIEF
MASTER SERGEANT OF THE SPACE FORCE
Mr. Carter. Good morning to all of you and welcome. A
little background information that I think would be interesting
to all of you. Sergeant Major Michael R. Weimer of U.S. Army is
the new Sergeant Major of the Army. We welcome you.
Master Chief James Honea, U.S. Navy, Master Chief Petty
Officer of the Navy; Sergeant Major Carlos Ruiz, U.S. Marine
Corps, Sergeant Major of the Marine Corps; Master Chief David
Flosi, U.S. Air Force, Master Chief Sergeant of the Air Force;
and Master Chief Sergeant John F. Bentivenga, U.S. Space Force,
Chief Master Sergeant, Space Force.
Best I can tell, all of you all are practically new. I
think maybe our Navy guy has been here before and most all the
rest of are new. So welcome, OK, first and foremost.
I know you are nervous, but don't be nervous. You are OK.
You are among friends. We consider you the people who give us
the best and most important information about the individual
warriors that you represent.
I think you can tell us more about what is happening on the
ground, in the dorms or whatever you call them, or in the
warfare that is important to the soldier, sailor, airman,
marine, whatever.
So I want to thank you for being here. Be frank. Don't be
afraid to be frank. Tell us what you see, what you think you
need, because we are here to fulfill not only in the event of
the big wars that we may have to fight, but make sure that
those who are willing to fight and go in harm's way, we give
them the best possible things that we can give them as their
government.
So you are our friends, and we are looking to hear from
you.
Today's hearing is on the quality of life for our enlisted
soldiers, sailors, marines, airmen, and guardians, and their
families. Our five witnesses at the table are the highest
enlisted personnel of leadership for their respected branches.
I am pleased that we are having this hearing today to start
off first on our 2025 inquiry for our next bill. This group's
insight is critical. This hearing is a great opportunity to
identify areas where we can be more helpful to our service
members and their families.
It is also an opportunity to discuss the important
connection between facilities, readiness, and quality of life.
Investing in infrastructure bolsters the military's ability
to train and fight, while also ensuring our service members and
their families are taken care of at home every day. We owe that
to them.
Now, I would like to recognize Ms. Wasserman Schultz, my
good friend, for her opening remarks.
Ms. Wasserman Schultz. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I
appreciate you yielding, and I really especially appreciate our
excellent partnership.
We have been side by side on this subcommittee for years,
switching places a couple of times, and it is always an honor
and a pleasure to join you to be able to stand up for,
particularly for this hearing's purpose, the quality of life of
our service members and their families.
I want to thank the five witnesses here today. Mr.
Chairman, I think we have probably the newest minted collection
of enlisted leaders that we have ever had at one time.
We appreciate your dedication, and to the degree that you
can answer questions in detail, that would be incredibly
helpful. But recognizing the brevity of most of your tenure, it
may be necessary for you to come back to us.
But the questions that I know I have are real and I
appreciated the opportunity to talk with nearly all of you in
advance of this hearing.
So our subcommittee continues to provide the robust funding
consistently above budget requests, which is necessary to
address many of the issues that we will discuss here today. But
we all know that, and forgive me, I have a cold on top of my
normally terrible allergies, so I am a little stuffy.
We all know that funding alone is not enough to address
issues like mental health, sexual assault, and inadequate
housing.
Leadership from all of our witnesses here today, thank you
very much, and other senior military leaders is a necessary
part of any solution. Your roles are vital to the success of
our military by ensuring that we take care of all of the needs
of our service members on and off the battlefield. And I know
each of you take your responsibilities seriously.
Maintaining recruitment and retention is a job that is
never completed. I hope to hear from our witnesses today about
the importance of providing adequate housing and childcare.
These fundamental services are essential to bringing on and
keeping service members in the military. And frankly, we have
heard testimony from those very service members, some of whom
have expressed angst to us that they would have liked to or
want to spend their careers in the military, but their quality
of life is so poor that the pressure on their families is
making that very difficult, if not impossible.
If we can't support our service members and their families
or provide livable, quality housing, we are going to lose
people. And we are already struggling with retention as well as
recruitment.
For fiscal year 2024, the committee provided $336 million
for Child Development Centers, known as CDCs, which includes
funding for six new CDCs.
Today, I want to dig into the specifics of childcare needs
across the services and the status of your infrastructure plans
to meet those needs.
Additionally, in fiscal year 2024 we again provided an
additional $30 million to improve the oversight of DoD's
housing portfolio. I would like to hear from our witnesses how
that funding will be utilized, and I am dismayed to once again
have to highlight the issue of sexual assault in the military.
That certainly affects a service member's quality of life.
While I appreciate the steps that DoD and the services are
taking to tackle this issue, like developing training programs
to educate and instill a culture of respect for those with whom
they work, the statistics that we have seen continue to show
dramatic progress is still needed in both reducing the
prevalence of assaults and in bolstering trust in the reporting
system.
The Department of Defense's fiscal year 2022 Annual Sexual
Assault and Prevention Report showed another increase in
reported assaults. I hope the fiscal year 2023 report, that
should come out imminently, shows more progress, but I tend to
doubt that it will.
A large part of supporting service members holistically
includes supporting them mentally and physically. We need to
ensure that we prioritize each and every person's mental health
and continue to evaluate and study the effects of what service
members are doing in combat or in training environments.
And to that end, healthcare is integral in supporting the
quality of life of a service member and their families. I
commend the Department for finally expanding its previously
discriminatory IVF policy by now allowing eligible troops to
access IVF regardless of their marital status or sexual
orientation, and allowing for the use of donated eggs and
sperm.
As someone who became a mother as a result of IVF, this is
deeply personal and very serious for so many families. I fought
for years through language in this bill to change this policy.
Thanks and side by side with the support of the Chairman
that affects the care that veterans can receive as well. More
can be done and we know that we will continue to work together
to make sure that we are pro-family.
We must continue to make investments to ensure that the
environment service members and their families live in are safe
and healthy. From addressing lead paint, to asbestos and mold,
oversight of housing is not just an abstract goal. Oversight
has a very real effect on military families.
We must also continue to address contamination that is left
behind after a military base is no longer active. I continue to
hear concerns from the public that the speed of DoD's
remediation efforts for PFAS contamination is far too slow.
For fiscal year 2024, this committee once again provided an
increase above the request of $50 million in dedicated funding
to address PFAS contamination. We have been prioritizing this
as a committee whether the Judge is chair or I am for several
years now, and the expectation is that DoD will expedite
cleanup of these contaminants.
Looking to the year ahead, we will soon dive into the
specific budget requests for the services. And I hope after
those robust discussions on MILCON funding needs, we will see a
bipartisan House bill with adequate funding to fully address
the requirements to ensure military readiness and improve the
lives of our service members and their families.
Thank you all for coming today and for your service, and I
look forward to your testimonies.
I yield back, Chair.
Mr. Carter. Thank you, Ms. Wasserman Schultz.
All right. We ask you to keep your remarks to about 5
minutes.
Go ahead.
STATEMENT OF SERGEANT MAJOR MICHAEL R. WEIMER, U.S. ARMY,
SERGEANT MAJOR OF THE ARMY
Sergeant Major Weimer. Chairman Carter, thank you. Thank
you, Chairman. Chairman Carter, Ranking Member Wasserman
Schultz, distinguished members of this subcommittee, thank you
for allowing me the opportunity to speak with you today about
the quality of life in the Army.
Over the last 7 months, I've been able to go out and see
our formation across the country and overseas. What I see makes
me extremely proud. The soldiers, families and Army civilians
who make up the all-volunteer force are committed to the
mission.
Our Army is formidable and lethal, capable of deterring,
fighting, and winning against capable adversaries. In large
part because of the incredible men and women we have on our
team.
We have active reserve National Guard soldiers training,
campaigning, and responding, including over 65,000 soldiers who
are deployed around the globe and another 74,000 standing by
with immediate and crisis response forces.
Behind every one of those men and women is a family bearing
immeasurable weight. We're committed to supporting those
soldiers and their families, building cohesive teams across the
Army, and ensuring that we are fostering a safe and
professional climate.
This starts with building positive quality of life on
multiple fronts. First and foremost, housing. Soldiers and
their families deserve safe living conditions.
We are committed to improving these conditions and
appreciate Congress's support, especially the $3.4 billion
investment in military housing in fiscal year 2023.
Currently, we're putting an emphasis on unaccompanied
personnel housing and barracks. Second, we are committed to
improving spouse employment options. We have over 431,000
spouses on the Army team, many of whom work.
It's important to us that those spouses have employment
options that facilitate their family readiness and quality of
life. Military spouse employment partnership and my career
advancement accounts are two initiatives that provide those
options.
Third, we must provide quality childcare options. CDC
construction and renovations are underway across Army
installations, and we are also offering fee assistance to
address unmet childcare demands and streamlining hiring to help
maximize capacity.
Fourth, holistic health and fitness known as H2F. We are
investing in our soldier's well-being to enhance combat
readiness and develop resilient and lethal warfighters. The
positive impacts of embedding H2F performance teams in brigades
are evident.
And finally, our families must be able to easily navigate
the Exceptional Family Member Program by the end of fiscal year
2024 Headquarters Department of the Army's Central Office is to
be established to ensure the consistent processes across the
Army.
These efforts are all interrelated and nested with a
broader effort to build a strong and successful team culture.
We lean on various approaches and organizations for both
bottoms up and top-down feedback, taking a connecting to
protect approach towards improving our climate and reducing
harmful behaviors.
These include the Director of Prevention, Resilience and
Readiness, the Integrated Prevention Advisory Group, our
monthly leaning change forums, and our building cohesive teams'
forums.
These efforts also require us maintaining a close
coordination and partnership with Congress, as well as reliable
and predictable funding. And I will add, recruiting and
retaining talented soldiers is a critical component to building
positive command climates.
Our Army has made some improvements over the last year and
we will continue to focus on the priority effort going forward.
In closing, the most rewarding aspect of my position is
ensuring our soldiers remain the most lethal warfighters the
world has ever seen. That includes taking care of their
families.
Together, we can ensure the Army remains the Nation's
premier warfighting force it's ever seen, built around a
culture of cohesive teams capable and ready to face the
challenges of today and tomorrow.
I'd like to thank the chairman, the ranking member, and the
members of this committee for their leadership, their continued
support of our soldiers, Army civilians and families, which are
our most valued asset, and taking care of them now and helping
us well into the future. I look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement follows:]
GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT

Mr. Carter. Thank you.
Master Chief, you may proceed.
STATEMENT OF MASTER CHIEF PETTY OFFICER JAMES M. HONEA, U.S.
NAVY, MASTER CHIEF PETTY OFFICER OF THE NAVY
Master Chief Honea. Chairman Carter, Ranking Member
Wasserman Schultz and distinguished members of the
subcommittee, it is my privilege to speak with you once more on
behalf of our sailors and their families.
Your Navy is busy generating credible combat power as a
decision option for our Nation's leaders and when called upon
to deliver exceptional results. This hard work is being done on
the backs of our sailors and their families.
To maintain a lethal fighting force, we must invest in
their quality of life and mission critical infrastructure. I'm
excited to be here with you today having this important and
hopefully rich discussion.
The Gates Commission was established to study the viability
of creating the all-volunteer force that we have today. The
Commission highlighted five pillars that would be necessary to
sustain that all-volunteer force.
Adequate pay and compensation, quality housing, timely
access to medical care, a retirement plan, and ensuring that
the military remains a reflection of the American people that
we serve.
The good work of Congress and the Department of Defense
over the last year has done a lot towards strengthening these
pillars, but there is certainly more work to be done. I also
believe that we should consider adding a sixth pillar to the
Gates Commission, one of family readiness.
A much greater preponderance of our force today are
families compared to the all-volunteer force we created 50
years ago. We understand that for us to retain our sailors, we
need to retain their families as well.
Family dynamics such as spousal employment and childcare
are key contributing factors to their retention. To fully enjoy
the financial stability in today's economy, most families in
America require dual income.
Many of our military spouses are challenged in securing
that stable and adequate paying employment. Without ample
opportunities for our spouses to secure employment and
contribute to the financial stability of their families, many
of our service members feel compelled to leave the Navy to
better provide for their family.
The work of Congress and the DoD in this area of concern
have been tremendously supportive and helpful. Federal hiring
authorities, licensure portability, fee reimbursements, among
other initiatives such as remote work options, have proven
beneficial to military spouses helping during duty station
transfers.
I encourage us all to continue working and consider
stronger Federal hiring opportunities for our spouses, along
with spouse colocation and securing continued meaningful
employment for those spouses whenever our service members need
to relocate to a new duty station.
Additionally, the ability to secure and afford adequate
childcare is one of the top stressors of our sailors and their
families and serves as an inhibitor to that spouse employment.
The approved military construction projects to build Child
Development Centers in fiscal year 2024 are needed, and I am
appreciative for your support and the appropriations necessary
to begin these projects.
And while we wait for these CDCs to be built and then
staffed, it is critical that we continue to look at all
available options to tackle these shortfalls.
Many of our CDCs are already in competition for staff with
childcare facilities operating in the local communities are
unable to reach full capacity due to those staff shortages.
However, we are finding great success with fee assistant
pilots, and an expansion of these pilots will make it an
immediate impact for our sailors and their families needing to
secure childcare.
We have highly skilled young men and women stand and watch
right now in our Combat Information Centers on our ships that
are patrolling the Babel Mendeb, who are deftly identifying
threats and determining which weapons to engage to neutralize
those threats in highly trafficked waterways in just a matter
of seconds.
Under these extremely stressful conditions, our sailors are
delivering prompt and precise action that, with one wrong
decision, could lead to catastrophic loss of life. The stakes
are high and the responsibilities and expectations we have of
these sailors is just as high.
In order to recruit and retain a highly qualified
professional force such as this, we must reexamine how we value
the jobs of our service members and adequately compensate them
commiserate with the scope of responsibilities and the
expectations that we have of them.
Our sailors and our families face many challenges and
experience many of the same barriers to service that have been
constant since the creation of the all-volunteer force.
When the quality of life needs and the barriers to service
of both our sailors and our families are adequately addressed,
our warfighters are better focused and are more positively
connected to our Navy.
As we continue to face difficult decisions, we must
continue to ensure our warfighters are appropriately equipped,
trained, and postured to fight and win. We must also ensure
that their wellbeing is in mind, providing a quality of life
commiserate with the scope of responsibilities that are placed
on our sailors and our families every day.
I am proud and honored to represent the talented sailors
serving in our Navy today. And with the support of our Navy
family, I am confident that we will remain the most dominant
maritime force the world has ever seen.
The work that you do enables us to remain ready for any
situation. I thank you and I look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement follows:]
GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT

Mr. Carter. Thank you.
Sergeant Major?
STATEMENT OF SERGEANT MAJOR CARLOS A. RUIZ, U.S. MARINE CORPS,
SERGEANT MAJOR OF THE MARINE CORPS
Sergeant Major Ruiz. Thank you, sir.
Good morning, Chairman Carter, Ranking Member Wasserman
Schultz, and distinguished members of this committee, I
appreciate your attention and support for the quality of life
for those who defend this great Nation.
By our title 10 mandate, the Marine Corps is uniquely
composed to perform other such duties as the President may
direct. It's a commitment we uphold across the globe because we
are persistently forward and ready today.
For instance, last week, at the request of the State
Department, U.S. Southern Command deployed a Marine Corps Fleet
Anti-Terrorism Security Team to the U.S. embassy in Port-au-
Prince, Haiti.
In the wake of civil instability and unrest, the embassy
remains open and secure today. Also, last week, the 26th Marine
Expeditionary Unit completed an extended deployment aboard
amphibious warships in the European Command and Central Command
areas of responsibility.
That special operations capable MEU conducted real-world
operations in the Arabian Gulf and the Straits of Hormuz in
response to attempts by Iran to threaten the free flow of
commerce.
And again, last week marines trained alongside our NATO
partners in Norway's Arctic, while other marines provided
humanitarian assistance to the Republic of the Philippines
during time of crisis.
So at any given day, any time of the year, your marines are
forward edge of every climb in place, demonstrated that we're
capable, that we're ready, and that we are trusted.
I recently spent time with some of these marines overseas.
They were living and working in challenging conditions with
limited amenities, overcoming mental and physical fatigue
associated with those austere environments.
Yet, the Marines were motivated, confident in themselves
and their teams, and getting the job done. That's how we
trained them.
The Marine Corps also recently achieved an unmodified audit
opinion, the best possible outcome and the first for a military
service. So rest assured that the resources you provide will be
well managed.
We owe it to the Marines to provide the services and goods
that fuel the Marines to persevere. Our Barracks 2030 Mission
takes an aggressive approach in tailoring the barracks
portfolio to the needs of the future force while improving the
Marine's quality of life through specific investments.
Our Marine Corps Total Fitness Mission addresses the
matters of mind and body, optimizing the performance of each
marine and the readiness of our organization.
These programs are designed to not only improve combat
readiness, but also reduce the behaviors that degrade our
service. So today, inside this committee hall, we share a
common understanding that we are to remain focused as the
premier war fighting organization we are known to be.
That statement, the Marines have landed, will always carry
an enormous weight to friend and foe. We are resolute in our
investments to the quality of life for our marines and our
families, and we will get this job done too.
I look forward to taking your questions.
[The prepared statement follows:]
GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT
Mr. Carter. Chief Master Sergeant.
STATEMENT OF CHIEF MASTER SERGEANT DAVID A. FLOSI, U.S. AIR
FORCE, CHIEF MASTER SERGEANT OF THE AIR FORCE
Master Sergeant Flosi. Thank you.
Chairman Carter, Ranking Member Wasserman Schultz, and
distinguished members of this subcommittee, I'm grateful for
the opportunity to address the critical issues affecting the
lives of our airmen and their families.
As we navigate through a time of profound significance,
it's imperative we acknowledge the evolving challenges facing
our military. Throughout modern history, airmen have been at
the forefront of pivotal moments, shaping the course of our
Nation's defense.
Today, we confront strategic competitors such as China and
Russia amidst a rapidly changing landscape of warfare. The
emergence of multidomain threats, including cyberattack,
hypersonics, autonomous weapon systems underscore the urgency
of maintaining our military superiority.
The age of uncontested Air Force dominance is behind us. To
stay ahead, we must harness the innovative spirit within our
ranks, addressing key challenges head on. This moment demands
decisive action to equip our airmen for success in an era
defined by great power competition.
Quality of life for our service members and their families
is paramount. We must ensure access to quality child care and
health care. Recent increases in military pay are appreciated,
yet, we must remain vigilant in addressing inflationary
pressures and rising housing costs. Ensuring adequate housing
for our airmen and their families is nonnegotiable. We're
committed to addressing the challenges investing in the
maintenance and construction of housing facilities.
In health care, we acknowledge challenges in accessing
services, particularly mental health care. We're committed to
improving access and support for our airmen and their families,
leveraging partnerships and data driven initiatives.
In addition to these programs, suicide prevention remains a
top priority with a focus on building connections, detecting
risk, and promoting protective environments. We're dedicated to
supporting the mental well-being of our personnel and
encouraging them to seek help when they need it.
Caring for our airmen must also extend to our family
members. Child care is a critical workforce enabler, yet
demands often outpace availability. We are working to continue
expanding child care options and support programs to better
serve our airmen.
Recognizing the diverse needs of modern military families,
we're committed to improving spouse employment opportunities
and license portability. Supporting our families is
foundational to maintaining readiness and mission success.
I want to thank this subcommittee for its unwavering
support. Our service members, backed by resilient families, are
ready to meet the challenges of today and tomorrow. Let us
ensure they have the resources and support they need to
continue safeguarding our Nation's security for generations to
come.
Thank you, and I look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement follows:]
GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT

Mr. Carter. Chief Master Sergeant Bentivenga, it's your
turn.
STATEMENT OF CHIEF MASTER SERGEANT JOHN F. BENTIVENGA, U.S. SPACE
FORCE, CHIEF MASTER SERGEANT OF THE SPACE FORCE
Master Sergeant Bentivenga. Thank you, Chairman Carter,
Ranking Member Wasserman Schultz, and distinguished members of
this subcommittee. Thank you for your continued support and
your dedication to the quality of life of our guardians and
their loved ones.
I'm honored for this opportunity to talk about my number
one priority, our Nation's guardians. The Space Force was
established in recognition of the rapidly changing face of
warfare.
As rival competitors seek to threaten our space domain and
United States' way of life, our Space Force is focused on
optimizing for great power competition with initiatives
organized to develop people, generate readiness, project power,
and develop capabilities that will support the joint force.
However, our service must also ensure we continue to
attract, recruit, and retain our guardians for this
competition, and if required, conflict.
This means accessibility of childcare, economic security,
dormitories, family housing, mental health, and competitive pay
and compensation are not solely quality of life issues.
For guardians with 24/7 employed-in-place operations,
primarily from permanent U.S. installations, these are not just
benefits, but they are readiness issues.
Our model of presenting forces to combatant commanders
creates a nontraditional war fighter experience. For example,
before guardians take their positions on operations floor, many
are often dropping off children at childcare providers, and
trusting that the facilities are available, well maintained,
and secure.
However, childcare access challenges are compounded by the
complexity of shift work where our guardians can struggle to
find child care outside of normal business hours and on
weekends.
Budget stability and timely appropriations are critical to
military quality of life initiatives and, in turn, military
readiness.
I want to thank you for your tireless efforts for the
Fiscal Year 2024 Military Construction Appropriations Act,
ensuring the Department has housing and child care resources
for our guardians.
Building on this momentum, the fiscal year 2025 budget
seeks to continue these investments, safeguarding our promises
to service members and their families.
The demand for guardian talent, technical expertise, and
capability will only continue to grow, and this comes with
added operational stress and pressure. We must insulate
guardians against internal and external factors that prevent
them from being combat ready and fully capable to accomplish
their mission.
We must make their experience meaningful and fulfilling
amidst lucrative options from other sectors that seek guardians
for their character, their skill, and their talent.
Guardians entering the service today are educated,
digitally literate, and hungry for opportunities to solve hard
problems and assume greater responsibilities in the
intelligence, cyber, and space domains.
We all know that job satisfaction is important for
retaining talent. During a recent forum with guardians, they
raised concerns with incomplete threat and system models and
simulators to prepare them for the high-end threat our near
peer adversaries pose.
These concerns demonstrate our guardian's passion for the
mission, and we owe it to them to continue our investment in
our operational test and training infrastructure, and ensure
they have the tools and the environments necessary for
readiness.
These investments are the value proposition we seek to
offer. It protects and ensures their focus, resolve, and
willingness to continue their journey in the Space Force and
greatly depends on our commitment and actions to care for them
and their loved ones.
The decisions we make today will impact future generations
of guardians. Our investment in them is the greatest leverage
to secure our Nation's interests in, from, and to space.
Thank you, and I look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement follows:]
GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT

Mr. Carter. We thank you and thank all of you and good job.
I will start off and we will go as we always do and try to
stay within our 5-minute limit.
Barracks. The GAO report from September of last year
painted a bleak picture of the state of barracks to DoD. They
observed barracks in poor condition, including some with safety
risks like sewage overflow, and inoperable fire systems, and
barracks that don't meet DoD requirements for privacy and
amenities.
How are each of your services responding to the finding of
this report? What can we expect from your services, in terms of
request for funding, to fix these problems over our latest
future year defense program?
And as cost of barracks rise, what role do you see that
possibly 3D printing might play in helping control costs and
provide high quality accommodations for service members to
exceed?
We will start with the Army.
Sergeant Major Weimer. Mr. Chairman, thank you for that
question, and I acknowledge the GAO report in which you're
referencing.
So the Army's prioritized $2.1 billion investment a year
across the FYDEP coming up, and the Secretary is passionate,
and we're going to invest a 100 percent sustainment in those
focusing on restoration and modernization.
We're also--we were already leaning into our approaches
before the recent NDA language came out on barracks managers,
And so that we get back from the model we currently have, which
is uniform service members with collateral duties and
professional barracks managers to truly take care of that
infrastructure as we invest dollars into sustaining it.
In reference to our Department of Public Works, to be able
to also sustain the money we're putting in those barracks,
we're roughly 900 plus short employees, and we have a strategy
through Army Material Command to, we call it, build back DPW,
to hire those critical people so that we can maintenance the
work orders in our barracks.
And then lastly, Judge, to respect the time, the 3D
printing, which I observed myself, the models down at Fort
Bliss, it could have an application in certain locations, but
it's still pretty restricted as far as a large opportunity for
us.
They're open bays right now. They don't stack. And so for
mobilization sites, it could be applicable, but it seems that
it needs a little further before it's--be able to use larger.
And then, of course, we are taking a look at privatized
options with a pilot at Fort Irwin.
Mr. Carter. Thank you.
Master Chief Honea. Chairman Carter, in the United States
Navy, we're already beginning from a deficit, alongside our
sister services and provide an inadequate, unaccompanied
housing and barracks to our most junior service members.
We still consider shipboard living to be adequate
government quarters, which is just not where we should be
thinking at in today. So we're moving out and trying to find
more and more bed spaces to move our sailors off our ships and
into our barracks.
That's largely where you're going to find us, to be not
compliant with the standard that we should be providing is that
we're doubling up people in single occupancy rooms. But make no
doubt, we do believe that every sailor deserves to have a
separation from their work life and into their home life. So
they have a place to decompress both physically and mentally,
so they could be more refreshed.
One of the areas that I think we're going to find greater
resolution and more impactful, immediate impact to supporting
our sailors will be with an expansion of our PPV pilots that
we've had going on both in San Diego and in the Hampton Roads
area.
Pacific Beacon that's operating our PPV barracks in San
Diego that is the model. That is what we should be striving
toward. We're looking for expansions in those pilots, and any
support that I can get from yourself and the other members of
Congress in meeting that end, I think we'll be a lot more
successful.
Mr. Carter. Sergeant Major?
Sergeant Major Ruiz. Sorry. Yes. Acknowledge the GAO
report, but typical Marine Corps we found that the GAO report
did samples, right? So as of 3 days ago we finished the entire
inspection of all of our barracks all over the globe.
So now we know we're in a better spot to understand where
the rest of the issues are. So it's not defendable and not
going to, but we do have, and the Commandant has, in fact,
invested heavily on the future of barracks.
And that's--I mentioned in my opening statement, Barracks
2030 Plan, and there's some immediate wins there that we're
doing. Sorry. It's the places where it's just so hot and there
is no air conditioning. The Commandant has decided, ``Hey, you
know, maybe we need some air conditioning in this space.''
It's not, for us, it's not that hard, right? It's a place
that you can climb and control your room. It's fresh furniture.
It's washers and dryers that work. But I think the other part
is right sizing our inventory.
So knocking down those barracks that are not ever going to
be in standard. And it's probably a place where this committee
can help and that when we build something new and we tear
something down, and you mentioned, sir, the rising cost of
building something, well, the cost of tearing down something is
also quite up there, right?
So there's significant investments in 2025. We've already,
in the last couple of years, refurbished 30 barracks. So
getting them up to date, having those basic things that we
need.
We are also going to hire civilians getting the Marines who
are doing three jobs and one of them is barracks manager,
getting back to their formations. So get the civilians to worry
about the maintenance of the barracks 24 hours a day, 7 days a
week.
Then we have dedicated maintenance teams. So when your room
is locked, when your window doesn't open, when something's
broken that someone's not going to come 45 days from the moment
that you put in the request that they come that that day or the
day after.
So it's not hard, like, as I mentioned, but I think the
final touch on it is, as the Commandant said, OK we will put
the way we handle barracks into the IG Marine Corps inspection
checklist.
So now we will know, all over the Marine Corps, who's not
meeting the mark and commanders, leadership will be held
accountable.
Mr. Carter. Very good.
What's the Air Force doing?
Master Sergeant Flosi. Thank you. Thank you, Chairman
Carter.
The DAF is planning its largest FSRM facility sustainment
restoration and modernization budget to permanent party dorms
in more than a decade.
We're investing $1.1 billion in these modernization and
restoration efforts to address more than a 100,000 bed spaces
across the Department of the Air Force for both airmen and our
guardians.
We have assigned full-time, trained military personnel as
airmen dorm leaders at every military dorm across the
Department. We've also written into our regulations a
requirement for supervisors, leaders, commanders, and first
sergeants to routinely visit the dorms and ensure that our
airmen have the living conditions they need to be successful.
We've invested in the last three fiscal years over $557
million to complete 98 projects to ensure our standard of
living for our dorms is adequate. And as of today, 99.3 percent
of our dorms are assessed as adequate or above.
We've increased our capability to service these dorms, and
when we have that small percentage of facilities that is not
adequate, we're investing in MILCON.
So in fiscal year 2025, we've got MILCON in the fiscal year
2025 PB for our largest deficit locations, including Langley,
Eustis, Sparksdale, Cannon, Goodfellow, and Ellsworth across
the FYDEP.
We have a Dorm Master Plan at the Department level that
considers the condition of each facility and prioritizes our
scarce resources to ensure our airmen have the have the living
conditions they need.
Additionally, we're paying attention to what the Master
Chief Petty Officer of the Navy mentioned, with his
privatization study out in San Diego, and we plan to leverage
those lessons learned and we're considering options as well in
the Department.
We think they'll work best in CONUS, remote, and isolated
locations and we're pursuing a privatization project for
unaccompanied housing out at Edwards right now, sir.
Mr. Carter. Thank you.
Space Force?
Master Sergeant Bentivenga. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. So the
Space Force and the Air Force work very closely on the
dormitories' infrastructure under the Department, but across
Space Force installations we have 28 military dormitories that
we have. The Average Building Condition Index is 82 which is
considered acceptable under the DoD standard. We are doing
investments. Each fiscal year we look to do an investment to
upgrade and do repairs on the dormitories.
Right now out at Fort MacArthur out at L.A. Air Force
Station there's a renovation going on a dormitory there. And at
Buckley Space Force Base they are going to do the plan and
design starting in 2026. That is what planned out. What is
really important is that for Buckley, for example, it is not
just guardians an airmen living in dorms. It is soldiers,
sailors, Marines and Coast Guardsmen in some cases as well.
So I have had the opportunity during my travels during the
last couple months to try and visit with my wife Kathy every
dormitory, every installation that we go to that belongs to the
Space Force to personally see the conditions and hear from the
men and women who are living in those facilities. And as Chief
Flosi pointed out the fulltime airmen dorm leaders is what we
call there, the leadership team that is invested and connected
with the men and women living in the dormitories partly with
the Chaplain Service and other leaders on the cross-
installation is very inspiring.
I was over there during some of the holidays, and just the
community they are trying to build there and the care to make
sure that it is a home for those men and women living in the
dormitories not just four walls and a bed.
Mr. Carter. Thank you. Well, I am glad the Marines have
found air conditioning. Ms. Wasserman Schultz.
Ms. Wasserman Schultz. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. This
committee is led by a Texan and a Floridian, and I think we
would say we are definitely pro air conditioning. I could
appreciate the effort to address the quality of life of living
conditions of enlisted men and women who live in barracks, and
certainly the condition of those barracks is important. But if
you fear being sexually assaulted no matter how good the
conditions are in those barracks, then your quality of life
needless to say is poor.
According to DoD's fiscal year 2022 annual report on sexual
assaults in the military issued in April last year there were
more than 8,942 reports of sexual assaults involving service
members during the 2022 fiscal year which was a slight increase
over the 8,666 assaults that there were in 2021. That was
itself an increase over 2020, and we are expected to see the
fiscal year 2023 report released soon. As I mentioned in my
remarks, I hope to see a significant improvement, but I am
doubtful.
The initiatives from the Independent Review Commission to
ensure justice are important, but it is essential that we get
ahead of this problem and have effective prevention efforts as
well. And I appreciated the opportunity to talk with most of
you ahead of this hearing, but I want to hear from each of you
how you are analyzing the degree to which increases are due to
increased reporting or increases in sexual assaults in your
branch of service.
So that is an important distinction, and it is one where I
hope there is enough curiosity for you to know the answer to
those questions and are trying to analyze specifically whether
or not there are true increases or more comfort level
reporting. So we will start with Sergeant Major Weimer please.
Sergeant Major Weimer. Ranking Member, thank you for that
important question. Though our numbers are a little bit down in
the Army based off the report that you are referencing the
numbers still aren't great, and sexual assault will continue to
be something--and sexual harassment something we continue to
never let our foot off the gas.
I think the two largest efforts that we are doing to not
get complacent is really our Integration Prevention Advisory--
--
Ms. Wasserman Schultz. Sergeant Major, I'm going to ask you
about that. My specific question is how are you attempting to
analyze whether or not--now, you had a slight reduction, but
still I want to know how you are attempting to analyze whether
or not increases or your numbers are due to more reporting or
more sexual assault and sexual harassment.
Sergeant Major Weimer. Yes, Ranking Member. Part of that
initiative is hiring 11 additional data scientists that we
actually have job offers out now is to truly look and be able
to see ourselves because we see trends. This one happens to be
a downward trend. But why to your point, your actual point? And
I am not sure we can still see ourselves which is the
importance of the----
Ms. Wasserman Schultz. In your case, less reporting.
Sergeant Major Weimer. Yes.
Ms. Wasserman Schultz. Is there more fear? Is that the
cause?
Sergeant Major Weimer. And then how do we learn?
Ms. Wasserman Schultz. But hiring someone who is going to
look----
Sergeant Major Weimer. Yes, ma'am. What is working so that
we can proliferate it across the entire force not celebrate the
fact that we went down potentially eight percent. Why? Because
we have to expand that from Humphreys in Korea all the way to
Poland. And so investing in folks, frankly, that is new to me,
data scientists, not something that we grew up talking about in
our careers, is what we have to do now to truly--because there
are so many streams of data coming in for a senior mission
command at each one of the installations we are overwhelmed
with it.
Now, we have spent a lot of time looking at what could be
causing those. A lot of those are the cultural pieces we talked
about. But it is folks like the data scientists and taking the
collateral duty out, in the sharp world taking that out of the
uniformed personnel and hiring those people that this is what
they do day in and day out for the commanders to know we need
more of this and less of this because this didn't work, and
this did. That is our secretary's number one goal right now
with the IPAG.
Ms. Wasserman Schultz. Thank you. Master Chief?
Master Chief Honea. Ranking Member, to get right to your
point of your question previously there was no mechanism to
indicate why there was an increase in reporting. But also to
your point in your opening, your comments, leadership needs to
be part of solving this problem, and I do believe that with the
cultural transformation that we have had, with some changes in
policies such as No Wrong Door and other things that we have
increased people's trust in the organization to make those
reports especially in the areas that the Sergeant Major of the
Army was describing where we have professionalized rather than
had collateral duty sailors serving in these important
positions. That shows the importance that we have as an
organization in solving this problem.
And I do believe that is increased trust, and that is
increasing our reporting. What we will learn is in--the Office
of Secretary of Defense has issued the DoD-wide Workplace and
Gender Relations Survey for 2023. We should have those results
shortly, and from there we will have a better understanding
hopefully of why we have that increase.
Ms. Wasserman Schultz. So is that survey designed to get
responses to questions to discern whether there is more comfort
level in reporting versus a greater increase in attacks and
assaults and harassment?
Master Chief Honea. Ranking Member, that is my
understanding is exactly the point of that survey.
Ms. Wasserman Schultz. If you can just follow up with us
with more detail about how that question instrument was
designed that would be helpful.
Master Chief Honea. Yes, ma'am.
Ms. Wasserman Schultz. Thank you. Sergeant Major Ruiz.
Sergeant Major Ruiz. Yes, ma'am. And just to follow with
the Master Chief, the organizational survey, that tells us
today what areas around the Marine Corps, what commands have a
higher tendency of Marines and sailors inside the organization
that don't feel trust in that command team in handling a
reporting. So we are starting to see where those issues are and
starting to pinpoint the data. It is our ability to see where
the command teams are failing to hold a climate, a culture that
Marines feel trusted and not just that they fear something may
happen in that command, but also does the command team have the
trust of the organization that they are going to do something
about it.
Ms. Wasserman Schultz. Are the Navy and the Marines doing
something similar to more granularly zero in on your own data
in your service rather than the general across the board DoD
service like the Army has?
Sergeant Major Ruiz. Yes, ma'am. And I was going to follow
up with the Sergeant Major of the Army's comments and the
hiring of the people and the data, the ability to see
ourselves. Absolutely. That is where we are going as well.
Every morning I see an email, and it has a list of what
happened around the globe, a sexual assault or ideations or
attempts. So we ask, What are we doing with this information?
How are we activating? How are we actioning this information?
And that is what we want to get at quickly.
But while we can control what we can control in the Marine
Corps, ma'am, I think it is also part of our culture. We have
such a strong imprint in a young person's life when they go
through 3 months of boot camp that we decided that it is time
to stop talking about response early in training and start
talking about what healthy relationships look like, consent.
So we want to set up a baseline early. That is when we want
to get that, early in their training when they are open to
imprinting from the Marine Corps and then continue as we have
with additional training as they improve in ranks.
Ms. Wasserman Schultz. Thank you. Chief Flosi.
Master Sergeant Flosi. Thank you, Ranking Member. It is
really difficult to assess out the reporting to your direct
question is it due to increased comfort level, or is it due to
an increase in actual assaults. So I would be happy to take
that question back and see if we can find some more detail. I
can tell you that we have introduced a SAPR reporting dashboard
for commanders that includes risk assessments of their climate,
and it provides for trend tracking over time.
So we are working similar to the other services on DAF-
specific reporting tools that will allow us to illuminate the
actual details that you are asking for, ma'am.
Ms. Wasserman Schultz. That is incredibly important to
understand whether the numbers that you are looking at are the
result of more reporting or more assaults.
Master Sergeant Flosi. Absolutely.
Ms. Wasserman Schultz. How are you able to make adjustments
if you don't know the answers to those questions?
Master Sergeant Flosi. I absolutely agree with you, ma'am.
We are focused on taking care of any victim that comes forward,
and so we haven't focused as deliberately on why they reported.
We focus on the report and taking care of the victim and
looking for accountability.
Ms. Wasserman Schultz. Well, that is the point of my
question is that the goal is prevention.
Master Sergeant Flosi. Absolutely.
Ms. Wasserman Schultz. I mean, I certainly hope that you
provide good care for someone once they have been assaulted or
harassed.
Master Sergeant Flosi. Yes, ma'am.
Ms. Wasserman Schultz. But you have to make sure that never
gets to that point in the first place, and understanding the
data is a critical tool in order to ensure that.
Master Sergeant Flosi. Absolutely.
Ms. Wasserman Schultz. Thank you.
Master Sergeant Flosi. Thank you.
Ms. Wasserman Schultz. Chief Bentivenga.
Master Sergeant Bentivenga. Thank you, Ranking Member. As
Chief Flosi said, collecting the data and parsing it out over
the last few months--4 years into this journey as a separate
service under the Department of the Air Force we just started
recently trying to pull out guardian specific data out of the
reports that were being rolled up at the DAF level inside the
Pentagon so that we can get an understanding from a guardian
specific culture what does that look like, and are the victims
and survivors of sexual assault and sexual harassment can we
collect that data and parse it out for guardians.
In addition to that because many of the Space Force
installations where our guardians are also have a lot of airmen
that are there as well, so being able to report back and say,
for example, at Peterson Space Force Base, what is the climate
that is there to not only understand assaults are happening for
guardians but also for the airmen that are there. So trying to
get the data so the that we can analyze it.
As you referenced, what does it mean? We would hope that
sometimes you say trust in leadership that survivors are
comfortable to come forward and talk about their experience and
report assaults is important, but understanding whether or not
that is an increase or a comfort level with, have we removed
barriers, trying unrestricted/restricted reporting, standing up
the Office of Special Trial Counsel, all these things to
instill confidence in men and women coming forward and
reporting it, understanding more work has to be done.
Is it because they are more comfortable now with
leadership, and they feel the support structure is there, or is
there still an untenable culture where assaults are still
occurring? And we will have to take that for the record. We are
still pulling that data apart, but I couldn't tell you what it
is telling us at this point other than the fact we know we need
more fidelity in the data we are collecting.
Ms. Wasserman Schultz. Thank you. And now that the
reporting is outside the chain of command thanks to a change in
the law and the President's executive order this should be a
priority because you have that mechanism.
And then just lastly very quickly you are dealing with old
data. I mean, you are getting reports in 2024 that are from
2022. So you are not even looking at what the current situation
is. What steps are being taken to make sure that you can
process data that helps you look at it more currently so that
you are getting a more real-time window into the problem? If
you don't know the answer to that question then----
Sergeant Major Weimer. Ranking Member, I can give you a
tangible one there. So between our sharp SMEs, Subject Matter
Experts, and our IG Schoolhouse, they came together in tandem
and collaboratively came up with a new POI to actually train
independent investigators on sexual harassment because a part
of this is the length of time the investigations take. And so
the longer that takes to be adjudicated while taking care of
the victim, obviously, simultaneously the data just gets older
and older to your point. And so that is a key effort for us.
Ms. Wasserman Schultz. Thank you very much. And if you
could get those answers to me for the record, I would
appreciate it. Thank you for your indulgence, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Carter. Mr. Valadao.
Mr. Valadao. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would like to thank
our witnesses for taking the time to be here today. I know that
we all share in the commitment to making sure that our service
members both abroad and here at home are taken care of.
The military relies heavily on local communities to provide
access to healthcare to our service members especially in areas
where there is limited on-base case. This is particularly true
for bases where Defense Health Agency has planned to
restructure or close hospitals and clinics as part of the
recent efforts to perform how the DoD provides healthcare to
both active duty and nonactive tricare beneficiaries. The
Defense Health Agency plan hinges on a community healthcare
system that can provide essential services in a timely manner
to both service members and civilians in need of healthcare.
Recently, Ridgecrest Regional Hospital which supports
service members stationed at Naval Air Weapons Station China
Lake announced that they would be suspending their labor and
delivery services due to unprecedented financial challenges.
This loss in care means our service members at China Lake will
need to drive almost 2 hours to the next closest labor and
delivery unit which places an incredible hardship on our
service members and their families.
Ridgecrest Regional Hospital is just one of 55 critical
access hospitals within a 40-mile radius of a military base.
These critical access hospitals are federally designated as
essential to providing healthcare services in rural
communities. I am incredibly concerned that with the continued
impacts of COVID-19, significant healthcare professional
shortages and lower reimbursement rates these hospitals will
not have the resources they need to continue to provide
services to our service members.
A question for the Navy and then all branches. Master Chief
Honea, I know that the Navy is tracking this issue, and I am
wondering if you have identified any possible solutions to
leveraging existing Navy or DHA resources to community
hospitals that provide critical healthcare service for our
military. If nothing has been identified at this time, does the
Navy have an interim plan to support any pregnant service
members or spouses at China Lake? Is it possible to provide
labor and delivery care on base? And then I'd like to open up
the question to anyone else on the panel who might have similar
concerns.
Master Chief Honea. Congressman, I thank you, sir, for your
attention and understanding of a problem that is happening in
Ridgecrest. It is a small community, and that it has your
attention gives me a lot of comfort to understand that it is
not just us paying attention to this problem.
The transformation of the Defense Health Agency has relied
largely on being able to access medical care outside our
military fence lines, and that transformation was based on
assumptions that existed prior to COVID. And just as you
described many of those assumptions are no longer viable or no
longer exist outside our military fence lines, and that is
manifesting itself in different ways in different locations.
Pregnancy, delivery, obstetrician services available in
Ridgecrest. We have similar problems up in the Bremerton area
where we used to have somewhere in the neighborhood of about 15
clinics that someone could go to. Now there are three on that
peninsula that are no longer accepting any new tricare
patients. So our service members and family members are having
to drive down to Joint Base Lewis McChord an hour and a half or
so away.
What we are doing in those locations, Ridgecrest there was
a lot of discussion with our Bureau of Medicine and Surgery and
our Surgeon General along with administrators of that
Ridgecrest Community Hospital to do all the things necessary to
keep them open not just for obstetrician services but across
the board. We are making a lot of headway in solving what those
problems are specifically to somebody that is a pregnant
service member but also other things that we are no longer able
to provide and feel confident in providing that medical service
care to that individual.
We are looking at that place like we would any other remote
location or overseas location where medical services are
restricted. And we will have to restrict assignments to those
locations until we can provide that medical care, perhaps
relocate service members who need that type of care so they can
deliver somewhere else. And that is going to have to be across
the board until we get this all solved.
This is a departmental issue. It is not something that is
Navy specific. Our Deputy Secretary of Defense has tackled this
on personally and is helping us solve our military healthcare
system.
Mr. Valadao. I appreciate that, but, and we had this fight
a number of years ago over Lemoore, the base closest to my
home, and they shut down the facility there. They're leaning on
the hospital in the city of Hanford, which is only a 15, 20-
minute drive away.
But as we see this continuing in many rural communities
across the country I mean, just in my district alone, we've had
two or three different hospitals closed over the last number of
years. And if it wasn't for one larger hospital outfit coming
in and saving a couple of them, we wouldn't have the resources
there, and it's frustrating to see across all the different
branches.
And I don't know if anyone else wants to add to this or
what they're seeing in their area?
Sergeant Major Weimer. Sure, Congressman. I'll take the
opportunity to also agree with my teammate here.
We're struggling in this space. We recently just came on an
agreement with, DEPSEC DEF, to surge our medical service
members into our medical treatment facilities to help cover
down and shorten times it takes to be seen, and it's just
another example of what we're doing inside with uniform
personnel.
For the Army side of the house, our combat medics, there's
a balance between the amount of time they spend working inside
the clinic, because there is goodness there when they're
actually working on medical skills, but then how much time they
spend with their war fighting unit preparing for their wartime
mission.
And so there is this tension. We also see this in our, in
our MEP stations, in our Entry Processing Stations also where
we're struggling and we're trying to surge medical personnel
also to ensure we don't lose any potential recruits.
Mr. Valadao. The opportunity is there.
Sergeant Major?
Sergeant Major Ruiz. It's part of it's the all-volunteer
force, right? So we promised that to the family member and the
service member.
I think that's where you're going with that service, it's
dangerous to recruiting and retention when they don't see it,
it's war fighting. The service member is not focused, right,
because they're worried about having to go further away.
They're not at work. They're not fixing an F-35 engine. They're
not doing live fire ranges and they keep falling back further
and further in training.
So there's some issues to be resolved for sure, sir, and
appreciate you bringing that forward.
Mr. Valadao. I imagine--I've got someone in my district
right now that she is due the day before her husband is due to
return home. And if she's going to commute to a hospital alone
and have to drive hours, that's not going to make life a lot
easier.
And I imagine the war fighter is not sleeping well, not
focused on their responsibilities, and not doing the best they
possibly can to fight for our Nation knowing that their family
isn't being taken care of.
So I appreciate the concern, and, Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Carter. Mr. Bishop.
Mr. Bishop. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Let me extend my welcome to our esteemed witnesses and let
me express my gratitude to each of you for your service to our
Nation.
Your testimony today is invaluable for informed decision
making and safeguarding the welfare of our soldiers, their
families, and our Nation's security.
I want to touch on three items today that I'd like to
quickly explore with you. First, is the issue of food
insecurity. Last year, the RAND National Defense Research
Institute revealed that 25.8 percent of active-duty members
face food insecurity.
And they noted that military and veterans experienced
double the national average of food insecurity. Military
personnel are often hesitant to seek assistance due to pride,
stigma, concerns about appearing weak or dependent.
So I'd like to know how your service is collaborating with
external partners to combat food and security issues, and what
are your projections for the future of your approach?
The second issue has to do with the Basic Needs Allowance.
I noted that, in fiscal year 2025 and the budget request
includes a proposal to raise the income eligibility threshold
for the Basic Needs Allowance from a 150 percent to 200 percent
of the Federal poverty guidelines.
Military Times tells us that 77 military families across
the Air Force, Army, and the Navy received the Basic Needs
Allowance in 2023, which is about one percent of the 6,000
service members that are deemed potentially eligible.
And given this limited potential, can you provide insights
into how you expect the impact of the expansion of that
eligibility threshold will benefit and how that will impact our
families?
And the final question has to do with the stress and
burnout. The fiscal year budget will reduce the in strength by
5,700 personnel. The army will lose 1,700, the navy 5,000. And,
the Navy survey revealed that a third of sailors reported
severe or extreme levels of stress in 2023.
Given the fact that we've got worldwide tensions and
trending conflict escalation, what measures are being
implemented to address this trend, and how are you going to do
more, in terms of dwell time and dealing with the stress level
and the overwork, with the reduction in the troop level? And
the in strength?
Master Sergeant Bentivenga. Congressman Bishop, I'll start,
if that's OK.
So first, let me start by saying thank you very much for
your attention on this issue. You know I think we all agree
that no member or family who's wearing a cloth of their nation
should be food insecure and not having the food on the table.
That's just unacceptable.
So as the Space Force, how are we getting after that? One
is, part of it's education. And, I mean, education and or are
we teaching our young families, our young enlisted members,
specifically, not only how to budget the amount of money that
is in their pay and compensation, but, also, what are they
eating and how are they eating?
You know, under the food and security discussion, you know,
when you try to define food and security, some of it is not
that there isn't enough food to eat, it's just that men and
women are not eating the right foods, not eating healthy food.
So part of the education campaign, from a nutrition
standpoint, is that they understand when they go to the dining
facility or go down to a restaurant or fast food, that they're
making positive choices on the foods that they should be able
to eat to get after that.
So education on finance and nutrition is one approach that
we're taking from a service perspective. On the BNA discussion,
you're right. We are looking at looking for authorization to
raise the threshold of the poverty line up to 200, and see what
that looks like.
But, overarchingly, again, right, and I think the SEAC has
talked about this, is that from a financial perspective, we
have to make sure the service members have at least enough
money in the bank account so they can budget appropriately to
make sure that they are buying the right foods and having the
right access to the foods.
You know, across, I think, the Department of the Air Force
and the installations that are Space Force installations,
there's a review going on where they're going on the
installation specifically and looking at what are the choices
available on base?
What are the hours of the dining facility for men and women
who are working shift work on weekends? Can they get access to
healthy food so that that that that they could eat,
appropriately making the right decisions?
But on the BNA front, if we raise it to 200 percent, which
I think will be helpful, but again, the pay and compensation,
overarchingly, we need to make sure that our members are
compensated enough so that, you know, those are the rare
exceptions, maybe with unique circumstances, extremely large
families, which I think the service members I think there's 35
across the Department of Defense today, Department of the Air
Force today.
And I think those are individuals with extremely large
families that are getting the BNA. The other thing I would ask,
and this is what the BNA specifically, sometimes it's late to
need because the way that the calculation works, it goes on the
previous year what you earn.
So if there's a family member who loses income in the
middle of the year and try to apply for BNA, they have to wait
until the January of the following year to be able to, you
know, provide their financial documents to earn the BNA
stipend.
So that's something we have to look at to make sure it's
acceptable service.
Mr. Bishop. So maybe it ought to be a real time opportunity
for service members to apply when that happens as opposed to
having to wait till the next year? That seems like an easy fix
for that issue.
Master Sergeant Bentivenga. Yes.
Mr. Bishop. But I am more concerned with the general income
levels that prevent service members, particularly low-ranking
members, from being able to do that.
Sergeant Major Weimer, do you have, from the Army's
perspective or even from the Navy, some ideas about this food
insecurity?
And I also really want to hear about the in-strength
reduction too.
Sergeant Major Weimer. Congressman, I'll try to touch on
all three of those really quickly. Be respectful of the time.
When it comes to food, we are reevaluating our entire
ecosystem, and that's exactly how we're looking at this.
Whether it's the bus transportation, it's increased kiosks
for available healthy food options, it's increasing our
financial training for single soldiers and soldiers with
dependents so they can understand budgeting. Whether it's
improvement with ordering from DLA, from the Defense Logistics
Agency to improve options for our warrior dining facilities.
There's a long list of things there, but it's truly an
ecosystem. And we're working with Army Material Command and our
Installation Management Command to really make improvements on
the entire ecosystem.
I could put a fabulous restaurant in the center of one
garrison, but if I don't have the bus to get soldiers there,
they can't actually take advantage of that.
On BNA, I will give you one example from the Army
perspective. We currently, as of at least three days ago, 16
people taking advantage of BNA. And one that I'll highlight,
without a name, is an E4 that lives at Joint Base Lewis-McChord
that had to have nine dependents to qualify for the
calculation.
I had to have my team do the calculation on the whiteboard
for me to truly understand between Federal poverty guidelines
and gross household income and I felt like I needed an
accounting degree to truly understand how to get soldiers to be
able to take advantage who qualifies.
And then on the last one, on the end strength, that is a
reality for us in the Army. It absolutely is, and I think this
committee is aware of the changes in ARSTRUC as we call it, our
Army structure.
Some of that is recruiting, and we're full court press on
improving our recruiting. And I'm encouraged and the results
we're seeing right now, based off changes the Secretary and the
Chief have recently made, but not letting off the gas.
Still more proof to be demonstrated in those. But that is
key for us to work on the in-strength question. And then the
demands globally, the demands globally are incredibly high,
potentially some of the highest we've ever seen in uniform
right now.
And so those two things have to, one, either the demands
have to lower or our ability to bring in new soldiers in the
Army has to improve. We're monitoring both, sir.
Mr. Bishop. So that in-strength reduction, though, is going
to really impact the stress level and the workload level, which
will ultimately impact your recruitment and retention.
Sergeant Major Weimer. Right now, our retention numbers in
the United States Army are solid, sir. I want to watch them by
the eaches and the owns.
Air defenders being probably the one that everyone's most
aware of right now, based off of global requirements. I get a
bi-weekly report by rank of where we are on those. That's how
closely we're monitoring that.
But I acknowledge, sir, you're correct. If the demands
don't decrease, in some form or fashion, and the input doesn't
get back to where we need it, then we could potentially head
towards a path of the stress you're referencing.
But right now, I feel confident where we're headed with
recruiting, not overconfident for the record, but confident.
And then we're having to be extra judicious in meeting those
requirements for the global combatant commanders.
Mr. Bishop. Thank you, sir. I think my time has expired,
but I thank the Chairman for the 5 minutes.
Mr. Carter. Mr. Rutherford.
Mr. Rutherford. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And, gentlemen,
thank all of you for your service and what you do for our
enlisted war fighters every day and their families, which is
why, you know, one of the big reasons we're here today
You know, as the Department of Defense continues through
the QRMC, you know, Congress, we haven't waited on results of
that. We've had some pay increases that we've already touched
on.
I'm hoping, it looks like this year, I think we're going to
have, DoD is going to have a really good outcome for an another
pay increase. But one of the things that I worry about, and,
Master Chief, if you could speak to this, you know, one of the
things that that that comes up is how well do we compare, when
you talk about military service to our civilian, counterparts?
And when you look at the responsibility, I had the opportunity
to go out on the USS Harry S Truman. To watch those men and
women perform was amazing.
How do you compare that to anything else in the world? I
don't know how you do that. So in this QRMC, how do we make
sure that we're offering pay commensurate with the duties that
we're truly asking these men and women?
And it's not just the Navy. It's everybody. But that that
we're asking them to do.
Master Chief Honea. Thank you, Congressman. I greatly
appreciate the question. You give me an opportunity to expound
on my opening statement that it was exactly the point that I
was trying to make about the level of responsibility and the
high stakes that our sailors are operating with currently right
now operating over in the Bab-el-Mandeb.
And I gave you one small example. But just as you also
said, Congressman, you go on board one of our aircraft carriers
and the ground crewmen that are moving the aircraft around.
If we were to make a mistake and have a ground collision
mishap of a couple F-35s today, that's a class A mishap. The
tolerance is much higher than excuse me, much lower than it's
ever been, and the responsibilities that are put on our service
members are stronger and greater than they've ever been.
So I do not believe that the comparison models that we've
been using and that we're currently using in the QRMC is going
to be giving us satisfactory or substantive change necessary to
really address our pay issues across our enlisted force for
sure.
I think that we should be looking for a comparison model
that isn't about similar age and education and more about the
level of responsibility and the expectations that we're putting
on those service members.
Something more along those lines. Exactly where we find
that at, we can look at our other first responders that are
operating in our communities, any number of other places. But
that young 19-year-old that's working at the Starbucks is not
the same thing that we're asking of our 19-year-olds that are
serving in harm's way.
Mr. Rutherford. Amen.
Master Chief Honea. Thank you, sir.
Mr. Rutherford. Let me also ask you this, because it kind
of goes right into it, and I come from a Navy district in
Jacksonville. I know the sailors in Jacksonville at NAS
Jacksonville, Mayport, even though we've increased the BAH,
there's a lot of challenges.
Whether it's a good thing or a bad thing, I'm not sure.
But, you know, the Navy is located on the waterfronts where
property values are extremely high. So it's, I think it creates
some added problems for sailors who are trying to find
affordable housing in areas where it's very, very difficult.
And especially those enlisted men. Can you talk a little
bit about the BAH? And is that being considered in the QRMC, or
are they looking at those two things completely separately?
Master Chief Honea. Congressman, how we compute the Basic
Allowance for Housing is also being considered. I'm hoping
that, I'm not a member of the QRMC so I can't speak to the
specific questions that they're going through to make the
determinations.
When I have an opportunity to speak with them, I will ask
more and more if we're figuring ways to be more responsive to
those challenges.
As you described, the United States Navy, in many good
ways, we get to live in some wonderful places. But that can
become extremely challenging in economic times such as we have
today, where rental markets and real estate prices are going up
faster then we're able to respond with changes to our housing
allowances.
That can leave our service members, especially our most
junior enlisted service members, in quite a contrary in that
what they're paying out in housing allowance far outweighs what
they make in base pay.
So it doesn't take very long for them to lose any kind of
discretionary spending if they find themselves upside down in a
rental market trying to survive in a high-cost area like that,
which goes back to Congressman Bishop's question about basic
need allowance and food insecurity.
I'll tell you. I've been married to my wife; this August
will be 35 years. So she's been with me for a very, very long
time, and she can tell you more about, you know, what it is
like to try to manage a family budget, you know, in a stressful
time like that.
But I can remember when we were younger, when we'd get done
paying our rent, our bills, and I mean, by bills, I mean, like,
electric bill. You know, I don't mean like I had a charge card
at Sears, you know?
We had very modest living. We had very small amount of
money to go grocery shopping with every month to fill up our
cupboards.
Mr. Rutherford. Yes.
Master Chief Honea. And if there was ever a pinch on our
budget, the first place we had to take make changes was in our
Commissary budget. That's when we sort of have to eat, you
know, Hamburger Helper, you know, instant soups, and things
along those lines because that's what it demanded of us.
That leaves with food insecurity. If we look after the
welfare, the well-being, I mean to say, and we pay our people
appropriately, then we won't have to worry about things like
Basic Need Allowance or be overly concerned about food
insecurity.
You pay them appropriately, they'll figure out how to feed
themselves. I feel pretty good about that.
Mr. Rutherford. And our recruitment and retention will go
up significantly as well.
Master Chief Honea. Yes, for sure.
Mr. Rutherford. And I tell you, as you talked about all
those things as a former Navy dependent of an enlisted man, I
can tell you I've heard all those discussions at the kitchen
table. And so, I'm very proud that this group is concerned
enough to want to do something about it. So thank you.
With that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Carter. Ms. Pingree.
Ms. Pingree. Thank you very much, Mr. Chair, and thank you
so much to all of you. I really appreciate your time with us
today in tackling some of these challenging issues that make it
possible for our military to survive and thrive, and
particularly taking on things like housing, and childcare, and
healthcare, mental health, it is a long list, and we have been
having a chance to talk about it all.
Mr. Chair, I just wanted to quickly recognize, I have a new
staffer for this committee, Hunter Friend, who is with us here
today, who served in the Army, so we are very grateful to him
for his service. And my partner will hate me to mention this,
but he is in the back of the room, and he is a graduate of the
Class of 1975 West Point. So my brother was in the Navy, I am
really a Navy family, but I am proud of having these two Army
people with me here today and appreciate their service.
So, well, I got to tackle a little tough question on mental
health. And thank you very much, Sergeant Major Michael Weimer.
We had a chance to speak briefly, but I just want to talk to
you about this.
We had a really sad situation in our state. An Army
Reservist went on a shooting spree in Lewiston last fall, in
November. He killed 18 people and injured 13. We just had the
release of an independent commission to investigate the facts
of this tragedy and they published an interim report, and one
of the things it highlighted was that the shooter's chain of
command notified on multiple occasions that there were serious
mental health issues which led to the commander ordering a
mental health evaluation, subsequently restricted the shooter's
access to all military weapons and ammunition.
The mental health evaluation explicitly recommended that
the commanding officer take measures to safely remove all
firearms and weapons from the shooter's home. However, the
commander did not report that information to the Sagadahoc
County Sheriff's Office, so when he was returned home, that
information was never made available. We are still waiting for
the Army to publish some findings about this, but a couple of
questions for you.
When a service member is grappling with mental illness, as
the Lewiston shooter clearly was, what does the military do to
ensure civilian law enforcement is aware that this person
should not be in possession of a firearm?
Sergeant Major Weimer. Congresswoman, thank you for that
question and, you know, my condolences go out for that entire
situation. Horrific. And I also acknowledge--thank you for
acknowledging the fact that it is still an ongoing
investigation, and so I will try to answer without
overstepping. The bottom line, in the active component, it is a
much simpler solution.
It just is, in the spirit of being very, very candid with
you. Much simpler. Chain of command has a very deliberate
battle rhythm. In our National Guard and our Reserve compos, it
is a little bit different, especially when the soldiers are not
currently on either title 10 orders or title 32 orders, title
10 working for the Federal Government, 32 working for the
governor at that time. It gets a little grey there.
Now I will say this, though. Every chain of command usually
has a mechanism to still look after their soldiers, right?
First and foremost is they are still a soldier whether they
were on title 10 or title 32 orders. Same for if they are
having suicide ideations or they are in trouble with the law
and potentially have weapons in their home, to your question,
it is a little bit different. But the commanders have the
ability to reach out to local law enforcement. I don't know a
specific mandate, I will have to get that for you for the
record, to be very specific, but then I also don't want to
overstep the ongoing investigation.
For us in the active component, that would be a senior
mission command. The garrison that was responsible with the
tenant unit that had said soldier and the criminal
investigation, CID, would be involved in that and would
immediately notify local law enforcement of any threats or any
danger.
Ms. Pingree. Thank you for making it clear that could have
or potentially should have happened in this particular case. Do
Reserve or National Guard commanders have the authority to
confiscate soldier's firearms?
Sergeant Major Weimer. Ma'am, I will have to take that for
the record for you.
Ms. Pingree. OK. Sort of more broadly, how are you
developing a broader plan to address with--issues with
reservists and guardsmen in crisis? And I understand what you
said earlier, and I appreciate that, that it is a lot trickier
than someone on active duty because of the sort of in and out
nature of their connection to the military.
Sergeant Major Weimer. So one tangible thing that we are
trying to understand how we can bring resources to our Compo 2
National Guard and Compo 3 Reserve teammates is in our holistic
health and fitness. Again, back to how do we get left, we get
upstream to be more preventative. The battle drill to be
reactive when a crisis happens, to your earlier question, how
do we get left.
We are trying to figure out how to resource and assist both
those compos with H2F, as I referenced it before, and that is
really challenging when service members aren't on orders at all
times. But what we are looking into is how could we use
regional hubs where we mobilize, and we train for the weekend,
and we train for two-week annual training in the summers,
because truly those resources are finite when you are hiring.
It is not just equipment. Those are sleep specialists, and
physical therapists, and nutritionists, and basically holistic
health. It is not just a gym.
We are trying to surge that to commanders in the Reserve
and the Guard to be able to, you know, invest in the welfare
and the health of their soldiers.
Ms. Pingree. Well, thank you very much for your answer, I
really appreciate that, and I do appreciate, and many of you
have addressed this already, that we are taking much more
seriously mental health as a component of readiness, of
wellness overall, that we are understanding how critically
important that is. And I, of course, look forward to the Army
publishing its findings. I know this community in my state is
anxiously waiting for that, and I do hope that any lessons
learned from this become part of future protocol and we can
spare another community or another individual soldier
themselves from any kind of harm.
I have used up my time, but I do again want to thank you
all. I would have been here to support the Navy. Thank you very
much for--I know the Navy is very important in Maine because of
Bath Iron Works and the Portsmouth Ship Yard, and so all of the
things that we are talking about today, the housing component,
the childcare, making sure that the sailors who are associated
with that have those level of services, and I appreciate the
conversation that many of my colleagues have brought up about
that, so thank you for that, it is really critically important
to retention and to them being able to do their best possible
job, so thank you all.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Carter. Thank you, Ms. Pingree.
Mr. Gonzales.
Mr. Gonzales. Thank you, Chairman, and thank you,
gentlemen, for serving this great country that we all live in.
I am going to give you the easiest question you are going to
get today, and this is for everyone, please. Yes or no. Five
minutes goes fast. Are military families the most valuable
asset in your service? Sergeant Major.
Sergeant Major Weimer. Yes, Congressman.
Master Chief Honea. Yes.
Sergeant Major Ruiz. Yes.
Master Sergeant Flosi. Yes.
Master Sergeant Bentivenga. Yes.
Mr. Gonzales. I would agree. I would agree. Now no more
softballs, now it is time for high and inside, and Sergeant
Major Ruiz gets the privilege here. When can family--when can
military families expect the family separation allowance to be
raised from 250 to 400?
Sergeant Major Ruiz. Appreciate that, sir. Yes, I--we
greatly appreciate the authority to go up to 400 from 250. It
is very expensive, absolutely, to have a Marine forward and
buying two sets of groceries or--it is just two sets of
everything, so it gets expensive. The authority came and now we
are looking into where do we find the money and how fast can we
find the money, what doesn't get paid. So I will come back to
you, sir. I don't have an answer for you right now, but we
understand how critical that is for families.
Mr. Gonzales. This is the problem I have in Congress.
Everybody says the right things, everybody comes up here and we
all advocate for these things, and half the time it is Congress
not doing its part, but we did our part in this case, right?
Last year we passed it from 250 to 400. I pushed very hard on
that. That hadn't been done in decades. Now it is time for us--
for our actions to match up with our words as far as putting
families above everything else.
So I am going to continue to push on that. We need to make
this a priority, and it cannot just be words, it has to be
actions. We owe that, at a minimum, I think we would all agree,
we owe that at a minimum to our family members, especially
those that are forward deployed taking on these tough jobs.
My next question is for Sergeant Major Weimer. Are Federal
funds issued to the Army being used or expected to be used on
drag shows?
Sergeant Major Weimer. No, Congressman.
Mr. Gonzales. Thank you, Sergeant Major. I think this is
very important. And look, I don't want to be talking about drag
shows. I served 20 years in the military. I don't care the
color of somebody's skin, or who they pray to, or what they do
in their off time, but there is a perception issue that the
services are doing other things other than training and
fighting to win wars, and we have to get ahead of that, and we
have to be very crystal clear in what these funds are going
for. So I would ask all of you all, please consider that when
you are having conversations, when you are going and visiting
other places is to make sure we are not using Federal funds in
order to go down some of these crazy rabbit holes.
My next question is for Chief Master Sergeant Flosi. Joint
Base San Antonio. Great idea, right? Let's pull all our
resources. You get the question because the two-star in the Air
Force is the one that holds the purse strings. But the question
in particular is the barracks there, the medical education and
training. And look, the Army has 51 percent of this barracks,
the Navy has 32 percent of this, the Air Force only gets 17
percent of it.
But ultimately, this is the issue I have, and I visited
this facility. Right now I think there's 148 students that are
being housed in Camp Bullis, about 35 minutes away, due to some
of the issues at the barracks. What can we do to make this a
priority? The joint base model. You know, everyone shares in
it, but somebody has to pay the ticket on it.
Master Sergeant Flosi. Thanks for the question,
Congressman. We are certainly focused on that particular dorm
at METC, Fort Sam Houston. So across--the larger question of
what to do at joint basing I think is a great question that we
need to look closer at. But to address this specific concern,
in the DAF we have programmed across the FYDP nearly half a
billion dollars in MILCON. We have design money approved and we
think we will be ready in fiscal year 2026, given the design
and MILCON appropriations come through, and so we appreciate
your support, and it is critical to our ability to build
medical readiness for our force.
Mr. Gonzales. Thank you for that. And you will find this
committee is committed to do our part and give you the
resources for it, but when I read the San Antonio Express news
and it says, you know, there is mold in the barracks again, and
once again the impression is that the military isn't taking
care of our families and our single soldiers, sailors, and
marines. And I know that is the furthest thing from the truth,
but let's get this fixed, right?
I would also offer this. I have used some of my previous
community projects to get a chow hall in Camp Bullis up to
speed, that hasn't been done in 50 years, and some other
things. So once again, if there are projects that can be--that
I specifically can help get over the finish line, you have my
commitment to doing it, but I can't select a project if you
don't submit a project, right?
So that is one of the things I look forward to working with
all--you and your teams on the priorities you have, not only in
my district in Texas but across the country. Once again, this
is the committee that I think you have the commitment for us to
get that done. Thank you again, gentlemen, for your service to
this country.
Mr. Carter. I like your passion.
Mrs. Lee.
Ms. Lee of Nevada. Thank you, Chair Carter and Ranking
Member Wasserman Schultz. I want to thank all of our witnesses,
as the proud representative of military families at Creech and
Ellis who all call Southern Nevada home. I appreciate all your
service and your presence here to discuss these quality of life
issues.
My top quality of life concerns, like many of us, are
related to military pay and compensation. I am eager to see the
outcome of the 14th quadrennial review of military
compensation, but I also agree there are things that we can do
right now to better support our service members. Access to
affordable housing obviously remains a central stressor,
especially for the junior enlisted in Nevada.
Creech Air Force Base, as you know, does not have any on-
site accommodations, forcing all the airmen to commute 50 miles
one way to work each day. They face costs as high as $400 a
month on gas. So just to put that in perspective, an E2 at
Creech will spend about 30 percent, one-third of their base pay
just to get to work to serve our country every day.
This is why I fought for the requirement in the fiscal year
2024 NDAA to mandate an assignment incentive pay feasibility
study for those assigned to remotely piloted aircraft missions.
Chief Flosi, can you share any updates on how the assignment--
the study is going and if you anticipate being able to use that
type of pay to offset the significant fuel costs for our men
and women at Creech?
Master Sergeant Flosi. Thank you for the question,
Congresswoman. Thanks for your focus on our airmen assigned to
Creech Air Force Base.
So we are continuing to explore the feasibility of using
assignment incentive pay. We--it is a mechanism that we have
used in the past. From 2008 to 2012 we had a process in place
to do this. And so it looks like we have the authorities inside
the department at the discretion of the service secretary, so
when our feasibility study is complete, we will make a
recommendation to the secretary, and we appreciate your support
in any recommendation we make.
Ms. Lee of Nevada. When do you anticipate the study to be
complete?
Master Sergeant Flosi. Ma'am, I do not have a date, but I
would be happy to follow up with you.
Ms. Lee of Nevada. Yes, that would be great. The sooner the
better obviously.
Master Sergeant Flosi. Absolutely, it is taking care of our
airmen.
Ms. Lee of Nevada. And I am moving on to childcare. In
Nevada and obviously across the country, ensuring access to
reliable childcare has become a major challenge for our
military members, and on top of excessive wait times, the need
for childcare during irregular hours and lengthy commutes to
remote work locations like Creech have driven home the
importance of having flexible childcare options.
Yet there is still installations today with significant
childcare challenges like the naval station in Fallon in
northern Nevada that have--it not Nevada. I don't know why I
said that. That have--I am never running for president. That
have not established an in-home family childcare program on
their installation. This program not only meets irregular
childcare needs, but also is a venue to provide spousal
employment opportunities. If it is not consistently implemented
DoD-wide with a streamline certification transfer process for
providers, it seems like a missed opportunity at two critical
needs.
Chief Honea, I just wanted to ask, can you share how your
service is incorporating family childcare program into your
strategy and what you have done to ensure that it might be
available to all military families?
Master Chief Honea. Yes, ma'am. We use child development
homes, you know, as a response to that similar program that you
were discussing that the Army has. And I am not aware of
anything that is preventing them from opening up a child
development home in Fallon, Nevada. I will look into it and
find out specifically that we are not preventing that, but it
typically has to come down to an individual wanting to open up
their home and create that business with inside their home.
Then there is a screening process that goes along with that to
ensure everybody in that home is suitable for having a child
development home, and then there is a verification and
certification process that goes along with that. It is rather
lengthy. It is easier once somebody has already established
one.
So I will need to find out specifically if there is a
prevention for Fallon. But this is integral to our child
development care needs across our force, and we have it robust
in many places.
Ms. Lee of Nevada. So let me ask. So the family childcare
program, you are saying the child development home is the same
thing or is it a different certification process?
Master Chief Honea. Ma'am, as I understand it, it is very
much--very similar.
Ms. Lee of Nevada. OK.
Master Chief Honea. There could be some differences. I am
not as familiar with the other services' programs as I am with
the child development home.
Ms. Lee of Nevada. OK, great. Thank you. I am past my time.
Mr. Carter. Mr. Franklin.
Mr. Franklin. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you all,
gentlemen, for being here today. As considering all of you are
in kind of terminal rank and unpromotable, it is a great place
to be, as my E9s used to always tell me, but you are all in a
unique position to shape the force for the future, hopefully,
you know, long after you are retired.
I am concerned by a lot of the things that we know are the
problems that have been raised here today, and I just was
seeing in this morning's press results of a survey by Blue Star
Families that you guys may have seen, but was really
disconcerting to me. It said only 32 percent of military
families would still recommend military service. And that pains
me as a career Navy guy. I tell every young person I meet,
going in the military was the best thing that ever happened to
me and I wish every young man and woman in our country could
serve. That is a drop from 55 percent in 2016 to 32 percent in
2023. That is at a time that we have gone from, you know, a hot
war, though we seemed to have been in one for a long time now,
to notionally not being in a hot war, though tell that to all
the folks out there on the front lines.
No surprise, time away from home was cited as the top issue
along with pay, spousal employment, access to childcare and
healthcare, and housing options, all things we have discussed
here today. 73 percent of the survey respondents said they were
paying more than $200 a month out of pocket for civilian
housing options. And as Mr. Bishop had alluded to earlier, one
in four enlisted respondents reported food insecurity.
So a question I have for all of you, and we will see how
the time goes here, we might have to pick it up, but have we
gotten--in your opinions, have we gotten to where we are
because we funded the urgent at the expense of the important
for far too long or are we seeing a fundamental shift in the
pool of folks out there who are potential candidates to come
into the military? So--because as we go to fix the problems, is
it a matter of spending more money that we may have shorted and
put to other resources, or do we need to fundamentally change
our approach to what it is going to take to attract and retain
these people? Because that is going to affect not only
retention but also how we bring them in the front door to begin
with.
So, Sergeant Major, if you could start with that.
Sergeant Major Weimer. Thank you, Congressman. Incredibly
complex question. There is a lot there. Quality of life
absolutely is part of that. I--pressure on the force, to
Congressman Bishop's question, that is absolutely part of that.
The data, and my wife actually attended that event with my
teammate here, he and his spouse actually spoke at it. I would
like a little bit more fidelity in the data because again--
which they have promised us the eaches and owns to look at that
because right now like our retention data is really good. So
people are staying in the service so they believe in the
mission, though we still have these stressors.
And so my concern is I don't want to reach a breaking
point, to the core of your question. I think there's a lot to
that. I think there's people having--I see--we see it in the
Army for sure, people are having families later in life. I am
an Army brat. That was very unusual growing up as an Army brat
and now it is not unusual at all to see lieutenant colonels and
colonels in command that have little ones running around. That
was not a normal. And so the family stability piece is a little
bit more important than it used to be and the amount of PCSs is
a little different.
So there is a lot there but I acknowledge why you are
asking the question, and the stressors do exist, and it is a
concern.
Mr. Franklin. All right. Master Chief?
Master Chief Honea. Yes, sir. I would--simple answer is yes
and yes. I do believe that it is those stressors, and, yes, I
do believe it is a matter of us overfunding the urgent compared
to the important, you know, and I do believe also that it is a
matter of fact of the people that are coming to serve are a
little bit different than you and I are.
You know, when I joined the service, the majority of my
leadership when I first came in were Vietnam vets and their
approach, you know, to answering my questions was typically
shut up, that's why, and I was fully acceptable of that kind of
a response. Our young men and women that are coming to serve
today don't find that to be an acceptable response. They want
to be respected and to be considered a full and complete member
of this team and they want to be respected as such. I don't
have any problem with that. We just need to understand that.
But--and I don't believe that the decision to fund the
urgent, you know, and what we need to be funding as the
important should be in competition with one another. I would
offer that is that as I said earlier talking about the sailors
that are operating in the Bab-el-Mandeb, I want them to have
all the weapon systems they need to have. I want them to have
all the munitions that they need to have to fight and win. I
want that to be a complete success.
At the same time, I want their well-being to take into
consideration. I don't think these things should be in
competition with one another. Them being war fighting competent
and their wellbeing should be complementary to one another and
that should be all of our collective priorities. That is the
things that we should fund together.
If we do that, we will meet most of these issues and we
will solve a lot of these problems. The issues you just
described were the exact things that I mentioned in my opening
statement as the five pillars, and then I offer that sixth
pillar that we needed to have from the Gates Commission to
maintain that all volunteer force.
As I move around and I speak with family members and
service members, their chief complaints are inadequate pay and
compensation that they are dissatisfied with, or dissatisfied
with housing that they are being provided, they are
dissatisfied with timely access, the quality medical care, as
we talked about earlier already.
We also talk about making sure that we remain ourselves as
a reflection of the American people that we serve. We have had
a break in trust with our American people and that includes a
break in trust of the American people that serve in our
military. We have to do much better at taking care of them and
them fully believing that this is an organization that has
their wellbeing in mind. If we meet those things, we are going
to come a long way.
Another thing I think that we could focus on in the areas
of our family is reconnecting them to us as an organization.
When I was younger in this military, everything that I did drew
me to that installation where there was Easter egg hunts with
my kids, going to the pool at the installation, meeting
everybody, that was just a greater connection that we had and
made a larger Navy family.
Mr. Franklin. That seems to be missing now, though.
Master Chief Honea. Yes, sir, because we have underfunded
that part of our installations. Most of those services are
closed, no longer existing, and those connections aren't
happening anymore. So now, you know, our sailors, service
members, and their families are enrolling their children in
youth sports in the communities they live in, not the youth
sports at the--on the installation. Those things that used to
draw us together that they give you that greater sense of
belonging and have a healthier connection to that organization.
We are endeavoring in the Navy to try and rebuild that. We
are endeavoring to build upon our Navy family framework and
bring a lot of that connection back. I think that will go a
long way in satisfying what some of those chief complaints were
at the Blue Star Family report. But I am going to tell you that
they are not off. What they had to say and what they found in
their survey is very similar to the feedback that I receive and
my wife receives as we go around speaking with our service
members and their families.
Mr. Franklin. Well, thank you, Master Chief.
Judge, I am well beyond my time, but I will have a question
I want to submit to you, Master Chief, about the decision to
open up the enlistment to folks without high school diplomas. I
have got a lot of concern about that. When we moved out of that
in the past, we acknowledged it was a bad decision. Looks to me
like an example of if your standards are too high, lower them.
But I know we are beyond time, but I would love to follow up
with you more about that.
Master Chief Honea. Yes, sir, I will be happy to.
Mr. Franklin. Thank you.
Mr. Carter. Thank you. Ms. Wasserman Schultz has requested
another round.
Ms. Wasserman Schultz. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Carter. I will let her go first.
Ms. Wasserman Schultz. Thank you. And I associate myself
with the gentleman's remarks about reducing standards and
allowing people who have--do not have high school diplomas to
enlist. That would not be a step in the right direction, in my
opinion, so I would also be interested in that information when
you share it with him.
So I would like to hear from each of you back to the
barracks issue. If your service is considering unaccompanied
housing privatization efforts, and if so, further elaboration
on why you think privatization would likely result in better
housing for our service members? Because that is certainly not
the track record of family housing, and I would envision, and I
have been on this sub since 2014 in the leadership role, I
would envision us having in the not too distant future hearings
like we had with family housing, companies, and service
members, and personnel who oversee those in this sub because
the privatization process is a failure in terms of keep--
maintaining the quality of life of housing. So if you could
share those plans and if there are any in your service.
Sergeant Major Weimer. Ranking Member, thank you for that.
And we also share some concerns from past history which is why
we are measuring twice to cut once in this space. We have had a
couple other small pilots really at Fort Meade and then one
that is getting ready to start down in Miami to assist with
U.S. SOUTHCOM, but they are not true privatized pilots like the
one we are getting ready to start at Fort Irwin. That will be a
true unit based pilot for the soldiers out of Fort Irwin.
We are going to analyze that and let that take place
without rushing it because I also have some concerns with
holding them accountable, still being able to influence
roommates and have some cohesive leadership responsibilities as
we would say in the Army with involvement inside that actual
facility. Now right now it looks promising in the sense of that
pilot is going to allow us to do what we want to do to truly
test the bounds of our ability to influence that, but the
secretary and the chief, we are moving out smartly with that
and not rushing to--this to be a silver bullet to solve our
investment strategy with barracks.
Ms. Wasserman Schultz. Master Chief?
Master Chief Honea. Yes, ma'am. I would offer that our
greatest failure with privatized military family housing was in
the area of oversight.
Ms. Wasserman Schultz. Right.
Master Chief Honea. Too many of our leaders, as you
described earlier in your opening remarks, it abdicated their
responsibility, you know, to their service members and those
families in providing that oversight to ensure our private
partners were delivering on their promises. We are doing much
better in that area and as long as we continue with our
responsibility in providing that oversight, our military family
housing is going to continue to improve.
Our pilots that we are running in private barracks, like
Pacific Beacon, have been operating for 20 plus years, largely
as a success because we have not abdicated our responsibility
in providing that oversight to ensure that our private partner
is delivering on the promises that they are going to make. If
we continued along that way, we are going to do resoundingly
well. I think that they are going to be faster at meeting our
need than we are with current MILCON projects. MILCON will take
us 7 years. We can go a lot faster with PPV, whether they come
in and they renovate currently existing buildings or they build
new facilities to house our service members.
Ms. Wasserman Schultz. Sergeant Major?
Sergeant Major Ruiz. Ma'am, I share the concern of
privatizing unaccompanied housing. It is--for the Marine Corps,
ma'am, our barracks are part of sustaining the transformation.
I need marines in barracks, having roommates. I need marines to
have an NCO down the hall to take care of an issue.
So will we run a pilot? Maybe in areas where it is probably
a small contingent of Marines it may work best, but I don't
want marines, and they don't want, to be alone in a room and
spread all over the base and station. It is important to take
care of what we have today, and with your help we are getting
after it.
Ms. Wasserman Schultz. Thanks. Chief Flosi.
Master Sergeant Flosi. Thank you, Ranking Member. So in our
department, we are assessing privatized, unaccompanied housing
independent from just first term airmen in dorms so that it
could be anybody that arrives at a location without dependents,
and we are looking very specifically at locations where there
is two types of challenges: they are either remote and isolated
and there is not adequate housing in the community, excessive
commute times, things like that, or the housing market is
incredibly competitive and our BAH rates, as we have discussed
earlier, that they lag the economic changes that make it really
difficult for our families to live near the installation.
So in those two circumstances we are assessing the
feasibility and we are paying close attention to the Navy and
the lessons that they have learned so that we don't replicate
some of the mistakes that came through our initial contracts
that we wrote with privatizing military family housing. We are
also learning to be more accountable. Through that process as
well between the categories of accountability through those
contracts, we have recouped more than $118 million from
contractors for issues for health and safety, mold, things like
that across our housing projects in the department.
Ms. Wasserman Schultz. Thank you. Chief Bentivenga?
Master Sergeant Bentivenga. Ranking Member, so the Space
Force has partnered with the Air Force as far as the
dormitories go. This is the Department of the Air Force issue
that we are looking at together, so there is no discussion on
the Space Force side to look at privatized for the dormitories
or for the barracks, if you will. But from a service
perspective, ours is unique for the guardians that are coming
into the service is that the average age of someone that is
becoming from a civilian to an enlisted guardian today is over
22 years old. A lot of them do already have some families but
most have some college with masters degrees and bachelor's
degrees, so it is a different type of individual that we are
bringing into the dormitories today, so we are looking at what
that means for dorm life, if you will, and what that
infrastructure looks like. But from a prioritization
perspective, we are attached to the hip with the Air Force
under the Department of the Air Force on our way forward.
Ms. Wasserman Schultz. OK. And since it really seems like
the Navy and the Army are more focused on this, I am concerned
about making sure that you have practices and priorities in
place to ensure that the quality of housing for service members
won't be compromised. We have a track record that is abysmal
with family housing and I agree because that is why we added
$130 million of oversight funding that we keep adding
additional funds for so that we can ensure that there really
is, you know, close up oversight.
But I am specifically interested, and then I am done, Mr.
Chairman, on what changes you are making to the lease terms and
oversight activities to better hold the privatized housing
providers to account, and what options will DoD have to pull
out of the agreements if private companies don't live up to the
required standards? Because we are stuck in nearly all cases
with the family housing and, you know, I just we--the
definition of insanity is doing the same thing over and over
again and, you know, it doesn't make sense to not make sure we
have course corrections or not do what we have already seen
doesn't work.
Sergeant Major Weimer. Ranking Member, acknowledged. We
have learned a lot on this journey, oftentimes too slow though,
to your point. And so some of the things that we are trying to
do, the inspection and the oversight piece is critical, and we
saw we weren't doing inspections properly and we weren't
meeting time standards to make sure that we truly had the work
orders that were knocked out between leases, between--that gap
between two people occupying a location, that was where we
found our weakness.
And so we had to go back and we had to retrain, and it is
called--for us it is called between occupancy maintenance.
There is a goal of ten days or less. That is installation
command's goal because we are stacking families up in temporary
housing while we are waiting on that. The problem was that we
were trying to go too fast just to get the people out of that
and so we couldn't do that.
And so unfortunately right now we are not meeting that goal
across 41 different locations. We are actually a 17-day
average, and that average isn't nearly as good as it sounds
because the larger locations like Fort Moore or actually
Carson, there are upwards of 23 to 64 days in between, which is
unacceptable. Part of that is staffing, having the right amount
of people to go in and actually take care of these, because
once we inspect it and identify things, the clock is still
continuing, so the response for the work orders. And then the
safety and health, as you know, because I know you are super
passionate like we are about the lead and other things before
people occupy a house. I live in an old house that has to have
that level of inspection before I actually moved into it.
And so retraining what an actual inspection is, and then
decreasing the amount of time to tackle identified issues are
two of the Army's oversight pieces that we are surging to
increase.
Ms. Wasserman Schultz. Isn't some of this that the private
companies need to provide the proper staffing levels to be able
to process the transition and address the health and safety
needs?
Sergeant Major Weimer. It is, and the quarterly meetings
that our general officers and SESs, our senior mission command
teams are now doing with the privatized housing companies is
actually starting to have that impact because it is
accountability and they can be penalized financially when they
are not actually meeting their objectives.
Ms. Wasserman Schultz. I just hope this raises a caution
flag on moving forward on barracks and unaccompanied housing
because I don't trust them. They are willing to take massive
fines just as a cost of doing business and then they do it
again. So I would just really consider this a very big caution
flag here that could down the road result in language coming
from me, so----
Sergeant Major Weimer. Acknowledged, ma'am.
Ms. Wasserman Schultz. Chief?
Master Chief Honea. Ma'am, fully understood your concern
and your caution. I will endeavor to have a better
understanding of what we are doing differently as we enter
these agreements. As I have said, the PPV partners that we have
for unaccompanied housing have been operating for 20-plus years
and we have had nothing but success from those. What the
difference is between that as far as the contract, and how we
hold them accountable, and the language in the agreement that
we have made with them, I need to better--have a better
understanding to give you that answer and to give you the same
confidence that I have in them.
Ms. Wasserman Schultz. OK. If you could submit that for the
record, I would appreciate it.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Carter. Some of that could be done with contracts. If
you actually contract a certain way on closing for the--where
they are getting their money and you are holding back some of
their money until you see them doing what they are supposed to
do and you will hold it for 20 years if they don't do it, it
gets their attention. I have worked on some housing projects
around, and that had--that gives great incentive to get the--
start doing maintenance.
Thank you for being here. I wanted to tell you that I have
got a bill that I have introduced twice and I plan to get it
done this time. It is Military Spouses Hiring Act. It allows
tax--the businesses that hire spouses a special tax break and--
because the fact that you move around so much, they can't get
the good jobs.
And by the way, as far as Cavazos is concerned, you all
need to be training up soldiers to do jobs at these factories
that are going up in Williamson County. We have got a $200
billion investment by Samsung that is going to have a huge
amount of employment, and as you--these guys are getting out of
the Army or any of the four services in our neighborhood, there
are going to be lots of jobs there, lots and lots of them.
Already have 26,000 people on the building site, and that is a
pretty good job, too.
Listen, thank you all of you. I appreciate you very much.
You give us the real story and that is important. So I know who
runs the military, all right? Thank you. We will adjourn.

Thursday, April 11, 2024

NAVY AND MARINE CORPS MILITARY CONSTRUCTION AND FAMILY HOUSING

WITNESSES

HON. MEREDITH BERGER, ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF THE NAVY (INSTALLATIONS,
ENERGY AND ENVIRONMENT), CHIEF SUSTAINABILITY OFFICER, DEPARTMENT
OF THE NAVY
VICE ADMIRAL JEFFREY T. JABLON, DEPUTY CHIEF OF NAVAL OPERATIONS,
INSTALLATIONS AND LOGISTICS, DEPARTMENT OF THE NAVY
LT. GENERAL EDWARD D. BANTA, DEPUTY COMMANDANT, INSTALLATIONS AND
LOGISTICS, UNITED STATES MARINE CORPS
Mr. Carter. Welcome. We are very glad to have everyone here
today.
Today's hearing is on the Navy and Marine Corps' fiscal
year 2025 budget request for military construction and family
housing.
It is a great pleasure to be here today with the Honorable
Meredith Berger, Assistant Secretary of the Navy for Energy,
Installations, and Environment; Vice Admiral Jeffrey Jablon,
Deputy Chief of Naval Operations for Installations and
Logistics; and Lieutenant General Edward Banta, Deputy
Commandant, Installations and Logistics, the United States
Marine Corps.
Military construction and family housing makes up only
about 2 percent of our budget when we look at defense, and yet
it has a tremendous impact on our sailors and our marines and
their families who feel the impact of infrastructure
investments daily.
Military construction dollars not only account for quality
of life in family housing projects, but they also directly
impact the recruitment, training, and readiness of our forces.
Infrastructure is a form of deterrence. With the unrest we
see today, it is clear that we must increase our investment in
infrastructure to strengthen our ability to deter aggression
wherever it occurs.
With this in mind, I look forward to discussing the
challenges and opportunities for the Navy and the Marine Corps.
Investing in facilities and infrastructure is critical to
supporting our sailors and marines, and their readiness is most
important because they invest their lives in the fight, and we
need to invest in their families.
Now I would like to introduce and recognize my good friend
and counterpart, Ms. Wasserman Schultz.
Ms. Wasserman Schultz. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I
appreciate the opportunity to provide an opening statement for
our hearing with the Navy.
I want to welcome back Assistant Secretary Berger and
Lieutenant General Banta, and welcome, for the first time,
Admiral Jablon.
We really appreciate all of you being here today and your
service.
The Department of the Navy's fiscal year 2025 budget
requests $5.2 billion for Navy and Marine Corps military
construction, Navy Reserve military construction, and Navy and
Marine Corps family housing construction and operation. That is
a cut of a billion dollars compared to the enacted level.
This is also a billion-and-a-half-dollar cut from last
year's budget request, despite our year-over-year efforts to
get military construction funding up to a level that adequately
addresses the true needs of the military.
Now, I know we are in a tight funding environment. We had
an opportunity to talk about that yesterday. The top-line
funding level for defense spending is essentially flat with
last year, so I realize we are going to need to see cuts, but
it is a shame that it has to come from the Navy like this.
I am a big believer in your budget request representing
your values, and I think this is especially true in tight
fiscal environments. You really have to prioritize what is most
important.
The Navy is prioritizing SIOP with an investment of $2
billion through construction projects in planning and design
this year. SIOP is critical to secure and modernize our
Nation's shipyards, which is vital for our national security.
The Navy is also prioritizing sustaining and strengthening
U.S. deterrence against China with $1.8 billion for projects in
the Pacific, including projects in Hawaii, Australia, and Guam,
all of which I have traveled to.
However, it is clear that the Navy is not prioritizing
quality of life in this year's request, with only one quality-
of-life project in its entire Active Component military
construction request.
I understand that there are a number of competing
priorities, and I do not envy you for having to make the tough
choices between mission readiness and ensuring the Department
is meeting all the other needs of our sailors and marines by
providing adequate childcare, ensuring housing is clean and
livable, and reducing the prevalence of sexual assaults.
While those things may not seem as mission critical, they
most certainly are. Sailors and marines cannot be expected to
perform at their highest level if they are worried about
affordable and convenient childcare or mold or vermin-infested
housing.
Quality of life directly affects mission readiness. It is
our duty to care for the whole servicemember, not just the
warfighter part of them, and that includes taking care of them
and their families holistically.
Again, I am extremely disappointed, to say the least, of
the lack of quality-of-life projects in the budget request this
year. Do you not have a backlog of Navy and Marine Corps
families seeking childcare? There are 13 child development
centers requested across the FYDP but none prioritized this
year.
The Government Accountability Office recently came out with
a report, back in September 2023, addressing military barracks
conditions. The Department of the Navy was not without fault.
And to see no military construction in this year's budget to
address these deficiencies is disheartening, to say the least.
Now, I know there are other funding sources to support
barracks, so the Defense Subcommittee's bill and MILCON is not
always the answer. But I am interested to hear the Department's
plan to address inadequate, unlivable housing conditions across
the board.
With our recruitment and retention problems, which we have
all talked about, we need to be making the U.S. military more
desirable, not less, as a career. We need to be showing people
that the Department of the Navy is and will continue to take
care of our sailors, marines, and their families.
In short, there just needs to be more balance in your
request than you currently have. And I know we are in a tough
spot. Once again, we have to work within the confines of the
law.
But I am interested in digging in deeper to the details
that make up this request, and I hope to gain a better
understanding of your priorities this year and how you are
prioritizing the people, not just the mission.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Carter. Well, thank you.
Thank you again for taking the time to be here with us.
Without objection, your written statements will be entered
into the record. Please summarize your remarks in about 5
minutes each.
We will begin with Madam Secretary.
STATEMENT OF HON. MEREDITH BERGER, ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF THE
NAVY (INSTALLATIONS, ENERGY AND ENVIRONMENT), CHIEF
SUSTAINABILITY OFFICER, DEPARTMENT OF THE NAVY
Ms. Berger. Chairman Carter, Ranking Member Wasserman
Schultz, and distinguished members of the committee, thank you
for inviting me to come talk to you today about our fiscal year
2025 budget request.
To fight and win, the Department of the Navy requires
ready, reliable, and resilient installations, and that includes
the buildings, systems, and assets that comprise them.
The majority of our infrastructure--whether barracks,
utilities, or our public shipyards--is not in good shape.
As an institution, we have allowed these assets to degrade
over time. We have accumulated and deferred significant risk
and allowed the risk to accumulate and compound until it has
created apparent impactful consequences for readiness, most
tangibly for our sailors and marines.
We are redoubling our efforts not only to prevent,
remediate, and mitigate the risks resulting from
vulnerabilities in the shore portfolio, but also to restore and
demolish and build new when needed.
As I talk about my portfolio, I often talk about
communities, critical infrastructure, and climate action. What
I am talking about are our people, our power projection
platforms, and making sure that we are ready, resilient, and
survivable. This is mission critical.
A sailor or marine recruited and retained--healthy, safe,
supported, and trained, with a physical space to achieve the
task at hand--will return infinitely more value to our
warfighting force than the dollars that it will cost.
The cost of construction is on the rise, and it will cost a
lot to get it right. Lockstep with my Marine Corps and Navy
teammates, we are prioritizing projects that assure mission
with the funds we receive.
The Navy and Marine Corps are taking steps to improve how
we resource these critical requirements through the
Installation Investment Plan and the Facilities Investment
Strategy, respectively.
These efforts inform the development of the Department of
the Navy's 30-year infrastructure plan, which looks at the
interdependencies among projects through mission assurance, in
order to prioritize and sequence necessary investments in the
infrastructure that keep our people safe and project power
around the globe.
The Department of the Navy is focused on the essential
warfighting, readiness, and quality-of-life support that naval
facilities provide. From the Marine Corps' Barracks 2030 wall-
to-wall inspection, the Navy's decisive investment in the
Shipyard Infrastructure Optimization Program, to strengthening
relationships with communities, Tribal and indigenous partners,
and enhancing quality of life and resilience via improvements
to energy, water, and wireless, we are implementing policy and
authorities to make our appropriations go farther.
Our Navy and Marine Corps respond when the Nation calls.
Around the globe, around the clock, our naval forces are where
they need to be when they need to be there, able to do all that
we ask of them because of the critical readiness enablers
across the Energy, Installations, and Environment portfolio.
I am grateful to the sailors, marines, civilians, and their
families who answer the call, and to you for supporting their
work. They are trusting us to get it right. Thank you for the
chance to work with you to do just that.
[The prepared statement follows:]
GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT

Mr. Carter. Admiral.
STATEMENT OF VICE ADMIRAL JEFFREY T. JABLON, DEPUTY CHIEF OF
NAVAL OPERATIONS, INSTALLATIONS AND LOGISTICS,
DEPARTMENT OF THE NAVY
Admiral Jablon. Chairman Carter, Ranking Member Wasserman
Schultz, distinguished members of the committee, thank you for
the opportunity to testify on the importance of our
infrastructure, its resiliency, and the entirety of support
required to meet the critical Navy and Joint Force mission.
It is an honor to appear before you and represent the
thousands of Navy sailors and civilians who work and live at
our 70 installations around the world.
Backed by strong support from Congress, the Navy continues
driving improvements in our installations to maximize the
operational readiness of our force as well as the quality of
service for our sailors and their families.
Additionally, thank you for your trust, confidence, and
commitment to ensuring our Navy's ability to preserve the
peace, respond in crisis, and win decisively in war.
The Chief of Naval Operations recently issued ``America's
Warfighting Navy'' highlighting the Navy's goals in alignment
with the National Security Strategy and the National Defense
Strategy through the framework of warfighting, warfighters, and
foundation.
Should we be called upon to win in combat, our success
depends on sustainment of the Joint Force. The CNO's strategy
for improving this critical warfighting function begins with
the principle that all sustainment starts from the shore. The
shore enables the naval logistics enterprise to execute
priority missions abroad, such as our surface warriors are
conducting in the Red Sea, and at home, where the Navy is
supporting salvage efforts to reopen the Baltimore Harbor
channel following the collapse of the Francis Scott Key Bridge.
The Navy's PB-25 submission maintains our momentum for
achieving a sustainable, resilient, and ready foundation of
installations that deliver fleet readiness and combat logistics
capability.
In PB-25, the Navy requests $3.4 billion for MILCON for 11
projects in fiscal year 2025. This includes investments in the
Fallon Range Training Land Acquisition and critical Shipyard
Infrastructure Optimization Program, or SIOP, projects, such as
the first increment of Dry Dock 3 Modernization in Portsmouth,
VA, and planning and design for a multi-mission dry dock at
Naval Base Kitsap, Washington.
Alongside warfighting priorities are equally essential
quality-of-life investments for our warfighters, to include
investments in unaccompanied housing and child and youth
programs.
Our sailors, civilians, and their families are the backbone
of our Navy, the true source of our naval power, and we cannot
operate without a proficient and motivated workforce.
PB-25 requests $206 million in fiscal year 2025 for
restoration and modernization of unaccompanied housing
facilities, both domestically and abroad.
Additionally, we continue to implement quality-of-life
initiatives, including the high-speed WiFi pilot initiated in
the Hampton Roads, VA, area, provided to our sailors free of
charge.
PB-25 also requests $437.4 million to fund Navy child and
youth programs, including fee assistance subsidies, additional
childcare providers, and pay increases.
We have already seen the results of previous investments,
as the wait list for Navy Child Development Centers is now at
3,500, down from 5,300 at the start of fiscal year 2023.
However, we strive to further lower the wait list by
continuing work on increasing staffing levels and expanding
utilization of the Military Child Care in Your Neighborhood fee
assistance program.
Our request also includes $826.7 million in fiscal year
2025 to improve installation cybersecurity, energy efficiency,
climate change modeling and simulation, and other installation
resiliency investments.
We remain focused on identifying vulnerabilities and
increasing resilience via exercises which test an
installation's ability to continue its mission upon a total
loss of commercial power, increasing our ability to mitigate
disruptions that may impact fleet operations.
I would like to express my sincere thanks for Congress'
$268 million increase in our fiscal year 2024 Facility
Sustainment, Restoration, and Modernization funding. These
funds will help improve critical utility infrastructure and
safety on our installations.
In fiscal year 2025, sustainment funding is targeted at 100
percent for nuclear deterrence, naval operational architecture,
unaccompanied housing, and fitness centers.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify before you today,
and thank you for supporting our uniformed personnel,
civilians, and their families, who are all over the world doing
incredible work on behalf of the security of our country, a
world that is dangerous, complicated, and interconnected.
I understand and embrace the depth of my responsibilities
as Deputy Chief of Naval Operations for Installations and
Logistics, and I look forward to working with you in the
pursuit of warfighting capability, readiness optimization
afloat and shore, and support for our sailors, civilians, and
their families.
Thank you, and I look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement follows:]
GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT
Mr. Carter. General Banta.
STATEMENT OF LT. GENERAL EDWARD D. BANTA, DEPUTY COMMANDANT,
INSTALLATIONS AND LOGISTICS, UNITED STATES MARINE
CORPS
General Banta. Chairman Carter, Ranking Member Wasserman
Schultz, and distinguished members of this subcommittee, thank
you for the opportunity to discuss the Marine Corps' fiscal
year 2025 military construction budget request.
First off, I would like to thank you for funding last
year's budget request and our unfunded priority list. Congress'
support will accelerate improvements for the quality of life
for our marines. It will enable Marine Corps modernization
initiatives and improve our INDOPACOM posture.
In this year's budget, we are requesting $1.2 billion for
nine military construction projects, unspecified minor
construction, and planning and design funds.
This request aims to modernize our installations and
reflects a balanced investment approach to support our marines
and our families. Viewed through an operational lens, these
investments allow to us posture ourselves in the best manner to
serve the Nation.
First, I would like to highlight our Barracks 2030
initiative. This is the most consequential barracks investment
plan we have ever undertaken.
In February of 2023, the Commandant of the Marine Corps
directed the service to review our barracks portfolio and
identify opportunities to improve the quality of life for our
marines.
From this review, we began our Barracks 2030 initiative,
and we identified three areas to focus our efforts: management,
modernization, and materiel.
These investments will include the professionalization of
our barracks management workforce with the addition of 347
full-time civilian employees.
Next, we will modernize our infrastructure through the
levers of repair, reconfiguration, recapitalization, and
rightsizing the number of buildings in our portfolio.
Lastly, we will prioritize available funds to provide
functional and updated furnishings for barracks rooms by taking
advantage of the current centralized procurement contract that
is in place.
Also of note, we recently completed a 100 percent wall-to-
wall barracks inspection to further inform these investments.
I also want to underscore the Marine Corps' investment into
the Indo-Pacific. Five of our nine projects in this year's
budget are in the region. These critical projects in Hawaii,
Guam, and Australia bolster our presence in the region and
continue our investments to begin the movement of marines from
Okinawa to Guam this year.
Funding modern and resilient infrastructure and housing in
the Pacific is critical to posture marines in a fighting stance
for both campaigning and crisis response.
Finally, I want to highlight the recent third-party audit
we completed this year.
As we invest in new platforms, barracks, and training, it
is our responsibility as good stewards of taxpayer funds to
continue to prove that when the Corps is provided a taxpayer
dollar we can show exactly where and how it has been invested,
a responsibility we take very seriously.
Following a rigorous 2-year audit, the Marine Corps
achieved an unmodified audit opinion, the best possible outcome
and the first time in DoD's history that any service has
received an unmodified audit opinion.
This audit supports what we have believed for a long time:
When Congress provides the Marine Corps a dollar, we invest it
wisely, and we can tell you exactly where and how it was spent
to further our Nation's national security objectives.
Thank you again for the opportunity to testify before you
today and for your continued oversight, input, and support. I
look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement follows:]
GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT

Mr. Carter. Well, thank you, each of you, for your
testimony. Your prepared testimony will be included in the
record.
The committee will ask questions, as we have discussed in
the past.
And, General, I am proud of you all for getting that audit
done. It is a good thing to do, and I hope the rest of the
services will start following your lead.
Last year, I went to Guam, and hope to make it out there
again this year. Guam and surrounding islands are critical to
our national security of the United States and is our number
one priority in the Indo-Pacific. However, the Navy budget
request only includes $243.5 million for Guam, which is
significantly less than last year.
What drove the decision to reduce the request for Guam in
2025, and how will it impact the timeline for the master plan
for Guam?
And a couple other questions.
Fiscal year 2024 NDAA extended visas for Guam to H-2B visas
for relief for Guam--which I worked hard on--and will impact
the workforce in Guam, hopefully in a positive way.
Do you believe the workforce is sufficient to get the job
done? Is that part of the reasons, that they have already
utilized money, that we are not going forward with more funds?
And do you have--do you wish to request more funds for Guam
that we should know about?
So I will let the Secretary start.
Ms. Berger. Thank you, Chairman.
And I will start with a quick note on a policy approach
that we are taking as well that I wanted to make sure that the
committee was aware of.
So the Deputy Secretary of Defense has recently designated
the Under Secretary of the Navy as the senior defense official
for Guam, so in a place where the Navy and the Marine Corps
certainly have a priority interest in ensuring that, across the
Department of Defense, we are organized and prioritizing and
executing in a way that is informed across the enterprise.
So with that senior defense official for Guam, we are
tiering out and under organizationally across the Department of
Defense to drive forward.
In terms of our budget request, of course, there was the
Mawar incident which changed the way that some of our
infrastructure stood in. So as we have put in all of the data
available and are working with OSD to make sure that we get a
supplemental request in to address some of those pieces, that
is one significant impact that took place.
Then I will thank you for your work on the H-2B visas
because that is a critical need in terms of getting the
workforce in place. It is still a strained workforce and a very
high requirement, and so we have more to do there in terms of
how we execute all of that.
I want to make sure to give the opportunity for the Marine
Corps, which has a major movement, of course, taking place that
is considered there, and also make sure that Admiral Jablon has
a chance to address as well.
Mr. Carter. General.
General Banta. Thank you, ma'am.
Thank you, Chairman.
So just to echo what Honorable Berger said, thank you again
for the work on the H-2B visas. That has absolutely helped us
with staying on track with our construction efforts on Guam. We
estimate that, with that extension, we are probably going to
save about $1.5 billion in construction costs going forward. So
it is very helpful.
We do remain on track with building out our DPRI work on
Guam. We are about 15 percent complete but quite a bit more
work to do. So, to your point, that help with the H-2B visas
will be very helpful.
We do have two projects on Guam this year. We have Earth
Covered Magazines, which will help with storing precision-
guided munitions and future capabilities needed on Guam, and
then we have also have a youth center, which is a quality-of-
life project that will go onto Andersen Air Force Base.
So we are on track to begin the movement to Guam this year,
and that will be a relatively small quartering party. But we
want to make sure that we have the conditions right both in
terms of what is available on Guam, from quality of life as
well as operational capabilities, before we really press
further.
So we are on track. We appreciate the support from
Congress. And there will be continued investment going forward.
I hope that helps, sir.
Mr. Carter. Thank you.
Admiral.
Admiral Jablon. Chairman Carter, thank you for that
question.
As you state, Guam is of vital strategic importance to the
Joint Force.
Firsthand, I talked about my former job as Commander,
Submarine Force Pacific. During my last tour prior to this job,
we had upwards of five submarines stationed permanently in
Guam. So of vital importance to the Navy and the Submarine
Force.
As far as infrastructure investments, we have a lot of work
to do in Guam. As you have visited several times, the utilities
infrastructure needs to be upgraded, the piers need to be
upgraded, and we are working towards that end.
We just finished up--or are starting this year, in fiscal
year 2024, three communication centers upgrades, an integrated
missile facility upgrade. And in the FYDP, we do have plans to
do restoration and modernization of our unaccompanied housing
and also investments in Polaris Point Pier for our submarines.
I appreciate the help with the visas. That will help us out
with getting the workforce that we need to complete those vital
investments. But, again, that is a priority for me and the
Navy, to get those right investments into Guam.
Mr. Carter. Thank you.
Ms. Wasserman Schultz.
Ms. Wasserman Schultz. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
So, Madam Secretary, I mentioned the concern that I have
over there being only one quality-of-life project in your
budget request.
I would like to understand why there are no child
development centers or unaccompanied housing projects included
in the budget request. As I said, I understand the tightness of
the budget requirements, but there is no balance in this
proposal.
And while you all just answered the chairman's question--
and we have been to Guam and seen what the challenges are and
understand that there are workforce challenges--I mean, you
mentioned it is 15 percent complete. That means it is 85
percent incomplete. There is a lot left to do. And, obviously,
the Pacific Rim is and the Indo-Pacific region is really
important.
But we can't wait until Guam is finished before we start
reinserting quality-of-life projects. I mean, if recruitment
and retention are important, quality of life has to be
important too, and a budget, like I said, is a reflection of
our values.
So, I mean, how did we end up with only one? Is there no
need for new construction in these higher-priority areas? And
do you view housing as a priority?
I mean, we had a GAO-released report in September of last
year that highlighted substandard barracks, potentially posing
health and safety risks, inadequate oversight, incomplete
information on barracks conditions for decision-making.
I mean, and that is the definition of insanity for us,
because we have highlighted over and over again what the
problems were and how poorly our servicemembers were treated in
privatized family housing.
One would hope that the military would self-correct and not
have those same problems when it comes to unaccompanied
servicemembers.
So how are the Navy and the Marine Corps planning to
provide adequate unaccompanied housing without any MILCON
projects? So it is a two-part question.
Mr. Berger. Ranking Member, thank you for your attention to
this. We share the attention. And you mentioned in your opening
statement digging in a bit more to what the lay-down is. And so
I am glad to have the opportunity to discuss this in a greater
context.
One of the reasons that there are not projects that you are
seeing is because we got to pull some left. So we are grateful
for that. Thank you. We were able to pull some of our barracks
projects into the year last year and get going on those. Some
of our child development centers are also our sustainable
materials project that we are doing, and so those actually got
an earlier start.
What you will see if you look across the FYDP--I am very
glad to provide more information on this--is that there are 13
child development centers across the FYDP, as you noted, in 10
barracks. So we are laying down the planning and design for
these so that we can keep sequencing forward and get all these
projects in place.
You mentioned that MILCON isn't the only answer that we
have, and so we have taken lessons that we have learned through
MHPI and applied them.
One authority that we have received is to be able to
privatize unaccompanied housing both in San Diego and in
Norfolk. We were able to see results that indicated very strong
quality of life from the sailors that were living there, and
that allowed us to be able to put some of that sustainment,
some of that maintenance as part of the bill that we were
paying, which yielded high quality of life.
We are interested in evaluating whether there is room to
use more of that authority to continue to increase quality of
life.
I would like to give each of my colleagues just a minute to
provide some service-level context, but I will encourage that
quality of life is a very broad and interdisciplinary approach.
So as we look at energy, water, things like WiFi, we are
providing quality of life in ways that go beyond some of the
infrastructure specifically and take that very seriously.
Ms. Wasserman Schultz. Thank you.
General Banta. Thanks, ma'am.
Ranking Member, thanks very much for the question.
I should have mentioned in my previous response that we do
have 136 homes being built on Guam as part of the 2025 budget
submission under family housing construction. So I would offer
that is an additional quality-of-life investment we are making
for families on Guam.
With respect to unaccompanied housing writ large, I
mentioned our Barracks 2030 initiative. That really is our
effort to improve quality of life for our single and our
unaccompanied marines, which are the most important thing in
our portfolio right now.
We are doing that through three phases. Management, by
improving the management of the existing facilities that we
have, to include civilian barracks managers. Maintenance teams.
And as well as a Resident Advisor Program to provide more
senior leadership in the barracks.
Getting to your point about the lack of MILCON, we are
prioritizing restoration and modernization initially in that
plan. There will be MILCON in the future. But until we figure
out exactly which barracks we need to maintain and which ones
we need to demolish in order to ensure we have got the right
size portfolio, we will focus on restoring and modernizing. And
we do have funds, $275 million in the base, for nine barracks
this year.
And then for the materiel aspect of it, again, just getting
after improved furniture, a consistent and lock contract to
ensure that we have secure barracks across the entire force.
But this is our initial effort. It will be a long-term
effort, and it will require investment going forward, and we
appreciate Congress' support towards that end. Thank you.
Admiral Jablon. Ranking Member, thank you for that
question. It really is such an important question.
And the CNO's recent ``America's Warfighting Navy''
outlines warfighting, warfighters, and foundation is a
priority. Quality of service falls under warfighters.
So we take this very seriously. It is a priority for us.
And, as you mentioned, it affects retention and recruitment.
Some of the things that we have done for unaccompanied
housing is we have issued the Unaccompanied Housing Bill of
Rights and Responsibilities, similar to what we have done for
family housing.
So we get that feedback from the sailors through the rights
and responsibilities and the surveys that they take so we can
listen to the issues that they have.
We also implemented a QR code for maintenance issues where
the sailor can take their iPhone, snap the QR code, and put in
what the maintenance issue is. And what has happened is it has
had a 24 percent increase in maintenance calls and responding
to those maintenance calls.
We have also increased our inspection program for
unaccompanied housing. We have mandated commands to do monthly
inspections of unaccompanied housing. And Commander, Navy
Installations Command for the regions do quarterly inspections
of unaccompanied housing to make sure they are up to the
standards and we are taking care of the issues, if there are
any issues.
Commander, Navy Installations Command just recently
authorized use of small appliances in the room. That wasn't
previously authorized. It adds more flexibility for the sailor
to cook in their room if they wish to do so.
And as far as infrastructure funding for unaccompanied
housing, we are funding unaccompanied housing sustainment to
100 percent. We also have restoration and modernization funding
for fiscal year 2025 of six unaccompanied housing facilities.
And then Commander, Navy Installations Command has also
generated a 110 list of 55 unaccompanied housing facilities
that are prioritized for restoration and modernization and
MILCON for fiscal year 2024 to 2031, which we are following
that plan for infrastructure funding.
Ms. Wasserman Schultz. Mr. Chairman, I know I am over
time--and I will come back to it when we do a second round--but
I am really from the school of thought, like, don't tell me
what you are going to do. Your budget request reflects what
your plans are.
And the responsiveness with military family housing has
been atrocious, so much so that we had to put in$130 million
and then $140 million in the last 2 years for oversight at the
military leadership--at the DoD level. And in this year's
budget request, you proposed cutting it by $16 million.
So, I mean, if you are cutting the oversight funding--
which, when it wasn't there, left people really in the Wild--
servicemembers in the Wild West and their families--it is hard
for me to understand how you are going to meet the needs of the
kind of repairs and response time that is essential. But we can
get back to that when I go again.
Mr. Carter. Mr. Rutherford.
Mr. Rutherford. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And I thank all of our witnesses for being here today. I
thank you for your service.
Admiral, I want to talk a little bit about Naval Air
Station Jacksonville. That is the home of the P-8s on the East
Coast, and they have brought tremendous additional capability.
But they have also brought tremendous additional weight,
something that I was just made aware of, and not just for
Jacksonville, but, as you know, we are also training countries,
our allies around the world, there in Jacksonville.
The additional capability has come with that weight that I
was just talking about, and we are literally crushing the
concrete aprons in NAS Jax. And as they replace them, the way
it was explained to me, it is really a unique situation. When
you replace one pad, it disperses the weight against the pads,
the surrounding pads, and then those crack.
Now, they had been on a replacement schedule for some time
and, for whatever reason, that replacement schedule fell out of
the funding priorities, I suppose, and as it stands there is no
military construction program to replace these parking aprons
at NAS Jax for the next 5 years. That is really a concern.
So my question is, how can we help you with the continuity
of the P-8 operations in repairing this concrete and come up
with a comprehensive plan going forward?
And I know in your comments you mentioned also the $268
million in the Facility Sustainment, Restoration, and
Modernization that we gave you the last year. And I would just
ask if there is any way to possibly move some of that funding
around, Madam Secretary, to really address this thing in a
sustained way going forward.
Admiral Jablon. Congressman, thank you for that question. I
very much appreciate it.
And I do understand the criticality of the P-8. As a
submarine warfare officer, I have played with P-8s throughout
my career, and they are a vital platform, they really are, and
in addition to training our allies and partners in the P-8. So
I agree wholeheartedly with you.
And you are exactly right, we do not have any program funds
for repairing the aprons in Jacksonville. But you have my
commitment, sir, that I will look into it, and we will get on a
program to repair those aprons.
Mr. Rutherford. Thank you very much, Admiral. And just
reach out and let us know how we can help.
Now, I would also like to talk to you about Mayport a
little bit specifically. This committee has conducted a lot of
oversight on the privatized military housing issue. I did a
little drive around at Mayport with the base commander and some
others, and there is a large track of off-base privatized
housing that is clearly uninhabitable. You can see mold. In
fact, it is fenced off.
And I am sure that we could use that space. We could use
additional housing at that location. And I know the price of
housing is still so high across the country, and it seems that
even the BAH can't keep up with the increases, although we are
going to, I think you have got a commitment from this
committee, we are going to try to do that, keep up with that.
And I know we restored the full BAH funding in the 2024 NDAA,
so it is 100 percent now.
But my question to you is, Admiral, can you talk a little
bit about the efforts with some of these privatized owners and
partners and how we can get them to make the capital
investments, working with us, so that we can provide this
housing--this much-needed housing, I should say--for our folks
there at Mayport?
Admiral Jablon. Thank you for that question. Very important
question. And, again, that goes to the quality of life and
quality of service of our sailors and their families.
And I believe you are talking about the 88 homes in the
Ribault Bay area that are uninhabited right now and unsuitable
for housing. Those were initially allotted for junior enlisted
housing. Our privatized partner, Balfour Beatty, currently has
no plans of bringing those back online, and, financially, they
don't have the ability to demolish them.
I can tell you that does not preclude our ability to house
those junior enlisted sailors in other housing. So it is not
affecting our ability to house sailors. We are in talks with
our privatized partner of possibly transferring those houses
back to the Navy so we can demolish them, but those talks will
hopefully progress to that end.
Mr. Rutherford. OK. Well, I have to tell you, I am glad you
know about it and you are on top of it. So thank you.
With that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back. My time is out.
Mr. Carter. Mr. Bishop.
Mr. Bishop. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Carter, Ranking Member Wasserman Schultz, thank
you for the opportunity to participate in today's hearing. And
it is an honor to serve on the subcommittee alongside you as we
advocate for our Nation's defense and the well-being of our
servicemembers and their families.
I want to extend my appreciation to our witnesses. Ms.
Berger, Admiral Jablon, and General Banta, we appreciate so
much your valuable service. It means so much in informing us of
how we can be helpful in assuring what your needs are and how
we can address them.
Let me ask you with respect to the budget. The Marine Corps
has a deferred maintenance backlog that exceeds $15.8 billion,
and it requires a $1.5 billion annual expenditure for barracks
and maintenance. But the fiscal year 2025 budget request
allocates $274 million, which reveals a significant budget gap.
Although there is a request for $642 million in the
unfunded priorities list for barracks, restoration, and related
services, it does not meet the annual upkeep requirement.
So can you summarize the steps that the Marine Corps is
taking to address the funding gap for barracks maintenance
while at the same time prioritizing the quality-of-life
initiatives? And if you might follow that up with a comment on
what risks might the Marine Corps face if the funding shortfall
should persist.
General Banta. Congressman, thank you very much for the
question. It is a great question because it does highlight kind
of our Barracks 2030 initiative and our efforts to get after
the quality-of-life improvements that we know we need to make
for our marines in unaccompanied housing.
So, as we look at the budget request, yes, we have $275
million in the base to get after restoration and modernization
of barracks. And we are, frankly, biased towards restoration
and modernization vice sustainment. We have 658 barracks across
the Marine Corps. About 83 percent of them are in pretty good
shape; 17 percent are not.
So we are focusing on determining, where do we put our
money to ensure that we get the most consequential outcome for
those investments? And we have done a study that looks at the
current conditions of the barracks rooms, and we are taking
that for action right now. That will inform these investments
going forward.
So you are right, we do have a request for additional
funds, an additional $230 million that would help us with
restoring and modernizing additional barracks as well as buying
more of the maintenance team capabilities up front. And then we
have got $61 million requested towards planning and design for
future barracks MILCON. So those are all efforts towards
getting after this shortfall that you request.
We will not get out of this in 1 year. We will not get out
of this in one FYDP. This is a long-term investment,
commitment, and requirement that we will have.
So, to your point, we very much appreciate the Congress'
support in this as we go forward and we continue to refine
where the most consequential investments will be to improve the
quality of life and get after that sustainment shortfall that
you mention. I hope that helps answer your question, sir.
Mr. Bishop. Thank you, sir.
Ms. Berger, the 2023 GAO report entitled ``DoD Can Further
Strengthen Oversight of Its Privatized Housing Program''
highlights the gaps in guidance and training, particularly in
dispute resolution, tenant advocacy roles, and housing
inspection. Six out of the 19 recommendations are aimed at the
Navy.
And given these concerns, how does the Department of the
Navy intend to improve oversight and to build trust among
residents in the privatized housing program through the 2025
budget request?
Ms. Berger. Congressman Bishop, this is a place that you
will see the Barracks 2030 plan and the infrastructure
investment plan at play. So we build trust by taking action
towards things that count to our sailors and marines.
And so, drawing on the ranking member's question a little
bit ago, with the MHPI we realized a bill of rights was
something that was a useful tool in creating oversight and
execution. Both the Navy and the Marine Corps have now stood up
a bill of rights for their unaccompanied housing so that
tenants know both their rights and responsibilities.
We are tiering off of our colleagues in OSD who set some of
the standards that we will need to follow, and we are taking
decisive action where we can and using those RM dollars and
making sure that we are starting to look across the stretch of
our portfolio to put a dollar where it counts, whether it is
demolishing and building new--as we did make some demo money
and have a new authority that we can use to make sure that we
move forward--but also make sure that we are implementing
things like Admiral Jablon mentioned in terms of the QR codes,
being responsive to when we hear that there is something that
needs to be fixed, because it is the action that builds
credibility, and then we put the dollars where they count.
Mr. Bishop. Thank you.
I think my time has expired. I yield back.
Mr. Carter. Mr. Valadao.
Mr. Valadao. Thank you, Chairman.
Thank you to our guests for being here today, and
appreciate your time.
One of the report recommendations was the Secretary of the
Navy should develop and implement a method to ensure that both
the Navy and the Marine Corps have visibility into all
barracks' military construction requirements identified at the
installation level, regardless of whether they are submitted
for funding. Is this recommendation being acted upon?
Ms. Berger. We are acting on all of the recommendations.
At the Department of Defense level, there is a working
group among myself and my colleagues. So we are looking to see
how we can make sure that we are implementing with clarity and
consistency as well with specificity on the requests that are
there. It is something that we are making sure that we have the
data inputs and that we can look across the portfolio.
So not only are we aware of what the asks are but also
where we might be able to create efficiencies in terms of
acquiring the appliances, the materiel, or other things that
will support the improvements that we need to make. And then
also making sure that we are considering timing in aggregate
against what can be either supply chain or workforce demands.
Mr. Valadao. All right.
And, again, Ms. Berger, during our quality-of-life hearing
I flagged a concern that Ridgecrest Regional Hospital, which
supports servicemembers stationed at Naval Air Weapons Station
China Lake, recently announced that they would be suspending
their labor and delivery services due to the unprecedented
financial challenges. This loss in care means that our
servicemembers at China Lake will need to drive almost 2 hours
to the next-closest labor and delivery unit, which places an
incredible hardship on our servicemembers and their families.
As the Defense Health Agency moves forward with their plan
to consolidate all on-base hospitals and clinics in the coming
years, I am concerned that we will not be able to rely on
community care to provide the level of healthcare our
servicemembers deserve, especially in rural communities.
Is this an issue you are tracking? And what steps is the
Navy taking to ensure essential healthcare services are readily
available to our servicemembers?
Ms. Berger. Congressman Valadao, tracking and critical.
This is something that, portfolio-wise, I share with my
Manpower and Reserve Affairs Assistant Secretary, but it is one
that has an impact, as you note, on our installation COs and
our servicemembers who are in these communities. It is a
national problem that impacts both inside and outside defense
lines.
So, yes, tracking the instance that you cite, but it is one
that replicates in other environments as well. So, as the
Defense Health Agency transfers, it is with BUMED that the
closest connection is at the service level. It is at Manpower
and Reserve Affairs and the Secretary. But, certainly, it is a
transition that is taking place.
And as DHA manages it ultimately, I would encourage you to
also connect with those. I am happy to make that connection.
But that is where a lot of the decision-making authority is.
But we are making sure that we are taking care of our
servicemembers to the best of our ability and advocating within
that process.
And I will make sure that I am not missing anything from
either of my colleagues.
Admiral Jablon. Congressman, thank you for that question.
That is really an important question that goes to, again,
quality of service for our sailors and their families. And
healthcare is something, obviously, that is provided and
promises a provision when sailors join the Navy, so we need to
live up to that.
With respect to China Lake and Ridgecrest Regional, China
Lake, as well as some of our other installations in the
continental United States, has been designated as a remote
location.
Because of that, we screen families before they go to
remote locations ahead of time. This is one of the provisions
we have put in place to hopefully prevent these types of
situations. If there is a medical need that the remote location
can't service, we won't send the sailor to that area.
Now, for labor and delivery, that is not something we could
screen ahead of time. I know BUMED and DHA are working this and
trying to find a solution to this issue. But very important
topic.
Mr. Valadao. All right. And it is one that, obviously, is a
little more closer to home for me, and that was one that--I
mean, my nephew and, I think, my niece were both born at the
hospital there on base. And that facility is no longer open.
Now they are moving into the Hanford hospital, a community
hospital, which, apparently, they are doing a great job. But I
worry about some of the other bases not having a hospital like
that close enough.
So that was the only question I have got, so I am going to
yield back the remainder of my time. Thank you.
Mr. Carter. Ms. Lee.
Ms. Lee of Nevada. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I want to thank the ranking member and all the witnesses
here today.
I represent Nevada, and Fallon--obviously, the naval base--
is important to our portfolio in our State. Nevada military
families continue to remain concerned about their access to
quality healthcare. They describe long wait times for primary
and specialty care as well as facilities not being located or
staffed to handle the workload.
Secretary Berger, now that the Defense Health Agency is
responsible for military medical facilities, how are you
partnering with them to ensure that your mission, impacting
infrastructure shortfalls, are appropriately prioritized with
them?
Ms. Berger. Congresswoman Lee, thank you for your attention
to this issue as well. This is exactly the type of location
that Admiral Jablon was just referencing where, when there is
distance, there is less access.
And so through DHA and the Assistant Secretary of Defense
for Health Affairs, that is where this is focused in terms of
the Department of Defense. It is through BUMED that the Navy
and my counterpart in Manpower and Reserve Affairs, how we are
handling that from a policy and a programmatic approach.
I will note, though, that one of the things that we have
learned from the work that took place at the Fallon Naval Air
Station--and thank you for your attention to the support for
the modernization there--is that that is the ultimate example
of a defense community.
And so, as we look at a challenge that is both inside and
outside the fence line, there is an opportunity there to make
sure that we are considerate of both the servicemembers that
call it home but also the people that are part of that
community. So I am thinking of some of the Tribal nations who
also need healthcare there. Our servicemembers need it. The
community needs it.
And so we are working very diligently with DHA, through
BUMED, through the Manpower and Reserve Affairs, and Defense
Health Agency, but there is an opportunity there to make sure
that we are benefiting an important defense community.
Ms. Lee of Nevada. Thank you.
I really appreciate your ability to look beyond the fence
and to look at access to healthcare as a community issue. And,
obviously, the partnership with the Tribes there is incredibly
important.
I just want to point out, I just spoke to the Under
Secretary of Agriculture, Cindy Axne, who was in Fallon, on
this specific issue. So I would love to connect you because--I
know we talked about the Department of Indian Affairs, but,
also, the Department of Agriculture does a lot with access to
rural healthcare. So I think it would be a good connection to
make on that.
And that is all I have. Thank you.
Ms. Berger. Thank you.
Mr. Carter. Mr. Zinke.
Mr. Zinke. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And I was listening attentively to our ranking member's
introduction, and I found myself agreeing with her, especially
on priorities. And looking at the budget, we are amiss in
barracks and a lot of features that we need.
But, also, I noticed in the budget that you have $1.256
billion for electric vehicles in the Department of Navy's
budget. How would you rack and stack electric vehicle priority
to barracks, per se? Because we are short in barracks, I think,
100-and-some million dollars, and we are plus $1.256 billion in
electric vehicles.
Ms. Berger. Congressman, let me go and double-check that
number for you.
But, in terms of the barracks, we have a decided and
purposeful investment both on the Navy and Marine Corps side
that we have had a little bit of a chance to talk about. But,
certainly, we are prioritizing----
Mr. Zinke. Would your priority be electric vehicles or
barracks?
Ms. Berger. My priority is making sure that we give our
sailors and marines everything that they need to do in order to
do what we ask of them and, as we look at a transition----
Mr. Zinke. Is that electric vehicles or barracks?
Ms. Berger. It is a----
Mr. Zinke. Because your priority--you have 1.256 electric
vehicles and climate change research--I can go through the
whole list--but the barracks is short.
So the priority of the United States Navy at the moment is
not barracks, it is electric vehicles. Would that be fair,
given the budget?
Ms. Berger. The priority is readiness and quality of life.
And there are barracks, as we discussed, that happened
throughout the FYDP and that we have been able to pull left in
a very purposeful plan to make sure that not only are we using
MILCON but also RM and putting sustainment dollars where they
count.
I know that you know well that electrification is an
opportunity to reduce our heat signature, to be quieter, to be
less discoverable, and so----
Mr. Zinke. I am glad we are quiet when we are outside of
Las Vegas.
General, I have a question for you, sir. The first AD
commander, I was reading it, and his comment was--you know, he
was out at Fort Bliss.
He found a significant portion of the barracks--the
condition of the barracks--cleanliness, general upkeep, and
maintenance--as a result of the soldier not being instructed in
basic cleaning, basic adult--being an adult, and those things.
Are you finding the same things in the Marine Corps, given
that the standard has been lowered, I guess, with college or
high school diplomas? What is the condition of the barracks in
the Marine Corps? Do you have the same problem?
General Banta. Congressman, thank you very much for the
question.
So I would say, no, I don't think we have that same
problem. We have not lowered the standards for our marines. We
are not putting the condition of our barracks on the backs of
our marines. This is an enterprise problem that the Commandant
has taken on, hence the Barracks 2030 initiative.
So we will continue to hold our marines to high standards,
whether it is training, physical fitness, marksmanship, or
cleanliness of the barracks.
But Barracks 2030 is about putting the investments where
they will be the most consequential to improve the quality of
life for our most important asset, and that is our marine.
I hope that helps answer the question, Congressman.
Mr. Zinke. And I respect my Army comrades, and I assume the
first AD commander is absolutely truthful in his remarks.
I am interested because I don't see the same thing in the
Marine Corps. The buildings and barracks that I have looked at
are clean. They just happen to be old and rusted.
And, Admiral, I am going to venture to ask you, do you have
the same issue as the first AD commander, or are you along with
the Marine Corps that basic skills on discipline and
cleanliness of the barracks--some reliance on the sailors to do
that--are you finding that it is different with this
generation?
Admiral Jablon. Congressman, thank you for that question.
As I mentioned previously, our commands for each of those
sailors do monthly inspections of the barracks. We do quarterly
inspections by the region commanders of the barracks.
I have heard no feedback to the description of what you
talked about for Army barracks, and in my touring of barracks I
have seen nothing with respect to the cleanliness.
So I don't think we have that problem in the Navy.
Mr. Zinke. That is great to hear. Overseas. I am
particularly concerned about MILCON with our fuel capacity,
ammo capacity, delivered specific to the Pacific. So I noticed
in the budget, where is the priority on fuel and ammunition,
bunkers, and facilities on the Pacific?
Ms. Berger. In terms of how we are prioritizing, we are
forward deploying some of our fuel. And one thing that I will
note for you is an exercise that I would love to give you the
readout of on Philippine and energy and operational energy, and
how we are making sure that we are testing, exercising and
getting ready for exactly the things that you are identifying.
But let me make sure that I give my colleagues their chance to
discuss that as well.
Mr. Zinke. General, are you concerned about where you are
going to get the fuel in the Pacific and the ammunition for our
depots and stockpiles?
General Banta. Congressman, yes, sir. Thank you for the
question. I think that the fuel laydown is incredibly important
as well as the distribution network towards that end. In terms
of the ordnance storage and ammunition, as I mentioned, we do
have a project on Guam, earth-covered magazines, getting after
that. As a kind of separate but related issue, prepositioning
is incredibly important for us, and if you are interested, we
would be happy to come back and give you a brief on our global
positioning network that looks at how we are distributing
capability around the Pacific in order to ensure that we are
ready to fight.
Mr. Zinke. Do you think you have the resources and assets
to do that?
General Banta. We have got money in it right now,
Congressman, but there is probably more work to be done. Yes,
sir.
Mr. Zinke. Admiral, same question, sir
Admiral Jablon. Yes, sir. Thank you for that question. As
part of our infrastructure development for each POM cycle, we
develop an infrastructure investment plan. That is based on six
priorities: intermediate and depot level maintenance,
unaccompanied housing, critical utilities, airfield operations,
port operations, and ordinance and magazines. So that is one of
our six priorities that we look at for investments to ensure we
get after exactly what you are talking about.
Mr. Zinke. You think you have the fuel and ammunition to
fight in the Pacific at the moment forward deployed.
Admiral Jablon. As far as the ammunition and munitions, we
need to work on that. We need to fully fund development of our
munitions. As far as fuel, along with General Banta, we can
provide a classified briefing on the INDOPACOM strategy for our
fuel distribution in the Pacific.
Mr. Zinke. I remain concerned. I will do what I can to help
make sure we win. Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Carter. Mrs. Bice.
Mrs. Bice. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank our witnesses
for being here this afternoon.
First, let me start out by saying I want to congratulate
the Marine Corps for successfully passing the financial audit,
the first to do so. I appreciate the Marine Corps' commitment
to accountability and transparency and managing the funds
appropriated by Congress. So thank you for being diligent.
Achieving that clean audit is no small feat, as we all know,
and it required a significant amount of time from your
organization.
Let me start by saying I am proud to represent the Oklahoma
City metro area, which is home to Tinker Air Force Base. In
early 2000, sailors who make up the Navy's strategic
communications wing 1, also known as TACAMO--never thought a
Marine base would be in the middle of Oklahoma, but here we
are. As the witnesses know, this unit plays a very critical
mission in safeguarding the national defense by ensuring the
security of communications between the Commander in Chief and
much of our Nation's nuclear arsenal.
Admiral, as you know, the E6B Mercury is slated to be
replaced with the C130 J variant in the near future. I would
first like to start out by asking you, what is the expected
timeline for the platform for the transition?
Admiral Jablon. Congresswoman, thank you for that question.
Very important. I know firsthand 86 Bravo, when I was stationed
at STRATCOM, I rode in 86 Bravo as part of the TACAMO missions.
So very professional crews and very impressed by them. As you
said, it is such an extremely important program. Right now,
with the extended service life of the 86 Bravo, it is out to
2038.
Mrs. Bice. What can you tell me about the expected MILCON
needs for that particular project, when we get to that point,
and how many aircraft are we looking to potentially acquire?
Admiral Jablon. Ma'am, I know the planning has started for
replacing aircraft. As far as the MILCON, 2038 is a little bit
too far in the future to figure out where that platform will be
stationed and what the MILCON needs are.
Mrs. Bice. Thank you.
I want to throw this out to General Banta and Vice Admiral
as well. In my first year in office, I worked on a provision in
the NDAA, which prohibited private housing contractors from
actually charging out-of-pocket expenses to servicemembers for
ADA upgrades to accommodate a disabled family member of a
household utilizing base housing units.
Can you give me any updates on if you have heard any or had
any experiences with contractors pushing back on providing
these ADA upgrades?
General Banta. Congresswoman, thanks very much for the
question. Providing quality housing for all of our families is
really important. And to directly answer your question, no, I
am not aware of any issues of contractors trying to charge
marines for upgrades. We do have ADA-compliant housing units
within both our public/private venture housing, as well as our
government-owned housing. When a house is not available, we
will work with the family requiring that to get the upgrades
completed, or if there are opportunities out in the local
economy to get them housing, then we will put them there also.
I hope that helps answer the question.
Mrs. Bice. Thank you, General.
Admiral Jablon. Ma'am, same experience with the Navy,
exactly what General Banta said.
Mrs. Bice. I want to pivot. It was mentioned earlier,
childcare certainly seems to be a hot topic of conversation
within our service branches. And I recently visited Tinker, and
we had a conversation around childcare and waitlist.
I want to pose this question to you, Ms. Berger, around
childcare. Do you believe that the outstanding waitlist that we
see currently is impacted by workforce challenges? Recruiting
and retaining individuals? And I am happy to open this up to
General or Admiral as well.
Ms. Berger. Yes, Congresswoman. There is a workforce
challenge. This is on the list of things that I would say is a
national challenge as well as a military family challenge. And
so, it is one of those inside/outside the fence line. We have
it no matter which way we are looking. We have been able to
find some places where we have been able to make advances in
terms of policies that I would love for my service counterparts
to describe as they have been working on them. But whether it
is a shared space, looking at licensing requirements and things
like that are things that would be added to the environment.
And I will turn to the General and the Admiral to talk
about some of their initiatives.
General Banta. Thanks, Madam Secretary. Yes, Congresswoman.
Thanks for the question. Staffing at our CDCs is a challenge,
but there are some programs that we have in place to help get
after that. One of them is a discount for providers who have
children in daycare; 50 percent for the first child, 25 percent
for subsequent children. So we find that is helpful.
Also, increasing wages, putting more funding, against
offering competitive wages for our childcare providers. And
then something that we recently started is a noncompetitive
transfer program where a provider who happens to be, say, a
spouse of a Marine at Camp Pendleton, he or she gets orders out
to the East Coast, they can apply and immediately be accepted
at a position at that new childcare facility. So it facilitates
employment going forward.
And in terms of how are we supporting that? Well, we have
got over $600 million within the FYDP just for childcare
programs writ large, and we have got $133 million in 2025 just
to sustain those programs that I just mentioned.
Mrs. Bice. Fantastic.
General Banta. Yes, ma'am.
Admiral Jablon. Congresswoman, thank you for that question.
And again, that leads to the quality of service and our
retention and recruitment efforts within the Navy. This is an
area that we have been working on for a number of years, but it
is not only capacity, but it is staffing as you talk about.
Right now, we are 88 percent full for staffing billets within
our child and youth programs. And we have done that through pay
raises, recruit bonuses, and childcare discounts, exactly what
the General talked about.
But we need to get more staffing, and that is a nationwide
problem, and we are working on that. One of the unique areas
that we have worked with is we partner with commercial centers,
and also with a couple of universities over high peak
summertime, NC State and Utah State to bring in daycare--
childcare workers during those periods.
So we have a number of areas that we are working on to
increase the staffing levels and the capacity levels, though we
haven't programmed for fiscal year 2025 for CDC MILCON. As the
Secretary had mentioned previously, we have got four MILCON in
progress right now for CDC, and 12 across the FYDP.
Mrs. Bice. Just a final wrap up, General and Admiral, I
want to thank you for the focus on that. It is incredibly
important that our servicemembers have access. Tinker is doing
some very similar work in trying to recruit and retain teachers
who have children in these childcare centers, and offering them
free or reduced opportunities for tuition so that they can
actually have their children in the facility, but also get paid
in the meantime.
So thank you for your creativity in trying to help, I
think, solve this issue. And with that, Mr. Chairman, I yield
back.
Mr. Carter. Mr. Franklin.
Mr. Franklin. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you to our
witnesses for being here this afternoon. I appreciate your
time.
Admiral, I was very encouraged to see the $9 billion across
the FYDP for the SIOP program. I was initially thinking PSY,
but I am pleased to see that that is the Shipboard
Infrastructure Optimization Program. I have a lot of concern as
we retool and refocus from 20 years of fighting in the desert
to positioning ourselves in great power competition, and
potentially a fight in the INDOPACIFIC region. Naval warfare is
going to be a final part of that. The Navy and Marine Corps
play a huge role there.
But you know, the struggle we keep facing with regard to
building our ship fleet back up to where we need to be is the
capacity to build new ships, and to repair the ones that we
have. So I appreciate the emphasis there.
As far as the $9 billion across the FYDP, is that going to
get us to where we need to be, or is that just a step in the
right direction and this is just the 5-year program we are
working on, and it is going to take another 5, 10, 15 after
that? Where is this going to position us?
Admiral Jablon. Congressman, thank you for that question.
As you mentioned, a SIOP, Shipyard Infrastructure Optimization
Program, is vital to the national security of the country. It
is targeted for our four public shipyards, and there are three
lines of effort within SIOP: revitalizing our dry docks are
well over 100 years old; improving the optimization within the
shipyard by building new infrastructure, and improving the
processes within the shipyard; and then also critical
equipment--buying critical equipment.
So in fiscal year 2025, our plan is for $2.8 billion of
investment in SIOP, which will target our nuclear submarines
and aircraft carriers to get them back out on the field, as the
CNO likes to say, more players on the field. And that will
improve the ability of the shipyards to get those platforms
back out into the water where they need to do the work they
have been built to do.
$9 million over the FYDP, I tell you right now, is probably
not enough. With cost increases due to inflation, labor, and
materials, we probably will see that cost go up. But this is a
major defense acquisition program. In 2026, after completion of
Milestone Bravo Charlie, we will have a final cost estimate for
SIOP.
Mr. Franklin. I also saw on the CNO's unfunded priority
list, the number one is the remaining money for the sub
industrial base, same challenges there.
Could you--I guess this would be preaching to the choir. I
know this answer, but it is really not rhetorical, because I
think it is important to get it on record here, but also not
just for the benefit of our colleagues, but for others out
there. Could you speak to the harm that is caused when we do
year-long CRs with programs like this when we have things that
we are trying to focus on the future, and you are not allowed
to do new starts to programs? How damaging is that going to be
to our Navy/Marine Corps operational readiness if we operate on
CRs?
Admiral Jablon. Congressman, thank you for that question.
You know, that is a tough question. It does prevent us from
doing the work that we need to do, the investments that we need
to make, starting the infrastructure projects that we need to
make at levels that we are not, programs where we want to be.
So it inhibits some hardship in our ability to do our job.
Mr. Franklin. Well, but it is not just incremental changes
from one year over and other that we can't do. We are trying to
make some fundamental shifts. The Marine Corps is trying to
retool and do things in a different way. And you just
fundamentally, can't do it if you are not allowed to make those
changes. Thank you for that.
Madam Secretary, question for you on facility resiliency. I
had the privilege of serving on the Naval Academy Board of
Visitors, and my alma mater floods a lot more frequently than
it did when I was there 40 years ago. It did flood. We had
floods back then too, but now what may have happened a time or
two a year now, maybe dozens of times. Thankfully, I was there
recently touring the work that is going on there as far as
rebuilding the seawalls, moving a lot of the infrastructure out
from whoever had the brilliant idea of putting a lot of that
stuff below sea level to begin with was not very bright, but we
are fixing those things now.
But the Academy has the benefit of having some folks with a
lot of ability to pull some financial priorities around here on
Capitol Hill. That is not the same for all the Navy and Marine
Corps facilities out there. A great thing about being in the
Navy and Marine Corps, we are usually in some pretty good
spots, the Navy more so than the Marine Corps. But a lot of our
stuff is ocean front. We could probably fix most of the
national debt if we sold off some of those, but are we making
the right levels of investment across places like Jacksonville,
Charleston, San Diego, and Alameda, and other places around
there that are facing those issues?
Ms. Berger. Congressman, thank you for your attention to
that. We are doing the work to identify the investments. We are
not always making the investments that we need to fully enable
the resilience. This is a place where we are using different
authorities, that we are making sure that we are using land
well-enhanced use leases, building back the eroded shorelines
that you note that we enjoy on the coast.
I will say the Marine Corps uses that to be able to train.
If there is not a beach to train, then your marines are not
going to be as ready. And so, we have identified the places
that we need this resilience. I think that there are many more
places that we can make those investments to ensure that we are
protecting the infrastructure that keeps our sailors and
marines trained, ready, and able to do their mission set.
You note rightly that the Naval Academy is a place that has
a lot more floods that threatens our electrical infrastructure
and other things that are replicated throughout any
installation that you go to where you are going to see the
resources that you need to be able to operate threatened
because there is not that resilience.
And if you don't mind, one minute on the MILCON question. I
just wanted to note quickly that when we do not have the funds,
we are not reliable partners. And so, people are less willing
to engage in contracting with us and doing the work. And as
this committee knows this very well, MILCON deferred has a
domino effect on everything else that we are trying to do, so
it is very consequential.
Mr. Franklin. Well, I thank you for that. And also, the
problems that the Navy has also become problems for the Marine
Corps. As I heard from the Commandant this morning too, marines
need to be embarked on ships projecting forward, and if we
don't have the ships there for them, then it hurts their
mission as well.
I am over, Mr. Chairman. Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Carter. Mr. Guest.
Mr. Guest. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to touch on a
topic that many of the Members have already touched on, which
is housing for our sailors and marines and airmen. Secretary
Berger, I know that you addressed that in your written
testimony, talking about both the quantity and quality. You
talk about quality of life on page, looks like 6, talks about
quality of life, investments. And then also, as we talk about
the availability of housing on bases, you talk about the
barracks 2030 initiative that appears to be basically a 5-year
program that will be carried out. And there is cost in there of
$1.2 billion there on page 7.
Is that $1.2 billion, is that the total cost of the program
itself? Just walk me through what is covered. And I am looking
there, just so you will be aware, on page 7 of your written
testimony, you say, For barracks, this includes $1.2 billion
over the FYDP for barracks construction.
And so my question is, is that over the life of this
program? Is that a single-year outlay? What timeframe are we
talking about as it relates to that figure?
Ms. Berger. Congressman, I just want to make sure I am
clear on your question. Are you referring barracks 2030 when
you say the program?
Mr. Guest. Yes, ma'am. The 2030 program. Yes, ma'am.
Ms. Berger. OK. Thank you. I just wanted to make sure I was
answering the right question.
So as we look at these investments, the Commandant of the
Marine Corps--and I would like to preserve some time for
General Banta to talk about the Marines as well--he has said
this is his number one priority looking at the quality of life,
looking at all of the returns that we see on these investments.
Over the course of the program, I would expect it as more of an
evaluation, including these results of the wall to wall and
other places that we get more information, it will change the
funds required for--with the fidelity of the requirements that
the Marines identify, but that is intended to be over the
course of time. And I would like to let General Banta talk just
a little bit about the work that he has been doing as well.
General Banta. Thank you, ma'am. Thank you, Congressman,
for the question.
I guess first off, Barracks 2030 is not a single year, nor
is it a single FYDP action. This will take us probably several
FYDP cycles, several POM cycles to get through. So as we look
at cost, we know what we need to do now that we are moving out
on in terms of assessing the condition of the barracks, hiring
on our civilian barracks managers, bringing on maintenance
teams so that we can better respond to the challenges that we
have now, do an additional study so that we can optimize the
footprint, how many barracks do we need going forward, which
will then inform both demolition as well as military
construction and restoration and modernization going forward.
So as Secretary Berger mentioned, as we continue to gain
insights and refine our program here, we will make adjustments
to the funding profile. So for purposes of 2025, we are
comfortable with what we have, but we are also hopeful and
thankful for Congress's consideration for what we have asked
for on the unfunded priority list to help us accelerate those
actions. So that is where we are right now, Congressman. I hope
that helps answer your question, sir.
Mr. Guest. It does. And I do want to thank each of you for
prioritizing military housing. I represent Naval Air Station
Meridian, where many of our naval aviators are trained. And we
currently are looking at challenges with the current number of
students that routinely come through Meridian. And I am led to
believe that we are going to see a projected increase of
roughly 400 students in fiscal year 2025.
And at a time in which we are having challenges now meeting
those housing requirements for those students, I guess my
question is: As we work through this long-term program, as we
work to evaluate and prioritize, where we are going to be
building structures, what we are going to modernize, what needs
to be demolished, my question, I guess, is what is the interim
plan for places like Meridian Naval Air Station, where we are
going to see an increase in training, but we are not going to
have, at least in this budget cycle, money to equip that air
station to be able to properly house their students?
And so, if you all can kind of just tell me what the
interim plan would be as we work towards fulfilling the long-
term plan, and after that, I will yield back.
Admiral Jablon. Congressman, thank you for that question.
And as you note, Naval Air Station Meridian is so vital to our
training for our jet fighter pilots using the T-45 for
intermediate and advanced jet training. So it is vital that we
have the accommodations for those students as they go through
there.
We do have a plan for fiscal year 2027 to do restoration,
modernization on naval education training center barracks that
will accommodate, or address some of your concerns. But other
than that, we don't have anything else programmed, and we will
have to take a look at that, sir.
Mr. Guest. Thank you. Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Carter. I keep seeing us being very slowpoke, drives me
crazy.
First off, let me speak a minute to what Ms. Wasserman
Schultz has been talking about. You know, the cost of taking
care of kids right now is really almost as bad as the cost of
college. My daughter has a 6-month old child. And she put him
in healthcare--I mean daycare. It is going to cost her a $1,000
for a year to keep that baby in. Grandma and grandpa said, Give
him to us. They think we are too old and frail or stupid or
something. But that is ridiculous.
And think about all the--what the people are doing--while
you are taking care of their children back home, think about
the job they are doing and the availability of them being
contacted from home about the issues. Back in the Vietnam War,
you couldn't call anybody. Now, you can call, pick up your
phone and call anybody around the world.
So I know from experience going out--because I go out of
town every weekend, or at the end of the weekend. Everything is
great until I basically get on the airplane. And by the time I
get off the airplane, everything is going to hell in a hand
basket back home because that is the nature of family. And if
you are the father, you are expected to do certain things. My
wife will be--she will have a list full of stuff for me to do.
I say, I can't do it, baby, I am in Washington, OK?
The whole point of that is these sailors and these marines
are in bad places doing tough things. And the spouses back home
are having worries. And healthcare, we have got to take that
healthcare burden off of them. I am going to join my
colleague--daycare. We need--I want to join my colleague in
saying we have got a lot of other things that got to be done,
and I am going to talk about one right now. But don't let our
marines and our sailors worry about their children when they
are fighting a war. And they may have to do that.
But now getting back to something that really, really
concerns me: shipyards. This committee continues to strongly
support the efforts to modernize the Navy's four principal
public shipyards. These shipyards play a critical role in
securing the Nation. It is important that we have modern,
highly efficient shipyards to maintain our fleet and support
the military operations, especially in the Pacific.
What is included in the fiscal year 2025 request for
investment in our shipyards, and how does it compare to fiscal
year 2024, and is it enough? Ms. Berger.
Ms. Berger. Chairman, thank you for your continued
attention to what is a critical investment in our national
security mission that we carry out through our four public
shipyards. So you will see in fiscal year 2025, as part of our
MILCON request, just about $2 billion that goes towards our
Shipyard Infrastructure Optimization Program.
Mr. Carter. Is that enough?
Ms. Berger. It is enough for right now, sir. And so, what
we owe to you is more clarity on what that big picture looks
like. I do not have that for you today, but it is something
that the Department of the Navy will make sure that we are
communicating with clarity, recognizing that there is a lot of
cost that goes into this. We are being responsible stewards of
the taxpayer dollar by making sure that we are providing
clarity with the request.
We are taking lessons learned and applying them as we go
forward in something that we have not done before but should
have, and making sure that we are projecting forward to
anticipate what it looks like to keep the investments that we
are making right now.
Mr. Carter. Admiral?
Admiral Jablon. Chairman, thank you for that question.
The Shipyard Infrastructure Optimization Program is really
a generational investment that we are making in our four public
shipyards that is extremely important. This infrastructure
investment is going to be over probably 40 to 50 years for this
program. So it is a long-term commitment.
As you mentioned, we are investing about $2.77 billion in
fiscal year 2025. We invested $2.73 billion in fiscal year
2024. So I think anywhere between $2\1/2\ and $3 billion is the
right amount of money to continue investment. But what we need
is a stable funding profile throughout that time period, and we
are talking about between $2\1/2\ and $3 billion every year to
upgrade our dry docks, to upgrade the facilities within those
shipyards, and also, the capital equipment that we need to get
those ships out on time to make sure they do what they were
built for.
Mr. Carter. I realize we are talking about aircraft
carriers and submarines that are big, big things.
Admiral Jablon. Yes, sir.
Mr. Carter. But what about private shipyards? Are you
utilizing private shipyards? Are there any you could utilize?
Admiral Jablon. Chairman, thank you for that question. For
private shipyards, specifically, we are using those shipyards
for shipbuilding predominantly, for Virginia class submarines
and our forwarded class aircraft carriers. Whereas, we are
using the public shipyards for maintenance, depot level
maintenance. We need to improve the processes and throughput of
both the public and the private yards. We are working on that.
NAFSI is working on that to get those ships out on time. That
is an area that is very much a priority for the Chief of Naval
Operations.
Mr. Carter. If the flag goes up and we get in a fight--I
mean, we are getting shot at right now over in the Red Sea. If
they hit somebody over there, and that has got to be repaired,
are we prepared to do that right now to fix those things, or
are we going to be at a loss?
Admiral Jablon. Chairman, I am confident that we are
prepared right now to fix any battle damage that we have, or
could have.
Mr. Carter. That is good. But you know, I look at the
numbers that the Chinese have, which horribly overshadows the
numbers we have right now, if the ones reported at least, to
me, on a report that I got from the Navy, and we are trying to
catch up. But they, for some unknown reason--well, probably
because they don't build a good product. I don't know. But they
seem to be able to turn them out a lot faster than we do. There
is no doubt about it. And both our building--I am worried about
our building of our ships, and I am worried about if we get in
a fight in the Pacific especially--because I keep hearing from
my colleague over in Washington that they are still working on
getting one up to speed over there. How is that going?
Admiral Jablon. Chairman, thank you for that question. As
part of my job, I am also responsible for contested logistics.
As part of contested logistics, we have kind of coined the five
Rs; refuel, rearm, resupply, revive, and repair. So repair is
one of those issues that we are working on.
The AUKUS Initiative is going to be very important for
repair of our submarines when Australia builds that capability
in Perth, Australia, in their submarine yard. So we will have
that capability there. We will have it in Guam and Pearl Harbor
in the Pacific, and also in CONUS, San Diego, and Burmington.
Also, we do intermediate maintenance in Yokosuka, Japan for our
aircraft carriers. So we have a lot of work to do. And I am
concerned about it, but we are moving out on it, sir.
Mr. Carter. OK. Thank you. As my colleague said, if it is
not enough, tell us. We sometimes can come up with some more
money, you know? So don't just be shy. This is a national
defense issue. You are going to be leading over in the Pacific,
both the Navy and the Marines are going to be leading over in
the Pacific. And they have got to be able to get to the fight,
get in the fight, and win. So even though we are the lowest
budget in the world, we can magically come up with some more
money every now and then. Please let us know if there is
something that you have forgotten to tell us about.
With that, I will pass to my colleague.
Ms. Wasserman Schultz. Thank you. Thank you. I not only
thank the gentleman for yielding, but I just want to point out
and appreciate that he and I work very closely together. And we
have an unusual partnership in that we have both been in these
roles interchangeably for longer than most of our colleagues
who kind of rotate through their committees in different
Congresses. So not only do we have a good relationship, but we
are pretty aligned most of the time, nearly all the time.
So when he says let us know if--and I will just add, we
know your constraints in terms of what you might have requested
and that goes up the chain and to OMB and what comes back to
you after you have sent it up. But the good news is that we get
the last word--well, the President does because he gets to
decide whether to sign it. But I think we are both pretty
confident that what we send him is likely something he would
sign. So, Mr. Chairman, I really appreciate our partnership.
I do just want to correct the record from my friend from
Montana because the number he cited, which I heard the
skepticism in your voice, Madam Secretary, of $1.256 billion
going to purchase electric vehicles is actually the amount for
the entire climate action strategy budget that the Navy--the
Department of the Navy has proposed. It is not $1.256 billion
for electric vehicles, and certainly doesn't remotely reflect
it being a priority to purchase electric vehicles versus
barracks. And quite frankly, addressing global warming and
climate change, and the impact it has on the deterioration of
our infrastructure certainly is a quality-of-life issue. One
only has to go to Okinawa or to Hawaii or any--or to Tyndall,
and see the impact that climate change and global warming and
beach erosion and sea level rise has on our infrastructure. And
by the way, the proposed amount this year is a cut from fiscal
year 2024. So the administration is actually proposing less
funding for your climate action strategy, not more. Certainly
that whole amount does not go to electric vehicles, but that is
not what I want to talk about right now.
I want to just focus a little bit more granularly on the
potential for privatized housing, because as you might imagine,
we are a little bit skeptical about expanding privatized
housing, given the really poor track record of the company in
multifamily housing, and you know, officer housing.
So, is the Navy or Marine Corps planning privatized
unaccompanied housing projects? I think you are, but how many
additional sites are considering? How did you determine where
the locations are? What locations are for candidates for
privatization? I know that you have two good examples that you
mentioned to me, Norfolk and San Diego.
But I mean those are new properties, and so they are not
going to have maintenance needs for many years. And so, my
concern is later, when significant investments are required,
how are the contracts going to be structured so that the
private companies are having to continue to invest in the
housing, make sure that the units are maintained. And also, if
they fail miserably, like they have in previous contracts, that
we are not stuck in a contract that is too big to fail, and
that you can't unwind and undo and have the ability for the
Navy to take it back over if they suck, for lack--that is a
technical term. Have at it.
Ms. Berger. Ranking Member, thank you for the record
correction. Your attention to something that is indeed quite
critical to the assurance that our Navy and Marine Corps is
sustained into the future, and also that they do have the
quality of life and resources that are required to support our
naval fighting forces.
With particular attention to the unaccompanied housing
question that you asked, this is an example where we had an
authority that we were able to pilot in two locations that you
noted. And so, the maximizing of that authority is putting
forth the unaccompanied barracks that are in the San Diego and
in the Norfolk region. And so, that is the limit of where we
are right now.
Very important to note is that we are not thinking of this
as 100 percent solution. It is not that every single place we
go privatization is the answer. It is a good option. As you
note, we have seen from where we started with MHPI, we started
from a bad place, and we had a lot of work to do, and we still
haven't--we talked about it today. There is still places to pay
attention. But what we did do is take what we saw there and the
things that did work, that were helpful, to include things that
are helping for oversight, for advocacy, for compliance, and
also, ensuring that people are able to get what they need out
of these requirements.
So as we look at the BAH, we mentioned the bill of rights
that exists. So we are making sure that people have those
rights and responsibilities. When it comes specifically to the
agreements, we have built into the contract that maintenance,
that sustainment. These are a little bit different than full
homes, usually more apartment style, but also cognizant of
where we need to be able to have that oversight and that impact
in a contractual agreement in a partnership as it is structured
are things that we have built in here.
And so, while we are at the front end of the
infrastructure, it is certainly something that we have learned
from, applied and that we are anticipating so that when we are
putting, in this case, BAH dollars down, the dollar that goes
in is a dollar towards that quality of life and that is how it
is structured. So that is some of the benefit that we are
trying to build in, not looking for 100 percent solution, but
where we have seen a good result trying to replicate something
that we have seen improve the quality of life.
Ms. Wasserman Schultz. And what about the structure of the
contracts if it becomes necessary to unwind them? Are you
structuring them in a way that makes that possible?
Ms. Berger. At this point, as we are building out a pilot,
we are structuring in a way that we are making sure that it
works. Financing is also a consideration as you build this out.
And so, some of the length of the contract is due to the way
that the financing works out. I would love to give you a more
detailed brief, and certainly, bring some of our Navy partners
who have actually been working with the partners more directly
to make sure you get that detail.
Ms. Wasserman Schultz. Great. There is a $16 million cut to
the oversight funding in what you proposed. You know, I know I
had real concerns about making sure that we maintained--it is
maintained and we even added $10 million in the final result of
our bill. So, I mean, how are you going to make sure that you
had enough when you had nothing before we acted and insisted
that you add a layer of oversight at DoD?
Ms. Berger. Ranking Member, we did listen when you had us
do some of these things, and so critically important was making
sure that we had the tenant bill of rights and the universal
lease in place. That creates a better structure under which
people are able to work both for advocacy return. We have our
civilian housing managers in place. We have plussed that up by
about 200 people. And so now, we have that oversight in place.
It brings some of the cost down when you do it well. And so, we
are able to mitigate on some of the places, because we have
been able to put more oversight in place. And if there are any
specific examples, I will offer some space.
Ms. Wasserman Schultz. Great. Thank you.
General Banta. Ranking Member, thanks very much for the
question. So with respect to the public-private housing
supervision and accountability, if you will, so we remain
committed to that. Quality housing is extremely important. We
have made a lot of headway on that. We have a total of 169
housing professionals that work in our military housing office
that are advocates for our marines and our families, working
with our private partners there and we are sustaining that
going forward.
In addition to the universal lease and bill of rights that
we have out there, we are completing the third-party
inspections of all of our homes this year, which will help, if
there are problems, then build the plans with the partners to
get better. So that is in place. I would have to offer to get
back to you on any specific cuts that we had within the
sustainment funding there, but it is a priority for us.
Ms. Wasserman Schultz. This was oversight.
General Banta. Oversight. Right. Yes, ma'am.
Ms. Wasserman Schultz. OK. Thank you.
Admiral Jablon. Ranking Member, thank you for the question.
I appreciate the $10 million that was added for oversight. And
as the Secretary said, that was used to hire about 200
additional employees, about 150 at the regions, installations,
and bases, and then 50 at naval facilities engineering command.
What that enabled us to do is have stronger linkages between
our privatized partners and our families that are living, and
be able to react to any problems that are going on.
I live in privatized housing, and I just got my tenant
satisfaction survey mailed to me. We act on those surveys, and
that additional oversight will help to answer any of those
questions or problems.
Ms. Wasserman Schultz. Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Carter. I think we are done. Thank you very much for
what you brought us today. We are here to help, and we are--
yeah. We are the government. We are here to help you.
Seriously. Very good presentation as usual. We always expect
the best, and we get the best from our Navy and our Marine
Corps. So thanks for coming in to visit with us today. Remember
and recall when you are looking at things, if there is other
things we need to know about, give us a call and let us know
about them, all right? Anything else?
We are adjourned.

[Answers to submitted questions follow:]

GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT

DEPARTMENT OF VETERANS AFFAIRS

Tuesday, April 16, 2024

WITNESS

HON. DENIS R. McDONOUGH, SECRETARY, DEPARTMENT OF VETERANS AFFAIRS
Mr. Carter. Well, welcome, Mr. Secretary. Good morning.
Glad to have you.
I am looking forward to this conversation. We appreciate
your leadership in the Department and your efforts in
supporting our veterans.
More than any other Federal department, the VA recognizes,
supports, cares for, and lays to rest our Nation's veterans. We
are in the saddle to build a budget that will back those who
put us first. I understand the great opportunity this is, and I
have nearly 65,000 veterans in my community who I hear from on
a regular basis. And so I truly appreciate you.
This subcommittee continues to support VA, DoD, electronic
health records management system. I was disappointed to see
that your request is a 50 percent cut from fiscal year 2024 and
does not include any future performance. VA must make this
system work for providers and veterans in a timely manner,
while holding Oracle and Cerner to their commitments.
Many veterans face unique health challenges, and we owe it
to them to provide the best health care options, whether that
be at the VA medical center or going into the community. This
committee, as always, will continue to fully fund VA medical
care, and we need to make absolutely certain that VA's fiscal
year 2025 budget request fully funds veterans' medical health
care needs.
While every issue that is facing the agency does not reduce
down to spending, we must do our due diligence to ensure we
fully fund veterans' programs in a bipartisan and financially
responsible manner.
I would like now to yield time to Ms. Wasserman Schultz, my
good friend and counterpart on this committee, as our Ranking
Member, for her comments.
Ms. Wasserman Schultz. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I wish
your throat the opportunity to feel better.
Mr. Carter. Oh, it will be back. I am happy to be able to
talk.
Ms. Wasserman Schultz. And thank you for yielding.
And, Mr. Secretary, it is good to see you. I just want to
say, because I have been in this role, either one of our roles,
since 2014, and I have appreciated the opportunity to work with
the most communicative, open, collaborative VA secretary that
we have had during my tenure. We have had an opportunity to
work together before, either one of these roles. But especially
because you are, I think, a secretary who has not served in the
military, one of the first not to, the way in which you have
gone about really, as you usually do, granularly understanding
the needs of our veterans, the top-to-bottom approach you have
taken to the Department, the really remarkable way that you
have made decisions, so I just appreciate the opportunity to
have been working with you.
In our fiscal year 2025 budget request for your department,
for the Department of the VA, includes $337 billion. And in
addition, will fully utilize the $24\1/2\ billion provided for
the Toxic Exposures Fund in the Fiscal Responsibility Act. And
that funding will support the Department's mission to provide
world class health care and benefits to our veterans.
We have historically expanded health care and benefits to
veterans exposed to toxins during their time in service through
the passage of the PACT Act. And the Department is surpassing
expectations in its implementation. More than 1.3 million PACT
Act related claims have been received, and over 1.1 million
have been completed. I just want to let that sink in, 1.3
million received and 1.1 million completed.
Just last month, VA announced that all veterans who are
exposed to toxins or other hazards while serving in the
military are eligible to enroll directly in VA health care
without first applying for benefits. This is years earlier than
required by the PACT Act.
Additionally, VA is ending its discriminatory IVF policy,
in vitro fertilization, by expanding services to eligible
veterans, regardless of marital status or sexual orientation,
and will allow for donated eggs and sperm. This is long
overdue. I applaud VA for finally taking this important step to
help veterans start or grow their families. I have worked on
this issue for many, many years, proposed multiple variations
of equitable policy, and we are finally on our way.
2023 was the 100th anniversary of providing health care to
women veterans, which is the largest growing group of veterans.
Not just providing access but continuing to expand access to
gender-specific care is vital to ensure that we are fully
providing the health care that veterans want and deserve. Women
are serving this country right next to men, and it is a shame
how hard we have to fight to provide the necessary resources to
support gender-specific care year after year.
VA is continuing to build new state of the art medical
centers and continuing to modernize and improve current
facilities. Quality infrastructure is the bedrock to providing
care to veterans and it must be maintained. We cannot provide
the necessary care to veterans if buildings are crumbling
around them. With an estimated capital funding requirement of
over $160 billion, we have a long way to go.
VA is on the cutting edge of research, and I am proud to
say that it will be eliminating the use of research on animals
within the next two years. Thanks to Judge Carter and our
counterparts in the Senate working together, we are pushing VA
to find other scientific methods to conduct this vital
research. I am especially proud of this. I have been pushing
for years alongside the Chairman, with his support, to
eliminate harmful testing on animals, and we were able to come
to a bipartisan, bicameral agreement in conference last year to
make this happen.
The Department of Veterans Affairs is doing incredible
things for veterans, and we want to make sure that it is able
to continue to do so. But today, we are essentially covering
two complete health care systems, the one that we are working
to expand to make sure all veterans receive the best care by
the best providers who know how to care for veterans and who
culturally understand their patients, and the one in the
community who we are trying to support to fill the gap in
service for veterans so we can ensure we keep our promise to
always care for those who sacrifice so much for us. But since
the passage of the MISSION Act and coupled with dramatic
impacts from the pandemic that have reverberated, I am worried
at how much we are relying on the community. Medical community
care continues to exponentially grow year after year and is
becoming unsustainable, as we predicted it would. I do not want
to be over-relying on community care at the expense of
providing the high quality care and service within VA's
facilities. Especially with the record hiring the Department
has done this past year, we should have the capacity within the
system to do more for veterans. I worry that we are not doing
enough to show veterans why they should get their care within
VA, since VA is willing and able to provide it. And we have
talked about that, and I appreciate it. And especially if VA
can provide that care better and faster than in the community
in some circumstances, even if the veteran is eligible for
community care.
What has been clear, I think, to all of us is that the
majority of veterans prefer to receive their care at the VA,
because this is where they can get care in an environment that
understands their unique needs. So today's hearing is vitally
important. Without a third budget category, VA continues to
compete for scarce resources along with the other domestic
funding bills.
Mr. Secretary, once again, I support your request to break
out medical care as a third budget category, and I urge my
colleagues on the other side of the aisle to join us in doing
the same.
The intensity and reliance on the VA health care system,
coupled with medical inflation, is consistently driving the
ever-growing funding requirements of VA medical care. The third
budget category will ensure that funding for veterans' health
care will always be taken care of so veteran health care is not
pitted against other non-Defense discretionary programs, which,
because this subcommittee unfortunately often is looked at as a
redheaded stepchild, it is really essential that we make sure
that we do all we can structurally to help ensure that veterans
get the care they need.
So this year, we are working within the tight confines of
the Fiscal Responsibility Act. It is especially important to
make every dollar count for our veterans.
And with that, I look forward to your testimony, Mr.
Secretary. Thank you so much. And I yield back.
Mr. Carter. Thank you, Ms. Wasserman Schultz.
Ms. Wasserman Schultz. You are welcome.
Mr. Carter. I would like to now recognize Chairman Cole for
his opening comment.
The Chairman. Thank you very much. Thank you very much,
Chairman Carter, and my good friend, Ranking Member Wasserman
Schultz.
Mr. Secretary, welcome. I am delighted to have you here.
This is my first MilCon VA Subcommittee meeting as chairman of
the full committee, and it is only fitting that it is focused
on funding for the VA. Just as our Nation's veterans answered
the call of duty, so must we on the Appropriations Committee
meet our constitutional obligations to those that have served
the country.
As we start the fiscal year 2025 process, my priorities
remain focused on our national security and those that support
a strong national defense. I take President Reagan's
perspective that we must ensure peace through strength and
provide the necessary resources to increase our military
capabilities.
On our own turf here at home, it is clear we have an
ongoing national security crisis at the southern border that
must be addressed.
And then lastly, but certainly not least, we must take care
of those who served our country in uniform. Defense, Homeland
Security, and Veterans are all critical priorities. And working
with our subcommittee chairs, these objectives will be
reflected in this year's bills.
My grandfather and uncle were both career Naval officers,
or career Naval personnel. My grandfather was an officer. My
uncle that I am named for was a noncommissioned officer. He was
also a Battan Death March survivor and Japanese prisoner of
war. My brother and father both served in the United States Air
Force. My father served 20 years, and then 20 years as a
civilian defense worker at Tinker Air Force Base. My brother
followed a similar pattern. So we know how important as a
family it is to ensure that veterans have the care that they
have earned and deserve.
That personal understanding, along with years of work on
the Appropriations Committee, have taught me the importance of
the mission before us. I thank each of you on this subcommittee
for your commitment to providing adequate resources for the men
and women who have put their lives on the line for freedom.
My home State of Oklahoma is a veteran-heavy State. We have
a variety of facilities and services that our veterans rely on
every day. The Fourth District alone has over 73,000 veterans.
And it is clear, health needs of that population are only
growing. We must prioritize funding to address those rising
costs.
As you know, the Oklahoma City VA Medical Center is a
leading regional provider. That facility has been critical in
implementing the PACT Act. And I am happy to hear that the
facility has spearheaded those efforts and implementation in a
successful manner so far. The example of success is what we all
want to build on.
Today's hearing will help us assess how we shape the VA's
budget and explore avenues to better support our veterans.
Given the history of bipartisanship on this particular
subcommittee, there are certainly common interests shared by
members on both sides of the aisle. As we begin this year's
appropriations process, I look forward to working with each of
you to support our veterans and fund the important initiatives
at the Department.
Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Carter. Thank you, Chairman.
Let me now recognize Ranking Member DeLauro for her opening
statement.
Ms. DeLauro. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Thank you
and Ranking Member Wasserman Schultz for holding the hearing
this morning. And I want to give a warm welcome to Secretary
McDonough, say thank you to you for appearing before this
subcommittee today.
I have said this to each of our secretaries who have come
forward in the last couple of weeks in these hearings, that I
just quote to you Shirley Chisholm, the first African American
woman who served in the House of Representatives, and her
comments were that public service is the rent you pay for space
on this earth. And, Secretary McDonough, you have paid that
rent over and over and over again, and we are so grateful to
you. We thank you for your leadership to our Nation.
Upholding our commitments to the Nation's heroes is a
critical mission. Your stewardship of the Department of
Veterans Affairs helped ensure that service members and their
families are receiving the care and the support they need and
they deserve.
In the first bipartisan funding package for fiscal year
2024, I am proud that we supported our veterans with
investments in health care, including investments that advance
women's health, mental health, and homelessness assistance. We
provided $121 billion for VA medical care. We protected funding
for women's health care, all while defeating attempts to
restrict women's access to abortion. We beat back poison pill
riders that sought to politicize the VA. And we increased
funding for medical and prosthetic research, VA construction
programs, and construction grants for State extended care
facilities. I am proud that we secured $153 million for major
construction funding at the West Haven VA Medical Center for a
new surgical and clinical space tower, as well as for
renovation and demolition projects. And I am so grateful to you
for coming to visit the West Haven VA and hope that you will
come back.
Furthermore, we boosted funding for the Veterans Benefits
Administration as a direct result of the PACT Act, to support
the more than one million claims coming in, and almost 900,000
total PACT Act claims approved.
Looking at the President's request for 2025, I am pleased
to see funding to expand child care benefits, provide for
clinical equipment needs, and boost capacity among women's
health personnel.
More women are choosing VA for their health care than ever
before. And the population of women veterans is the fastest
growing demographic in the VA. We must ensure the Department is
equipped to address the need for trained primary care, as well
as gynecology and obstetrics work for us.
And I am so glad to see last month's announcement that the
VA will make millions of veterans eligible for health care
years earlier than required by the PACT Act, opening enrollment
to veterans exposed to toxins or other hazards during their
military service.
Serving in our Nation's armed forces is a selfless and
patriotic decision to defend America's freedom. And we need to
do everything we can to ensure that retired service members are
given the dignity, the respect, and the support they deserve.
I thank you for all that you and the VA work force do
towards those ends, look forward to discussing in this hearing
what we can do to support the VA in its mission of serving
America's heroes.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I yield back.
Mr. Carter. Thank you, Ms. DeLauro.
OK, we are ready for you to give us your summary of what
you have put together. We would appreciate it if you would try
to limit it to five minutes. We will give you some slack if we
have to.
Go ahead, go ahead.
STATEMENT OF HON. DENIS R. McDONOUGH, SECRETARY, DEPARTMENT OF
VETERANS AFFAIRS
Secretary McDonough. Chairman Carter, Chairman Cole,
Ranking Member Wasserman Schultz, Ranking Member DeLauro,
distinguished members of the committee, thanks so much for the
opportunity to testify today.
Despite serious injuries from an Army training accident,
Bob Brownridge remains a very active 75 year old. He swims
1,000 yards a day, he competes in the Senior Olympics. Because
he is a dual citizen and lives just across the border in
Ontario, Bob has access to health care in Canada and in the
United States. But Bob chooses to drive 11 hours to the
Philadelphia and Wilmington VA Medical Centers for his care.
While in the pool late last year, Bob experienced a minor
cardiac event, and he learned from his local ER that he needed
a series of heart surgeries. There is no question where Bob
wanted to go to the VA team that he trusts. Bob says, ``What VA
Nurse Michelle Bennett went out and did for us is just awesome.
And Dr. Aymen Alrez, well, he saved my life. Nowhere in the
civilian world would I get anything approaching the treatment
and coordination that I experience every time I am at the VA.''
In fact, Bob says that his wife, Elaine, who retired from a 45-
year nursing career, is constantly amazed at the attention and
the treatment he gets.
We owe vets like Bob, and all vets, including the vets on
this committee, our very best, and we are fighting like hell to
give them exactly that, delivering more care and more benefits
to more vets than at any time in our Nation's history.
Over the course of the last year, we enrolled 400,000 new
vets in VA. That's a 30 percent increase over the previous
year, and an increase in each of the 50 States. Six point five
million vet patients had over 118 million clinical visits, 47
million in the community, 42 million in person at VA, and 29
million via VA Telehealth. That last data point bears
repeating. Millions of vets use VA Telehealth.
Now, on to benefits. We decided over 1.9 million claims,
shattering the previous year's record by 16 percent. You have
all heard, we have all heard vets' justifiable frustrations
with C&P exams. But last year, we processed 2.4 million C&P
exams, a record by nearly 30 percent, and took an average of
just 31 days to complete them. In total, we delivered $163
billion in earned benefits to over 6 million veterans and
survivors, another record.
And the PACT Act has opened the door to millions of toxic
exposed veterans and their survivors, bringing generations of
new vets to VA health care, and expanding benefits for millions
more. The PACT Act is also delivering additional benefits for
vets, the GI Bill, VR&E, home ownership, survivors' pensions,
and so much more, benefits that not only improve veterans'
lives but also strengthen the American economy.
We still have a lot of work to do. The President's proposed
budget fully funds VA so we can continue doing that important
work. Work is also about preventing veteran suicide, ending
veteran homelessness, supporting health care for women vets,
modernizing IT, processing benefits, and honoring vets with
eternal resting places. No single investment is more critical
to veterans we serve, and VA's future, than the people we hire
and we retain.
Team mates like Richard Saver, a food service worker at the
VA in Asheville. A proud Marine, he likes coming to work every
day to serve his fellow vets. That's the kind of deep devotion
that characterizes VA's personnel. Richard says he is grateful
for the critical skills incentive he received, a CSI. He spent
years saving up for a home and, at 65 years old, the CSI has
given him hope that he might be able to own a home before
retiring from VA. He says that critical skills incentive, which
you all made possible in the PACT Act, was life changing.
The work of caring for the brave men and women who fight
our wars and their families, survivors and caregivers, is in
full swing and continues to grow. The MISSION Act, COVID, and
the PACT Act all enacted or all experienced in just the last 6
years have changed the American health care landscape and the
statutory basis for the work we do at VA. Any one of them on
their own would lead to monumental change for VA. Together,
they represent a seismic shift in the way veterans receive care
and benefits. They have changed the way we do business,
creating enormous opportunities for veterans and for VA.
And right now, we are at a critical moment for shaping and
securing the future of veteran health care in America. So we
will work to reliably offer a VA care option to every veteran,
even vets who qualify for community care under the MISSION Act.
We want to bring as many veterans as possible into our care,
because study after study shows that vets do better at VA. And
we've made considerable progress. Whether in person via
Telehealth, in the community, in our community living centers,
mobile medical units, or elsewhere, vets can access VA care at
every turn.
What we do this year and over the next several years,
building on the generosity of this committee and of the
Congress in general, and the innovative work of VA's workforce,
the best workforce in the Federal Government, will determine
what vets can expect from VA and how we deliver that high
standard of care well into the future. This budget is the next
step to continue delivering more care, more benefits to more
vets than ever, and for generations to come.
So we look forward to collaborating even more closely and
effectively with you, to building on what's working, and being
candid about and fixing what's not.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I look very much forward to your
questions.
[The prepared statement follows:]
GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT

Mr. Carter. Thank you. I remind our members that we will
follow our usual hearing procedures and we will begin.
I hate to beat a horse, but I have to go back to something
I started working on back in 2004, OK?
Secretary McDonough. Yes, sir.
Mr. Carter. VA must make electronic health records systems
work for providers and veterans. We are encouraged by the VA's
rollout in March at Lowell, and I have heard it has been
successful so far.
The VA's budget request of $894 million for electronic
records is a cut of approximately 50 percent. Assuming Lowell
will continue to be successful in restart developments at VA
sites in other places, how will the proceeds cut impact future
deployments? That is very important. Are there more resources
needed? And if so, give us an idea of what you're talking
about.
Secretary McDonough. Yes, Chairman, thanks very much, and
we appreciate how hard you have pushed on this since 2004. I
just want to underscore one more time how much we agree with
you that we need an enterprise medical record for a single VA-
wide system that communicates effectively with the Department
of Defense. This is in the veterans' interest for a wide
variety of reasons.
By the same token, we have to get it right before leaving
the current posture of reset. We are committed to this record.
We are not going to stay in reset forever. I anticipate by the
end of this fiscal year, we will be in--before the end of this
fiscal year, we will be in serious discussions about going live
more broadly.
Now, when we do that, we will use prior year funding. We
have prior year funding available to us. It is 3-year money
that you made available to us here. So that 50 percent
reduction you see reflected in the discretionary budget before
you will not impact our ability to move forward. Not least
because in addition to the prior year funding, we have made a
series of investments in the next sets of go-live facilities to
prepare those facilities for the eventual go live.
So we do not need additional funding above what we request
in the budget. We have right sized our eyes and our stomach in
this program, having learned very hard lessons over the course
of the last almost four years of deployment of the new system.
And a big part of that is keeping our partner, Oracle Cerner,
accountable to what they promise us. Using you all's help, your
all's oversight, we have been able to do that, and we will stay
on forward lean on that.
Mr. Carter. Do you have a new date on how Lowell rollout is
going and what lessons were learned from the prior deployments
of the system that will improve Lowell?
Secretary McDonough. We are so far, I think, pleased with
progress at the Federal Health Care Center in Chicago. The one
measure of success there is the speed with which we've returned
to a higher level of predeployment appointments for veterans.
So overall, that deployment has been on the high level of
expectations.
It is still early. If we had had this conversation about
Columbus, which was the fifth go-live site, at this point, we
might have said the same things, meaning that the deployment
was going relatively well at that point, at this commensurate
point in Columbus as well. So we want to take this very
carefully.
Nevertheless, so far, very positive in Lovell. One of the
big takeaways is that the increased personnel on site and the
increased at-the-elbow presence for the training at those
facilities made a considerable difference. That was, as I think
we have all discussed in other settings, not entirely the case
in the first five go-live sites, for a lot of different
reasons, including for example the pandemic.
Lastly, Lovell did roll out at the same time as we are
experiencing challenges associated with Change Healthcare and
the ransomware attack at Change Healthcare. There are still
challenges with the United Health Group. We had a very serious
meeting with them just last night about that. And so it is hard
to discern, you know, some of our concerns about, for example,
the pharmacy function in our record and how much of that is a
reflection of Change Healthcare and the interoperability of
that system with ours now, and how much of that is the new
system.
But we will stay on top of this, Judge. Let me just
reiterate one more time, we are committed to this. We see this
as in the veterans' interest. But this only works if we have
the full attention of the contractor and we have the buy-in of
our workforce, and we are working really hard to get that trust
back from our workforce because, frankly, in the first five
sites, we did not do a good enough job of that.
Mr. Carter. Let me know if we can help.
Secretary McDonough. You have been great so far, and you
have been very generous, not only with EHRM, but----
Mr. Carter. You get some people's attention, we can step on
their air hose.
OK, Ms. Wasserman Schultz.
Ms. Wasserman Schultz. Note to self, do not make Judge
Carter mad. I do not want anyone stepping on my air hose.
OK. As I mentioned, Mr. Secretary, in my opening remarks, a
big part of your budget hinges on being able to bring more
veterans in to VA for care. We are essentially supporting two
systems. It is not sustainable. We have said since the debate
over the MISSION Act that it was not going to be sustainable
and that the cost of community care was going to chew up the
care that we have to provide for the VA. And we have challenges
with the rest of the nondiscretionary funding for all the other
bills. So community care is not only growing, but you also had
a record amount of hiring in VA this past year which, you know,
intuitively means that you should be able to be serving more
veterans.
So how--what is your plan to bring veterans back into the
VA for care? And it is not that they are leaving because they
want to. It is just that that option is available. I mean, if
changes are not made, are there more drastic changes at the VA
that are necessary, like tightening the access standards for
community care? It is especially frustrating that we are at
times sending veterans out into the community when the private
sector does not get them care any faster. And that is important
for people on this committee to understand. The purpose of the
MISSION Act was to get veterans care more quickly than we were
able to get them care at the VA, both in terms of time and
distance. And the community care is often taking as long if not
longer.
So how much risk are you assuming in your budget? And I
have some other questions related to this as well.
Secretary McDonough. Ms. Wasserman Schultz, thanks very
much for the question. I think your characterization that we
are kind of servicing two separate systems is correct. And
there are certain inefficiencies built into that. And we are
actually robbed of certain kind of economies of scale as a
result as well, one from the other.
But I think it is important to underscore that trust
ratings in the system, notwithstanding the difficult
challenges, are at historic highs, and we are really proud
about that. Nevertheless, we do think that focusing on the
highest quality outcomes for veterans, which inevitably are in
the VA direct care system, will get us on the right path. The
question is, how do we do that?
There are, I think, reasonable steps that we can and should
take to reflect the current way health care is delivered. For
example, we think it is time to look at the access standard as
it relates to accounting for Telehealth. And so we will be in
touch with the committee on that over the course of the coming
weeks and months.
Ms. Wasserman Schultz. So the potential for Telehealth to
count as care in the VA?
Secretary McDonough. Correct. Because what we are
experiencing is veterans who get referred out are oftentimes
referred out to Telehealth in any case. OK?
Ms. Wasserman Schultz. OK.
Secretary McDonough. And so--and, by the way, veterans need
not accept Telehealth. But many veterans are choosing
Telehealth, including in the VA system.
Ms. Wasserman Schultz. So if you have a chance to get them
Telehealth at the VA and it counts as within the standard of
time frame and their needs, I mean and the distance, obviously,
because that is not an issue, then----
Secretary McDonough. And it continues to score as highly as
it does on the trust scores as it is now, we think that's a
win-win for veterans.
Secondly, you are right that we should see an increase in
productivity and an increase in the number of veterans coming
into the direct care system more quickly because of the record
hiring year. So we tested that between October and February. We
saw 25,000 more new patients in that window, that is an 11
percent increase, than in the same window preceding year.
Eighty-one percent of VA sites saw more new patients in that
window. As a result, 14 percent fewer new patients waited for
appointments in the community.
We did that by offering more convenient and accessible care
options for vets, evening appointments, weekend appointments,
and we are working to sustain those options now in light of the
fact that we have the clinicians that we hired. And, by the
way, historic highs in terms of retention. Quit rates are down,
retention is sticker, partly because of the critical skills
incentives and other pay incentives that you gave us over the
course of the last year and a half. Not only gave us, but then
also funded us to implement.
The third issue is what I was saying earlier, which is we
think it is important that the veteran have an apple to the
apple every time to compare every time we refer that veteran
into the community. In many of your states, Texas, Oklahoma,
Florida, Georgia--in particular Georgia and Nevada I would
highlight--Georgia is part of VISN 7. VISN 7, 70 percent of
veterans are qualified for a referral based on drive time alone
in the first instance, right out of the box, because of drive
time. The available options for them in the private sector are
no more accessible than the VA options. And so we have to make
sure that the vet--we can get the vet an apple to an apple, to
compare drive times and compare wait times so that they have
that basis on which to make those decisions.
We think, when presented with that option, as you suggested
in your question, the vet is going to choose not a hundred
percent of the time with VA, but we think that we are going to
be more competitive there because, in that transparent
offering, I think the veteran will come to understand lastly--
you all understand this better than I do because it is your
districts and your States--I think the states and districts and
the offerings of health care have fundamentally changed as a
result of the pandemic. There are fewer providers in the
private sector. Especially in rural settings, it is a
particular challenge.
Inasmuch as veterans are more likely to be in rural
settings, we feel very strongly that we have to make sure that
we are giving them real options in the VA system in rural
settings.
Ms. Wasserman Schultz. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield
back.
Mr. Carter. Mr. Cole.
The Chairman. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Secretary, you know, I think probably one of the things
that Congress was proudest of last session was the PACT Act
and----
Secretary McDonough. You should be.
The Chairman [continuing]. it was a great bipartisan
victory. But obviously, when you launch a program of that scale
and size, there are going to be both challenges and successes.
So I would like just a quick assessment from your point of view
of where we are at in terms of the implementation, what are the
things you think we have done successfully, and where do we
have challenges.
Secretary McDonough. Yes, thanks very much. First of all, I
thank you very much for the law. I think it is a really
important law, and I think claims on the high end of what we
had hoped. Interestingly, the real question for us is when do
we peak on the inventory, because the inventory is directly,
obviously, correlated to backlog. Backlog is any claim that
sits for more than 125 days without the decision being--any
part of the--the entirety of the decision being afforded to the
veteran.
We are actually beating our assessment on the backlog and
on the inventory. That is because we think there was more
aggressive enrollment, in submission of claims last summer. So
what we thought was going to be a series of claims spread out
over the course of this calendar year actually got compressed.
And because we have been able to hire, another positive of the
PACT Act, hire more quickly, those numbers are coming down
faster. That is a positive. More enrollees, also a positive.
But to be honest, I think the enrollees are on the low side
of what we might have expected. We will see over the course of
this year, because we are biasing toward, and there is some
risk in this, we are biasing toward aggressive outreach.
Each of you highlighted in the opening the fact that we
compressed and brought forward eligibility for enrollment for
all the veterans, shrinking what was a nine-year period into
one, basically, the President making available on March 5
enrollment for every veteran, in effect, envisioned in the PACT
Act. We have bias toward reaching out to them. We have 550
events to reach them in each of your states, in each of your
districts already scheduled for this calendar year. That number
will grow. The risk there is that we over-enroll veterans. If
that is the case, then we may be coming back here to talk to
you about a second bite. But as you saw, we did not ask for a
second bite in the budget.
So in outreach and enrollment, a positive. Even if
enrollment to date is on the low end of expected.
Lastly, a particular challenge for our Vietnam vets,
remember that the PACT Act said if you're a Vietnam vet exposed
to Agent Orange, today you have hypertension, that is now--your
hypertension is connected to your service. The ratings are
coming back lower, in many cases zero percent service
connected. Zero percent is not meaningless. In fact, it is
meaningful for a lot of reasons. But it is surprising on the
down side for veterans.
Lastly, one more positive as it relates to claims. There is
a 17 percent increase in the number of veterans 100 percent
service connected. Right? So that is going to mean things like
increased access to dental care. So that is a real challenge
for us, getting more dental beds, more dental chairs, more
dentists. And, throughout the course of this year, 350,000 new
veterans with service connection. So they had none before and
they now have service connection. That is really important,
both for benefits in the long term and ultimately access to
care. And because of what we were able to establish in this
year's Suicide Prevention Report, a correlation between reduced
suicidality and a relationship with VBA. That is ultimately in
the net interest of vets as well.
So those are some of the positives. The real challenge is,
as we get more vets into our care, are we in a position to take
care of them? So far, the answer to that is, yes. And we are
going to stay on top of that and make sure that we are candid
with you about it.
The Chairman. Thank you very much. I don't have a lot of
time left. But I noticed your construction budget is $2 \1/2\
billion. It is about a billion dollars higher than last year.
Can you give us a quick summary of the differences, the reasons
for the increases, where your emphasis is?
And I will be shamelessly parochial. Ms. Bice and I, she
actually represents the Oklahoma City Veterans Center, and I
have a lot of constituents that go there. And so we are
particularly interested in that facility and how we're coming
there. I know we've got some new expansions under way.
Secretary McDonough. We are really proud of that facility.
I think the director there, Wade Vlosich, is one of our finest.
And he is excellent, and in fact just taken a really hard
assignment outside of Oklahoma City to help us with a big
challenge that we have had because we have such great respect
for him.
We are in the middle of a $63 million expansion of the
operating room and the surgical ICU at Oklahoma City. It is a
long time coming because of some challenges that we have had
there. Frankly, we got to the bottom of those, and we are proud
of that. And that money is now in the system.
Also in Oklahoma, we just purchased in December of 2022 a
facility, a prior hospital in Norman. Our plans are under way
to convert that to a residential treatment facility for
substance use disorder and for residential mental health care.
So that is very positive.
And what you see also in Oklahoma City is a reflection of
what you see in the budget, meaning we are, notwithstanding the
fact to have the demand to have new hospitals. San Antonio is a
perfect example. Miami has major challenges. Obviously, so does
West Haven.
Notwithstanding the need to have major new hospitals, the
future in VA health care, as in many health care systems, is
outpatient care. So we are, in Oklahoma City and across the
system, afforded by this budget, investing aggressively in new
leasing opportunities for increased access to outpatient care.
An example of that is activations in this new budget. So that
is opening new facilities.
Activations account for $623 million, which is an increase
of almost 60 percent over the year prior. That is because so
many new facilities, like a big new facility north of Mr.
Rutherford's district, but also here in Fredericksburg, VA,
which will be the biggest CBOC in the entire country, is
opening this year. So those activations are expensive, the
staffing of them is really important. But those reflect a VA
closer to where veterans are, in outpatient settings, less
reliant on the big hospitals that really were the basis for the
VA system going back to the post World War II era.
The Chairman. Thank you very much.
And thank you for your generosity with the time, Mr.
Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Carter. Absolutely.
Ms. DeLauro.
Ms. DeLauro. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Secretary, recently the Department announced in vitro
fertilization coverage would be provided to eligible unmarried
veterans and eligible veterans in same sex marriages.
Additionally, VA will now allow veterans who are unable to
produce their own eggs or sperm due to service-connected
injuries and health conditions to utilize donated gametes.
While this is significant improvement over past policy, I
am concerned about those veterans who may not meet the service
connection requirement, yet they struggle with infertility.
With the average cost of IVF being upwards of $20,000, for
veteran families that need IVF to build their family but do not
have a service-connected injury, that opportunity may be out of
reach.
Why does the VA require veterans to demonstrate that their
infertility is service connected? Does the VA require that of
any other health care besides dental care?
Secretary McDonough. I will double check on the last
specific question. I think it is dental care and IVF. But there
may be others. And I will come back to you, if I can take that
one for the record.
There are two, really two challenges to the administration
of IVF outside the updated policy that this committee has been
so helpful in ensuring that we have a foothold for. The first
is the ability to provide care to the non-veteran partner in
the event that the family is looking for that care. We would
need independent authorization for that. Your bill, this bill,
has generally provided us that.
Secondly, it is a cost issue. It may be that removing the
service connection increases costs as much as two orders of
magnitude, which is obviously, notwithstanding of the very
generous funding we get from you and the significantly large
budget that you afford VA, you know, growing the program at
that rate would be a substantial expansion and a costly one.
So those are the two issues. Support to the non-veteran's
partner, spouse, partner, and the cost of the expansion outside
the service connection.
Ms. DeLauro. And I would appreciate your looking into
that----
Secretary McDonough. I will. And you got that, you got my
commitment on that.
Ms. DeLauro. Yes, right, because that seems to--anyway.
Secretary McDonough. Fair enough. Yes.
Ms. DeLauro. Cost issues.
Let me ask you, this is PACT Act, and I will just say this.
I did a tele-town hall a few weeks ago. This was in the Third
District in Connecticut, and it was just about the PACT Act.
And in the midst of that, they do some polling questions. And
one of the questions was, how much do you know about the PACT
Act? And what we found is, with that universe, and maybe it is
a small number, but 63 percent of the people who were on that
call did not know anything about the PACT Act.
So I am going to make it, you know, my business in terms of
our community, our State, to get that word out. But I do not
know if that is being experienced in other parts of the country
as well as the knowledge about the PACT Act. It has been,
overall, I believe a success. And if you could speak about
that?
You know, expanding it, what are the problems with
implementing it, and how could we best support? I understand
funding. Do you foresee that--does the fiscal year 2025
budget--I think I heard you say that it does not cover the PACT
Act expansion. And do you foresee needing additional funds,
given what happened in March, et cetera, and some of the other
areas, and reaching out to those who do not now know about the
PACT Act.
Secretary McDonough. Yes, so I am surprised at that high
number. I am not surprised about the content----
Ms. DeLauro. I was, too.
Secretary McDonough. I am not surprised about the idea, but
I am surprised about the high number. But this is why we
continue to do aggressive, in-person outreach.
As I said, we already have for this calendar year, the rest
of this calendar year, 550 events scheduled. And these events
are--we have a belief at VA that we should be making sure our
programs and our outreach fits into veterans' lives, rather
than asking veterans to change their lives to fit into our
programs.
So for the first time, starting late last year, we began
using text communication with veterans who are not currently
tethered or associated with VA. We are aggressively texting and
emailing to make sure that veterans know about it.
But, you know, that is on us. Because like there are 19
million vets in the country. Our goal is to have a relationship
with all 19 million vets in the country, rather than the 60
percent or so that we currently have relationship with.
Second, the budget, the fiscal year 2025 budget does fund
PACT Act. It does that because of the TEF, the Toxic Exposure
Fund, to the tune of about $24.7 billion. It is really
important. That is all as envisioned in the PACT Act. That is
all expenditures for toxic exposure care above the baseline of
fiscal year 2021. We now have methodologies that we have
briefed to your team, we have briefed to the authorizers, we
have briefed to the IG, we have briefed to the OMB,
methodologies for VHA, for VBA, for our Office of General
Counsel, for our human resource department to make sure--for
our Office of Information Technology, to make sure that we can
invest in caring for those veterans.
Lastly, a couple of challenges that we face is there are
veterans who feel that they are on the outside of the PACT Act
looking in. Veterans who deployed to K2, a facility in
Uzbekistan early in the post-9/11 fight feel like they were
exposed to wastes there. They so far do not have conditions
that are covered by the service connection.
Missileers, so Air Force and Navy personnel who work with
missiles feel that they have conditions that are not yet
covered. So a big part of the PACT Act is a new way for us to
establish new service connection. We're pushing really hard to
use that because we want to make sure that those vets who feel
like they're on the outside looking in know that we're working
really hard to get to them.
Ms. DeLauro. My time is well over. If we could, I would
like to get information on the usage of PACT Act by Vietnam
vets.
Secretary McDonough. Yes.
Ms. DeLauro. And female veterans to see if they are coming
forward. Normally, they are pretty reticent about coming
forward.
Secretary McDonough. Yes. We'll get that.
Ms. DeLauro. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Carter. Mr. Rutherford.
Mr. Rutherford. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Secretary, it is great to see you. I would like to ask
a little question, kind of parochial to start off. As you know,
the veteran population in northeast Florida is----
Secretary McDonough. Exploding.
Mr. Rutherford. It is growing, surging and while we have
upgraded our clinic services recently, many of our veterans
still have to travel for hospital services 2 hours away to
Gainesville.
Can you give me any update on the plans to bring a VA
hospital to northeast Florida?
Secretary McDonough. Yes, thank you very much. And I've
appreciated how much you've advocated on behalf of this, both
in our private conversations and your work here on the
Committee.
Right now, as we have discussed, the major effort is a
massive new outpatient clinic on the north side of
Jacksonville, which we'll cut ribbon on here in about a week
and a half.
Mr. Rutherford. We are looking forward to that.
Secretary McDonough. Yes.
Mr. Rutherford. That is a great expansion.
Secretary McDonough. That expansion we believe will cover
the 42,000 additional vets who are now enrolled in that
catchment area for the next couple of years.
We're working through but do not yet have a Jacksonville
based hospital plan on what we call our strategic construction
list, our skip list. But I know this is a priority for you
because you've continued to raise it with us and we'll look for
opportunity to do that as we work down this major construction
budget.
Mr. Rutherford. Very good. You know, I know the chairman of
appropriations now, so.
Well, Mr. Secretary, if I could, you know, in the MISSION
Act I had a bill that was veterans armed for success.
Secretary McDonough. Yes.
Mr. Rutherford. Which was assisting members and their
spouses as members would transition out of the military and
into private industry.
And Operation New Uniform that runs in Jacksonville does an
amazing job of placement and training with these veterans who
are, you know, going through TAPs. My question is this. I know
the Veteran and Spousal Transition Grant Program came out of
the MISSION Act and that was the implementation of ONU.
And they're the model that I really want to see us
replicate around the country because their success rate is
truly amazing. I mean, their placements are like over 96
percent, I think. So we have been waiting now I think two----
Secretary McDonough. A long
Mr. Rutherford. Thank you. And look, I know some of it is
COVID and we have had a lot of interruptions in that last two
years. But first quarter of this year, I think they said that
it would be available.
Secretary McDonough. Yes. So we published a rule on this
last July. We received four comments on it. That's now
sitting--we have respond. We have drafted through responses to
those comments. This is publicly available information.
It's now sitting for review at the Office of Information
and Regulatory Affairs at OMB. So it will come relatively
quickly. I both don't know how quickly, but I also, if I did
know, couldn't tell you specifically how quickly it will come.
But it's in the last steps of review for publication based
on that rule that we received comment on over the course of the
last year.
Mr. Rutherford. And I know some of that was our delay in
the fiscal 2024 budget, getting the money for the grants.
Secretary McDonough. Yes, I think you're being very
generous. I think the delay on this is ours, but we're going to
get this out the door and we're going to get it out with
dispatch and I hope that's very, very soon.
Mr. Rutherford. Thank you. Thank you very much. Last, I
would like to ask very quickly about the PAWS Program versus
the model that is normally run by groups like K9s for Warriors,
which is a great group.
And I know the model is being--are they reporting out the
findings of the beta test?
Secretary McDonough. Yes. Each of the pilot sites is now
active. The next step will be once they have sufficient data
from the five pilot sites to report to us.
I think as you and I have discussed, I think that would be
the moment at which, when we have those reports back, for us to
make some assessments, both the usefulness of those five pilot
sites and then the usefulness of those five pilot sites as
against known high performing facilities like K9s for Warriors,
which I've heard an awful lot about myself.
Mr. Rutherford. So would it be, Mr. Secretary, would it be
possible to do a comparison of the statistical information that
we have gathered at K9s for Warriors once the report comes out
on PAWS?
Secretary McDonough. Yes. Mindful that I want to commit,
like I took statistics, but I wasn't that good at them. So I
want to make sure that I don't commit to something that our
kind of statisticians and our researchers are going to like,
say I've committed heresy on.
But you have my commitment to make sure that we take a look
at this, both the pilot, but then also the pilot as against
other proven performers on that and we'll work with you on
that.
Mr. Rutherford. Thank you very much. I see my time is up. I
yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Carter. Mr. Bishop.
Mr. Bishop. Thank you. Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Carter, Ranking Member Wasserman Schultz, I
appreciate the chance to join you in today's hearing. I want to
express my gratitude to our esteemed witness, Mr. Secretary,
for your service to our veterans and their families.
The budget request before us today represents more than
just a set of numbers and allocations. It reflects our Nation's
commitment to its veterans. It is a statement of our values and
our priorities as a society. And it is a testament to our
unwavering dedication to those who have served.
Mr. Secretary, the GAO Report from July of 2023, showed
differences in the initial claims approval rates between black
and white veterans, with black veterans having the lowest
approval rate at 61 percent.
Given these disparities, it is crucial to understand how
the VA plans to address the racial and ethnic inequalities that
are highlighted in that report. Through the FY 2024-25 budget
request, what steps does VA propose to take in order to
mitigate these disparities and to ensure fair treatment for all
veterans, irrespective of race or ethnicity?
Secretary McDonough. Mr. Bishop, thank you very much for
the question. The first thing we did is we established the
Office of Equity Assurance in the Veterans Benefits
Administration.
The Office of Equity Assurance did an initial study
paralleling--including some of the findings from the GAO, and
they came back with our first two actionable items
One, evidence shows that veterans who apply--who submit a
claim closer to transition, including during transition, are
likelier to have a higher service connection rating.
Secondly, veterans who use Veteran Service Officers to file
those claims will also have a higher service connection rating.
So what we're doing in light of those two findings is we are
increasing our outreach, including through the deployment of
VSOs during TAP classes.
But we're increasing our outreach at VA--sorry, at Army,
all active duty stations across the country during transition,
to ensure that all veterans, black and white and brown, apply
during transition and apply using Veteran Service Officers.
When they do that, the evidence shows that the service
connections are higher.
Mr. Bishop. What about those who have already transitioned,
who are already out, and who now are feeling the residual
impacts of their service?
Secretary McDonough. I think it's a really important
question, and we've bifurcated this question in two ways. One,
we snapped the chalk line at the PACT Act because that's an
actionable thing for us.
Mr. Bishop. And that's been very helpful.
Secretary McDonough. Right. And we say the PACT Act, which,
by the way, when you incorporate the force from Vietnam, plus
the force in all those intervening periods, but also people
like Mr. Gonzalez who served post 9/11, those have to be like,
I'm not a demographer and I'm not an historian, but those have
to be the most diverse forces in the history of the planet, by
gender and by race.
So we're making sure snap line is chalk line forward. We're
saying, let's make sure that we get those people to file claims
early. The chalk line back, what happened prior that right now
is the subject of litigation.
So I'm trying to be really careful about what I say about
that. But that's also something that we're going to have to
come to terms with. And the Office of Equity Assurance will
continue to look at that question too.
So I don't want to tell you it's tough luck. It's not. But
I also want to make sure that you understand that we have
bifurcated this question, which is chalk line back. Let's
figure out what happened and make that right.
Chalk line forward. Let's make sure that we use this tool,
the PACT Act, to make sure that all veterans, including those
veterans of the most diverse forces in the history of the
planet, have access to those benefits and have access to that
care.
Mr. Bishop. Thank you. My time is about expired, so I will
yield back. I did have another question.
Secretary McDonough. Sorry.
Mr. Bishop. That is OK.
Mr. Carter. Mr. Gonzalez.
Mr. Gonzales. Thank you, Chairman. And thank you,
Secretary, for your service to this country.
As you can tell, you know, we had the overall committee
chairman and the ranking here. There's a lot going on, on the
Hill and they were here to grill you, right?
So for a couple reasons, it shows the importance of
veterans to us and also the partnership that I think that this
Committee has worked with you. You know, you and I visited
Audie Murphy Hospital in San Antonio and one of the things that
came up is San Antonio is the fastest growing community for
veterans in the country.
So I am looking at why, let's see here. So, the Audie
Murphy hospital in San Antonio is important. I see some funding
line items in fiscal year 2025 budget to support this. What is
being done to construct a new hospital, a new state of the art
hospital in San Antonio?
Secretary McDonough. Yes. Well, thanks very much. And it's
amazing in San Antonio, the veterans that we have there, the
expansion that we have there.
I will say that, reflective of this challenge we have with
increased access to care, let me just tell you a quick story.
Which is Julie Flim (phonetic) there. The doctor who's a VAMC
director, just made a really tough decision last week, hired
two GI experts. She'd been trying to get them for 3 years.
And mindful of this challenge that Ms. Wasserman Schultz
raised, which is how do we make sure that we have the providers
in house, to make sure that we have the care? She went ahead
and made that decision to hire those two providers because we
have a serious demand in San Antonio.
The other challenge is going to be clinical space. So we
asked for, and you gave us money in FY 2024 to do an assessment
of what the future footprint in San Antonio should look like.
That work is underway, being led by the team in San
Antonio. When that comes back, then we'll make some decisions
about where and how, as against the other requirements in the
country, the other needs in the country, and as against our
major construction list. But San Antonio is near the top of our
needs.
Mr. Gonzales. So when that feasibility study comes back and
shows that 26 percent of, in the next 15 years, San Antonio or
South Texas is only going to grow even more, what is the next
step after that feasibility?
Secretary McDonough. The next step will then be to take
that feasibility study and make some decisions.
Mr. Gonzales. The decision part of it?
Secretary McDonough. Yes.
Mr. Gonzales. Is there a timeframe on that? How about this?
When is a feasibility study supposed to be completed?
Secretary McDonough. Well, I anticipate that during the
course of this fiscal year.
Mr. Gonzales. This fiscal year?
Secretary McDonough. Yes, because it's this fiscal year's
money. So we'll make sure that we're keeping an open line with
you on that.
Mr. Gonzales. OK, excellent. So that is kind of the front
end of a veteran's access after they get out.
Secretary McDonough. Yes.
Mr. Gonzales. I want to talk about the back end. Fort Sam
Houston, the cemetery at Fort Sam Houston is very important to
San Antonio and South Texas.
There is not a community that doesn't have a direct
connection to that. My grandfather is buried there. I will be
buried there. There is a lot of people in San Antonio. This is
a priority for many of us.
I know Henry Cuellar, who also represents a large part of
San Antonio. We always hear about Fort Sam Houston.
Your Under Secretary Quinn, visited there with myself. We
walked through some things. Some of the things that--I am going
to ask a question here.
I am also very interested in is, let's see here, how can we
work together to address improvements for Fort Sam cemetery in
San Antonio?
I want to be specific. Like, some of the improvements are
the gate, the road. We weren't talking about plots. We weren't
talking about some of the heavy lift stuff of purchasing more
land. That is all kind of taken care of there.
It is the fact that Fort Sam has over 5,000 burials a year.
And the gate is the same gate it is been for 50 years. That
same road is trash to drive on. These are some of the things I
am looking at, and I think my colleague, Mr. Cuellar, would
agree that area needs to be updated.
Secretary McDonough. Well, we really appreciate that you've
been in active conversations with Undersecretary Quinn on this.
We do have, currently, because of your observations, we do have
active work going on on the roads in the facility.
I know you and Matt, Undersecretary Quinn have talked about
the gates. I know that there's an upcoming meeting among you
guys to work that through, but you're absolutely right that the
facility is going to need some improvement there. And we want
to work with you on that.
Mr. Gonzales. And I definitely want to work on that area.
We always talk about mental health. We always talk about kind
of the front end of the veteran process, but at the very end,
the cemetery piece of it is just so critical to many people's
closure of it. And that is an area of need. So count me in as a
partner.
I am sure this Committee as well is committed to that. So
thank you again for your service. And Mr. Chairman, I yield
back.
Mr. Carter. Ms. Lee.
Ms. Lee. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to thank the
ranking member as well as you, Mr. Secretary, for being here.
Veterans in southern Nevada and throughout the country
truly deserve the highest level of care. The efforts that the
VA has made to expand and improve services has not gone
unnoticed.
And in southern Nevada, the veterans I meet with echo this
appreciation with the progress that has been made, and
obviously us asking the VA to do more with less resources.
I want to first associate myself with the questions of
Ranking Member DeLauro about in-vitro fertilization. You and I
spoke about it last night or yesterday.
I wanted to ask you just you say that removing the service
connection would increase the cost by twofold. What is the
dollar amount like? Do we know?
Secretary McDonough. Yes. When I said that, I thought to
myself, I better remember the number. And now I can't. But I
can get you the number as soon as we can.
Ms. Lee. Sure. Thanks for that.
Secretary McDonough. I can dig through my book right now,
but it would look awkward.
Ms. Lee. OK. I would appreciate that follow up.
Secretary McDonough. But we're talking about, in the ones
of millions right now. So we're talking about if the number, if
I remember the number, I think we're talking about a couple
hundred million dollars.
Ms. Lee. OK.
Secretary McDonough. But again, let me just make sure that
I come back to you with the specifics on that.
Ms. Lee. OK. Speaking of women veterans, we have seen women
account for 30 percent of the increase of veterans served in
Nevada.
This is sort of a niche issue, with respect to the Southern
Nevada Medical Center, especially women who have been victims
of MST. There is concern--they keep asking me and advocating
for a separate women's clinic.
Again, I understand the cost associated with that, but I
just want to put a bug in your ear that maybe moving the clinic
so that these women can have a separate entrance.
Secretary McDonough. Yes.
Ms. Lee. Right now they are getting mixed in with the
general population, and most importantly, they need to have a
safe place to receive care.
Secretary McDonough. I will take that for action. It's
absolutely best practice. So I'll make sure that we're doing
their best.
Ms. Lee. Thank you. Yes. Right now it is on the third
floor. They got to go through the whole clinic.
Ms. Wasserman Schultz. Would gentlewoman yield for a
second?
Ms. Lee. Yes.
Ms. Wasserman Schultz. I just want to also add that that is
not the case. That is the case in many, sadly----
Secretary McDonough. Yes. So we're working this.
Ms. Wasserman Schultz. It is really important that women
have separate care in separate centers.
Secretary McDonough. Agreed. Agreed.
Ms. Wasserman Schultz. Thank you.
Ms. Lee. One issue I have also been following is the VA's
plan changes to emergency transport reimbursement rates. And I
agree with the need to reevaluate these. But I am also
concerned that with the new proposal, the reduction will cut
too deep, most importantly impacting veterans in rural areas
who may find themselves without life-saving transportation
options.
I was glad to see the VA's recent contracting proposal,
which allows the contracted rate between a VA initiated
transport to and from a VA facility. But I hear that only makes
up a small percentage of transport total transports.
Can you fill us in on what the VA is doing to deal with
this solution and the rest of the need?
Secretary McDonough. Yes, I really appreciate the question.
I've had this ongoing conversation with the Chairman as well,
and I think I'm OK to say this, Mr. Chairman, but he and I
talked last Friday, and I think it makes sense for me to sit
down with the Chairman and with some of the leaders of that
industry to make sure that we understand from the national
level what those particular challenges are.
My hope continues to be that this will be able to be
resolved at the market level, at the facility level, where
they're going to have much greater granularity and
understanding of the individual market, including costs.
And I'd like to get away from a system where we're paying
basically by bill on that, which is not in the veterans best
interest, not in the taxpayers best interest.
But I think I'm looking forward to that conversation. I
appreciate the Chairman offering his good offices on that, and
I appreciate all of you keeping us focused on that.
Ms. Lee. Thanks. And before I end, one real quick question
about this new ruling on realtors.
Secretary McDonough. Yes.
Ms. Lee. And knowing that the VA has a rule prohibiting
payments for fees and commissions, can you share what the VA is
doing to determine the implication on veteran borrowers and
what changes might be required?
Secretary McDonough. Yes, thanks very much. We're working
with DOJ and with the industry to make sure that no veteran
using VA Home Loan Program is disadvantaged or overcharged for
real estate broker commissions.
We don't believe new legislation is necessary here. While
the rulemaking process can be quite lengthy, we believe we
actually have an option to expedite changes in areas where it's
necessary.
And we hope that we'll be in a position to move soon on
that. And we'll work with you guys, obviously before we move.
So you're not surprised by that.
So as we consider revisions of policy in light of the
market developments, we're working through the types of
guardrails that can help veterans remain competitive in the
home buying process without jeopardizing their financial
wellbeing.
So we think we've got important tools here embedded in the
existing statutory basis for that program, and we'll be in a
position to move quickly on that. We're working closely with
Department of Justice and with other industry leaders. I'll
make sure following up on your question about the VA real
estate, the veteran real estate agents that were staying in
close touch with them as well.
Ms. Lee. Great. Thank you. I'm over my time.
Mr. Carter. Mr. Franklin.
Mr. Franklin. Thank you Mr. Chairman.
Thank you Secretary McDonough, appreciate your time here
with us today.
Secretary McDonough. And nice to see you, sir.
Mr. Franklin. As one who represents a lot of veterans, as
we all do in all of our districts, but also as a veteran, there
is probably nothing in the portfolio stuff I work on that
matters more to me.
So thank you again for being here. I want to talk a little
bit more about PACT and we discussed that it is the largest
expansion of VA benefits probably in history, I think.
Is it roughly a million claims or so that have been----
Secretary McDonough. Yes. 1.3.
Mr. Franklin. 1.3 and growing. I noticed on your website, I
think it says right now it is roughly taking 160 days to
process or process those through to completion. Where is that
in relation to your target? Where are you on progress in that
and what is the ultimate goal?
Secretary McDonough. Yes, thanks very much. There's two
ways to measure this. First is, where we are right now is I
think we're at--I want to say we're at about 900,000 claims in
the inventory.
And of the inventory, about 330,000 are considered
backlogged. So that means they're over 125 days. Remember that
any individual claim will have multiple contentions, so it will
not be considered completed until every contention is resolved,
even if, let's say there's five contentions, and we resolve
three, and are even beginning to pay benefits based on those
three, we will not consider it closed until all five are
closed.
Right now, current course and speed, we believe that we
will be down to a backlog of about 50,000 by December 2025.
Mr. Franklin. OK.
Secretary McDonough. That's one way to look at it. The
other way to look at it is average days to completion, which is
the number you used. Right now, we're about 17 days faster than
last year.
Mr. Franklin. OK.
Secretary McDonough. So we want to keep bringing that
number down. Lastly, we also just don't do a great job of
staying in touch with a veteran such that the veteran, even if
it's going to be longer number of days, the veteran just needs
to know that we haven't forgotten.
Mr. Franklin. Well, and I appreciated you sharing the
anecdotal stories upfront, and those are great. And I would say
overall, VA does tremendous work the vast majority of the time,
but like an air traffic controller, you know, 99.99 percent of
the time is good enough.
And, you know, unfortunately, I do have a data point to
share with you, and I know this isn't necessarily
representative of the system, but if it's you, it matters.
And as I've heard before, I don't know if it's true. It
takes twelve positive touches to overcome one negative. I don't
know if that's the right number or not, but what I do know is
veterans talk a lot, probably more than any other group out
there.
But I have a constituent had, sadly, Mr. James Conine, who
made an initial filing of a PACT claim on July 11, 2023. He had
been diagnosed with a terminal condition at that time was
receiving private care.
Unfortunately, 260 days went by without getting his first
appointment. He was finally granted an appointment and
unfortunately was not able to make that and died 2 days later.
So somewhere between the 160 day average and 260 in this
gentleman's case, to have not received even an appointment,
that is my understanding. And I could be--that might not be
accurate, but that's how it has been explained to our office.
But I am just trying to understand when you have chosen to
accelerate the rollout timeline and compressing your timeline
from nine years to one, do you have the adequate staffing to
take care of these veterans and make sure, assuming that this
information is accurate, this kind of thing doesn't happen?
Secretary McDonough. First of all, there's no justification
for Mr. Conine's the situation that he's experienced or that
his survivor and his family members are experiencing.
That's first. Second, you know, we've grown the VBA
workforce by about 25 percent going back to September 2021, to
be ready for this significant uptick in claims, and there's two
challenges to that.
One is to be ready for it and to make sure that we bring it
down faster. And I think we are doing that as against our
assessments. But again, I don't want the assessments or our
planning to overshadow what is an absolutely unacceptable
outcome for Mr. Conine.
But the other challenge is we don't want to have a big
workforce that doesn't have work to do on the other side of
that big hump of work. So we're working that through very
aggressively and that's why the budget envisions an end
strength at the end of 2025 that's reduced for VBA because we
will have been through the lion's share of those claims by
then.
So again, no acceptable, there's no acceptable
justification for what happened to Mr. Conine, although I'd
like to work with you in your office to make sure that we're in
touch with his family.
Secondly, we have been getting ready for this and which is
why we felt good in the decision to compress because it's not
like the conditions that Mr. Conine has or any of the other 1.3
million vets who have filed claims went away.
Those conditions didn't happen or not happen because of the
PACT Act. Those happened and we got to make sure that and what
you guys are saying in the law and what we are really happy to
do is let's make sure we're addressing those with dispatch,
obviously, and in a high quality manner.
Mr. Franklin. Very good. Thank you Mr. Secretary and,
Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Carter. Mr. Cuellar.
Mr. Cuellar. Mr. Chairman, thank you so much. And Ranking
Member also. Secretary, sorry about being late. We have, I
think we had three committee meetings and I was stuck in
Homeland. I think we know that.
First of all, thank you for what you and your men and women
do for the veterans. As you, I think when we spoke earlier, we
were talking about that, I think Tony Gonzalez and myself
represent the fastest growing area, the fastest growing State
when it comes to veterans.
I know the Waco office and I work more with the San Antonio
office. I appreciate the work that you all have done to hire
more people and move some of those claims faster.
Also, I want to associate myself with Representative
Gonzalez on the feasibility study on that and look forward to
working with you all. And also the Fort Sam situation.
I don't think it takes a lot of money. It's a gate, the
roads, and whatever you said, quote, we want to work with this,
with you. Also, let us know what we need to do to help you on
that.
Secretary McDonough. You can bank on it.
Mr. Cuellar. And then finally, the last thing I certainly,
I think you been to San Antonio. I'm sorry I missed you at that
time. But if you ever go down the border, let me know. I
certainly want to invite you there, because the border area,
Laredo, Corpus, the valley, used to be part of the San Antonio.
Secretary McDonough. Yes.
Mr. Cuellar. And it was very hard for us to go travel, the
veterans go up there. Once we establish our own area there,
things got a lot better. And I would ask you, let me know who I
need to talk to about getting the status of the south Texas
border area.
I represent the San Antonio area, but I still represent the
border area. I would like to follow up on some of, see where we
are on the services. Again, we have gone a long way. We have
established clinics in Laredo and McAllen, hired a lot of
folks.
We are doing a lot of the work with the private sector.
Things have gotten a lot better. But I just want to see where
are we? A snapshot of what we are with the border area on that.
Secretary McDonough. Yes. So I did visit the McAllen
(inaudible) facility. I think it's a beautiful facility, but
it's like many of our facilities. Once it's built, it's
already, or at least it's already too small.
We're experiencing that in Portland, actually, as well. So
I think the best way to plug into this is under the MISSION Act
we had something called the Air Commission.
The Air Commission was a process by which we had look at
market by market across the country. What does veteran demand
look like? What do we expect from that veteran demand over the
next ten years? And then what is the capacity in each market?
The last assessment we published in March 2023, along with
an infrastructure plan that did not end up going anywhere. The
underlying assessments, though, and we're doing the second
assessment now, the underlying assessment of that process, will
help us inform us on decisions like the one Mr. Rutherford
asked, like the one that you and Mr. Gonzalez are asking about,
which is, where are the new hospitals? Where do we need new
hospitals?
Importantly, the big part of the assessment this time
around, which, frankly, we did not do a good enough job last
time around, is not only asking what is the infrastructure
capability in each of your markets, but what is the staffing
look like in each of those markets, because there's actually
facilities that are not appropriately staffed, as far as the
private sector is concerned, which is why we're also using this
process to dramatically deepen our cooperation with the
Department of Defense, where we're putting VA personnel into
VA--sorry. We're putting VA personnel into DoD facilities,
where our people then see active-duty, family members, and
veterans at no extra cost to American taxpayers.
Mr. Cuellar. Yes, and I certainly want to follow up on that
because, you know, the narrative sometimes by my colleagues is
that the border is a very dangerous thing. But if you look at
FBI stats, you will see that the crime rate is lower at the
border than other places.
And the reason I say that is because I have talked to some
of the VA facilities, and they say it is hard to bring doctors
because they are afraid of the border.
So I certainly want to follow up on the staffing and how we
can do that. Finally, my time is almost up, but Fort Sam is
very important.
I know the valley has a cemetery over there, but then you
have areas like Laredo that is isolated. I know that the
Chairman and I had worked on public/private partnerships on
CBP.
Love to look at public/private partnerships on cemeteries
where there are entities that are willing to work with you all.
I don't know what sort of authorization, but you got areas like
Laredo and other places that the valley is too far. San Antonio
is too far, 150 miles. I would love to work with creative
ideas.
Secretary McDonough. I would love to put you in touch with
Under Secretary Quinn, because we have some existing
programming there that I think could be helpful.
Mr. Cuellar. Thank you. And again, thank you to your men
and women.
Secretary McDonough. Thank you.
Mr. Cuellar. Go Hoya Saxa.
Secretary McDonough. Hoya Saxa.
Mr. Carter. Mrs. Brice.
Mrs. Brice. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and Secretary. It's
great to see you again.
Secretary McDonough. Nice to see you.
Mrs. Brice. First, let me say thank you for your
organization and helping expedite the reopening of the Shawnee
VA clinic that was destroyed in a tornado last year.
It is up and running, and I know that it was a priority for
Director Vlasic to make sure that it was functional again.
Again, let me start by asking you about how the VA is
addressing healthcare in rural areas. What specific measures
are you implementing to improve access for veterans in these
areas?
Secretary McDonough. Yes. Thanks. We have our Office of
Rural Health. You see, it's basically been flat funded the last
couple of years, because what that does is it develops, grows,
and then deploys innovative new care options for rural
facilities.
It also funds our five national centers for Rural Health
Innovation. They also develop new policy options to deploy. So
that's where a lot of our telehealth options, our home-based
primary care options were developed in those settings.
So that's the first thing we do is we have concerted effort
on developing new strategies and new capabilities and new
technologies to deploy to our rural friends.
Mrs. Brice. Very supportive of telehealth strategy that you
are using. So thank you for that.
Secretary McDonough. Yes. The second thing we do is we are
using outpatient-based structure, building new and leasing new
clinics, including in rural areas.
What we're doing increasingly is using those as areas where
we can forward deploy specialty care. A perfect example is a
veteran who is going to get infusion, be that for rheumatoid
arthritis or for cancer treatment.
He should not have to drive only to Oklahoma City to get
that care. Or increasingly, those infusion centers, even if
they're private sector, are also in Oklahoma City.
So what we do is we take the infusion pharmaceutical and
the professional, deploy them, the clinician to the community
based outpatient clinics in a program called Closer to Me,
meaning the veteran gets the care closer to him. OK, so those
are some examples.
Mrs. Brice. Great. Thank you for that.
It has been brought to my attention that when someone goes
to a private ER, one of the intake questions at the hospital is
whether the patient is a veteran. And if the answer is yes, the
hospital is charging the VA regardless of whether or not the
person has medical insurance.
To what extent are you aware that this is actually
occurring? And, you know, what do you think the options would
be for potentially addressing this?
Secretary McDonough. That's a really good question. One of
the rules, in terms of access, for community care is that we
have a limited--we have a number, but it's a limited number, a
number of potential visits to an emergency department that is
covered by VA and by community care.
There's a challenge there, and one of the things we're
doing about that--well, so the challenge is what is emergency?
But more importantly, oftentimes the major costs and,
potentially, not best care is the veteran then being taken into
inpatient care, right?
And so if you look at the top ten lists of community care
investments for VA, emergency department care by an order of
magnitude is number one. So what are we doing about that?
I think there's two things that are worth highlighting.
One, we are deploying now, it's only been tested in 25,000
cases, but we're calling it tele-emergency care. 25,000 cases,
10,000 last year, 15,000 so far this year.
In the, in the majority of cases, we resolved the veterans
issue within 30 minutes.
Mrs. Brice. So what's a percentage of those 25,000 cases
that you were able to resolve?
Secretary McDonough. I don't have--the numbers in my book.
I can't remember it right now, so I'll get you that number
after the hearing.
Mrs. Brice. OK.
Secretary McDonough. The last thing I want to say is you
all passed a No Surprises Rule for Medicaid and Medicare
emergency department appearances.
We do experience where veterans come in, they're told
they're going to be covered. The veteran doesn't know that this
is not authorized by VA. The provider then provides the care
and then bills VA, but we say this wasn't a referred care, in
which case they bill the veteran. We thing that's not right.
In the majority of cases, we can get that worked out with
the hospital, but I think this is one of those issues, as we
think about the durability of the system over time, I think
this bears looking at the way you all looked at this No
Surprises Rule for Medicare and Medicare.
Mrs. Brice. I think it is important for us to recognize
that there are cases where private hospitals are actually using
VA benefits as a first stop rather than private insurance.
Secretary McDonough. I'd agree with that.
Mrs. Brice. And because of that, we are actually putting a
strain on the benefit cost to the VA. And so I definitely think
it is something that we should look into to see what the
prevalence of this is and how we can try to address it long
term to bring down costs.
So with that, Mr. Chairman, I yield.
Secretary McDonough. Thank you.
Mr. Carter. Ms. Pingree.
Ms. Pingree. Thank you very much, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Secretary, thanks for being with us today.
Secretary McDonough. Nice to see you.
Ms. Pingree. Nice to see you. Thank you for your visit to
Maine. I know that was really a great visit, and we appreciate
it all the time you gave to our State.
So first I want to talk a little bit about military sexual
trauma. In March, the Disabled American Veterans released their
2024 Women Veterans report. The report highlighted a 24 percent
increase in suicide rates among women veterans between '20 and
'21, 2020 and 2021. That is four times higher than their male
counterparts during that time.
Another striking finding was that firearms were used in
over 50 percent of women's veterans suicides. The veteran's
community has struggled with suicide and mental health for
years, and while I applaud how far the VA has come with mental
health and suicide prevention, I am seriously concerned about
the impact of military sexual trauma that it has on our women
veterans.
One in three women veterans enrolled in the VA report
experiencing MST, which is a leading cause of suicide in women.
Based on the DAV's report, it's clear that the VA is still
struggling to process MST claims and to properly screen women
veterans for MST.
How does this budget address MST and the survivor's mental
health issues?
Secretary McDonough. Yes, thanks very much. We've increased
investment in--we've sharpened the training for claims
processors who only work MST claims. They are now aggregated in
one regional--well, it's coming. It will be aggregated down to
one regional office.
So we're developing expertise and making sure that
expertise is deployed only against MST claims. You know,
because sometimes it's the absence of evidence that is the most
powerful indicator that MST occurred.
An unplanned, unannounced, unexplained--one example is
unplanned, unannounced, unexplained transfer to the Republic of
Korea for a young woman soldier, which happened to coincide
with what she was telling the claims processor, was the moment
of MST.
So that kind of expertise, working only MST claims, is
important. That has had an impact.
Over the course of 2023, 61 percent of cases of MST claims
were awarded in the interests of the veteran. Now, that's still
low, but it's up from 41 percent. So we have to make extra
effort on that.
In particular, what we do in this budget is that the
overtime available for VBA is, in the first instance, going to
be dedicated to those MST specific claims raters. So we're
going to not only have their expertise, but we'll have their
expertise deployed more aggressively, meaning for more hours,
because even though the number 61 percent is better, it's still
taking too long to Mr. Franklin's question. And quality has
suffered during this same period. So we've got work to do.
Ms. Pingree. Well, thank you for your attention to that,
and really thank you for trying to look into the root causes
of, you know, whether it is the training expertise of the
investigators, but certainly I appreciate your working to get
those numbers where they should be.
So we will continue to follow that with you. One other
thing I wanted to bring up is the Maine veterans' homes.
Veterans housing is a big problem across the country. Maine is
no exception to that, and veterans' homes are in serious need
of funding for more healthcare staff, infrastructure costs, and
expenses associated with complex medical conditions for the
veterans living in the homes.
VA's reimbursement rates are not keeping pace with overall
cost of care. And I am concerned that this isn't getting the
attention that it deserves or the funding that is needed to fix
the problem.
Does the VA have a plan to increase assistance with
veterans' homes as the cost of care outpaces your rates? Are
any plans or capacity to do a rate study also to reflect labor
increases and other changes that have been experienced?
Secretary McDonough. So this does have my attention, both
because you raised it. It came up when we were together in
Maine, and it's come up from other of our State leaders,
including the Association of State Run Veteran Facilities.
There's two big challenges. One is that veterans who are in
State run facilities have, as your question suggests, more
complicated, more complex healthcare situations.
Meaning the staff of those facilities have to have those
expertise that drives up costs. The second is the medicines
that those veterans are on are also quite expensive and the
states assume the care for those veterans, including the
pharmaceutical backbone of that care.
So we are in active discussion with the states on both of
these questions. I told you, I just find out if we have a
specific rate study. I have not yet found that out, but we are
on top of this.
Our partner, you know, no veteran thinks that they're going
to the State VA or the Federal VA. They just think they're
going to the VA to be taken care of. We just have to make sure
that we operate consistent with what those veterans'
expectations are. This is a good example of what we have to
make sure we're staying on top of.
Ms. Pingree. Thank you very much.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Carter. Mr. Zinke.
Mr. Zinke. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Good to see you again,
Mr. Secretary.
One of my favorite, and I am sure yours is too, is the
ambulance, air ambulance. Thank you for delaying the rule.
Secretary McDonough. Yes.
Mr. Zinke. That was good. But when you said you would work
with us, I assume that meant, I hold you to your word, there's
still work to be done. Because for the benefit of everyone, air
ambulances, you know, when Montana, I keep reminding people
Montana is the same size as Washington, D.C. to Chicago plus 45
miles. So pretty big out there.
And when you are in the middle of nowhere and you get an
auto accident and need ambulance, that ambulance generally is
life flight. And there is uncertainty in the life flight area
about they can't invest until the rule is in place and the rule
works.
So again, do I have your commitment to work with, and if I
could, a commitment to have a meeting with the next 30 days
with the staff so we can kind of work this thing out?
Mr. Carter. Would you yield for just a moment?
Mr. Zinke. Yes, sir.
Mr. Carter. We are working with, with the VA. I will
include you at the meeting.
Mr. Zinke. That would be outstanding on that.
Secretary McDonough. Yes.
Mr. Zinke. It's a big issue in my----
Secretary McDonough. Yes, you've been clear about this. I
got it. You've got my commitment. I've given the same
commitment to the Chairman and the Ms. Lee, and I get it. It's
important. We'll stay on top of this. I owe it to you guys, and
we owe it to the vets.
Mr. Zinke. Thanks. And then secondly, is we've had a
conversation about the Montana hospital. It has gone through
several layers of leadership over about as many years, and
sometimes a director, you know, pulling it from Jobs USA, it
may not deliver the best solutions.
My solution, quite frankly, is you have Major General Quinn
is working with you. I think you have the authority or deputy
to transfer him, at least temporary there, because Montana is
sitting out there with a VA hospital. While he is not a
professional in hospitals, he is professional in National
Guard.
And certainly he is at a point of position and he has a
leadership background. So if you would take a second look at
that and see if that is a possibility, and certainly you will
have my support because we need leadership out there. We have
had a series of years and stuff like that.
Secretary McDonough. You and I have had this, a version of
this conversation. I'm having that conversation with Matt.
Mr. Zinke. And lastly, really quickly, you have been now in
the office for a while. I always looked at the VA as I am not
sure it is fixable without reorganization.
So now, if you had your chance of being in there a year and
looking at the ever expanding role of VA, never seems to be
enough money. You have 52 different unions. How would you
approach to look at it? Would you reorganize? What is your--
looking at it, your appraisal of where to go?
I know it is a big question in a short amount of time, but
do you agree that we should reorganize and what steps would you
take?
Secretary McDonough. Look, I think. I think the two most
important concepts are veteran centered decision making and
expertise driving decision making. And we have the tools in
place to do both, meaning the veteran signal, right? We're
putting out new data today about what the trust score says.
The trust score is a really important thing because it's
actual intel. It's statistically important because between 13
and 14 percent vets accept the survey. That gives us hotspots
and gives us indications of what's happening.
So when you have that intel, that means you know what's
happening. Secondly, as it relates to the delivery of care.
Secondly, we have to make sure that it's experts, not
bureaucrats like me, but experts making decisions about care.
This is why docs want to come work with us is they don't
like running their ideas through the accountants at Blue Cross
Blue Shield. They want to just provide for the care.
So we have that too with this higher liability
organization, HRO. This is something that I had nothing to do
with. This is Dr. Stone going back 5, 6 years, starting this
process.
That process says to providers, healthcare providers,
you're at the point closest to care, we accept your decisions,
feel empowered to make those decisions, and we're going to hold
you accountable.
Lastly, what do we expect in return? Free flow of
information. We've not always had that in Montana. We've not
always had that in other facilities too here.
So that's the trade. Good intel about what the veterans
experience, experts making decisions, and, in exchange for all
this, people are very honest about where they make mistakes.
So that we come before you guys and we're giving you
realistic information, right, including cost for care and
things like that. Those things are all there. And so I have
almost nothing to do with any of those except this thing where
I say, look, my job is to help you manage risk.
The best way for me to manage risk is you guys to be honest
with me and to share when you encounter problems. And I'll do
the same with them, right? Teams are really good, retention's
up. We're hiring people, still too slow, but they want to come
work for us.
And veteran satisfaction is up. Not perfect by any means. I
think those are the indications of a place that's working
really well, you know, and can work better. No doubt about it.
We just heard Mr. Franklin's story. That just really pisses
me off that that veteran died before we got to him. That's
absolutely unacceptable. So it's not perfect by any means, but
it's a good, solid organization.
Mr. Zinke. I appreciate your service.
Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Carter. Thank you. And we are going to do a brief
second round because we are down to a short crowd here.
Secretary McDonough. OK.
Mr. Carter. But I will start off with how much is the
medical community care grown over the last year? And veterans
have a unique healthcare need and community healthcare can be a
lifesaving for many of them. Will you elaborate on
Administration's view on community healthcare?
Secretary McDonough. Yes. Thank you very much, Chairman.
Since I've been in the job, the community care has grown at
a rate of about 15 percent to 17 percent a year. We put in the
budget a target for next year for FY 2025, 15 percent. I forget
if it's 15 or 13 percent growth.
So our goal is that, not that we fully restrict it, but
that we restrain the growth. Right now, over the course of this
year so far, you know, I think at the end of last year, I think
as we've briefed your staff, we saw a significant second half
of FY 2023, we saw a significant increase in community care.
In some cases above that annualized mean of about 15 to 17
percent. And during the course of the early part of this year,
FY 2024, it's remained high in some places and reduced in other
places.
So we're at kind of a very steady increase. I say it's
variable, but that's generous. It's variable in one direction,
and that's up.
So I think that invites a series of important questions,
including what is the quality of the care in there? Well, how
good a partner are we to the providers in the community? Are we
paying on time? Are we getting records back from them on time?
Are we giving them a bunch of red tape?
I increasingly meet with providers when I travel to hear
about their experience of working with us, right? Because, you
know, I hear a lot from our people about their working with
them. So I want to hear the other side of the story.
What is our view about community care? Our view is that
community care is and always has been a critical part of VA
care. And the provision of care to our veterans, by virtue of
the MISSION Act, has this time basis on it, including drive
time.
I think those expectations from veterans are good, right?
Because it disciplines us. Some of them, though, like 70
percent of VISN 7 being qualified for referral in the first
instance based on drive time alone.
We know that rural care in Alabama, Mississippi, Georgia is
not, let's call prevalent. So we ought to make sure that we're
not just pushing them into the community and then making it
their problem to get the care somewhere else.
But it's a critical part of the care. It should be time
bound. But we ought to lose sight of the fact that, that
veterans who are in our care do better.
The reason they do better is we can coordinate the care.
And the more a veteran is being referred to the community, the
harder it is for us to coordinate the care.
And so our commitment to the veteran is to provide best
possible healthcare, best possible outcomes. I want us, as an
organization, to be focused on that. And when we do that, we'll
be making a case to each veteran that we want them in our care
and we'll fight for them in our care and we'll compete for them
in our care.
And when we do that, I like our options.
Mr. Carter. Thank you.
Ms. Wasserman Schultz.
Ms. Wasserman Schultz. Thank you. I have just two
additional questions, Mr. Secretary.
I want to focus on childcare centers at the drop off
centers at the VA.
Secretary McDonough. Yes.
Ms. Wasserman Schultz. So efforts are underway now to
establish 10 onsite drop-in childcare centers in 2024 and
followed by 20 additional sites in 2025. The budget requests
$18.6 million to fund the Veteran Child Care Assistance
Program.
And I am incredibly supportive of that program, especially
because you have a 58 percent no-show or cancellation rate of
VA appointments for veterans with children due to a lack of
childcare.
And so it is obviously a huge obstacle to them getting
care, but this program should not be funded out of the women's
healthcare budget.
Secretary McDonough. I agree with that.
Ms. Wasserman Schultz. It is not a component of women's
healthcare, and there are male veterans who have children too,
and who avail themselves of its services.
So what is your plan, in light of your agreement that it
shouldn't be funded out of women's healthcare budget to move it
out of it?
Secretary McDonough. Yes. So first of all, the plan for the
program, for the administration of the program is a two-pronged
plan.
One is that we reimburse a veteran if they get care to
cover the appointment and or we have, as you say, drop-off
facilities, drop-off arrangements at the facility.
The two facilities closest to ready there are Fresno and
Shreveport, and those are for drop at the facility care. I've
told you and I've also told my team that I don't think it's not
a good--it just doesn't make sense to fund this out of women's
healthcare.
And so we'll keep working on that. We'll have another
budget submission, and I hope that we've changed that because
it doesn't make sense. And so my commitment to you is to keep
working on it. I don't have a specific plan other than to
change the budget submission.
Ms. Wasserman Schultz. But the current budget submission
has it still within women's health care.
Secretary McDonough. It does.
Ms. Wasserman Schultz. And is it possible that we can move
it out in this fiscal year?
Secretary McDonough. I think so. It's just been a question
of kind of pay for and how we account for the financing in each
of those places. But, yeah, I'd be more than happy to work with
you on that.
Ms. Wasserman Schultz. OK, great. Thank you.
And then I want to just go back to the subject of the third
category. So I have been supportive of the request for the
third budget category for VA medical care.
As I mentioned in my opening remarks, I have been saying
since the passage of the MISSION Act that health care costs
were going to grow too quickly to account for them within the
non-defense discretionary top lines.
Can you walk us through--well, there are only two of us
here, but at least it is for the record how the third budget
category for VA medical care would better protect veterans
compared to maintaining this funding within the non-defense
discretionary category?
Secretary McDonough. Yes. So, I mean, especially when
you're operating as we are now under the cap of the budget
agreement, and it's very generous to us. I'm not complaining.
But part of why you see the decisions that we've made
inside the budget, including a reduction of 10,000 full-time
equivalents by the end of 2025 at the Veterans Health
Administration, is a reflection of my belief that prudence
leads one to conclude that we're going to be operating in a
capped situation for some time and we ought to be in a position
to, as I say, prudently manage to that outcome.
So the idea behind the third budget category is that we
recognize that the care afforded veterans in the health care
account, the medical care account, is going to be subject, as
many of the other mandatory investments are, to health care
inflation, and routinely that health care inflation is above
inflation in the rest of the budget.
So as a result, you throw investment priorities that are
growing at different rates into the same basket, and especially
when that basket is capped, creates an entire zero-sum game.
And ultimately, that's not in the veteran's best interest
in our judgment. And that's why for the second year in a row
here we're or maybe the third year in a row, we've submitted a
proposal that seeks to create that third budget category.
Ms. Wasserman Schultz. Yes.
Mr. Chairman, I mean, forcing a robbing of Peter to pay
Paul, and on top of that, adding a capped situation really
squeezes VA on the decisions that they can make, the kinds of
investments that they can make.
You add, you know, you've got community care pressure, PACT
Act pressure. I mean, we shouldn't be, I am of the view that we
shouldn't be structuring the way we allocate funds in the same
way just because that is the way we have always done it.
And so as we have made dramatic, significant, important
changes to help improve the quality of care that we provide for
veterans, we have to make sure that we are not undercutting
ourselves in that effort and losing the ability to improve
their care and the service we provide to them as much as we
could have.
So I really hope we can seriously consider and that we can
talk about the efficacy and reasonability of the proposal to
create the third budget category.
Mr. Carter. I want to go over to the (inaudible).
Ms. Wasserman Schultz. That is what creating a third budget
category does. Because, as we said when we first started
debating the MISSION Act and it's playing out.
You know, our discretionary funds that are allocated to
this Committee get chewed up by the whole rest of the--all the
rest of the competing interests outside of MILCON VA.
And then within MILCON VA, there are competing interests
for the non-discretionary funding. So I mean, eventually the
consequences are that you could end up having more and more
moves toward privatization, more restrictions on the ability of
the VA to fully serve the veterans and meet the commitments
that they have made. And I just think this is an item worthy of
substantive discussion.
Mr. Carter. We will have a discussion on that.
Ms. Wasserman Schultz. I look forward to it.
I yield back. Thank you.
Mr. Carter. Thank you very much for being here.
Secretary McDonough. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Carter. We will get together all that ambulance thing.
Secretary McDonough. Yep.
Mr. Carter. We are talking about it, we will get notice out
and I will include the two that asked questions here. Ms.
Wasserman Schultz, of course I will include her if she wants to
be there.
Secretary McDonough. Good. Great. I appreciate it very
much.
Mr. Carter. And we'll have a conversation and try to come
up with some solutions.
Secretary McDonough. I look forward to it.
Mr. Carter. OK?
Secretary McDonough. Excellent.
Mr. Carter. OK. Thank you. I appreciate your cooperation.
Secretary McDonough. Right back at you. Thank you very
much, Chairman.
Mr. Carter. Thank you.
Secretary McDonough. Thank you, Ms. Wasserman Schultz.
Ms. Wasserman Schultz. Thank you very much.

[Answers to submitted questions follow:]

GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT
