- THE FISCAL YEAR 2024 DEPARTMENT OF ENERGY BUDGET

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

THE FISCAL YEAR 2024 DEPARTMENT OF ENERGY BUDGET

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON ENERGY, CLIMATE, AND GRID SECURITY

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION
__________

MAY 11, 2023
__________

Serial No. 118-36

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Published for the use of the Committee on Energy and Commerce

govinfo.gov/committee/house-energy
energycommerce.house.gov
__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

56-005 PDF                 WASHINGTON : 2024

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE

CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington
Chair
MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas            FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey
ROBERT E. LATTA, Ohio                  Ranking Member
BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky              ANNA G. ESHOO, California
H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia         DIANA DeGETTE, Colorado
GUS M. BILIRAKIS, Florida            JAN SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois
BILL JOHNSON, Ohio                   DORIS O. MATSUI, California
LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana               KATHY CASTOR, Florida
RICHARD HUDSON, North Carolina       JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland
TIM WALBERG, Michigan                PAUL TONKO, New York
EARL L. ``BUDDY'' CARTER, Georgia    YVETTE D. CLARKE, New York
JEFF DUNCAN, South Carolina          TONY CARDENAS, California
GARY J. PALMER, Alabama              RAUL RUIZ, California
NEAL P. DUNN, Florida                SCOTT H. PETERS, California
JOHN R. CURTIS, Utah                 DEBBIE DINGELL, Michigan
DEBBBIE LESKO, Arizona               MARC A. VEASEY, Texas
GREG PENCE, Indiana                  ANN M. KUSTER, New Hampshire
DAN CRENSHAW, Texas                  ROBIN L. KELLY, Illinois
JOHN JOYCE, Pennsylvania             NANETTE DIAZ BARRAGAN, California
KELLY ARMSTRONG, North Dakota, Vice  LISA BLUNT ROCHESTER, Delaware
Chair                            DARREN SOTO, Florida
RANDY K. WEBER, Sr., Texas           ANGIE CRAIG, Minnesota
RICK W. ALLEN, Georgia               KIM SCHRIER, Washington
TROY BALDERSON, Ohio                 LORI TRAHAN, Massachusetts
RUSS FULCHER, Idaho                  LIZZIE FLETCHER, Texas
AUGUST PFLUGER, Texas
DIANA HARSHBARGER, Tennessee
MARIANNETTE MILLER-MEEKS, Iowa
KAT CAMMACK, Florida
JAY OBERNOLTE, California
------

Professional Staff

NATE HODSON, Staff Director
SARAH BURKE, Deputy Staff Director
TIFFANY GUARASCIO, Minority Staff Director
Subcommittee on Energy, Climate, and Grid Security

JEFF DUNCAN, South Carolina
Chairman
MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas            DIANA DeGETTE, Colorado
ROBERT E. LATTA, Ohio                  Ranking Member
BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky              SCOTT H. PETERS, California
H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia         LIZZIE FLETCHER, Texas
BILL JOHNSON, Ohio                   DORIS O. MATSUI, California
LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana               PAUL TONKO, New York
TIM WALBERG, Michigan                MARC A. VEASEY, Texas
GARY J. PALMER, Alabama              ANN M. KUSTER, New Hampshire
JOHN R. CURTIS, Utah, Vice Chair     KIM SCHRIER, Washington
DEBBIE LESKO, Arizona                KATHY CASTOR, Florida
GREG PENCE, Indiana                  JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland
KELLY ARMSTRONG, North Dakota        TONY CARDENAS, California
RANDY K. WEBER, Sr., Texas           LISA BLUNT ROCHESTER, Delaware
TROY BALDERSON, Ohio                 FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey (ex
AUGUST PFLUGER, Texas                    officio)
CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington
(ex officio)
C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hon. Jeff Duncan, a Representative in Congress from the State of
South Carolina, opening statement..............................     2
Prepared statement...........................................     4
Hon. Diana DeGette, a Representative in Congress from the State
of Colorado, opening statement.................................     7
Prepared statement...........................................     9
Hon. Cathy McMorris Rodgers, a Representative in Congress from
the State of Washington, opening statement.....................    11
Prepared statement...........................................    13
Hon. Frank Pallone, Jr., a Representative in Congress from the
State of New Jersey, opening statement.........................    16
Prepared statement...........................................    18

Witness

Jennifer M. Granholm, Secretary, Department of Energy............    20
Prepared statement...........................................    22
Answers to submitted questions...............................   129

Submitted Material

Inclusion of the following was approved by unanimous consent.
List of documents submitted for the record.......................    91
Article of May 10, 2023, ``The West Needs Russia to Power Its
Nuclear Comeback,'' by Jennifer Hiller, et al., Wall Street
Journal........................................................    92
Letter of March 17, 2023, from Jennifer M. Granholm, Secretary,
Department of Energy, to Hon. Rosa L. DeLauro, Ranking Member,
House Committee on Appropriations..............................    99
Article of May 11, 2023, ``EV Startups Are Proving Warren Buffett
Right,'' by Stephen Wilmot, Wall Street Journal................   102
Letter of February 15, 2023, from American Public Power
Association, et al., to Jennifer M. Granholm, Secretary,
Department of Energy...........................................   106
Report,``Energy Transition in PJM: Resource Retirements,
Replacements & Risks,'' by PJM, February 24, 2023..............   109

THE FISCAL YEAR 2024 DEPARTMENT OF ENERGY BUDGET

----------

THURSDAY, MAY 11, 2023

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Energy, Climate, and Grid Security,
Committee on Energy and Commerce,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 2:01 p.m. in the
John D. Dingell Room 2123 Rayburn House Office Building, Hon.
Jeff Duncan (chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Members present: Representatives Duncan, Burgess, Latta,
Guthrie, Griffith, Johnson, Bucshon, Walberg, Palmer, Curtis,
Lesko, Armstrong, Weber, Balderson, Pfluger, Rodgers (ex
officio), DeGette (subcommittee ranking member), Peters,
Fletcher, Matsui, Tonko, Veasey, Kuster, Schrier, Castor,
Sarbanes, Cardenas, Blunt Rochester, and Pallone (ex officio).
Also present: Representatives Carter, Clarke, Barragan.
Staff present: Sarah Alexander, Professional Staff Member,
Energy and Environment; Kate Arey, Digital Director; Sarah
Burke, Deputy Staff Director; Sydney Greene, Director of
Operations; Jack Heretik, Press Secretary; Nate Hodson, Staff
Director; Tara Hupman, Chief Counsel; Sean Kelly, Press
Secretary; Peter Kielty, General Counsel; Emily King, Member
Services Director; Elise Krekorian, Professional Staff Member,
Energy; Mary Martin, Chief Counsel, Energy and Environment;
Jacob McCurdy, Professional Staff Member, Energy; Brandon
Mooney, Deputy Chief Counsel, Energy; Kaitlyn Peterson, Clerk,
Energy and Environment; Karli Plucker, Director of Operations
(shared staff); Emma Schultheis, Staff Assistant; Olivia
Shields, Communications Director; Peter Spencer, Senior
Professional Staff Member, Energy; Michael Taggart, Policy
Director; Dray Thorne, Director of Information Technology;
Camden Burk, Minority Intern; Waverly Gordon, Minority Deputy
Staff Director and General Counsel; Tiffany Guarascio, Minority
Staff Director; Kris Pittard, Minority Professional Staff
Member; Kylea Rogers, Minority Policy Analyst; Andrew Souvall,
Minority Director of Communications, Outreach, and Member
Services; Medha Surampudy, Minority Professional Staff Member;
and Tuley Wright, Minority Staff Director, Energy, Climate, and
Grid Security.
Mr. Duncan. The subcommittee will come to order, and the
Chair recognizes himself for an opening statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. JEFF DUNCAN, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF SOUTH CAROLINA

I want to thank you all for being here today to examine the
Department of Energy's fiscal year 2024 budget request. Today
marks the first time that Secretary Granholm has appeared
before this subcommittee in over a year.
Madam Secretary, welcome back to the subcommittee.
The administration's budget request for fiscal year 2024 is
almost $52 billion, a $6.2 billion or 13.6 percent increase
from enacted levels in 2023. This includes a $366 million
increase for the Office of Energy Efficiency and Renewable
Energy, a $46 million increase for cybersecurity, a $238
million cut to nuclear energy.
This request is in addition to the billions of dollars
already appropriated to DOE through the Democrats' tax-and-
spend bill, the infrastructure bill, and the CHIPS Act, all of
which passed in the last Congress. I look forward to taking a
closer look at the request and DOE's priorities today.
Energy is the foundational--is foundational, and impacts
every aspect of American life. Democrats' rush-to-green
policies are making energy unaffordable for too many Americans.
Over the past 2 years, energy prices have skyrocketed. This
administration has discouraged private-sector investment in
critical energy infrastructure like oil and gas pipelines,
issued onerous regulations on energy production and processing
facilities, maintained a needlessly complex bureaucracy that
makes permitting reliable power generation like nuclear energy
nearly impossible, and made our energy supply chains more
vulnerable to hostile foreign actors.
Not long ago, America was an energy superpower. Increased
American energy production helped strengthen our economy and
gave our industries a competitive advantage, allowed us to
challenge adversarial energy dictators without having to worry
about global markets, all while decreasing greenhouse gas
emissions. President Biden and his Department of Energy has
spent the past 2 years ceding that strength and autonomy to
hostile nations like China, Russia, and Venezuela.
Since the beginning of 2021, retail electricity rates have
increased by 8 percent, gas prices have increased roughly 46
percent, natural gas prices are up roughly 31 percent, and home
heating oil and diesel fuel are up by 49 percent.
Unfortunately, Democrats and President Biden's regressive
energy agenda takes a whole-of-government approach to phase out
American energy production and ship it overseas to countries
like China.
In fact, the Department recently announced its intention to
award $200 million to a Chinese battery company, Microvast. We
have yet to hear a good explanation from the Department
regarding how this company was able to secure taxpayer dollars
intended to establish a domestic supply chain for battery
technologies.
If we follow President Biden's energy agenda, Americans
will become even more dependent upon China and Russia. The
critical minerals supply chain for renewable energy
technologies is largely controlled by those two countries. This
rush-to-green agenda includes an impractical goal of a zero-
carbon electric grid by 2035. And with this impractical goal
comes calls for a massive expansion of transmission
infrastructure.
The driving force behind this push to build transmission is
not reliability or to lower costs for consumers; it is largely
to connect more renewable energy to the grid. I am not totally
averse to that. That is why I am wary of a lot of the so-called
reforms to the transmission permitting process as well as a lot
of the transmission programs in DOE's budget request. Most are
a precursor to achieve this unrealistic rush-to-green goal.
President Biden's energy agenda discourages investment in
traditional energy sources that provide 24/7 electricity
generation. According to the EIA, last year we added the least
amount of interstate natural gas pipeline capacity since the
agency began collecting data nearly 30 years ago. This did not
happen by accident.
Republicans on Energy and Commerce have solutions to
reverse the Democrats' regressive energy agenda. H.R. 1, the
Lower Energy Costs Act, passed the House a few weeks ago with a
bipartisan vote. Legislation would create a regulatory
structure that encourages investment and innovation to bring
all forms of energy online.
The Department of Energy's core mission is to confront
energy security needs that face our Nation. This budget request
falls short of that goal. Instead, the Biden administration's
Energy Department prioritizes Green New Deal policies that
raise prices for hardworking Americans and embolden foreign
adversaries.
When America is a world leader in energy production, the
world is safer and a cleaner place. President Biden's Energy
Department has put its foot on the scale in favor of green
technologies at the expense of reliable fuels like nuclear,
natural gas, and hydropower. This is making our supply chains
more vulnerable to foreign adversaries, dragging down economic
growth, harming our national security, and raising prices for
everyday American families. DOE must reverse these policies and
return to its core energy security mission.
So I want to thank you again, Chair Rodgers, for letting me
hold this hearing. I want to thank the Secretary for being
here, and I look forward to her testimony.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Duncan follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Duncan. And I now recognize Ranking Member DeGette for
5 minutes.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. DIANA DeGETTE, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF COLORADO

Ms. DeGette. Thank you so much, Mr. Chairman.
And Secretary Granholm, thank you so much for joining us
today. It is good to see you. I want to commend you and your
agency for the critical work that you have been doing in recent
years to help us combat the climate crisis and to ensure that
Americans continue to have access to the energy that they need
as we transition to more renewable forms of electricity.
As I have said countless times before while sitting here at
this dais, the climate change is an existential threat to the
future of this planet, and we must address it immediately, if
not past immediately. We know the only way to meaningfully
address this crisis is by significantly cutting our greenhouse
gas emissions, and as quickly as possible. We know that to do
that we have to transition to clean sources of energy now.
Breaking our reliance on fossil fuels will not only help us
stave off the worst effects of the climate crisis, but it will
also protect consumers around the country from the sudden
increases in the cost of gasoline that can strain families'
budgets. And it will help us ensure that all Americans have
access to the affordable, reliable energy that they need. And
good news, looking at your budget, I believe the Department of
Energy's proposed budget for next year will continue to help
put us on a path to do exactly that.
By increasing funding for key research projects and
initiatives and continuing to focus on industrial
decarbonization, supply chain development, and workforce
transition, the Department is helping us create a cleaner, more
diverse energy portfolio right here in the United States. The
agency's plans to invest $9.4 billion for energy programs and
$8.8 billion for the Office of Science will help the research,
development, and demonstration of clean energy technologies and
support the important work that is being done by our national
laboratories.
While there is no doubt we still have a long way to go in
making this clean energy transition, the investments that will
be made under this proposal will provide critical support to
this incredibly important endeavor.
It will provide $1.2 billion for industrial decarbonization
efforts, including $160 million for the Office of Clean Energy
Demonstrations to support large-scale industrial
decarbonization projects.
It includes $75 million to launch the Global Clean Energy
Manufacturing Initiative, which will help build resilient
supply chains for the clean energy future, a critical component
of this fight.
And it includes $2 billion to support the clean energy
workforce and to help fund key infrastructure projects across
the Nation, including millions of dollars to help weatherize
low-income communities and retrofit their homes to lower energy
costs for communities that have been forced to
disproportionately bear the brunt of the climate crisis for far
too long.
Each and every one of these proposals will play a critical
role in helping us combat the climate crisis. They will also
help us not only stabilize the cost of energy here at home but
lower it for many Americans by making critical new investments
to increase our energy efficiency and drive the innovation of
new clean energy technologies.
This budget also makes commonsense investments in cyber and
energy system security, as well as environmental health and
management for low-income communities.
It includes $156.6 million for the Energy Information
Agency, whose work provides critical energy information and
data that informs our work.
It includes $56.6 million for the Office of Technology
Transmission to help accelerate the commercialization of new
clean energy technologies.
And it includes $165.2 million for the DOE Office of the
Inspector General to ensure that taxpayer dollars are being
used efficiently and effectively.
I believe that this budget will allow the DOE to place the
United States where it belongs, as the leader in the clean
energy transition. And I want to thank you, Senator--sorry, not
Senator, didn't mean to give you a demotion--Secretary
Granholm, again, for being with us today, and for explaining
how this is going to happen.
[The prepared statement of Ms. DeGette follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Ms. DeGette. And I yield back.
Mr. Duncan. I thank the gentlelady. And now it is my honor
to recognize the gentlelady who is the Chair of the full
committee, Chair Rodgers, for 5 minutes for her opening
statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, A
REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF WASHINGTON

Mrs. Rodgers. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Secretary Granholm, welcome. Foundational to our lives and
our future is access to affordable, reliable, and clean energy.
On Energy and Commerce, we have worked since the start of this
Congress to achieve that promise, most recently by passing H.R.
1, the Lower Energy Costs Act. Today I am deeply troubled that
the Department of Energy under your leadership has put America
on a dangerous path that harms our energy security and benefits
our adversaries, mainly China.
Since day one, Department of Energy has enabled the
President to shut down American energy. Rather than sounding
the alarm about America's declining energy security, the
administration canceled the Keystone pipeline; begged OPEC,
Russia, and Venezuela to produce more oil and gas; supported
the completion of Russia's Nord Stream pipeline; and turned to
China for solar panels and batteries made with slave labor and
dirty manufacturing.
As a result, America's energy prices are higher than ever,
and we are less energy secure. Gas and electricity prices
remain too high. Our electric grid is becoming unstable, and
this is driving inflation and hurting Americans and businesses.
Because of this, families every day have to make tough choices
about whether to put gas in the car or food on the table.
Earlier this year we heard from a local Virginia farmer,
David Hickman, a fifth-generation farm owner whose livelihood
has been made worse by these policies. And he told us, and I
quote, ``This is the most perilous time for American
agriculture.''
In some places like California, the government is even
asking people to ration energy. This should be a warning to the
Biden administration.
One of the first orders of business this Congress was the
passage of bipartisan bills to stop President Biden and the
Department of Energy from mismanaging the Strategic Petroleum
Reserve and sending our emergency stockpile to China. Now our
SPR is at the lowest level in 40 years. I am equally concerned
that this administration is making us more dependent upon
China.
America has the highest labor and environmental standards
in the world. We value liberty and equality. Madam Secretary,
you support waivers for solar panels sourced from China, even
when China violates our trade laws, uses slave labor, and
pollutes more than any other nation.
The Department of Energy is spending hundreds of billions
of dollars of taxpayer dollars to force an energy transition on
Americans with a false promise of 100 percent wind, solar, and
battery-powered energy, the supply chains for which are
basically controlled by adversarial China. And at the same
time, the administration is threatening to ban natural gas
stoves and other home appliances that Americans rely on.
We have seen the future that these proposed policies and
government mandates lead to. I have recently visited Europe
with other Energy and Commerce Committee members, and it was
clear that Europe's rush to green destroyed their energy and
manufacturing industries and increased their reliance on
adversaries like Russia and China. And now Europe is in an
energy crisis following Russia's war with Ukraine. We cannot
let Europe's mistakes become America's future.
DOE must return to its core mission, its mission to protect
America's energy security and our way of life, which brings us
to the budget request for fiscal year 2024. Last year DOE
received a 200 percent boost in funding, nearly $100 billion
and up to 350 billion in new loan authorities, and that is an
additional--to its regular appropriations of 46 billion. This
year the request is to increase the budget to 52 billion.
Our constitutional responsibility is to ensure that the
Department of Energy carries out its mission, and the mission
is for two of our Nation's most critical missions: that is
maintaining our nuclear weapons and ensuring America's energy
security. Rather than being focused on this core mission, we
see the Department prioritizing the implementation of a rush-
to-green agenda and rushing to spend money without taking the
steps to prevent waste, fraud, and abuse.
The actions taken by Department of Energy and the alarming
comments that you have made, Madam Secretary, about commending
China and suggesting that the U.S. follow the Chinese Communist
Party's lead have failed to reassure me that DOE's priorities
are aligned with the needs of Americans or the national and
energy security interests of the United States.
We must abandon this dangerous and radical agenda so that
people, Americans, have the opportunity for a better life and a
secure future.
[The prepared statement of Mrs. Rodgers follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mrs. Rodgers. Thank you, I yield back.
Mr. Duncan. The gentlelady yields back. I will now
recognize the ranking member of the full committee, the
gentleman from New Jersey, Mr. Pallone, for 5 minutes.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. FRANK PALLONE, Jr., A REPRESENTATIVE
IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF NEW JERSEY

Mr. Pallone. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And after hearing from our committee's Republican
leadership, I have to say that I support strongly President
Biden's energy agenda, which I know is your energy agenda.
Frankly, I don't think we would be able to compete in a global
economy if we don't--and certainly not compete with China--if
we don't move forward with the President's energy agenda.
And I want to also say that I think that H.R. 1 would
destroy our economy and certainly reverse the remarkable and
robust job creation that we have seen under President Biden. So
in my opinion, you are doing everything that is necessary to
compete with China and recognize fully well the competition
that we face with China.
I wanted to say, with the passage of the Inflation
Reduction Act and the Bipartisan Infrastructure Law, we have
certainly given the Department of Energy a lot of work to do.
And I am looking forward to getting updates on some of these
important clean energy programs today.
Let me start with the Bipartisan Infrastructure Law, which
invests $1.2 trillion to modernize our Nation's aging and
crumbling infrastructure. The law includes important funding
for DOE to invest in American manufacturing, increase access to
energy efficiency, and make our Nation's electric grid more
clean and secure.
Now, that was the first step, and then we followed it up by
passing the Inflation Reduction Act. That law provides $369
billion to build more clean energy in America, create clean
energy jobs, lower energy costs for American families, and
slash greenhouse gas pollution.
And DOE is also playing a major role in implementing these
funds that are supporting innovative clean energy projects,
that are investing in communities all around the Nation and
have helped create 142,000 good-paying, clean energy jobs since
the law was enacted in August. They are also providing rebates
to consumers for more efficient home appliances to lower energy
costs for hardworking American families. And DOE is addressing
emissions at America's industrial facilities, as well.
Now, these two laws, the infrastructure bill and the
Inflation Reduction Act, are making a real difference in
communities all around the Nation, including in Republican
congressional districts. But as we know, not one Republican on
this committee supported either of these bills. And that was
bad enough, but now they are trying to hold our economy hostage
by threatening a default crisis if we don't go along with their
demands to roll back these crucial investments and to put
polluters over people.
Last month, House Republicans passed the Default on America
Act that does the bidding of Big Oil and Gas, increases energy
costs for working families, and sets American workers up to be
left behind by abandoning our homegrown clean energy industry.
The Republican bill will cut important programs that provide
rebates to consumers for home appliances and remove funding for
workforce programs in these new and developing industries. It
also repeals key energy programs from the Inflation Reduction
Act, repeals the zero-emission nuclear power tax credit that
was praised by our witness at a recent hearing on nuclear
issues, and raises taxes on American energy.
Committee Republicans have not only been trying to
undermine these new laws, but they have attempted to
manufacture scandals that simply do not exist. Last month they
even sent a letter to you, Madam Secretary, criticizing you for
your ``international travel to Puerto Rico.'' Of course, Puerto
Ricans have been U.S. citizens for over 100 years, and with all
the energy issues there, we should be commending the Secretary
for visiting Puerto Rico and prioritizing their issues.
At the end of the day, Republican energy policies look to
the past, while Democrats and the Biden administration are
looking to the future with our commitment to the clean energy
transition. The President's DOE budget request includes
important funding that will help us meet our decarbonization
goals and build on the success of both the Inflation Reduction
Act and the Bipartisan Infrastructure Law.
So I also want to highlight the good work that the
Department is doing outside of these laws. Last year, DOE
periodically released crude oil from the Strategic Petroleum
Reserve to help lower gasoline prices at the pump for Americans
following Putin's invasion of Ukraine. Today the price of a
barrel of crude is $34 cheaper than it was a year ago. The
price of a gallon of gasoline is nearly 80 cents cheaper than
it was a year ago. So, Secretary, thank you for the
Department's decisive action in this regard, and thank you
again for joining us today.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Pallone follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Pallone. And I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Duncan. I thank the gentleman.
So our witness today is the Honorable Jennifer Granholm,
Secretary of the Department of Energy, who I understand drove
her electric vehicle up to the Hill to testify today, this
year.
So you are recognized for 5 minutes, Madam Secretary.

STATEMENT OF JENNIFER M. GRANHOLM, SECRETARY, DEPARTMENT OF
ENERGY

Ms. Granholm. Great, thank you so much, Chair Duncan and
Ranking Member DeGette, and members of the subcommittee. I am
so honored to be with you today to discuss the President's
latest budget request for the Department of Energy.
Over the last 2 years it has been my great privilege to
lead the Department in meeting many of our Nation's most
pressing needs. From deepening our energy security by reshoring
supply chains and manufacturing to strengthening American
innovation with cutting-edge research and development to
maintaining a strong nuclear deterrent, we are positioning the
United States to outmaneuver aggressors, outcompete our rivals,
and create new jobs and opportunities for the American people.
The President's budget request for fiscal year 2024 will
empower us to drive these endeavors forward, even in the face
of emerging challenges. Russia's invasion of Ukraine has
sparked a reckoning with our overreliance on fossil fuels.
Vladimir Putin has exploited this overreliance, injecting
extreme volatility into global markets and leaving working
people in the United States bearing higher energy costs.
In response, we are pursuing a strategy of energy security
through energy diversity. Congress has made the United States
the world's most attractive destination for investment in new
energy, and the Department is helping the country capitalize
using the resources that you have provided.
Through the infrastructure law, the Inflation Reduction
Act, and regular appropriations, we are backing large-scale
deployment of solar, wind, electric vehicles, and storage. We
are funding demonstrations of next-generation technologies,
clean hydrogen, advanced nuclear, carbon capture. We are
building a more resilient, reliable grid that can integrate
this increasing number of solutions while better weathering
disruptions, and we are shoring up supply chains so that no
adversaries will be able to threaten our access to energy. This
is all to the great benefit of American companies, American
communities, and American workers.
In the last 2 years, for example, planned investments in
America's battery, solar, and wind supply chains have reached
more than $100 billion. Those investments will support
thousands of jobs, especially manufacturing technologies that
are stamped ``Made in the USA.''
Still, we know that the more we can improve performance and
reduce costs, the faster we can deploy these technologies, the
faster the bills for Americans will be lower, and that is why
the budget boosts our clean energy research, development, and
demonstration programs.
A couple of highlights: Our Office of Fossil Energy and
Carbon Management is advancing a suite of CCUS technologies as
well as technologies to recover critical minerals from carbon
sources; our Office of Science would receive more than $1
billion for fusion research, furthering our work to harness
fusion's tremendous potential; and our Office of Nuclear Energy
is driving innovation in nuclear fusion and keeping our
domestic fleet online so we can make the most of this clean,
reliable baseload power.
Programs like the Advanced Reactor Demonstration Program
and the Civil Nuclear Credit Program are helping us to cut
carbon pollution and boost grid reliability. And through our
consent-based siting process, we are getting closer to
identifying sites for interim storage of spent nuclear fuel.
Furthermore, the budget provides more than $8 billion for
our Office of Environmental Management to treat radioactive
tank waste, to address contamination issues across EM sites,
and to enhance river protection, particularly at the Hanford
site.
I would note that the request aligns with an announcement
that we made last week, which is we have reached a conceptual
agreement with the EPA and Washington State's Department of
Ecology for managing millions of gallons of tank waste at the
Hanford site in a safe, effective, and achievable manner, and
that achievement would not have been possible without
bipartisan support from Congress.
Your support is indispensable to all of our core missions,
and we will need it for the work ahead. The President's budget
will allow us to shore up our energy security and our national
security while reinforcing our efforts to properly implement
Congress's legislative actions.
Thank you so much for the opportunity to address you today,
and I look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Granholm follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Duncan. The gentlelady yields back, and so now I will
begin the questioning portion of the hearing.
Before we do, I would like to enter into the record an
article here about the need for domestically sourced enriched
uranium, and get away from Russia.
So without objection, so ordered.
[The information appears at the conclusion of the hearing.]
Mr. Duncan. So electricity prices in the Nation are 52
percent higher over the last 2 years than they were for the
last 4 years, or the only 4 years under the last
administration. And for the record I will reiterate that you
have increased the budget for the Office of Energy Efficiency
and Renewable Energy by 366 million while also cutting 238
million to nuclear energy.
We will get back to nuclear in a minute, but I wonder--why
cut nuclear power investments by that amount?
The PJM Interconnection, the Nation's largest grid
operator, issued a dire warning earlier this year regarding the
premature retirement of dispatchable generation. This report
noted that, at the current pace of retirements, the grid
operator will potentially face a significant generation
capacity shortfall by 2030. PJM noted numerous policies
directly impacting these premature generation retirements,
including multiple EPA regulations--and we just saw another one
today; State rush-to-green policies; and private-sector ESG
commitments. Massive tax credits and subsidies are unreliable.
Wind and solar are contributing to this problem, as well.
These are all issues that policymakers, the Biden
administration, and congressional Democrats specifically are
forcing onto the American people, decreasing grid reliability
and raising consumer costs. It seems the Biden administration's
energy policy is a pay more, get less.
So I know the DOE signed a memorandum of understanding with
the EPA regarding coordination on electric reliability, but the
agreement seems to do nothing in practice. What specific
actions is your Department taking to improve grid reliability?
Ms. Granholm. Several things, thank you. One is we are
making sure that we have enough transmission to ensure that the
grid is able to take on the additional resources that we want
to see continue to be deployed, including clean--but clean
energy that includes nuclear, that includes hydroelectric, that
includes geothermal, that includes solar, that includes wind,
and that includes battery storage.
Mr. Duncan. How about some specifics? Those are all general
topics, and we could agree with that. But how about some
specifics that you are doing?
Ms. Granholm. Well, specifically, we are accelerating the
implementation and deployment of the Bipartisan Infrastructure
Law, which helps to increase grid reliability. So, for example,
we have just announced a series of funding opportunities called
the GRIP Program, which will enhance the reliability of the
grid by giving grid operators the opportunity to make sure that
they also enhance security by potentially undergrounding, by
adding additional transmission.
So the tools that have been given to the Department related
to grid reliability are very important to be able to ensure
that we have enough access to reliable power and that the
transmission grid is able to withstand it.
Mr. Duncan. So we are going to need transmission line
permitting reform. We also need gas pipeline permitting
reform--the statement I referenced concerning lack of natural
gas pipeline capacity and its effects on energy reliability,
especially dispatchable energy. This committee adopted reforms
to the interstate natural gas pipeline permitting process,
which ultimately passed the House bipartisanly.
The reliability of our electricity system is closed
interconnected with the interstate natural gas--closely
interconnected with the interstate natural gas pipeline system.
We need to build more to improve electric reliability.
Do you believe insufficient natural gas pipeline capacity
harms grid reliability and affordability for consumers?
Ms. Granholm. I think we have to have sufficient
infrastructure to make sure that we have the dispatchable
power----
Mr. Duncan. Infrastructure means----
Ms. Granholm [continuing]. That we need.
Mr. Duncan [continuing]. Expansion of pipelines, more
pipelines, and----
Ms. Granholm. We are going to need pipelines, certainly,
for making sure that dispatchable power gets to the places
where it is needed.
Mr. Duncan. Where it needs to be to be utilized----
Ms. Granholm. But we also need----
Mr. Duncan [continuing]. By the utilities, correct?
Ms. Granholm. We also need to be able to have pipelines for
hydrogen, for----
Mr. Duncan. Carbon capture.
Ms. Granholm [continuing]. For carbon capture, et cetera.
So----
Mr. Duncan. Export, you could throw that in there to help
the world.
Ms. Granholm. And I would say that your observation about
permitting reform is right on. We need to do permitting reform
across the board, and I am hopeful that this----
Mr. Duncan. I look forward to working with you on that.
Ms. Granholm [continuing]. Congress will be able to get
there.
Mr. Duncan. So I want to talk on nuclear real quick. I
recently chaired a subcommittee on nuclear hearing--on nuclear
energy, and it was bipartisan. I was pleased by that. There was
widespread agreement, and there is widespread agreement, both
chambers and both sides of the aisle.
It has been over 2 years, and the DOE still hasn't complied
with the congressional directions to stand up and advance
nuclear fuel or HALEU, program. Is that reflective of DOE or
administrative policies? And why do we have this delay?
Ms. Granholm. Well, we need to do a whole project with
respect to HALEU and uranium, overall, to make sure that we can
fuel our current fleet as well as the advanced reactors. We do
not want to be reliant on Russia.
We have stood up a uranium--started to set up a uranium
reserve. We have asked for and we are--we will be issuing a
funding opportunity announcement for uranium----
Mr. Duncan. My time is expiring. Let me just ask you this:
Why cut nuclear energy funding by $238 million?
Ms. Granholm. Because that funding was--had been used to
fund the Advanced Reactor Demonstration Program, and that is
now funded over at the--through the Bipartisan Infrastructure
Law. And so it would have been duplicative. So it is something
that the Department--that the Office of Nuclear Energy actually
supported because we didn't need that funding at this moment.
Mr. Duncan. Thank you for that.
My time has expired. I will now go to the ranking member,
Ms. DeGette, for 5 minutes.
Ms. DeGette. Thank you so much.
Madam Secretary, as I mentioned in my opening statement,
the climate crisis is an existential threat that has to be
addressed as quickly as possible. And you know quite well,
because you are on the front line, we have to slash our
greenhouse gas emissions and transition to clean energy and
provide energy at an affordable rate to Americans.
So I have a couple questions. I assume you agree with me
that, to combat the worst impacts of climate change, we have to
drastically reduce our emissions. Is that right?
Ms. Granholm. I do.
Ms. DeGette. And one way to do that is to rapidly deploy
zero-carbon-emitting sources of wind and solar and other
sources. Is that right?
Ms. Granholm. Correct.
Ms. DeGette. But now--I mean, let's cut to the chase. The
last 10 percent of emission reductions will be the hardest. And
we don't yet have the technology to be able to say we can get
to 100 percent by 2050. So how is the agency positioning itself
and its work to actually be able to close that gap and to meet
the goals we need to make?
Ms. Granholm. Yes, thank you for that question. I mean,
both on the research and development side, through our work at
the labs and our work in the Department, as well as on the
deployment side, we will be doing both on the difficult-to-
decarbonize areas, such as industrial decarbonization, heavy
transportation, aviation, et cetera.
Part of the--and thank you for supporting the Bipartisan
Infrastructure Law and the Inflation Reduction Act. Those tools
will allow for us--and we have just--we have got a funding
opportunity announcement out for industrial decarbonization,
but it is also the--and the budget actually supports an
increased amount for our office of decarbonizing industry. But
we also are seeing that, with hydrogen and the hydrogen hubs,
that is a tool that can be used to decarbonize heavy industry,
cement, et cetera, steel. That tool is important.
And decarbonizing heavy transportation. Our vehicle
technologies office and the work that we have done on both
electrification as well as fuel cells for transportation, also
very, very important. And then I would say carbon capture and
sequestration is another tool to be able to help to decarbonize
heavy industry, all of which we are working on, both on the
research side as well as on the deployment side.
Ms. DeGette. That is great. One of the things that we talk
a lot about in this committee--and it is a very real concern--
is what are we going to do about the fossil fuel workforce?
I represent Colorado, which is traditionally an oil and gas
State. But I think that, as we try to move towards a clean
energy economy, we have to transition the workforce. So can you
talk to me about what is happening, both the investments in the
last Congress and also in this budget, to help continuity for
the existing energy workforce?
Ms. Granholm. Yes, there are several things that are
happening.
One is that there is an all-of-government approach to being
able to focus on the skill sets that will be needed for next-
generation technologies and making sure we are able to upskill
the workers, particularly in fossil communities, but also in
communities that have high unemployment.
What we want to do is create sector-specific skill sets and
make sure that those are taken in a place-based manner. When
grants are awarded, for example, to hydrogen hubs, we need
workers to be able to both build as well as to operate
facilities. The fossil fuel workforce, for example, those who
do natural gas, who extract natural gas, who extract oil from
beneath the subsurface, have an expertise in subsurface fuels.
They can also be transitioned to geothermal, for example. Those
who build offshore wind platforms can also be building
offshore--who build offshore oil and gas platforms can build
offshore wind platforms. Those skills matches are part of what
the Department is working on through our workforce development
initiatives, as well as through the skills--the tools that the
Congress has given us on--through the Inflation Reduction Act
on apprenticeships, et cetera, funding and incentivizing those
apprenticeships.
Ms. DeGette. Thank you. I have one last question, because
we have had a lot of hearings and markups in this committee
already this year, for which I commend the chairman, because we
have to work on energy. But one thing that folks on the other
side of the aisle keep pounding on, we can't do this just
through--they keep somehow insinuating the administration is
trying to move to zero-carbon emissions program just through
solar and wind.
And I want to be clear. Has the administration said we are
not going to have nuclear, or hydro power, or other types of
things--of energy sources?
Ms. Granholm. On the contrary, the administration is very
much in favor of nuclear, hydroelectric power, geothermal
power. We want to grow the energy pie by adding diverse forms
of sources--of clean energy sources, and to decarbonize the
existing fossil fuel sources. We want to do both.
Ms. DeGette. Thank you.
I yield back.
Mr. Duncan. The gentlelady yields back. I will now go to
the Chair of the full committee, Mrs. Rodgers, for 5 minutes.
Mrs. Rodgers. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And again, Madam Secretary, I appreciate you being here.
The war in Russia really exposed our energy security
vulnerabilities and the danger of relying on adversaries for
our energy needs, and I have had numerous conversations with
our European allies, you know, and they regret some of the
decisions that were made that led them to this place to be
dependent, dangerously dependent, on Russian natural gas. And
they have been pleading with us for years for America to
increase our LNG exports.
Now, in America we are blessed with some of the world's
largest and cleanest supplies of fossil fuels, the critical
minerals for renewables, plentiful supplies for uranium to
power our nuclear reactors. And--but unfortunately, we are
falling behind on the processing of those minerals and uranium.
China controls more than 90 percent of the critical minerals
processing used for renewables and batteries. And the U.S.
nuclear fleet imports more than 20 percent of its enriched
uranium from Russia. Reliance on Russian-sourced nuclear fuel
has weakened our nuclear fuel infrastructure and now puts our
whole nuclear security at risk.
Congress imposed a ban on Russian oil and gas imports. Do
you support a ban on importing Russian enriched uranium into
the U.S., as well?
Ms. Granholm. I would certainly consider that if we have
our own--developed our own supply. We want to be energy
independent, we don't want to harm----
Mrs. Rodgers. OK. OK, thank you.
Ms. Granholm [continuing]. Existing fleet, but we want to
build up that energy supply.
Mrs. Rodgers. OK. I have a----
Ms. Granholm. Hopefully, Congress will work on----
Mrs. Rodgers. Thank you. I am going to take back my time,
and I look--we need a--I have a whole bunch of yes-or-no
questions here.
Will you commit to supporting with--working with me on
legislation to ban the import of Russian-sourced nuclear fuels?
Ms. Granholm. Again, I would support making sure that our
fleet is secure and that we have enough supply, and that means
making it here. And I hope we can work together on a uranium
strategy that ensures that we can have that for our own fleet.
Mrs. Rodgers. Yes, and we got to ban natural gas--or we got
to ban the nuclear coming from Russia. And then we got to work
on getting supply here too.
Ms. Granholm. Yes.
Mrs. Rodgers. Yes or no, do you agree that because China
controls more than 90 percent of the critical materials used to
make solar panels and batteries, that America is becoming
dependent on one supplier, China, for our energy needs?
Ms. Granholm. I think America is becoming more dependent on
ourselves because of the investments that were made through the
Inflation Reduction Act. The Loan Program Office has just
financed several processing----
Mrs. Rodgers. I don't see--nothing is being manufactured
yet.
Ms. Granholm. Well----
Mrs. Rodgers. Yes or no, are you----
Ms. Granholm. But it is going to be. It is going to be.
That is what is so exciting, all the announcements that have
been made about batteries, battery supply chain----
Mrs. Rodgers. Reclaiming my time, are you aware that China
uses slave labor, and is the largest polluter----
Ms. Granholm. I am.
Mrs. Rodgers [continuing]. In the world?
How many critical mineral processing facilities do we have
in the United States?
Ms. Granholm. Well, just--that is exactly what I am saying,
is that we must build more processing in the United States.
Mrs. Rodgers. OK.
Ms. Granholm. And that is exactly----
Mrs. Rodgers. Let's start, Madam Secretary----
Ms. Granholm [continuing]. What the Inflation Reduction Act
and----
Mrs. Rodgers. Reclaiming my time----
Ms. Granholm [continuing]. The Bipartisan Infrastructure
Law----
Mrs. Rodgers. We--let's start with how many do we have
right now. How many do we have right now?
Ms. Granholm. We just--in fact, the Loan Program Office
just financed three additional ones----
Mrs. Rodgers. How many existing processing facilities----
Ms. Granholm. We don't. We have not done that. It has been
in Asia. This is exactly why we cannot stand by and allow that
to continue. We want to bring----
Mrs. Rodgers. OK, thank you.
Ms. Granholm. We don't disagree, I don't think.
Mrs. Rodgers. Thank you, OK.
Ms. Granholm. We want to bring processing here, and do it
here.
Mrs. Rodgers. Thank you, thank you. How long does it take
to permit----
Ms. Granholm. Far too long.
Mrs. Rodgers [continuing]. A critical minerals processing
facility in the United States?
Ms. Granholm. Far too long, far too long.
Mrs. Rodgers. How many years?
Ms. Granholm. It takes years. It is ridiculous and----
Mrs. Rodgers. How many years?
Ms. Granholm [continuing]. Unacceptable.
Mrs. Rodgers. So how many years----
Ms. Granholm. It shouldn't take----
Mrs. Rodgers [continuing]. Does it take?
Ms. Granholm. [continuing]. As long as it does.
Mrs. Rodgers. How many years?
Ms. Granholm. Let's work on slowing the--excuse me, let's
work on speeding up----
Mrs. Rodgers. You don't want to say how many years it
takes----
Ms. Granholm. Well, I don't----
Mrs. Rodgers [continuing]. Because we are talking about
years.
Ms. Granholm [continuing]. Responsibility for how many
years it takes. It takes too long. It is years, and it
shouldn't be.
Mrs. Rodgers. OK.
Ms. Granholm. We should be doing it much more quickly.
Mrs. Rodgers. So it is going to be years. And in the
meantime----
Ms. Granholm. Unless we do permitting reform.
Mrs. Rodgers [continuing]. There is no processing in the
United States of America, which means it all is going to go to
China and come back----
Ms. Granholm. No, no, that is exactly what we are not going
to happen. That is why we have to do permitting reform----
Mrs. Rodgers. If you don't have processing----
Ms. Granholm [continuing]. And that is why we have to
continue to invest.
Mrs. Rodgers [continuing]. In the United States of America,
it is----
Ms. Granholm. But we are investing in it right now. That is
why all of these new----
Mrs. Rodgers. Thank you, thank you.
Ms. Granholm [continuing]. Battery companies----
Mrs. Rodgers. Reclaiming my time.
Ms. Granholm [continuing]. Have announced they are coming.
Mrs. Rodgers. How--OK. Reclaiming my time here, would you
support a prohibition on using taxpayer dollars to purchase
renewable energy technologies that are manufactured with slave
labor?
Ms. Granholm. No.
Mrs. Rodgers. You won't support a prohibition?
Ms. Granholm. I am sorry, I thought you said would I
support--I do not support slave labor making solar panels----
Mrs. Rodgers. OK, would you support----
Ms. Granholm [continuing]. Or us supporting it in any way.
Mrs. Rodgers [continuing]. A prohibition on using taxpayer
dollars to do this, to purchase--would you support a
prohibition on using taxpayer dollars to purchase renewable
energy technologies manufactured with slave labor?
Ms. Granholm. Yes.
Mrs. Rodgers. Would you support a ban on importing
renewable energy technologies made with components mined or
processed in factories that violate America's environmental
standards?
Ms. Granholm. I would have to look specifically at what you
are saying on that. But I want for us to be manufacturing in
the United States----
Mrs. Rodgers. I do too.
Ms. Granholm [continuing]. All the components, the full
supply chain----
Mrs. Rodgers. I do too. I do too.
Ms. Granholm [continuing]. For solar, as well as for
batteries.
Mrs. Rodgers. Thank you. Thank you, Madam Secretary. I
think my point is it is the difference between what the dream
is, or--and what reality is. And the reality is it is not
happening here. It is happening--we are dependent upon China.
And so we got to--we can't get--we got to get the--we can't get
the cart before the horse.
I yield back.
Mr. Duncan. The gentlelady yields back. I will now
recognize the ranking member, Mr. Pallone, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Pallone. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Secretary, again, thank you for being here. And as I
mentioned in my opening statement--and you did, as well--over
the last 2 years Congress has passed 2 landmark bills, the
Bipartisan Infrastructure Law and the Inflation Reduction Act,
that give the Department tremendous resources to lower energy
prices for everyday Americans while making our energy cleaner
for everyone.
So the budget request from your Department built on these
laws by making additional investments in affordable, clean
energy made right here in America, which you continue to
stress. But the problem is that now the House Republicans'
Default on America Act will seriously undermine the progress
that we are beginning to make and that you have pointed out.
So on the issue--back in March you wrote to Appropriations
Committee Ranking Member DeLauro and said that capping DOE's
fiscal year 2024 spending at 2022 levels would have
catastrophic impacts on everyday Americans.
And I would like to ask unanimous consent to insert your
letter into the record, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Duncan. Without objection, so ordered.
[The information appears at the conclusion of the hearing.]
Mr. Pallone. Thank you.
So I would ask you, Madam Secretary, could you detail how
the DOE budget cuts in the Default on America Act would have a
devastating impact on everyday Americans? Do you know how many
jobs, for example, might be jeopardized?
Ms. Granholm. Well, first of all, I would say that people
care about our investments in research and development. And so
the slashing of, for example, 5,000 scientists in research at
our 17 national labs would very much hinder our ability to be
competitive globally. That is very important. It is my
understanding, as well, that there is--there are rollbacks of
the Inflation Reduction Act tax credits.
And to the point we were just making, there--since the
President has taken office, and this agenda to invest in
America, there have been 150 battery companies or battery--
excuse me, 160--as of last week, 160 battery companies or
supply chain companies that have announced they are coming to
the United States, all the way from processing all the way to
anode, cathode, separator material, electrolyte, critical--160.
That policy works. And the idea of rolling that back would harm
Americans all across the country in communities that will be
benefiting from the jobs that would have been created by the
policies that were supported by members of this panel and
others.
Mr. Pallone. Well, thank you. But you also wrote that the
cuts would imperil and reduce the impact of the Bipartisan
Infrastructure Law. So can you detail how the budget cuts would
impact the bipartisan investments that Congress made just a
year and a half ago from that----
Ms. Granholm. Right. I mean, so those investments in next-
generation technologies that are in the process of being
granted now give the United States a leg up on our competitors.
They also make sure that we are able to deploy these
technologies at home to make us more energy secure.
Why would we cut the ability to undo decades of job losses
to competitor nations when we now have policy that brings those
jobs home and makes us more energy secure and makes products
that are stamped ``Made in America'' and are used here and are
perhaps sold elsewhere but we are making them here? That makes
us energy secure. And cutting both the Bipartisan
Infrastructure Law investments in those technologies as well as
the deployment strategies in the Inflation Reduction Act would
harm our Nation from an economic point of view as well as from
an energy point of view.
Mr. Pallone. Well, thank you so much. I mean, I started out
by pointing out in my opening statement that, contrary to what
some of my Republican colleagues are saying, is you are very
much aware of the competition from China, you realize the
threat, and that, you know, if you implement what the
Republicans want to do with this Default Act, it is going to
take us backwards, make us less competitive in a global
economy, less able to compete with China. And, you know, the
job numbers keep coming out.
I mean, just in the last few days the unemployment is at an
all-time low, even lower than it was a few months ago. And the
jobs just, you know, keep coming in a very robust fashion. And
I am just convinced that this Default Act would do just the
opposite, completely reverse that in the way that you have
outlined.
So thank you so much for being here. I appreciate it.
I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Duncan. I thank the gentleman. I will go to Texas, Mr.
Burgess, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Burgess. Thank you.
And thanks for being here, Madam Secretary. Let me just ask
you, can you just kind of briefly bring us up to date on where
the Department is with the work on reprocessing spent nuclear
fuel?
Ms. Granholm. Yes, thank you for asking that. We have a
research program on that. We are working at the Idaho National
Lab on that. It is smallish. It is not huge. I think it can be
much larger. I think we should be looking at this to a much
greater extent. So we have some initial research that is being
done on that, but I think it is something that is worthy of
expansion.
Mr. Burgess. Well, if I can ask, what is holding us back?
Why is it smallish? Why isn't it robust?
Ms. Granholm. Historically--that is a good question.
Historically, it just hasn't been a huge priority. But I think,
with the help of Congress and some investment, we can make it a
much more robust program.
Mr. Burgess. Well, you have addressed the fact that we
don't want to be buying our fuel stock for nuclear reactors----
Ms. Granholm. Right.
Mr. Burgess [continuing]. From Russia.
Ms. Granholm. Right.
Mr. Burgess. So it seems like the reutilization of spent
nuclear fuel would make a lot of economic and geopolitical
sense.
I guess my concern is with--as big as a budget that you
have and all of the money that has been pumped in with the
Infrastructure Act and the Inflation Reduction Act and now the
President's budget request, it just seems like a larger portion
should be dedicated to that research because, I mean, if we
want abundant, low-carbon fuel, that is the place we are going
to get it, correct?
Ms. Granholm. It is one of the places, certainly, and I
would support authorization to expand our investment in that
area.
Mr. Burgess. Well, Mr. Chairman, I will just say I hope we
can have a meaningful hearing on reprocessing of spent nuclear
fuel. I think it made no sense when we were debating the
President's big, big bill to be talking about investing all of
this money in solar and wind,--geothermal even--and not talking
about major investments in nuclear power.
You used the term a few minutes ago, ``undergrounding.'' I
think it was in relation to electric transmission lines. So is
that--I mean, no one likes to have a big transmission line
behind their house. So are you--is the agency studying the
underground placement of large transmission lines?
Ms. Granholm. Yes. As part of the resiliency funding that
our Grid Deployment Office is administering, the resiliency
component with undergrounding, particularly in areas where
there's high wildfires, a great risk of wildfires, et cetera,
is potentially one solution. Of course, it is more expensive,
but it is also very expensive to build back.
There is another component of efficiency that could also, I
think, be very beneficial in terms of transmission acceptance,
which is reconductoring existing lines to make them twice as
efficient on existing infrastructure so that you have less of
the NIMBY problem that is concerned with transmission.
Mr. Burgess. I wasn't aware that reconductoring was a verb,
but I appreciate you----
Ms. Granholm. Like ``undergrounding,'' I guess.
Mr. Burgess [continuing]. You bringing that to our
attention.
Well, it just seems like there--again, with all of the
substantial investments that are being made into your agency,
these are the types of things that I, for one, would be--I
would be grateful to see some----
Ms. Granholm. Yes.
Mr. Burgess [continuing]. Additional work. And we can talk
all we want about the other sources of energy, but these are
capturing energy efficiency, higher utilization of nuclear
power--I mean, these are things that make a lot of sense in the
Nation's armamentarium. At least it would seem to me that it
would.
I am concerned. We had a hearing in our Oversight and
Investigation Subcommittee a few weeks ago, and your inspector
general, Department of Energy inspector general, was here. I am
really concerned about the--it is not just the amount of money
that is going in to the agency but the rapidity with which the
money is leaving the agency, so the velocity of spending, not
just the amount of spending.
Some of us were here when Solyndra became a four-letter
word, really fearful of seeing projects where the money is, in
fact, misdirected. Can you give us some insight on how you are
controlling that?
Ms. Granholm. Yes. First of all, we are grateful to have a
great relationship with our inspector general. And on all of
these programs, we consult with that office in how to make sure
that there is no waste, fraud, and abuse, that it is designed
in a way that is conducive to making sure that the taxpayer is
protected. As you have seen in this budget, her budget has been
increased by almost double, which is important, given the size
of the Inflation Reduction Act and the Bipartisan
Infrastructure Law funds that must go out.
I am happy to continue to work with this committee in any
way you deem important to have regular briefings on the
cadence.
Mr. Burgess. She said that wasn't enough. And I know my
time is expired, and I am going to yield back, but--and that is
the concern. The rapidity of the spending is going so fast, the
money is going out the door so fast, the inspector general of
the Department of Energy can't keep up with it. She says, ``I
need more money to keep up with the money you have already
invested.'' I realize that is a longer-term project, or a
longer-term question, but we have got to stay focused on that.
Mr. Duncan. The gentleman's time has expired----
Mr. Burgess. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I will yield back.
Mr. Duncan [continuing]. And I now recognize the acting
ranking member, Mr. Peters, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Peters. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
It is great to see you again, Madam Secretary. Thanks for
your good work.
Last year, Congress provided record funding to build a
cleaner and more secure energy system through historic
legislation like the Inflation Reduction Act and the
Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act. I want to thank you for
your responses to the Chair of the committee, because I think
there is a lot of room for agreement. Some of the talking
points that I have heard from the other side are inconsistent
with what you said today in terms of your support for nuclear
power, for hydro, and for carbon capture, and all sorts of
clean energy strategies and batteries. So I think we should be
encouraged by that.
And the other thing you talked about is that you
acknowledge that things take too long. And I think in this
Congress we need to work on speed. If we don't--we can have all
the money in the world, but we will not succeed if we don't
build things faster, particularly because a lot of what we want
to do on climate action is build stuff, not slow stuff down. So
I want to thank you and the White House for recognizing the
need for that permitting reform, for using your existing
authority to speed deployment, and I want to continue to work
with you and your team to advance a bipartisan reform this year
that will be durable over time because it is bipartisan.
So first, I just want to make sure that we--you seem to
agree that permitting and siting reform for clean energy is
essential to meet our climate goals. Isn't that right?
Ms. Granholm. Yes.
Mr. Peters. Do you think we could solve our permitting
challenges simply with funding for agencies, or do we need to
both provide funding and additional underlying process and
authority reforms?
Ms. Granholm. I think there needs to be process as well as
funding.
Mr. Peters. Maybe you could just give us a little flavor
for how permitting challenges impair your ability to deploy
clean energy projects, and provide specific examples that might
be on top of your mind.
Ms. Granholm. In terms of what I would do to increase
efficiency on permitting?
Mr. Peters. Sure, or what the holdup is now, and how you
would----
Ms. Granholm. Yes, I mean, clearly, the holdups are the
fact that you have processes that require reviews that are
consecutive and not concurrent.
Mr. Peters. Right.
Ms. Granholm. And so now it takes twice as long, when
things can be done concurrently. We want to make sure that we
have some, for example, a better use--maybe a more liberal use
of categorical, you know, exclusions----
Mr. Peters. Right.
Ms. Granholm. In particular, types of devices that have the
same footprint, we shouldn't have to be doing a whole new study
around it, assuming that the area is--you know, that there is
not some sort of other violation.
We should be doing a greater job of, for example,
programmatic energy assessments to be able to take a swath of
area and say, ``This is OK to be able to build on.''
We should be developing more as more projects, more--bigger
goals about how quickly we want to get there, perhaps some kind
of time limit.
We don't want to degrade the environmental laws, but we
want to be able to administer them in a way that, where there
is alacrity----
Mr. Peters. Right.
Ms. Granholm [continuing]. Where we are moving quickly on
them, and we can do that because, of course, slowness is--
impacts species because we will not be able to address climate
change.
Mr. Peters. And disadvantaged communities, by the way,
sure, right?
Ms. Granholm. Of course.
Mr. Peters. Who are most affected by the pollution.
Ms. Granholm. Of course, of course.
Mr. Peters. Also, so you know, we saw something from one
study that showed it takes, on average, 10 years to do one
interstate transmission line.
Ms. Granholm. Ridiculous.
Mr. Peters. Seven years of that is process. So you and I
see eye-to-eye on this. And I think transmission is going to be
one of our big objectives. I passed--help pass the POWER On Act
last year to give backstop siting authority to FERC. I think
that is a good start.
This week DOE issued a request for information on a new
process for designated National Interest Electric Transmission
Corridors, and that is going to be helpful and would focus on
narrow routes proposed by applicants, as opposed to larger
corridors designated from scratch by DOE. How do you think that
approach can help advance and speed up transmission----
Ms. Granholm. Well, first of all, glad to say that the
approach is based upon a needs study that has been completed
about where the most need is in the country.
Number two is that this step that was taken this week is
gleaning information from industry partners about how they
think NIETC corridors should best be done. But what we want to
do is to give them the ability to apply for NIETC corridor
designation. That will happen in the Septemberish area. We
close down the funding opportunity--excuse me, the notice of
intent and the request for information.
So this year we will have set the stage for rapid movement
and designation of those corridors, and then it unlocks
resources to be able to do that, whether it is the transmission
financing resources, it could be the funding that comes from
the Bipartisan Infrastructure Law that helps to fund those
transmission lines. So all of that gets unlocked, and that will
happen this year.
Mr. Peters. And I am going to run out of time, but I do
want to ask you the same question I have asked Mr. Landrieu,
Mr. Podesta, this morning Secretary Raimondo: If there are ways
that we need to help you speed things up through legislative
changes, please let us know so we can get to work on them as
soon as possible. Can you do that?
Ms. Granholm. Absolutely.
Mr. Peters. Thank you so much, and I yield back.
Mr. Duncan. The gentleman's time is expired, and I will now
go to Mr. Latta from Ohio for 5 minutes.
Mr. Latta. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Madam Secretary, good to have you back. You said a little
earlier that we can't ban Russian uranium until we have our own
domestic industry built up. But industry has said they can't.
They need to have the certainty if they are going to invest in
that. Wouldn't Congress passing the ban with possible waivers
send that market a signal and help provide the industry with
that need, that certainty that we have to have out there?
Ms. Granholm. It is possible, but I am worried--my worry is
about the gap, right? We need to build up the supply here. And
I think the way to do that is to work with Congress on a
uranium strategy that gives us the ability to finance the
processing, the conversion, the enrichment in the United
States.
So this was--we got a downpayment on that through the $700
million, but it is just the tip of the iceberg. We need about
2.1 billion and a revolving fund to be able to send the message
both to industry and to not cut the legs out from under the
existing----
Mr. Latta. Well, because----
Ms. Granholm [continuing]. Fleet----
Mr. Latta. You know, the fear out there, though, it is the
time factor we have. And, you know, if you just keep putting it
off, we just--I think we have to have a time limit out there
that we make sure that the United States is going to take care
of itself.
Let me just go on another point that was brought up a
little bit earlier, because I have--this is something I have
been very interested and involved in with our spent nuclear
rods. You know, you mentioned about that--you know, the United
States is behind. France has been doing this for years. Not
only is France doing it, but France is also reprocessing rods
for other countries. So why are we lagging?
Ms. Granholm. Yes, I think this is the question. I mean, in
France they--it is heavily subsidized by the French Government.
And that could be one way of going. I think what we have been
looking at in our research is how to commercialize it in a way
where private entities can take this on.
However, your point about us thinking differently about how
we have done this is very important so that we can be
independent, and I would eager----
Mr. Latta. Well----
Ms. Granholm [continuing]. Be eager to have that
conversation.
Mr. Latta. Well, and it is really important because, again,
just to finish up on this point, because, you know, if we go
out there and you think about all the rods we have out there
right now around the entire country----
Ms. Granholm. Yes.
Mr. Latta [continuing]. We wouldn't need to worry about
uranium for a little while, because we have got it right now.
Let me move on to another area. You know, I am very
concerned that the Biden administration and States like
California are pursuing policies that will undermine the
reliability of the grid. And you also mentioned a little
earlier that we have to have enough transmission out there. And
we--and, you know, there's proponents out there saying that we
need to have EVs by 2035, but we also saw what happened in
California around Labor Day of last year, where we saw the
Governor saying that people needed to turn their air
conditioners up and not plug their cars in.
And then the other problem has been--is that, you know,
when you are talking about transmission and where we are going
to get it, that, for example, EIA in 2019--in--these are, like,
2019 estimates--that the United States would need to generate
at least 50 percent more electricity to power all the electric
vehicle fleet. And that is 4 years ago. And we have been
seeing, you know, a push for even more.
With the administration pushing for these unreasonable
standards, I believe that--and we are seeing today we are going
to be shutting down coal and gas-fired power plants around the
country and losing that baseload capacity out there. What is
the plan to generate the levels of electricity for this country
that we are going to need for all of our vehicles and
appliances, and especially your home State, Michigan, Ohio,
mine? We are heavy manufacturing. We need baseload. It is not
intermittent power. Where are we going to get it from?
Ms. Granholm. Yes, so a couple of responses to that.
Number one is that the wind and solar are intermittent. We
know that. And we have to add the technology associated with
battery storage to make them more like baseload. And we are
making great breakthroughs in that. And in many places they
have already started to deploy wind/solar combinations that get
them a reliable grid.
However, it is clear that we--this is a transition. We
cannot flip a switch automatically and expect that everything
is going to be 100 percent clean tomorrow. This is why what the
EPA did today was to give a ramp that goes to 2040 so that we
have the time to be able to develop and deploy the
technologies.
Mr. Latta. Just to reclaim my time, because, you know, when
you have been out and heard from the industry and all like
that, they said we just can't get there by 2035. And even if it
is 2040, they are saying we got a problem.
Let me let me finish up on one other question, because
again, I am concerned about some of the proposed actions out
there for U.S. consumers that prefer top-loading machines, and
the proposed standard would also drastically increase the
upfront cost of basic new clothes washers by nearly $200,
according to the Department's own estimates, which would have a
particularly negative impact on low-income consumers.
Will you commit that any final DOE clothes washer standard
will guarantee that consumers will continue to have access to
top-loading washers of various capacities without a significant
price surge for consumers?
Ms. Granholm. We are always concerned about the price, both
short-term in the upfront costs as well as the long-term price
that--the savings that are generated, particularly for lower-
income people. This is an open proposed rule----
Mr. Latta. But is it something----
Ms. Granholm. So we are eager to hear----
Mr. Latta. Just if we can get a yes or no on that, that you
will, you know, make sure that we are not going to see these
increases, that we need to--DOE be out there saying that we are
not going to have these high increase for these people across
the country with these top-loading washing machines. Would DOE
commit to that?
Ms. Granholm. We are--I would commit that we are not going
to raise significantly the price of top-loading washing
machines----
Mr. Latta. OK. Well, Madam Secretary, I am going to take
that for a yes. Thank you.
Mr. Duncan. I thank the gentleman. I will now go to Mrs.
Fletcher from Texas for 5 minutes.
Mrs. Fletcher. Thank you, Chairman Duncan, and thank you,
Secretary Granholm, for being here and for sharing your
thoughts with us today.
As we have heard from several folks today, the legislation
that we passed in the last Congress has been historic and
transformational, and is really important in investing in
technologies that are going to power our future while reducing
our emissions and helping us address our climate goals and
achieve them.
And we have already seen the market respond, in addition to
what we are seeing in terms of investments from the Government.
We are seeing, I think, $242 billion of new clean energy
investments have already been announced. We are certainly
seeing that in Houston, and we are seeing some of the
challenges, as well. And so I want to follow up on some of the
questions that you were just discussing with Mr. Peters,
specifically around permitting reform, and drill down a little
bit.
I really appreciated your testimony about how to address
some of the challenges that we see, and it is certainly
something that I hear from my constituents, and one area in
particular I wanted to ask you about.
We have seen exploding demand for carbon capture
utilization and storage. The Houston Carbon Capture Storage
Alliance was recently formed to really take--to advance what is
one of, I think, the most--the biggest CCUS opportunities in
the world. The collection of energy companies, organizations,
academia, and institutions and experts are working together so
that the region can store 100 million metric tons of carbon per
year by 2040. So this is really an incredible opportunity.
And the work that DOE has done up to this point has made
this possible. But there is still work to do, as you have
already testified. And I think one of the challenges we see is
that, while the technological capabilities exist and the
funding to deploy the technology is included in the
Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act, there are still
barriers to a functioning ecosystem. And it is primarily
relating to permitting, how we build the infrastructure to do
this to transport and store the carbon. And you know, also,
permitting class 6 wells is hindered by these long regulatory
timelines that you were discussing.
And so, while these aren't the primary jurisdiction of the
Department of Energy, I understand, I do think the Department
has a role in convening the stakeholders and working together
with other agencies to really advance a whole-of-government
approach to ensuring success for CCUS. So I would love it if
you could talk for a minute about what steps you have taken to
work with EPA and other relevant agencies to really drive a
whole-of-government approach to addressing these challenges, in
particular when it comes to CCUS.
Ms. Granholm. Yes, we are in constant contact with EPA
about this, because this whole effort to try to sequester is
not going to work unless you have a place for it to be
sequestered in. And less on EPA, but more for our Loan Programs
office, we have the ability now to finance the pipelines to be
able to move the CO2, as well--and hydrogen, as well.
So we are--we have to do all of it. We have got to make
sure we have the acceptance, as well, which--obviously, there
is acceptance, you know, in Texas, in the Houston area. We have
to make sure that we are bringing along the community as we
gain that acceptance. We have to make sure we can safely
sequester it, and we have to make sure we can transport. All of
that infrastructure is necessary, and now we have the tools to
be able to help industry get there.
But the permitting side and the government side of this has
got to be addressed, and we have to move with greater speed.
And I hope--I mean, everybody keeps talking about it--right,
left, White House--so I am hopeful that we can all agree that
we need to do this and compromise to get that done.
Mrs. Fletcher. Well, thank you. I hope so too. And I
appreciate your commitment to doing that. And I think you
really serve in such an important capacity as a convener here.
And I know the interest is sincere on our side of the aisle,
and it is certainly something I hear about every day when I
talk to my constituents about the challenges and, really, the
opportunities that are in front of us.
With that in mind, I want to switch gears a little bit and
follow up on a question, touch on something that Mr. Pallone
mentioned in his opening remarks. I agree that the Department's
use of the Strategic Petroleum Reserve over the last year has
been very important in bringing down the cost of gasoline.
Last year, President Biden announced that the
administration was targeting a price range of roughly 67 to 72
dollars per barrel of crude to refill the SPR, and that is a
$20-per-barrel profit. So I understand that the Department is
currently completing long-mandated modernization work on some
of the caverns, and that the cavern infrastructure right now is
not ready to receive, physically, some oil. But I want to point
out that the oil markets are currently backward-dated, and that
means that the future prices are lower than the current prices,
and oil futures for this fall are currently within the
Department's target price range for purchase.
So I would love to ask, and maybe get the answer in the
record, how the DOE can take full advantage of the current low
oil prices to refill the SPR, and how--or if any additional
authorities are needed from Congress to be able to do so.
Ms. Granholm. No, I think we have the authorities to be
able to do it.
Right now, in addition to the maintenance that is
happening, the life extension program, we are also doing
congressionally mandated sales. And that congressionally
mandated sale of 26 million barrels will be completed by June.
And it is at that point where we will flip the switch and then
seek to purchase.
Mr. Duncan. The gentlelady's time has expired.
Ms. Granholm. So we hope to be able to take advantage----
Mrs. Fletcher. Thank you.
Mr. Duncan. I am going to go to Mr. Guthrie from Kentucky.
Mr. Guthrie. Thank you very much.
Thank you, Madam Secretary. Brett Guthrie from Kentucky,
but I lived a year in Grand Rapids----
Ms. Granholm. All right.
Mr. Guthrie [continuing]. Learning the automotive supply
business. And, you know, the EV is exciting in my area. I
represent I-65 between Louisville and Nashville--obviously, not
south of the Tennessee border, but essentially between
Louisville and Nashville--and we have BlueOvalSK, which is
locating there in Elizabethtown, and then Envision coming. And
so it is important.
But it has been brought up a couple of times, one of our
biggest concerns is baseload power just to supply the battery
plants, not necessarily--I mean, it is set for what they are
constructing, but the issue is for moving forward, and
expanding baseload power. So I just think there's a lot of
concerns in moving to electric vehicles. There's just a lot of
concerns.
And it seems that, when we talk to members of the
administration or people who are promoting the fast transition,
that a lot of the concerns get just dismissed away--``Oh, we
will figure that out and we will move forward.'' And you used
the term we are not going to ``flip a switch.'' I know that you
have--that the administration has put out you are going to be
two-thirds battery electric vehicles by 2032. So it is 10
years.
And, you know, it takes about 5 to 7 years to launch a new
product for automotive. And that 5 to 7 years actually could be
faster, I could tell you that, but it is when you have existing
supply base and people just retool their factories. We are
talking about building new battery plants, securing lithium,
securing a lot of other things. And I don't think many people
in automotive, if they are giving you a real answer, would say
that is doable in the--by 2032, because that is 10 million
vehicles.
So if you take--we sell 15 million cars in America--that is
10 million vehicles. So if we could do half of that, if we
could do half of that, which is a big goal if we could do half
of that, but half of that means two-thirds of the fleet will
be--would be 8 million because you have--half of that would be
5 million electrical vehicles. Or if you even say two-thirds of
that, we are talking about selling 10 million cars in America.
And I know you were Governor of Michigan in 2009, when we sold
9 million cars in America, and what did that do to Michigan?
What did that do to America? And what did it do to the world
when the automotive industry shrunk in half?
Now, if you stated two-thirds--if we can't hit that two-
thirds goal, you are talking about shrinking the new sales in
America to whatever that level of two-thirds is.
Ms. Granholm. So we don't want to put the cart before the
horse, as you say. We want to make sure we have a grid that is
capable of taking on electrification. We have--want to make
sure that the goals--and these are just goals, right--the auto
industry put forth a goal of half of its fleet being electric
by 2030. Obviously, that is the industry goal. That is the
administration's goal by 2030.
We don't know how fast this is going. We know that electric
vehicle sales doubled this past year. We know that it is----
Mr. Guthrie. Right.
Ms. Granholm [continuing]. Really accelerating. But to your
point, we have to make sure that we have a grid that can
withstand it and that we have enough electricity on that grid
to be able to make it, which is, again, why--I will just be
honest--the tools that have been given to be able to
incentivize the deployment of additional energy resources are
really important. And I am grateful to Congress for those who
supported that, because it will help us to be able to ensure
that we have a reliable grid.
Mr. Guthrie. Well, thanks for saying ``goals,'' because I
say that to a lot of people in automotive. This is--you know, I
know it is 2032. I don't think anybody can get there, but we
are going to move--well, things like this happen in Congress,
delays, and I say that, and they say to me, they said, you
know, ``This is an EPA rule. It is not an administration goal,
and we can't invest to a goal. We have to invest to what the
rules are.'' And if you are going to tell me--which I can't
tell them, ``Hopefully my colleagues here could fix this,'' but
we can't say, ``Well, don't invest according to the rules
because somewhere down the road we are going to fix this.''
This is really changing the investment in the automotive
industry.
So let's say we get to 5 years down the road, and you are
saying, well, maybe just half, or maybe just a third, since we
can't get there. Well, people have already got out of
powertrain, people aren't making transmissions anymore. And so
you are really risking the supply chain. You are really risking
moving forward.
So just to say it is a goal would be one thing, but putting
in as a rule, that--you can't get an investment from capital
suppliers. I mean, it is really concerning, unless we really
think--and if all the automotive people get in the room and
say--with honesty and say that we think we can get there in
2032, that is one thing. But I don't think you will hear that
if you get a good answer.
Ms. Granholm. Well, I will say that these rules have been
modeled, and the technologies that can allow existing baseload
to stay online and meet the rules exist. And Congress has given
tools to make sure that they are profitable.
So the increase, for example, in carbon--the amount of
money for carbon capture, so that you can keep a baseload plant
online, that is really quite amazing and will help to ensure
that you have a reliable and growing grid.
Mr. Guthrie. Well, baseload is one thing. So that is
important. But it is also--it is getting the supply chain
together to go to two--you are completely changing the
automotive industry. It is not--and that is what you want to
do, I understand that, but it is not--you can't just flip a
switch and--I am just really concerned we are going to really
disrupt the automotive chain and the supply chain, which
affects, as you know, the economy of America.
Ms. Granholm. Yes, 160 battery companies coming to America.
That is pretty exciting.
Mr. Guthrie. I agree with you, but I am not sure we are
going to get to 10 million cars in 10 years. That is the
question. Thank you.
Mr. Duncan. The gentleman's time has expired. I will now go
to Ms. Matsui for 5 minutes.
Ms. Matsui. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, and thank
you, Madam Secretary, for being here and being part of this
great discussion.
You know, each year I lead an appropriations letter with
Senator Cortez Mastro and Chairman Carper and Congresswoman
Clarke supporting increased funding for DOE clean
transportation programs. Programs like the Vehicle Technologies
Office produce cutting-edge innovations that are crucial to
keeping the U.S. one step ahead of our competitors.
Medium- and heavy-duty vehicles are the largest mobile
source of smog-forming pollutants, particulate matter, carbon
monoxide, and other air toxics. Some heavy-vehicle classes,
like busses, are ripe for electrification, while others, like
long-haul trucks, are more challenging.
The question is, what is DOE doing to help decarbonize
long-haul trucking, and what technology or infrastructure
challenges do we need to overcome in order to eliminate
pollution from long-haul trucking?
Ms. Granholm. Yes, thanks for that question, too, because
our Vehicle Technologies Office has been working on this, and
the long-haul trucking largely has been focused on both--
biofuels is one----
Ms. Matsui. Right.
Ms. Granholm [continuing]. But also hydrogen fuel cells,
very important, especially for fleet.
And there is a lot of work being done now on large-scale
batteries, as well. Those are more expensive. We will see how
that goes. But DOE's long-term research in batteries for
vehicles tells you we can reduce the cost. Eighty percent has
been--the cost has been reduced 80 percent for batteries over
the past decade. So the continuation of that is very important,
as well as looking at the materials that can build those
stronger, bigger batteries----
Ms. Matsui. Yes.
Ms. Granholm [continuing]. And substitute out for the more
expensive materials that are currently in the lithium ion
batteries.
Ms. Matsui. Yes, and I was going to follow up on that
vehicle battery research, because research into battery
technology for electric vehicles is a significant focus of the
fiscal year 2024 budget for the Vehicle Technologies Office.
Now, foreign battery companies have made significant
advancements in battery technology in recent years. Madam
Secretary, what new-generation battery technologies is DOE
working on, and, if commercialized, how would these new
technologies potentially impact the range and cost of electric
vehicles?
Ms. Granholm. Yes. So obviously, there are batteries for
electric vehicles and there are batteries for long-duration
storage.
Ms. Matsui. Right.
Ms. Granholm. And the technologies sometimes they share and
learn from one another, and sometimes they are quite different.
For long-duration storage, you can use things like iron,
iron flow batteries, because they are bigger and you don't have
to worry about putting them into a vehicle, right?
Ms. Matsui. Sure.
Ms. Granholm. But for vehicles, you want to have substitute
materials that lessen your reliance on very expensive materials
like cobalt. And so, for example, Argonne National Lab is
working on a lithium manganese battery that lessens our
reliance on cobalt and that gets you very great performance for
larger vehicles. That kind of technology is what we are looking
at.
We have got our 17 labs, probably 10 of them are working on
next-generation materials and substitutes for both long-
duration energy storage as well as for vehicles.
Ms. Matsui. OK, that is great. Thank you.
My district includes--in Sacramento includes a
decommissioned nuclear generating station at Rancho Seco. And I
bring this up every year: The power station closed in 1989, but
the spent nuclear fuel is still awaiting transport to a
consolidated storage facility. Each year I lead an
appropriations letter in support of DOE's interim storage
program. And after years of inaction, I am pleased to see the
recent progress with the consent-based siting approach.
Madam Secretary, can you describe how the $53 million in
the fiscal year 2024 budget will advance the consent-based
siting approach?
Ms. Granholm. Yes, thank you for that question.
We issued last year a request for information to find out
whether there were communities that might be willing to raise
their hand. And then we issued a funding opportunity
announcement. We got a number of communities that were willing
to enter into those discussions. We will be announcing those
awards, I want to say, this spring. And then, after they have
the opportunity to do the work that they need to do to prepare,
we will then follow up in 2024 with the ability to be able to
start the conversation about actually doing interim storage.
Now, we can negotiate, we can have these discussions, but
we don't have the authority--DOE does not--Congress needs to
give us the authority to actually help site the facilities,
both--whether it is interim--and I will say that there is, you
know, there is concern if you do an interim one, does that mean
I am going to be the long-term place as well?
Ms. Matsui. Well, yes.
Ms. Granholm. And that authority also needs to be----
Ms. Matsui. Well, and I am looking at--you know, as the
administration pursues a new fleet of advanced reactors, you
know, we have to think about the waste storage. I think----
Ms. Granholm. Yes.
Ms. Matsui [continuing]. Some people are thinking--not
knowing that we--what kind of waste are we going to have, how
are we going to deal with it? And if we can take care of this,
it would be really important for our thinking about the nuclear
industry to move in a positive way.
Ms. Granholm. Absolutely.
Ms. Matsui. Thank you very much.
Ms. Granholm. Thank you.
Mr. Duncan. The gentlelady's time has expired. I will now
go to Mr. Griffith for 5 minutes.
Mr. Griffith. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, and I
appreciate it.
Secretary Granholm, are you aware that China reportedly
permitted or began construction on coal units equivalent to
about 2 coal-fired power plants per week in 2022?
Ms. Granholm. They are the world's largest emitter.
Mr. Griffith. And they are building more coal plants. That
is correct, is it not?
Ms. Granholm. That is correct.
Mr. Griffith. And I surmise that last year's renewed
construction, based on the reports that I have read, is likely
in response to grid failures that China experienced last summer
due to heat and drought.
Especially after today's announcement of its newest
crackdown on fossil fuel plants, what are we going to do in our
country to mitigate coal and natural gas power plant closures
and ensure that America doesn't fall prey to grid failures like
China did?
Ms. Granholm. A great question, and it is one of the
reasons why the funding for carbon capture and sequestration,
the amount of money going to $85 per ton for sequestration, is
an incentive to install decarbonization technologies on coal
plants and on natural gas plants as well. That will enable
those plants to keep running.
If they are a plant that has already announced that they
are closing, they don't have to install any of that stuff. But
if they are going to be long term, I think because of the
resources that has been given, it allows for them to continue
to operate, but without CO
2
emissions.
Mr. Griffith. Well, and based on your statement just now,
if you are already planning to close, or if you are going to
close, you don't have to spend the money. Isn't that actually
going to do the opposite, and encourage more plants to close
and therefore put our grid at risk?
Ms. Granholm. I think that those are private investment
decisions by those--by the operators----
Mr. Griffith. Driven by your policies.
Ms. Granholm [continuing]. Of those plants.
Well, I don't think so. I think we want to make sure that
we have decarbonized our electric system, and that is why the
technologies exist.
Mr. Griffith. We are just going to have to disagree on
that, Madam Chair--or Madam Secretary. I appreciate it.
Cathy McMorris Rodgers and I, in my capacity--her in
capacity as Chair of the full committee and my capacity as
Chair of the Oversight and Investigations Subcommittee, wrote
to you last year requesting a briefing to include specific
information regarding the Department's October 2022
announcement of a $200 million award to Microvast and the
Department's review of potential ties to the Chinese Communist
Party. That requested briefing has not occurred, and your
written response from February of this year did not provide the
requested information. Instead, the Department stated that it
would not provide more information on this award while it was
still undergoing a ``post-selection, risk-based due diligence
review.''
Is it a--and here is the question: Is it standard procedure
for the Department to begin conducting due diligence reviews
more than 3 months after it announces an award?
Ms. Granholm. The Department conducts reviews after the
announcement of a selection, because that always happens, and
every person, every entity that is selected gets a letter
saying that this is not a done deal, you have to go through a
due diligence process.
With the additional funds that have been now coming through
the Department of Energy and the grant funding, we have set up
a process that is informed by the Committee on Foreign
Investment in the United States to ensure that we vet everyone
that has made it through the technical reviews. So there's
several layers of review to be able to be eligible for funding.
In the instance you have described, not a dollar has gone out.
So just to be clear: There is a serious process of vetting
that is going with everyone that was selected now, and that is
a serious looking under the hood to make sure taxpayers are
protected and that no IP is going to China.
Mr. Griffith. And has that always been the case when you
all do an award?
Ms. Granholm. We have always done vetting, but this time we
are--because of the new funding that we have, set up a
different and more intense process that is involving the
Committee on Foreign Investment in the United States and their
process.
Mr. Griffith. And I am not against that, but I am curious.
When did you all develop this? Was it before the grants were
announced, or--I forgot the words you just used, but before the
grants were----
Ms. Granholm. Selected.
Mr. Griffith. Selected, there you go. Thank you. Before the
grants were selected, or was this a process that came about
subsequent because of some of the negative press you got about
Microvast?
Ms. Granholm. Well, let me just say that we have always had
a vetting process. And now--in the fall we set up a more
intensive vetting process because of the additional funding
that is coming through the Department of Energy and making sure
that we can protect the taxpayer and ensure that China is not
getting funding from us.
Mr. Griffith. So it would be subsequent to our letter?
Ms. Granholm. Well, again, I don't know when your letter
was----
Mr. Griffith. October of 2022.
Ms. Granholm. I don't know exactly.
Mr. Griffith. You can get back to me. My time is up, but
you can get back to me.
Ms. Granholm. Yes, for sure.
Mr. Griffith. I would appreciate it. Thank you.
Ms. Granholm. You bet.
Mr. Duncan. The gentleman's time has expired. I will now go
to Mr. Tonko for 5 minutes.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
And Secretary Granholm, thank you for your leadership,
outstanding leadership, with the agency. Thank you to the
Department for all you are doing. You have been in my district,
and they really believe in the efforts that you are making, and
we see them as strong partnerships that will really get us to
this transformation.
Now, we hear a lot of talk today about a vision of a clean
energy economy, and then the fundamentals of assets, resources,
infrastructure, and the like. But it seems as though we part
company where there is a message from some that will make
certain that never happens, and others are messaging we are
investing in the now and the future to make certain it happens.
So study after study has found that the clean energy
transition will require massive investments and buildout of our
electric grid, especially transmission lines, which we know can
take close to a decade to get through the siting, permitting,
and construction process. I would like to ask about some of the
actions DOE is taking to accelerate these electric
infrastructure projects.
Yesterday the White House permitting announcement confirmed
that DOE has entered into an interagency memorandum of
understanding using its authority under the Federal Power Act.
So, Madam Secretary, can you inform us about anything happening
with the MOU?
And what is DOE's role as the lead Federal agency for
coordinating the authorization of these transmission lines?
Ms. Granholm. Yes, so the memorandum of understanding
involves several of the land agencies and those who do
permitting and the Department of Energy. And under the Federal
Power Act section 216(h), it gives the Department of Energy the
ability to set a timeframe, a timetable for the granting and
the processing of permits. And so we will be shepherding them
with more rapidity.
Mr. Tonko. Great. And how will this improve interagency
coordination, help permit transmission lines more quickly
without sacrificing important environmental reviews?
Ms. Granholm. Well, it is very important to make sure that
we do the environmental reviews properly, but we can do them
simultaneously. You don't have to wait to do a concurrent. And
to get the agencies at the same table on the same project to
identify what the barriers are and move through it quickly to
develop the mitigation strategies--if they are necessary--
together, that helps to move things with greater speed.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you. And offshore wind energy is also
going to require major transmission planning and investments.
Several studies have found that using a system of shared
transmission infrastructure where multiple projects from
different developers are connected offshore will be more cost
effective and less environmentally disruptive.
Earlier this year, DOE released a major offshore
transmission study which identified interoperability of
electric equipment as a potential barrier to this vision of
shared offshore infrastructure. So can DOE play a role working
with project developers and transmission equipment
manufacturers to support the development of standards to
overcome these interoperability challenges?
Ms. Granholm. Yes, and this is part of what the MOU sets
up, is a way for us to work together with the private sector as
well as the agencies to move more quickly.
We did a study both on the Atlantic and we are starting one
now on the West Coast as well, so that we can have the same
kind of speedy process and coordination.
Mr. Tonko. Super. We also need to get more out of our
existing infrastructure. Grid-enhancing technologies and
reconductoring of existing lines can make them more efficient
and reduce line loss. Building new infrastructure faster is
critical, but what is DOE doing to ensure that we are getting
the most out of the infrastructure that we already have in
place?
Ms. Granholm. Yes, I love this question, because I do think
it is one of the solutions to how we get around some of the
NIMBY problems.
So under the Bipartisan Infrastructure Law, the Grid
Deployment Office has $5 billion for enhancements of grid
technologies. Reconductoring is one of those. And we are
hopeful that we get a number of applicants who are willing to
use existing lines just to put twice as much power on them by
using more efficient materials.
Mr. Tonko. Great, setting a great tone.
Finally, on the Inflation Reduction Act, I know DOE is
working hard to implement all the new programs, including
electric appliance rebates for low- and moderate-income
households. This program will be administered by State and
Tribal governments. Madam Secretary, can you provide any
updates on when guidance for this program may be released?
And can you discuss how DOE is working to provide support
and tools to States so that their programs will be consistent
and useful for both consumers and retailers?
Ms. Granholm. Yes, very important. This is a new program,
so we did a request for information to make sure we got the
input of stakeholders, and that includes retailers because we
want the rebates to be taken at the point of sale. How quickly
can we do that? How--what does that look like?
Each State will be administering the rebate programs, and
so we want to make sure we set up that guidance in a way that
is very clear and consistent across States so that there is not
a patchwork. That guidance and the rebate money will flow to
the States this fall in order for it to be available for this
winter season.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you, and thank you for leading us into a
transformational era. Thanks.
Mr. Duncan. The gentleman's time has expired. I will go now
to the Chair of the environmental subcommittee, Mr. Johnson,
for 5 minutes.
Mr. Johnson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and Madam Secretary,
thank you for being here today. I want to discuss a pressing
subject that both the Energy Subcommittee and my Environment,
Manufacturing, and Critical Materials Subcommittee have been
working on for some time now, and that is the issue of critical
minerals, rare earths, and the precarious nature of the supply
chain. It is a national security issue. This is a defining
challenge for policymakers here in the 21st century.
So, Madam Secretary, for the record, do you agree that the
United States needs to reduce its dependance on unfriendly
nations and secure the supply chains for sometimes volatile
global commodities like lithium, cobalt, graphite, and rare
earths, among others?
Ms. Granholm. I do.
Mr. Johnson. OK, great, because that seems to contradict
your remarks a couple of weeks ago before the Senate.
Now, I truly wish we had time to get into your claim, for
example, that--in that Senate hearing--that we can electrify
the military by 2030. Because based on my 26-year Air Force
career, I don't even know how to process that. But in your
reasoning for this statement that you made, you said we need to
bolster energy security by ``reducing our reliance on the
volatility of globally traded fossil fuels.''
So, Madam Secretary, I am trying to connect the dots. Are
you telling us that dependance on globally traded fossil fuels
is too volatile and dangerous for our military, therefore we
should electrify, but somehow making our military dependent on
other globally traded commodities and enormous additional
amounts of lithium, cobalt, and rare earths is an improvement
of some kind?
Ms. Granholm. I believe we should have the full supply
chain----
Mr. Johnson. Just a yes----
Ms. Granholm. No, I----
Mr. Johnson. Just a yes or no.
Ms. Granholm. First of all, that was a question that was
asked of me by Senator Ernst. And the--I was agreeing with what
the military wanted.
Mr. Johnson. OK.
Ms. Granholm. Because they have said----
Mr. Johnson. No, but I am asking you----
Ms. Granholm. Let me just finish this, though.
Mr. Johnson. No, I don't want a filibuster----
Ms. Granholm. This is a really important clarification----
Mr. Johnson [continuing]. Madam Secretary----
Ms. Granholm [continuing]. Because they have said----
Mr. Johnson. I don't want a filibuster.
Ms. Granholm [continuing]. That the----
Mr. Johnson. I want you to answer the question.
Ms. Granholm. I am not filibustering, I am clarifying.
Mr. Johnson. Do you think that it is responsible to make
the military dependent upon those volatile commodities?
Ms. Granholm. No, I think the military should be dependent
on----
Mr. Johnson. But you said that----
Ms. Granholm [continuing]. Supply chains from here, from
here.
Mr. Johnson [continuing]. In that hearing.
Ms. Granholm. No----
Mr. Johnson. You said they should----
Ms. Granholm. You won't let me explain. That hearing--I
believe what the military said, which is they believe they can
electrify nontactical vehicles----
Mr. Johnson. Well, you just confirmed that.
Ms. Granholm [continuing]. Nontactical vehicles----
Mr. Johnson. So would you agree----
Ms. Granholm [continuing]. By 2035, nontactical vehicles--
--
Mr. Johnson. Madam Secretary, reclaiming my time, I am
asking the questions, please.
Ms. Granholm. I know, but you won't let me answer.
Mr. Johnson. Would you agree that these critical minerals
are, in fact, volatile and controlled in many cases by
unfriendly nations like China, and become--could become scarce
in a conflict? Do you agree with that?
Ms. Granholm. Right now, but that is why----
Mr. Johnson. OK, great.
Ms. Granholm [continuing]. We have a strategy to be able to
get----
Mr. Johnson. So, Madam Secretary, I actually agree with
you----
Ms. Granholm [continuing]. Extraction here.
Mr. Johnson [continuing]. That we want to become more
secure in all our critical energy resources. Let's produce more
of it here at home.
Ms. Granholm. Right.
Mr. Johnson. But the fact of the matter is we have never,
ever been as dependent on OPEC for oil than we are on China
right now for the critical materials to do this electrification
that you are advocating for.
The 7-year timeframe that you suggested to electrify the
military is a recipe for further dangerous dependance on China
for these materials that our military and civilian fleets of
vehicles, for that matter, would need.
So you told the Senate we need to double down on the status
quo and stop being dependent on volatile commodities like
fossil fuels, but you just said that you want to secure the
supply chain. So which is it? Because you can't do both.
Ms. Granholm. Number one, I support the military's
decision----
Mr. Johnson. No, but----
Ms. Granholm [continuing]. To try to go electric by 2035.
Mr. Johnson. I asked you a different question.
Ms. Granholm. No, you didn't.
Mr. Johnson. Which is it?
Ms. Granholm. And number two----
Mr. Johnson. Do you think we should be--do we--should
secure our supply chains, or----
Ms. Granholm. Here, yes, I do.
Mr. Johnson [continuing]. Do you think we should be
dependent on China?
Ms. Granholm. And that is exactly what the President's
agenda is allowing us to do, is to----
Mr. Johnson. Well----
Ms. Granholm [continuing]. Both extract and process here in
the United States.
Mr. Johnson. You say one thing when you are over in the
Senate, and you say another thing when you are over here, and
your comments don't match, Madam Secretary. And that is what--
--
Ms. Granholm. Well----
Mr. Johnson [continuing]. Is confusing us.
Ms. Granholm. Unfortunately, you are twisting the words.
Mr. Johnson. That is what is confusing the rest of the
American people.
For the record, would you commit to working with your
agency and your experts to better study our dependance on
critical energy resources and identify ways to increase
production, refining, and processing of those critical
materials right here at home?
Ms. Granholm. We are doing that, and absolutely.
Mr. Johnson. Mr. Chair, I yield back.
Ms. Granholm. One point of agreement.
Mr. Duncan. The gentleman's time has expired. I now go to
Mr. Veasey from Texas for 5 minutes.
Mr. Veasey. Mr. Chairman, thank you very much.
Madam Secretary, last Congress the Bipartisan
Infrastructure Law invested a historic $1.2 trillion in our
Nation's infrastructure, and the Inflation Reduction Act
provided 369 billion in investments for growing domestic
cleaner energy. These laws are already creating new jobs, they
are already cutting costs for working families, and they are
helping America be more competitive in this space.
Under no circumstances--absolutely under no circumstances
do we want China to be the leaders in this space, particularly
with the world being so thirsty for a lot of these newer
technologies. And so I thank you for being here today to answer
these questions. And before I get specifically to mine, I
wanted to give you the opportunity to take 30 seconds to
clarify your position on the question that Mr. Johnson was
asking you.
Ms. Granholm. Number one, I support the military's goal of
electrifying the nontactical vehicles by 2035 and the tactical
vehicles by 2050. That is a goal. I support the generals.
Number two, I also support the bringing of the supply chain
for batteries home so that we are reliant on us, on our land,
on our processing, and on our workers to make us energy
independent.
Mr. Veasey. Thank you very much, Madam Secretary.
In the carbon management liftoff report the Department
released a few weeks ago, your Department estimated that the
U.S. could need up to 1.8 billion tons per year of
CO
2
removal by 2050. And right now we only have 20
million. Can you talk about how carbon removal programs that
were authorized under the Energy Act and the Bipartisan
Infrastructure Law are helping create a domestic carbon removal
industry that will be necessary to help us get to the scale of
carbon renewal in just 27 years?
Ms. Granholm. Yes, and thank you for your leadership on
this, the SCALE Act obviously providing such an impetus for us
to be able to use the Loan Program Office to be able to fund
the infrastructure necessary for carbon--the movement of
CO
2
as well as the sequestration of it, and to be
able to finance that in a large-scale manner is very important.
In addition, the ability to be able to finance and pay for
the sequestration at $85 per metric--per ton is critical for us
to create that market. So we have both now supply and demand,
and the ability to be able to move it, that we are working on
all at once. But that market is essential for us to get to our
decarbonization goals.
Mr. Veasey. Absolutely. And I also want to zero in on the
Carbon Dioxide Transportation Infrastructure Finance and
Innovation Act, which I secured the inclusion within the
Bipartisan Infrastructure Law. Can you talk a little bit about
LPL's implementation of that program and when we might start to
see the first loans being put out for that program?
Ms. Granholm. Yes, it is my understanding that there have
been several applicants for that provision to be able--and they
are in discussions now with the Loan Programs Office. The loan
programs process is very rigorous, and so--and we want it to
be. And so we hope that we will be able to see some
announcements later this year.
Mr. Veasey. Thank you very much.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Duncan. We are just trying to calculate. Votes have
just been called, and we are trying to calculate based on your
hard break and Members coming back. We are going to go ahead
and take another couple of questions before Members have to go,
and then I am going to talk with the staff.
I now Recognize Mr. Bucshon for 5 minutes.
Mr. Bucshon. Thank you.
Secretary Granholm, thanks for being here. I do want to
clarify something about you saying that the generals want to do
that. The generals work for the President of the United States,
and the ones that don't agree with the President of the United
States get replaced by people who do agree with the President
of the United States. So for--the American people should know
that high-level generals that are running the DoD in an
administration are people that, in general, politically agree
with the commander in chief, or they are replaced by someone
who does.
So I just think it is really--any time a political party
says that you--tries to use our military as a reason they are
doing something and--like it is their expertise--yes, it is
their expertise, but they agree--these level people you are
talking about agree with the commander in chief, or they
wouldn't be in their job. So it is just--I just--just don't do
that.
As I have stated before, I am strongly supportive of an
all-of-the-above energy approach. Look, we need reliable,
affordable energy, and we obviously need to decrease our carbon
emissions. I think that is a goal that we all have. I just
believe that it should be about emissions, not about source.
And America's future, you know, we have to have affordable,
reliable, sustainable energy that is cleaner, no doubt, and
will require a diverse energy mix.
Have you been recently in Europe or talked to any of your
European counterparts in Poland, Germany, Czech Republic,
anywhere in Eastern Europe?
And have you--are you aware of what is happening in Eastern
Europe related to the fact that they have all now recognized
that it is a bad idea to be dependent on energy sources from
countries that don't like you?
Ms. Granholm. Absolutely.
Mr. Bucshon. Well, then you must have a different
interpretation of what they have said than I did, because I was
just there with Chair Rodgers. And, you know, if you go to the
European Union, they are true believers in global warming, the
ministers there, I understand that. But when you actually talk
to the countries who are at risk of losing their national
security based on energy insecurity, what they told us, they
are rapidly looking for alternatives to Russian fuel.
And guess where they are looking in the short term? They
are going back to coal that they have, or they are reliant--
going to rely on LNG imports from around the world. And it is
going to, from what they had on their clean energy agenda
before, set Europe back by a decade or more on that goal,
because they were short-sighted and didn't take an all-of-the-
above approach.
And now they have shut down all their nuclear plants and
they no longer can rely on Russian gas, although there were
protests in Europe, some people loyal to the Russians, that
want the European countries to start importing cheap Russian
gas. This creates an international instability.
The United States cannot put ourself in a position of being
reliant on foreign sources of energy while shutting down our
own energy resources in this country, and that is what this
administration is doing by all the things they are doing to
their rush to green, to eliminate fossil fuel in the short run
and the long run.
And what we should be doing is focusing on emissions and
not source. And if we don't do that, we are going to end up
just like they are over there, scrambling, wondering whether
they can keep the lights on and the heat on in the winter. It
is just--it just--when I--these hearings, when I hear my
colleagues like yourself and on the other side of the aisle
talk about--this isn't--your plans are not doable. Everybody in
the--almost everybody we talk to in Europe has now recognized
that. It is just not doable without considering an all-of-the-
above energy approach, including fossil and nuclear and others.
And so I just--so the Energy Information Administration--I
will have one quick question--the way--their modeling doesn't
work. So what do you plan to do to update the EIA modeling
capabilities to be sure they can provide policymakers and the
public accurate information on energy supplies, demand, and
related issues central to the administration's agenda and our
policymaking decisions?
Ms. Granholm. Well, I would disagree that they don't work.
I mean, they----
Mr. Bucshon. Well, we have--OK.
Ms. Granholm [continuing]. Are experts at----
Mr. Bucshon. OK. So we have had modeling both on climate
and all kinds of things for decades, right? And they have been
wrong. All of it has been wrong.
Ms. Granholm. Well, I don't know that all of it has been
wrong, but these are----
Mr. Bucshon. Well, the data shows----
Ms. Granholm [continuing]. Economists and experts that----
Mr. Bucshon [continuing]. That they are all wrong.
Ms. Granholm [continuing]. Know what they are doing in
terms of modeling, and they use very sophisticated tools----
Mr. Bucshon. OK.
Ms. Granholm [continuing]. To do so.
Mr. Bucshon. Fair enough. We are going to risk the energy
future and national security of the United States based on
computer scientists sitting at a computer, modeling things that
have been shown not to work.
I yield back.
Mr. Duncan. The gentleman yields back. I now will go to Ms.
Kuster for 5 minutes.
Ms. Kuster. Thank you, and thank you very much, Secretary
Granholm, for taking the time to testify before this committee.
Before I dive into questions, I want to thank you for your
efforts to ensure that the hydropower grant program created in
the Bipartisan Infrastructure Law reflects Congress's intent.
As you know, section 247, maintaining and enhancing
hydroelectricity incentive programs, provides grants to
hydropower owners to make dam safety, grid resiliency, and
environmental improvements at the facilities. I appreciate your
willingness to resolve issues around the draft guidance in the
final version to maximize the benefits from these dollars to
help preserve the existing hydropower fleet. So thank you for
that.
Secretary Granholm, I want to start my questions by talking
about two things we need to achieve our clean energy goals: new
clean energy generation and long-duration energy storage.
One way to build out new, clean electricity generation is
to retrofit some of our 90,000 dams with hydropower generation.
According to the DOE's analysis, retrofitting nonpowered dams
could add 12 gigawatts of reliable, renewable energy to the
grid, enough electricity to power 12 million homes.
In addition to building new, clean energy generation, we
need long-duration energy storage. Pumped storage hydropower is
a proven, long-duration energy storage technology. There's
already 23 gigawatts of pumped storage on the grid, and more
than 100 gigawatts in the pipeline.
But retrofitting a nonpowered dam with hydropower or
building a new pump storage facility can be very expensive. The
Inflation Reduction Act provides a 30 percent investment tax
credit for the next 10 years to help developers retrofit
nonpowered dams with hydropower generation and build new pumped
storage projects.
Madam Secretary, can you speak to how repealing the tax
credits in the Inflation Reduction Act would impact the
domestic hydropower and pumped storage industries?
Ms. Granholm. Yes, it would be devastating for the
industry. I mean, we are just at a point now where we are
starting to get the investment decisions to be able to add
capacity at dams. And we--this is clean, dispatchable baseload
power that could--has blackstart capability. It is 93 percent
of our pumps--pump storage is 93 percent of our storage,
utility-scale storage. We absolutely have to accelerate the use
of hydroelectric power.
Ms. Kuster. Great. Thank you so much. Rather than spending
our time rolling back tax credits for hydropower and pump
storage, I think we should focus on improving the licensing
process for hydropower facilities. According to analysis by
NREL, on average it can take between 7 to 10 years to relicense
a hydropower facility. Licensing pumped storage can take even
longer.
Madam Secretary, as Congress considers permitting reform
legislation, should we also evaluate ways we can improve the
licensing process for hydropower and pumped storage facilities?
Ms. Granholm. Absolutely.
Ms. Kuster. Final question. I was proud to see that Mascoma
Valley Regional School in my district won an energy class prize
to lower energy costs and improve indoor air quality. How can
Congress best support the Department of Energy's work to foster
healthier learning environments in our schools?
Ms. Granholm. Well, one of the things you have done is to
give the Department of Energy the ability to incentivize more
energy-efficient work at schools, at public schools all across
the country. We have a funding opportunity announcement out, a
huge response to it. I would love to see more of that so more
schools can benefit.
Ms. Kuster. Great. And next time you are in New Hampshire,
I invite you to come see the impact of that award on Mascoma
Valley Regional School.
And with that, Mr. Chair, I yield back with 1 minute to
spare.
Mr. Duncan. I thank the gentlelady for yielding back, and
we will go to Mrs. Lesko from Arizona for 5 minutes.
Mrs. Lesko. Thank you, Secretary Granholm, for coming here
today.
I have seen one analysis that shows that DOE will spend at
least $150 billion over the next 5 years, maybe significantly
more. In your budget request you use the term ``equity'' 137
times. President Biden issued an Executive order directing the
Federal Government to spend money that is ``consistent with
applicable law to allocate resources to address the historic
failure to invest sufficiently, justly, and equally in
underserved communities.''
You have been directed to spend $150 billion by Congress.
Will you provide to this committee the specific applicable law
passed by Congress that allows these dollars to be spent in a
manner to address the historic failure to invest sufficiently,
justly, and equally in underserved communities?
Ms. Granholm. One of the laws is through the Inflation
Reduction Act. There is a low-income adder that allows for--it
is an additional incentive, a 10 percent incentive for those
who are building out solar, for example, facilities to locate
in communities that have been disproportionately affected,
perhaps by--negatively by pollution, or have been a
disadvantaged community economically.
Mrs. Lesko. DOE's Justice40 Initiative requires 40 percent
of spending to go towards disadvantaged communities. Can you
provide me with a specific applicable law passed by Congress
that allows such a massive quota system?
Ms. Granholm. It is a goal. It is Justice40, that 40
percent should be directed to communities that have been left
behind, that have not had the benefit of the investments that
other communities have. So we are trying to achieve that goal,
and part of that is through Community Benefit Agreements
associated with the grants that we are providing under the
Bipartisan Infrastructure Law. We want those who are investing
to be able to consult with communities to make sure that there
is a workforce strategy----
Mrs. Lesko. So you say it is in the infrastructure law?
Ms. Granholm. Infrastructure law and the Inflation----
Mrs. Lesko. The language.
Ms. Granholm. [continuing]. Reduction Act both provide
incentives for locating facilities in disadvantaged
communities.
Mrs. Lesko. Thank you. Madam Secretary, you, I think,
already know that I am sponsoring a bill, Save Our Stoves--Gas
Stoves Act. So far we have 55 cosponsors, and it has bipartisan
support, and 29 of my Democratic colleagues voted for a similar
amendment--in fact, it was the same language--on H.R. 1 to save
our gas stoves.
I wrote a letter with 70 other Members and submitted our
comments for the record on your rulemaking that would ban gas
stoves in--effectively ban gas stoves in America.
I think it is unfortunate that we have to introduce a bill
to reverse an unnecessary anticonsumer choice rule by the
Department of Energy. On DOE's website it states claims that
the Federal Government is banning gas stoves are absurd, yet
here are the facts that I know.
DOE's first approach was to set a requirement of the
proposed rule--max tech requirements which DOE itself said
would eliminate 96 percent of the products available today.
Setting a max tech requirement has never been done before for
household appliances. After pushback, it appears that DOE
revised their information and subsequently determined half of
the products would be eliminated from the market.
It appears DOE pulled this number, quite frankly, out of
thin air. I don't know where you got it from. They used--they
started counting products on a website that looked like
products it tested. DOE, of course, has no actual basis for
knowing if the products it found meet its proposed standard,
because it did not test them.
To date, DOE provides no data or substantiation for how it
determined the models on retailer websites would meet its
proposed standards. This proposed rule puts at risk at least
1,000 manufacturing jobs in just one company in Arizona. And
quite frankly, it eliminates consumer choice.
According to DOE's own estimate, the rule will save only
$21.89 per stove over a 14-year period, or $1.50 per year, or
12 cents a month. And then DOE said somehow that equates to a
saving of $1.7 billion.
Finally, the projected gas emissions reduction is
equivalent to about 8 hours of Chinese coal plant emissions.
And so my statement is, why in the world would we want to
increase funding for the Department of Energy, when it appears
that they are going after consumer choice and, quite frankly,
Americans?
Thank you, and I yield back.
Mr. Duncan. The gentlelady yields back. I go to Ms. Schrier
for 5 minutes.
Ms. Schrier. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And welcome back, Madam Secretary. Thank you for your
service. There are a few topics I would like to touch on today,
but I also want to make sure I give you an opportunity to set
the record straight on anything you feel like you haven't had
an opportunity to be clear about. The topics I wanted to touch
on are small modular nuclear reactors, hydrogen hubs, and
Hanford. And I will try to be brief, so you have an
opportunity.
There is consensus in this committee that nuclear energy is
a big part of the solution if we want to curb greenhouse gas
emissions and have a clean energy portfolio. And I was really
pleased to see additional funding announced this week to help
with the deployment of small modular nuclear reactors.
Pacific Northwest National Lab also suggests that this is
incredibly important that we have them factory fabricated,
delivered on trucks, affordable. And I just wanted you to
comment on how do we make this happen in the timeframe that we
need it to happen in.
Ms. Granholm. First of all, super important that we
continue the research and development on these advanced
reactors, super important that we continue to get them licensed
by the Nuclear Regulatory Commission. So we have a--we have a
process issue that we want to continue to accelerate and
continue to do the research.
It also is very important that we have the fuel for these
small modular reactors, and that means NALEU, and that means we
have to have a national strategy on--uranium strategy for both
our larger nuclear fleet, as well as these advanced reactors.
That is something I hope I can work with you and the committee
on.
Ms. Schrier. Thank you. I really appreciate that. And I
know that Canada can be a significant source for us, a
friendly, next-door-neighbor nation. But I also saw that there
was investment in looking for alternative fuels. And so I
appreciate those investments.
On that topic, in kind of that same vein, alternative fuels
to--or materials to use in batteries, in addition to lithium,
do you have any comments on that?
Ms. Granholm. Yes, oh, we are--the labs are all working on
substitutes. Not--I mean lithium, but also substitutes for some
of the other materials that are critical minerals that we may
rely upon other nations for.
So that--I was mentioning earlier that manganese is
something that we are researching. Our Critical Minerals
Institute at our Ames laboratory is looking at a whole slew of
potential substitutes as well as getting critical minerals from
tailings of coal from coal separation, from uranium. We want to
make sure that we are looking at all potential sources, and I
would say including recycling of batteries that currently
exist, because that is a circular economy solution that is very
promising.
Ms. Schrier. Thank you. We had a hearing in here with
companies who are ready to do that recycling.
Second, I wanted to put in just another plug for Washington
State as a possible hub for green hydrogen. We have abundant
hydropower. We also have solar and wind. And ultimately, green
hydrogen is our ultimate goal, far better than blue or gray,
because of zero fossil fuel, zero greenhouse gas emissions.
And lastly, I just wanted to thank you for your commitment
for work at Hanford and working with our State and--to achieve
our goals and the administration's goals. And I appreciate your
help.
Your--the floor is yours. You have a minute and a half to
set the record straight. Anything you would like.
Ms. Granholm. You know what? I don't know that it is
necessary.
I will say that the Department of Energy is not banning any
gas stoves, that we are doing our duty to make sure that
appliances are more energy efficient, as we are required to do
under the Energy Policy Conservation Act of 1975. We regulate
and add efficiency standards to 60 appliances. This is one. It
was required by a consent decree, and nobody is taking my gas
stove, nobody will take your gas stove. But in the future, gas
stoves that are high end, which is all that we looked at--the
high-end gas stoves can be more efficient, and the cost for
making a high-end gas stove efficient is about $12.
Ms. Schrier. Sounds like a great investment with a good
payoff.
I yield back.
Mr. Duncan. She yields back. I will go to Mr. Balderson
from Ohio for 5 minutes, and this is going to be the last one,
and then we are going to break for votes and come back
immediately after.
Mr. Balderson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Ms. Secretary, thank you for being here. Nice to meet you.
Last year, the Senate Democrats unveiled electric
transmission permitting reform provisions that were included in
a broader permitting bill. This transmission provision included
language to socialize the cost of new projects and give FERC
enhanced transmission siting and permitting authority. The same
language was just introduced the other week in the Senate.
Regarding the electric transmission siting and permitting,
you recently stated, ``Community input is important in all of
this. We have to be very intentional about that. And we have
got a team that is focused on that, as well.'' Do you believe
granting FERC more authority to unilaterally site and permit
electric transmission lines is consistent with the principle of
community input, as you previously have stated?
Ms. Granholm. Are you talking about the backstop authority?
Mr. Balderson. Yes.
Ms. Granholm. Yes, I do, because I think you can do both.
You can have FERC issue the backstop authority, but you do it
in a sensitive way.
Mr. Balderson. OK.
Ms. Granholm. Including in community.
Mr. Balderson. Is granting FERC more authority to impose
cost socialization of new transmission infrastructure to those
who do not directly benefit from increased reliability or lower
costs consistent with the principle of community input?
Ms. Granholm. I think communities need transmission. And
the fact that the interconnection queues are completely backed
up and that we need to have a cost allocation strategy that is
fair is very important.
Mr. Balderson. OK, thank you. My next question is I
understand that nine Federal agencies, including the Department
of Energy, have signed an MOU on facilitating Federal
authorizations for electric transmission facilities. This MOU
states there is a strong public interest in increasing
coordination across Federal agencies to expand our Nation's
electric transmission infrastructure.
I am curious why there is such strong interest in
increasing coordination, reducing bureaucracy, and moving
forward with these projects but not doing the same when it
comes to interstate pipelines or nuclear energy projects, which
are more essential for grid reliability and for America to meet
our energy needs.
Has the Department of Energy signed a similar MOU for
coordination on pipeline or nuclear energy projects with other
Federal agencies?
Ms. Granholm. No.
Mr. Balderson. Why?
Ms. Granholm. Well, the grid and the transmission grid has
been utterly and ridiculously lengthy. It is true that it is--
takes a long time for these others to get permitted, as well.
We are very much in favor of ensuring that we have, as I was
discussing earlier, pipelines for a variety of things,
including CO
2
as well as hydrogen. We also want to
see expedited movement on nuclear, especially these small
modular reactors and the microreactors that could be used to
decarbonize heavy industry.
Mr. Balderson. OK. Secretary, in your testimony you note
that the administration supports the use of the Defense
Production Act to support rebuilding domestic uranium
production as well as other clean energy technologies to ensure
robust supply chains for electrical transformers and other
critical grid components.
The Inflation Reduction Act provided significant funding to
carry out the Defense Production Act with almost no strings
attached. The administration decided to give your Department
250 million of these--million dollars of these funds to
accelerate electric heat pump manufacturing. If the
administration supports using the Defense Production Act to
rebuild uranium production and improve supply chains for
electrical transformers and critical grid components, why did
President Biden choose to use the DPA funds for your Department
entirely on electric heat pumps?
Ms. Granholm. I would say that, if we do a uranium
strategy, it is going to require a good deal amount more than
that, and then even the 700 million that we initially got under
the Defense Production Act. We need a comprehensive strategy,
and I hope we can work with you on it.
Mr. Balderson. OK. My last thing is kind of a statement,
but I am going to run out of time. I want to discuss it is part
of this--the goals and the replace the electrical steel piece
of the transformers. So I will send this question in to you,
because I don't want to go over my time.
So I appreciate you being here, and we will get that over
to you. Thank you.
Mr. Duncan. All right. The committee will stand in recess,
and we will reconvene immediately following the last vote.
[Recess.]
Mr. Duncan. The subcommittee will be back in order, and I
will now recognize Mr. Walberg from Michigan for 5 minutes.
And thank you for your patience, Madam Secretary.
Mr. Walberg. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Michiganians and Michiganders are very patient people. We
share that, don't we, Madam Secretary?
Ms. Granholm. Absolutely.
Mr. Walberg. Yes. Well, thank you for being here, and you
and I agree on some things and we don't agree on other things,
but that is the way it goes.
I have been listening throughout the hearing thus far, and
one thing that just became at least clear to me was that with
IRA and IIJA, and all of the forward good thoughts about what
this can produce, that is still in the expectation realm.
You know, I look back at what we did in the last
administration. There is a case history of energy independence,
lowered emissions--which I think we agree on, we want to lower
the emissions--and lower prices at the pump and otherwise. And
so that is, I think, where the concern comes when we see some
of the projected savings, experiences. We know what worked, and
a concern about what we are--going forward.
So with the recent EPA emission rules, over two-thirds of
the new vehicles have to be all electric in less than 10 years.
I know you have said in the past that the rules don't specify
what type of vehicle technology, and we hope there is
flexibility that remains there. But the OEMs who have been
unwilling to stand up and say, ``We can't do this''--and I have
jumped on them plenty, Ford and GM and Stellantis most
recently, and I have lauded Toyota for being willing to look at
some alternatives--I worry, with the massive increase in EVs in
addition to other forced electrification coming out of your
agency and the EPA, our electric grid will not be able to keep
up. I think I can say it won't be able to keep up right now.
In going about my new district that goes from Lake Michigan
and the Cook Nuclear plant and the mothballing of the Palisades
plant that is taking place now, all the way over to Lake Erie
with Fermi I and II, and Fermi that has a third license that
they spent millions of dollars to get, but they have told me
because of permitting, because of cost they are probably not
going to do that. So I look at nuclear capabilities, and
there's concerns there.
This also comes with the new regulations coming out of the
administration last night talking about emissions being cut by
90 percent, or close to that. Today I heard from a constituent
company who said they were prepared to put four EV chargers at
their filling station convenience store, but the local utility
ultimately came in and said, ``You can't do it. We can only
give you one, because we don't have capacity.''
And I could go down the list, and you have heard the same
concerns.
I heard something new today, that a similar company--
relative to transporting fossil fuels, oil, specifically
gasoline, to areas where they have had disaster, hurricane or
whatever--FEMA has expressed concerns on meeting emergency
needs without fossil fuel capacities and capabilities, because
you can't carry a 20-gallon drum of electricity, and even
getting the trucks there.
So those are, I guess, preface to my concern about how is
the Department of Energy planning to offset both this increase
in demand and decrease in supply being forced by administration
policies?
Ms. Granholm. Thank you.
First, this is a--and it must be--a managed and thoughtful
transition. And it is why these are all proposed rules, and we
want to hear from industry so that we get it right and that we
don't end up creating insecurity on the grid. Super important.
I will say that, for example in Michigan, the Palisades
plant, there is hopefully an effort to try to revive that. That
will be coming through our--I think--our Loan Program Office.
So we are hopeful that that will not reduce supply. And we need
more nuclear online. This--what you have just described with
Fermi is new to me, so I am going to dig into that a little
bit.
However, I will say this too: One of the things we have not
discussed here, and I think that is important, is the
electrification of the vehicle fleet is also an opportunity to
have virtual power plants to allow for the batteries. This is
why all of the OEMs care about bidirectional charging to have
the batteries of those vehicles end up having a conversation
with the grid when times are tight.
Mr. Walberg. But that----
Ms. Granholm. And that is an opportunity.
Mr. Walberg. That is a hope for the future. And right now
they are making their assumptions, they are making their plans
based upon what we are talking about, and that is why, Madam
Secretary, I think we ought to be cautious. We ought to talk
with great flexibility before we start putting percentages and
timeframes on.
I think we are capable through innovation. We have shown
that. We have cleaned up our environment to a great degree,
better than any other country in the world with natural gas.
So I have run over my time. And so I must say also, let's--
any help you can give us on Line 5? You knew I would bring that
up.
Ms. Granholm. I knew you had to.
Mr. Walberg. We have to have help.
Mr. Duncan. The gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. Walberg. Thank you.
Mr. Duncan. I will now go to Mr. Cardenas for 5 minutes.
Mr. Cardenas. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, Secretary Granholm, for being here with us
today, and for serving our country so well. Thank you so much
for your service.
Last Congress the Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act
and the Inflation Reduction Act authorized the programs and
funding necessary to meaningfully address the climate crisis.
These two complementary laws have already accelerated our
Nation's transition to a clean energy economy powered by
American workers, manufacturers, and innovators. We are now
beginning to see the impacts of these bills and job creation,
clean power, and cost savings for families.
Unfortunately, some of my colleagues on the other side of
the aisle are taking steps to undo the strides Democrats made
in lowering energy costs for American families, undoing our
Nation's legacy of environmental injustice, and transitioning
our Nation to a clean energy economy. That includes pushing the
Default on America Act, which would repeal environmental review
processes and keep provisions from the Inflation Reduction Act.
Republicans have chosen a path that would further line the
pockets of Big Oil as they continue to push their polluter--the
polluters-over-people agenda. As we look to deliver the
America--for the American people, we must preserve these
victories for our economy, workforce, environment, and our
children, and children's future.
As we know, the budget is a reflection of our values, and I
am heartened to see that the Department of Energy is looking to
build off the major accomplishments of the last Congress. To
deliver on climate action equitably, the Inflation Reduction
Act advances the Justice40 Initiative, which sets to deliver 40
percent of investments to disadvantaged communities that have
been hurt by polluters for generations.
Secretary Granholm, what is the Department doing to advance
Justice40?
Ms. Granholm. Yes, thanks for asking that question. It is--
as you know, it is the first Executive order that the President
signed, and it is part of this administration's DNA across
agencies.
For us, for example, what it means is that when we are
offering a grant program--say, the hydrogen hubs as an
example--that those who are coming to seek the grant have to
demonstrate that they have a Community Benefits Agreement, that
the community is at the table and helping to craft it so that
they get the benefit of the good instead of, obviously, being
the victims of the bad, which has been the case.
The combination of the Community Benefits Agreement and the
incentives that are embedded in the IIJA to incentivize the
location of good projects in communities that have been
disadvantaged is a really strong one-two punch to ensure that
the community--the communities are at the table.
Mr. Cardenas. So the administration is looking to do this
in a way that creates more equitable and accessible future for
all communities?
Ms. Granholm. Absolutely.
Mr. Cardenas. OK, thank you. Speaking of communities, I
happen to have been elected to represent the community that I
grew up in, the side of town where we have more dump sites in
LA County than any other place in the 10-million-person County
of Los Angeles. I was the first one to represent that
community.
I am very proud to say that I was the first elected
official to say no to a landfill expansion, that the first
permit said that they are going to put trash in the ground,
very deeply into the ground, up to grade. And by the time I got
elected, they had so many permits that they were above 100 feet
above the ground. The children in the community called it a
mountain. It was just a mountain of trash that came from all
parts of Los Angeles but was dumped on our side of town. So we
cannot do all the wonderful work that you are getting done soon
enough for communities like the one that I grew up in, and that
I am so blessed to represent.
The Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act and the
Inflation Reduction Act prioritize building out our Nation's
workforce by creating good-paying union jobs. This has also
been under attack. Most recently in H.R. 1, the Republicans
sought to repeal home energy efficiency contractor training
grants that we had included in the Inflation Reduction Act.
However, to strengthen our Nation's economy and transition into
clean energy, it is vital that we build our Nation's workforce,
and we must do so in a way that prioritizes diversity and good-
paying jobs that families can sustain themselves on.
Secretary Granholm, what steps in the Department--is the
Department taking to increase workforce training opportunities
for communities of color, low-income communities, and
nontraditional students?
Ms. Granholm. We are doing a bunch of things, but I--let me
just specify one that is really important, which is these
Community Benefit Agreements that I am talking about. They are
weighted in the evaluation of the proposal 20 percent that has
to demonstrate that the communities there--and part of that
includes workforce training for the specific project that may
be coming to that area, number one.
And number two, ensuring that there are apprenticeship
opportunities for those so they can earn while they learn, so
that we can have the next generation, as well, building out,
whether it is trades or the specialized kind of work that is
necessary in these advanced energy projects. So we are excited
about being able to bring everybody along.
Mr. Cardenas. I exceeded my time. I apologize, Mr.
Chairman, and I yield back.
Mr. Duncan. The gentleman yields back. The Chair will now
go to the vice chair of the subcommittee, Mr. Curtis, for 5
minutes.
Mr. Curtis. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Madam Secretary, my compliments for being here. My--also my
compliments for your interaction with me and our caucus. I
think the first step to overcoming differences is communication
and working together. And I am one who really appreciates your
efforts to reach out to us.
I also advocate frequently that we actually agree on far
more than it sometimes sounds like between different parties
here. One of those vast areas, I think, of agreement is
nuclear, and we have had that quite a bit discussed today, but
I would like to discuss a specific project.
Thank you for DOE's historic commitment to the Carbon Free
Power Project. I have an organization, UAMPS. It actually is
Utah Associated Municipal Power Systems--I had to look it up
myself, because we all know it is UAMPS--who is 10 years
through a permitting process, about halfway through and $100
million into it, couldn't do it without the help of DOE. And
this is a big load on municipalities to finance this, and so I
am grateful for your support. This is a big deal, if we are
able to complete this project.
And that said, I am a little concerned about the overall
amount of money towards advanced small nuclear reactors and
wanted to kind of hear from you DOE's position and commitment
to these small nuclear reactors, which, clearly, I think by
everybody's standards, needs to be part of our energy future.
Ms. Granholm. Yes, I couldn't agree more that it absolutely
does. I know the--we have a $10 million in there for the UAMPS
program, and I know it has been given hundreds of millions over
the past years, but we are totally committed to small modular
reactors, advanced reactors, and the technologies that are
going to not just help the United States, but around the world.
We know that we have got allies in countries like in Eastern
Europe, et cetera, that are very interested in these
technologies, and we want to develop them here. We want to have
them made in America, but we also want to be able to export
them.
Mr. Curtis. Clearly, we should all agree on the fact that
we want it made here, in America, right?
Ms. Granholm. Yes.
Mr. Curtis. And exported----
Ms. Granholm. Here, another point of 100 percent agreement.
Mr. Curtis. Yes, another point of agreement, right, that we
all agree on.
So--and it has been brought up today, but let me just touch
on Russia being an available source for advanced nuclear fuel.
It feels to me like, on one hand, we are trying to get
permitting reform in place so we can build all these nuclear
facilities. And yet, if we do that, we may not have the fuel.
Ms. Granholm. Yes.
Mr. Curtis. Can you address that, and----
Ms. Granholm. Yes, this is one of the things that I think
we have to work on in a bipartisan fashion, is a uranium
strategy. What we have developed is a proposal for a $2.1
billion uranium strategy that would allow for a revolving fund
so that we could finance the conversion enrichment, et cetera,
all the steps, here in the United States.
We are hopeful--we got 700 million as a downpayment of
that, but we are hopeful to be able to work with Congress to
fully fund that, perhaps in NDAA or in a supplemental or
whatever, because I think it is really important that we do
that if we are to become--to wean ourselves from reliance upon
Russian uranium.
Mr. Curtis. Yes. I--so we are building this facility, and--
well, we have the HALEU, right, in place----
Ms. Granholm. Right, right.
Mr. Curtis [continuing]. When this is done, I think----
Ms. Granholm. Well, as you----
Mr. Curtis. And I don't know if you have any specific
comments on----
Ms. Granholm [continuing]. Are probably aware, we are, at H
Canyon, using--we are down-blending highly enriched uranium to
get HALEU for the advanced reactors that we have. But it is not
going to last long enough. We need a long-term strategy.
Mr. Curtis. So thank you. I would like to turn to maybe an
area where there is not as much agreement, but still vast
agreement.
I heard my colleague Mr. Walberg talk about EVs. And I
think sometimes when as Republicans we ask questions, we are
viewed as not supporting or not wanting solar or wind or EVs
and things like that. And I don't think it is the case, but I
do think we have questions, right, and we want answers.
I happened to read a Wall Street Journal article today that
pointed out that Rivian Automotive is going to lose, this
quarter, $75,000 on every vehicle sold. And the value of their
company is based--is given $98,000 for every car it expects to
sell. But Lotus--Lucid, excuse me, their value of the company
is 1.2 million for every car that they expect to sell.
So sometimes, you see, when we hear these things, this is
why we bring up questions. And sometimes I think it is
perceived as, well, we just don't want EVs. But I think--I
would just really like to point out there is a practical part
of this that we want answers.
How are we going to charge these? Where is the grid going
to come from? Where is the electricity going to come from? And
this isn't even speaking to the $7,500 credit.
So I don't know if you have a comment on that. It was just
a point I wanted to make.
Ms. Granholm. Well, I would say that this is why we have
these 17 jewels, which are the national labs that are expert at
modeling all of these different scenarios. And you are right to
ask the questions, and it is important to ask the questions,
and it is important to get the right answers from those who
have expertise.
Mr. Curtis. Thank you.
Ms. Granholm. And so----
Mr. Curtis. Madam, I am out of time.
Mr. Chair, I would like to ask unanimous consent to submit
for the record ``EV Startups Are Proving Warren Buffett
Right,'' Wall Street Journal today.
Mr. Duncan. Without objection, so ordered.
[The information appears at the conclusion of the hearing.]
Mr. Duncan. And the Chair will now go to Mr. Sarbanes.
Mr. Curtis. Thank you.
Mr. Sarbanes. Thanks very much, Mr. Chairman.
And Secretary Granholm, welcome.
Ms. Granholm. Thank you.
Mr. Sarbanes. You are definitely in the eye of the energy
transition storm, but doing a terrific job in managing that
transition on behalf of our Government. So thanks so much.
It is so vital that we stay at the forefront of the
evolving energy industry in developing clean energy technology
and the workforce. Critically, to implement it is going to spur
tremendous economic growth, as you know, while also promoting
our environmental and our national security interests.
But we know that those interests are impacted by the much
larger global marketplace, of course. And for more than a year
now we have witnessed an upheaval in global energy security in
the wake of Russia's invasion of Ukraine. Despite these
challenges, many of our European allies have stepped up to the
plate to reduce dependance on Russian energy sources. Could you
describe some of the recent steps that DOE has taken to bolster
European energy security in partnership with our allies?
Ms. Granholm. Yes, for sure.
Number one, we have obviously done a lot of exporting of
liquefied natural gas, which has been, I think, a great save to
many of them.
We have partnered with them on developing strategies for
hydrogen and to systematize the standards related to it so that
there can be international trade of clean hydrogen.
We have worked with them on--especially the Eastern
Europeans--on advanced nuclear and have partnered with them on,
for example, Westinghouse going to Poland to be able to build
several of their reactors going forward, all of their focus on
diversifying energy supply.
We have been in tandem with them, both on the technology
side as well as on the deployment to the extent that we can.
I will say we have learned from them, too, offshore wind
efforts that have--that the UK and the Northern Europeans have
engaged in, and have been very instructive for us as we
consider our own offshore wind strategy. So it has been a
mutual arrangement.
Mr. Sarbanes. And on that score, in Maryland we have got
some really exciting developments in terms of offshore wind
production with some of those international partners being in
the mix.
We have eastern Mediterranean allies like Greece and Cyprus
and Israel, who are playing a very critical role in these
efforts, the ones that we are discussing, as you know, and
Congress recognized this when it passed the bipartisan Eastern
Mediterranean Security and Energy Partnership Act a few years
back. And in that we authorized the establishment of the United
States Eastern Mediterranean Energy Center.
The Center's goal will be to leverage ``the experience,
knowledge, and expertise of institutions of higher education
and entities in the private sector, among others, to identify
opportunities for energy development in the region.''
Establishing the U.S. Eastern Mediterranean Energy Center will
both facilitate the development of cutting-edge clean-energy
solutions and promote Europe's energy diversification in
accordance with our economic and national security interests.
Could you maybe just comment on why establishing the U.S.
Mediterranean Center is so important for international energy
policy, and what resources you think might be necessary to get
that center off the ground?
Ms. Granholm. Yes, thanks for that too. I think that across
the Mediterranean there is so much happening, and so important
to solidify the relationships, especially around energy because
of its critical nexus, where it is in the world, and the desire
to wean ourselves from energy from Russia. That particular
center, the concept of a center, is super important.
I know that there has--we have been authorized to be able
to establish it, and looking forward to an appropriation. And I
know there has been a suggestion about a $10 million----
Mr. Sarbanes. Yes.
Ms. Granholm [continuing]. Appropriation. Our International
Affairs Office is in the middle of drafting a concept paper of
what this would look like. But the bottom line is the various
points of energy, whether it is wind or offshore wind or clean
hydrogen transported via ship or solar, obviously, or advanced
small reactors, you name it, that region is a fundamental part
of our ability to partner with Europe to become energy
independent.
Mr. Sarbanes. Great, and we look forward to working with
you on that. We are seeking the appropriations.
I have got 30 seconds left. So just on another topic real
quick, a lot of focus on sort of technology as a way of
sequestering carbon, but can you speak to your perspective on
making sure we have a good balance of sort of biological
solutions in terms of dealing with climate change alongside of
technological solutions?
Ms. Granholm. Yes, we have to do biological solutions. We
have to do Earth-based solutions. We have to do technological
solutions. We have to do everything, everywhere, all at once.
Mr. Sarbanes. Great, thanks very much. I yield back.
Mr. Duncan. OK. The Chair will go to Mr. Palmer from
Alabama for 5 minutes.
Mr. Palmer. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
First of all, Secretary Granholm, I am very encouraged by
your support for next-generation nuclear. I think it is our
best option, best opportunity for transitioning to an
emissions-free--well, it won't be emissions-free because
there's emissions involved in the construction, but there are a
number of reasons why I think this is the direction we ought to
go.
One, we can recycle spent fuel rods. France is doing that.
They use a standard design on their nuclear reactors, which I
think helps reduce the cost of the reactors themselves, reduces
maintenance costs, but they operate 24/7, where with wind and
solar it is intermittent power. And I worked for two
international engineering companies prior to running a think
tank for 20-something years. And our--we cannot have the
economic growth that we want to have, we cannot be able to
support the emergence of economies in poor countries with just
trying to rely on intermittent power.
And as I was saying, what the nuclear facilities will do
for us is 24/7 power generation, except when you shut them down
for maintenance. Their operational life cycle will be
approximately 80 years, which--Lord knows where we will be with
technology in 80 years.
But the other thing that I think we need to take note of is
that you can cite one next-generation nuclear facility on 640
acres. It is about the same amount of space you would use for a
natural gas facility. But to generate the same amount of power
from that nuclear facility from a turbine farm would require
77,000 acres. And I think you understand the problems we are
running into with Not In My Backyard, with potentially a very
aggressive use of eminent domain, which I really don't think we
want to go that direction.
So my other concern is--about this, and you can address
this, is there really isn't a scenario where we are going to be
net zero by 2050. The physics don't work, the economics don't
work, and the technology doesn't work. Now, that is not to say
in the next 20 or so years that the technology won't improve,
but there really isn't a way to get there. So it is encouraging
to me to see the emphasis on next-generation nuclear, and
particularly since we can recycle spent fuel rods.
The Director of the National Nuclear Laboratory was here
the week before last, I think it was, Mr. Chairman, and I asked
him if he had done any calculations to determine how long we
could operate these nuclear reactors using the fuel that is
stored now, and he said 100 years. So we don't have to depend
on anybody.
The other thing that I want to address is my concern. I
know my Democrat colleagues are very dismissive of what we are
trying to do with H.R. 1. They are very dismissive of some of
the issues that we have brought up about China. I do not
believe the existential threat to the world is climate change.
I think it is China. And in that regard, I am very concerned
about how much we will be dependent on China for our energy
resources.
And I have said this many, many times, that the war in
Ukraine did not create the energy crisis, it exposed it. It
exposed the fact that we have spent a decade and a half
neglecting our hydrocarbon infrastructure, particularly natural
gas. But it is also instructive that no nation should be
dependent on an adversarial nation for anything as important to
its economy and its national security as energy. So how would
you respond to that?
Ms. Granholm. Well, I couldn't agree more that we should
not be reliant upon countries whose values we don't share for
our own energy resources. And that is why the importance of the
Invest in America agenda, the Inflation Reduction Act has
caused all of these companies doing critical mineral processing
and battery supply chain work to come to the United States to
build up our supply chain here, so that we are energy
independent.
I think we could probably all agree that it is important to
build up our own supply chain so that we are energy
independent----
Mr. Palmer. But my point is we don't need to--we don't have
to do that for nuclear.
Ms. Granholm. I am agreeing with you on nuclear.
Mr. Palmer. We have got a major problem with permitting. It
will take years to get us where we need to be on the critical
minerals.
I am not--I am fine with renewables, but there's certain
physics that come into play here. You cannot sustain the
economy that we have, much less grow the economy that we need
to grow, with intermittent power. Europe is starting to wake up
to this.
So I think we need an all-of-the--truly, an all-of-the-
above, but we should not cast aside our hydrocarbon resources
in this mad dash, which I think is rather mad to think that we
have got to do all this in such a short amount of time, when we
really don't.
And Mr. Chairman, I yield back, and I thank you for
testifying, and for you holding this hearing.
Mr. Duncan. The gentleman's time has expired. I will go to
Ms. Blunt Rochester for 5 minutes.
Ms. Blunt Rochester. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And thank you, Secretary Granholm, for attending today's
hearing.
On behalf of my State and region, I would like to thank you
and the Department for moving forward with the hydrogen hub
program, which will help create more jobs and ensure an
effective transition to clean energy. Last month the Mid-
Atlantic Clean Hydrogen Hub, also known as MACH2, submitted its
application to become one of those hubs. And the proposal will
transform the energy economy of the State of Delaware and spur
massive job growth for my constituents.
And I urge you, Madam Secretary, to ensure that small
States like Delaware are also able to benefit from this
program.
I would also like to thank you for your testimony's
attention to supply chain resiliency. My bill, the Supply
Chains Act, would help us solve these problems across the
economy, including the energy sector, and I would love to
follow up with you in the future to discuss this legislation.
I am glad to--also to have you here. And I heard the
conversation with Representative Cardenas about the efforts of
the administration to focus not only on clean energy jobs, but
also union jobs, apprenticeships, also the focus on Justice40.
I can say from my own constituents how grateful they are for
that work and that attention, that focus.
And in your testimony you noted that a $70 million
investment for community capacity building initiatives to
address areas of persistent poverty. This issue has come up
repeatedly when I am talking to folks about the implementation
of major bills like the IRA or the Bipartisan Infrastructure
Law. And so can you just speak a little bit about what that
investment means, what it would do, what--the intention of it?
I would love to hear more about that, and also how it ties to
the persistent poverty issue, as well.
Ms. Granholm. I mean, one of the great things about policy
mattering is that when you adopt great legislation and craft it
in the right way, then it can go to the populations that you--
that really need it.
So I think, as an example of weatherization--you and I were
at a weatherization event--there has been enhancements to the
weatherization program that are specific that will impact
significantly impoverished communities. For example, allowing
impoverished communities to install not just weatherization,
but also solar generation, for example, on homes; allowing
those who live in manufactured housing to take advantage of
those.
So the--we have a State and community energy program that
is now--that is as a result of trying to administer these
programs where DOE meets the street, if you will, and making
sure we are thoughtful about crafting our outreach and our
programs to communities that have been left behind, communities
that are fenceline communities--has been a big part of our
efforts in our administration of our Justice40 goals.
Ms. Blunt Rochester. Yes, I really want to zero in, as
well, on making sure that dollars get to the communities that
need it most, but also that they have the capacity to do it.
Ms. Granholm. Yes.
Ms. Blunt Rochester. That is one of the things that I have
heard most back from constituents is, ``I don't know how to do
this kind of grant application.''
Ms. Granholm. Yes.
Ms. Blunt Rochester. ``I have never done this before.'' And
so that capacity-building part is really, really vital, I
think, in this moment.
Ms. Granholm. And I would say streamlining process, so that
they don't have to do a huge funding opportunity.
Ms. Blunt Rochester. Exactly.
Ms. Granholm. Maybe they do a concept paper, maybe you
reduce the amount of cost share. All of those are what we are
considering as we administer these grant programs.
Ms. Blunt Rochester. I mean, for me, I think about this
from a jobs perspective, I think about it from a health
perspective.
Ms. Granholm. Yes.
Ms. Blunt Rochester. There are so many pieces to--and then
there is the justice impact of it, as well.
So thank you for that. I think we have talked before as
well about, you know, the efforts to upscale retrofitting, like
home performance programs, to include large public buildings.
And I will be reintroducing legislation to help DOE do just
that. According to the EPA, the building sector accounts for 31
percent of U.S. greenhouse gas emissions. Public buildings such
as schools and hospitals tend to be the most energy intensive
because they are larger, older, and usually have higher
electricity demand.
And so can you talk a little bit about what you have been
able to do through the Office of State and Community Energy
programs at DOE for schools and hospitals----
Ms. Granholm. Yes.
Ms. Blunt Rochester [continuing]. And municipal buildings?
Ms. Granholm. This is really important, too, the schools
piece. As an example, there is a funding opportunity
announcement to be able to allow schools to retrofit for
weatherization. It was way oversubscribed. The need is
enormous. And so, to the extent that we can work together,
Congress can work on upping that so that schools can take
advantage of this because their heating bills or cooling bills,
depending, are--eat up a huge amount of budget that they could
be using for educational resources.
Ms. Blunt Rochester. I have run out of time, but the last
point I will make is about lowering cost. That is the other big
point of this is to lower costs for families.
Ms. Granholm. Yes.
Ms. Blunt Rochester. So thank you so much for your
testimony, and thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Duncan. The gentlelady's time has expired. I go to Mr.
Weber for 5 minutes.
Mr. Weber. Thank you. Secretary Granholm, thank you for
being here. I echo his comments, John Curtis, about coming to
the meeting. I was part of that. I sat right beside you, and
you did a good job. Thanks.
And actually, I am part of the Science Committee. I know
the Science Committee has been trying to get you there because
the Department of Energy's critical R&D programs are about a
third of the DOE's annual budget. Do you have plans to meet at
the Science Committee?
Ms. Granholm. I know that my Under Secretary--didn't they
testify there yesterday, the two Under Secretaries?
Mr. Weber. OK, well----
Ms. Granholm. I know----
Mr. Weber. I wanted to get that out of the way----
Ms. Granholm. OK.
Mr. Weber [continuing]. Because that is important, too.
Do you have any plans to impose a cap on the total volume
of U.S. LNG exports?
Ms. Granholm. I do not. I don't have any plans on doing
that. We are--we do have a request for information on the
street about how we should consider all of this, including how
the exports impact natural gas.
Mr. Weber. Well, we have 2\1/2\ LNG plants in my district.
I am the gulf coast of Texas, and we export a lot of it, and we
got one on the drawing--we got one that is pretty well
underway, and then one on the drawing board--so four total, I
guess.
I think we can send more gas to Europe to help them wean
off of Russian gas. Obviously, you support LNG exports to
Europe?
Ms. Granholm. As you have seen, we have granted export
licenses to a whole slew. In fact, we have got--for those LNG
terminals that are under construction--that will be 20 Bcf of
LNG----
Mr. Weber. Right.
Ms. Granholm [continuing]. To go, which is a huge amount.
There is another 20 that have been licensed that aren't even
under construction. So there is a universe of LNG that is
available for Europe. The question is whether they get a final
investment decision.
Mr. Weber. OK. Well, we--yes, that is absolutely right.
Do you agree with the existing DOE studies that showed the
net economic benefits of expanded LNG exports? Have you seen
those studies?
Ms. Granholm. The--who wrote the study?
Mr. Weber. The DOE.
Ms. Granholm. Wait, which--do you know which----
Mr. Weber. It is the--I don't.
Ms. Granholm. Is it the FECM, the Fossil Energy and Carbon
Management?
Mr. Weber. It may be. You might----
Ms. Granholm. I have to go back and take a look at----
Mr. Weber. We will look at that later, then. Any plans to
revisit those existing studies? I guess you are talking about
it now, you will go back and look at them.
Ms. Granholm. Well, we are looking at--I mean, we want to
look at the impacts, because we are really blessed, as you
know, with a huge amount of natural gas. And the question is,
how does--how do exports impact the greenhouse gas emissions?
How does methane? You know, how do we deal with all of that,
and what does it do in terms of domestic pricing for natural
gas?
So it----
Mr. Weber. We want to be careful with that. In our rush to
go green, we want to make sure that we don't do a number on our
energy industry. So we want to be careful with it.
Ms. Granholm. I understand.
Mr. Weber. Do you believe that cooking--the cooking
products rule is far reaching and deserves a complete
transparent rulemaking process from the DOE, which would
include sufficient time for comments?
Because there's a lot of people in Texas that are going to
be unhappy if you--if the regulations for gas--I was an air
conditioning contractor for 35 years. I know what super-high
efficiency ratings did to the cost of equipment. It was hardest
on the lowest-income people because they never planned to
replace their air conditioning, and when the equipment became
more expensive, it was hard on them.
But anyway, do you believe the cooking products rule is far
reaching? And will there be a good comment period on it?
Ms. Granholm. There is a comment period on it, and we are
always--in fact, we just extended the comment period for
another one, because we want to make sure that we get all of
the feedback necessary before issuing any final rule.
Mr. Weber. OK, good to hear that. Are you aware that
households that use natural gas, which--we have a lot of LNG in
Texas--for heating, cooking, and clothes drying save an average
of $1,068 per year over electric appliances, $1,068 a year in
savings--natural gas cooking, heating, clothes drying--over
electricity.
Ms. Granholm. And----
Mr. Weber. That is not a small amount.
Ms. Granholm. And the electric and the gas furnaces, we
want--furnaces, excuse me, the gas stoves, we want them to be
efficient too. And that is what the rule was about, it is about
creating--but those are for--it was for higher-end gas stoves.
Mr. Weber. Well, it is a little harder to get efficiency up
on them as it is furnaces, which wound up with a 90 percent
AFUE rating. So I was very familiar with the SEER ratings and
what the----
Ms. Granholm. Sure.
Mr. Weber. I sold my company 5 years ago. It is hard on
people. The more expensive the appliances and stuff are, the
more it hurts those who can least afford it.
Well, I have got about 49 seconds. So are you aware that
switching from gas to electricity costs thousands of dollars in
a home? When we went into a house, if they had an electric
furnace and they wanted to go gas, then you are talking about a
gas company, you are talking about a plumber, you are talking
about a gas meter, you are talking about a lot more labor. You
know that that is pretty expensive, right?
Ms. Granholm. Well, I would say that, with the incentives
that are about heat pumps, for example, to reduce the cost,
the--what we have seen in the modeling is that, in fact, it
reduces on average cost----
Mr. Weber. Well, I will tell you that heat pumps are a lot
more expensive than regular conventional air conditioners.
Ms. Granholm. That is what I am saying, is the incentives
for the heat pumps really bring down the cost. The rebates that
will be there can reduce by half, in many cases, especially for
poorer or lower income, it can replace almost the full thing.
Mr. Weber. But if you are going all electric and you have
got to go to natural gas, it is expensive.
I am out of time, and I got a plane to catch. Thank you for
being here.
I yield back.
Ms. Granholm. Very good, thank you.
Mr. Duncan. Mr. Armstrong is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Armstrong. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I think before I
start I will just point out that everything is cheaper if it
has a rebate and incentive, a tax break or a subsidy, not just
green energy. And I will continue to say that when we talk
about cost competitiveness.
But the EPA had a rule 2 weeks ago, a proposed rule that is
going to have two-thirds of all car sales be electric by 2032.
You spoke earlier about 160 battery companies coming to the
United States, which I actually think is great, and dealing
with all of this. But the top five critical minerals in a car
battery are lithium, nickel, cobalt, graphite, and manganese.
Lithium: Australia produces 52 percent, Chile produces 25
percent, China produces 13 percent. But China actually has a
stranglehold on the lithium supply chain, and they have
invested $6 billion worth of assets in lithium in Chile,
Canada, and Australia and currently holds north of 60 percent
of the refining capacity. There is one mine in the United
States, and it cannot cover 20 percent of the current EV
consumption.
And I agree with the aspirational growth. I--permitting
reform, if we had DoT or EPA in here, I would be asking about
transmission infrastructure and how we are actually going to
charge these cars when they are on the road. I don't. I have
you in here, Madam Secretary. And so, under current--under the
current construction and regulatory construct, how much lithium
are we going to mine in the United States in 2032?
Ms. Granholm. I don't know by 2032. But I do know that
there is a huge amount of lithium resources in the United
States that----
Mr. Armstrong. There is a ton of lithium resources----
Ms. Granholm. Right.
Mr. Armstrong [continuing]. In the United States. I don't
think we will have a lithium mine permitted by----
Ms. Granholm. Well, that is the whole thing. Let's work
together on that. Let's work together on reforming the Mining
Act.
Mr. Armstrong. Well, except--but that is the whole policy
point behind this, is--it is like we are blowing up the bridge,
and then we are going to figure out a way to cross the river.
Ms. Granholm. But I would imagine----
Mr. Armstrong. We should have the permitting reform before
we have the EPA mandate to make two-thirds of all new car sales
electric by 2032.
Ms. Granholm. Well, I disagree. I think we can do it if we
can come together, Democrats and Republicans, to reform the
Mining Act, for example, and speed up permitting.
Mr. Armstrong. The top three places in the United States to
mine cobalt are Congo, Russia, Australia. How much cobalt are
we going to mine in the United States by 2032?
Ms. Granholm. Well, we may not. It may be that we have a
friend, like in Australia or----
Mr. Armstrong. Yes.
Ms. Granholm [continuing]. Like in Canada.
Mr. Armstrong. When you are looking at the rare earth
mineral list, we better not anger the Aussies, or we are going
to be in a real, real difficult problem.
Nickel: Indonesia, Philippines, Russia, New Caledonia,
Australia, Canada, China. How much nickel are we going to mine
in the----
Ms. Granholm. A number of those----
Mr. Armstrong [continuing]. United States?
Ms. Granholm [continuing]. Are very friendly countries that
want to have those arrangements. That is why Canada is very
interested. Australia is very interested. Japan is very
interested.
Mr. Armstrong. How much nickel are we going to mine in the
United States by----
Ms. Granholm. I hope we mine a good amount by then.
Mr. Armstrong. Manganese: South Africa, Australia, China,
Gabon, Brazil. How much manganese are we going to mine in the
United States?
Ms. Granholm. I hope we do what we need, and we onshore the
rest.
Mr. Armstrong. Graphite: China, Madagascar, Mozambique,
Brazil, South Korea, Russia, Canada. How much graphite are we
going to mine in the United States?
Ms. Granholm. Same answer.
Mr. Armstrong. Hope is not a policy.
I want to just talk a little bit about the Northeast
Gasoline Supply Reserve, which was established in 2014 to
address supply issues following Hurricane Sandy. The budget
requests an 8 percent increase to support a 1 million barrel
reserve. Do you know approximately how many days the northeast
gas life consumption the reserve would support?
Ms. Granholm. It is not very much.
Mr. Armstrong. It is like one day, I think, isn't it?
Ms. Granholm. It is a small amount.
Mr. Armstrong. The gasoline reserves are commingled in
tanks with commercial supplies costing about $13 per barrel a
year to maintain. If a storm disrupts the supply at commercial
Raritan Bay facility, the DOE reserves would almost certainly
face disruption because the gasoline is commingled. Doesn't
this place the reserve at the same level of risk as the
commercial supply they are meant to supplement?
Ms. Granholm. Well, I would say this, that it is important
for that area to feel like they have a bit of an insurance
policy, given that it is an area that often is difficult to get
supply to. So it is important for them, and that is one of the
reasons why it exists.
Mr. Armstrong. But citing previous operational concerns,
the Department of Energy officials told GAO in 2022 that the
current administration was considering its position on whether
to continue our recommended closing the gasoline product
reserve. Has the administration determined its position on the
gasoline reserve?
Ms. Granholm. I think they are going to keep it open.
Mr. Armstrong. Between the limited scale, commingled
supplies, and excessive cost per barrel, the Northeast Gasoline
Supply Reserve merits significant review. I mean, we have to
figure it out.
Ms. Granholm. Yes.
Mr. Armstrong. The very disruptions we are trying to
protect are going to have the same problems for our actual
reserve.
And then I would just comment, instead of permitting the
necessary infrastructure to diversely move products to the
northeast, we have a commingled supply that will end up being
under the same consequences as the--of a natural disaster of
what we are trying to get to. So I just would hope the
Department would focus on existing operational maintenance
challenges associated with the--dump money into ineffective
product reserves.
And with that, I will yield back.
Mr. Duncan. I thank the gentleman. I will now go to Mr.
Pfluger from Texas for 5 minutes.
Mr. Pfluger. Yes, thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Secretary, thank you for being here. Would you consider
yourself the principal adviser to the President for energy
matters?
Ms. Granholm. Well, I am the Secretary of Energy. I am one
of the main advisors, but he has got a few.
Mr. Pfluger. OK, but you are the principal advisor.
Ms. Granholm. Well, I don't know that I would say that. I
think he has got some very good advisors in the White House.
Mr. Pfluger. I believe in this position. I represent the
Permian Basin. We have had this conversation before. You know,
we produce about 43 percent of the country's crude oil. It is
the most secure supply of oil and gas in the entire world. And
in fact, I would also go a step further, that it is probably
the only thing that has kept this economy going, despite the
policies that we have seen. I am very concerned about those
policies. And I just have a couple of questions for you based
on, you know, being the Secretary of Energy.
When the President went to Saudi Arabia and asked OPEC+ to
increase production, was that your recommendation to him to do
that?
Ms. Granholm. I think the President wanted to see greater
production in the United States also.
Mr. Pfluger. We have that ability.
Ms. Granholm. And----
Mr. Pfluger. That is why H.R. 1----
Ms. Granholm [continuing]. He has been asking for it.
Mr. Pfluger [continuing]. Is so important. And Madam
Secretary, you are the Secretary of Energy. We are blessed, as
a country, to have the most enormous amount of reserves, not
just of oil and gas but of so many other critical minerals and
things that have been discussed today. Did you recommend that
he go to Saudi Arabia and ask for them to produce more oil?
Ms. Granholm. I was not in that conversation.
Mr. Pfluger. So he did not ask the Secretary of Energy
for----
Ms. Granholm. I was not in the conversation.
Mr. Pfluger [continuing]. Your recommendation?
Ms. Granholm. But I will say this: He has been very strong
about asking for greater supply here in the United States.
Mr. Pfluger. We have that capacity to do that. I am
extremely troubled with the fact that, for a political
emergency, the President released almost half--over half of our
SPR.
At what point in time will you make a recommendation to the
President or act upon current law to refill?
Ms. Granholm. We will be refilling, as you are probably----
Mr. Pfluger. What is the--do you have a timeline?
Ms. Granholm. As soon as we are finished with the current
congressionally mandated sale, which we are required to do
before the end of the fiscal year, as soon as that is done--
because, as you are probably aware, you can't take in and
release at the same time--we will begin the process of----
Mr. Pfluger. I would like for you to follow up for the
record on that one, to let us know what that timeline looks
like.
I am going to move to the next question----
Ms. Granholm. Starting this summer.
Mr. Pfluger. You said we cannot flip a switch today, but
the administration has actually tried to flip that switch.
You know, just a couple of questions for you when it comes
to--what is the total amount of electricity that our country
needs on an annual basis?
Ms. Granholm. Well, right now we have about 1,400 gigawatts
on our grid.
Mr. Pfluger. On an annual basis, what does that equate to?
Ms. Granholm. Well, 1,400 gigawatts on the grid, so how
much electricity do--I mean, we have a bunch of different
sources of electricity that are provided. We use about 3----
Mr. Pfluger. It is about 4 trillion kilowatt hours per
year.
Ms. Granholm. Oh, OK.
Mr. Pfluger. And I would expect you to know that because we
have a 2032 mandate to get to electric vehicles, like my
colleague just mentioned.
My next question is, what will the increase in that total
amount of annual----
Ms. Granholm. We have to double the size of the electric
grid by 2035.
Mr. Pfluger. Double.
Ms. Granholm. Mm-hmm.
Mr. Pfluger. So what portion of our grid is serviced by
hydrocarbons right now?
Ms. Granholm. About 40--no, 40 percent is natural gas.
About 17 percent is coal, and the rest is clean.
Mr. Pfluger. OK, so it is about 20 percent--22 percent
coal----
Ms. Granholm. No, 17 percent.
Mr. Pfluger [continuing]. Nineteen percent nuclear----
Ms. Granholm. As of right now.
Mr. Pfluger. This is from you all's website.
Ms. Granholm. Well, the----
Mr. Pfluger. Thirty-eight percent natural gas and 20
percent renewable.
So what--in 2032, if we have to double--and thank you for
that answer. That is actually more than I was expecting you to
say. If we have to double the amount of electricity, where is
that going to come from?
Ms. Granholm. That is going to come from growing our energy
pie.
Mr. Pfluger. And what----
Ms. Granholm. Increasing----
Mr. Pfluger [continuing]. Pieces of pie will grow?
Ms. Granholm. We want to increase clean.
Mr. Pfluger. Clean.
Ms. Granholm. So----
Mr. Pfluger. So what does that mean? What does clean----
Ms. Granholm. So that means let's increase nuclear, let's
increase hydroelectric power, let's increase geothermal.
Mr. Pfluger. What about----
Ms. Granholm. Let's increase----
Mr. Pfluger. What about in places that don't have hydro?
Ms. Granholm. Well, that is why you have a transmission
grid, to be able to bring electricity from where it is
generated to where it is needed.
Mr. Pfluger. When was the last time you visited the Permian
Basin?
Ms. Granholm. I have not been to the Permian Basin.
Mr. Pfluger. It is the most prolific production area for
energy in this country.
Ms. Granholm. Will you invite me?
Mr. Pfluger. I have invited you.
Ms. Granholm. Ah, I didn't know that.
Mr. Pfluger. I invited you last year, when I saw you in a
meeting.
Ms. Granholm. Great.
Mr. Pfluger. And I will invite you again.
This area helped us win World War II. This area has lifted
a billion people out of poverty. This administration is
choosing to not use the best-of-the-above strategy. I am not an
all-of-the-above kind of person, I am a best-of-the-above. And
that is different for different places. Hydrocarbons in some
places, clean natural gas. Maybe if you have hydroelectric. We
have more wind energy in my congressional district than the
entire State of California. Come see it. It doesn't always
work. The wind in west Texas in July, when it is 110 degrees in
the middle of summer, doesn't blow.
Ms. Granholm. But your sun shines.
Mr. Pfluger. But--it does. And give me a battery that works
for more than 4 hours that services the largest electric----
Ms. Granholm. We are working on that.
Mr. Pfluger [continuing]. Grid in the country.
Ms. Granholm. Yes.
Mr. Pfluger. We don't want to be like Europe. We don't want
to be like California. That is why we are trying to use a best-
of-the-above approach.
My time is expired, but I would like to see, Mr. Chairman,
the timeline for when the SPR is going to be refilled. I yield
back.
Mr. Duncan. The gentleman yields back. We will go to Mr.
Carter from Georgia.
Mr. Carter. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate you
letting me waive on to this committee.
Madam Secretary, thank you for being here. I believe I am
your last questioner, so----
Ms. Granholm. I don't think so.
Mr. Carter. One more? Oh, you got one more, OK. Well,
nevertheless, I am your next to last. And I want to ask you, as
I am sure you are aware, on another subcommittee that I serve
on we had EPA Administrator Regan before us just a couple of
days ago, just the other day. And it is my understanding that
the Department of Energy and the EPA have signed a joint
memorandum of understanding on electric reliability and that
your announcement of this MOU highlights the challenges of
transitioning to clean energy.
And--but, you know, I find it interesting. Since that MOU
was announced in March, it seems like the EPA has announced as
many new rules or changes that it can that would threaten grid
reliability. I mean, just today EPA announced a new power plan
rule that is going to put significant new requirements on our
baseload generation. I am really concerned about this. This is
after a holiday season that saw nine States experience
blackouts and brownouts.
I mean, even in the State of Georgia--fortunately, we
didn't have any blackouts or brownouts, but the EMCs tell me
that we were at peak capacity, that we could not have done any
more than what we did. And we are a growing State. My district
is a growing State. I just had the largest economic development
project ever announced in the district, in the State of
Georgia. So we are growing, and we are going to need
reliability. We are going to need that in our State, and the
rest of the country is going to need it, as well.
Last week, FERC Commissioner Mark Christie said that the
problem is not the addition of intermittent resources but the
rapid subtraction of dispatchable resources like coal and gas.
He also said, and I quote, ``The U.S. is heading for a
reliability crisis because dispatchable generating resources
are retiring far too quickly and in quantities that threaten
our ability to keep the lights on.'' Do you agree that the U.S.
is heading for a reliability crisis?
Ms. Granholm. No, I think we have to do it right, and I
think that is why----
Mr. Carter. Do you think we are doing it right?
Ms. Granholm. Well, I think what the EPA rule did was to
say we want to reduce emissions. And it didn't say how. We have
been working on all of this technology to decarbonize. And
whether it is coal or natural gas, we want clean baseload
power.
I heard a number of Members of this side of the aisle say
this is about emissions. So let's work on that. Let's
decarbonize and allow for baseload power to exist.
Mr. Carter. Well, I am encouraged to hear you say that,
because I believe that. I don't believe it is about fewer
choices, I believe it is about less carbon----
Ms. Granholm. And more technology.
Mr. Carter [continuing]. Not less choices. So I am
encouraged to hear you say that. But then I see the rules that
are being implemented here by the EPA that concern me, because
it is putting our grid reliability at risk here.
You know, I had the opportunity to go to Europe last year
as a member of the Conservative Climate Caucus, and we saw and
witnessed in Europe what has happened there. And they have
allowed their policies to get ahead of their innovation,
resulting in a mess, to be quite honest with you. They closed
down their nuclear plants and ended up going back to coal.
Ms. Granholm. Yes.
Mr. Carter. Very important lessons to be learned there, and
I certainly hope we are paying attention and learning those
lessons.
Ms. Granholm. Yes, we certainly are. And I agree with you.
We have to be thoughtful about this transition.
Mr. Carter. But, you know, again, the Biden administration
has said that they--by 2030 they want 80 percent renewable
energy. And right now you said it is how much of our portfolio?
Ms. Granholm. We want to get to 100 percent by 2035 with an
80 percent reduction in greenhouse gas emissions.
Mr. Carter. OK, OK. And what are we at right now?
Ms. Granholm. In terms of--we are at--in terms of clean, we
have 20 percent that is nuclear, we have 20 percent that is
renewable.
Mr. Carter. Are you still confident that that is an
achievable goal?
Ms. Granholm. I do--I am, I am, because of the policies
that were just adopted. I know you didn't vote for them, but--
--
Mr. Carter. No, and----
Ms. Granholm [continuing]. Are incentivizing----
Mr. Carter [continuing]. I am not going to vote for them,
because I believe that we are going to make the same mistake
that they made in Europe and allow our policies to get ahead of
our innovation. And we can't do that. We can't afford to do
that.
Look, I would submit to you, Madam Secretary, that what has
happened in our economy is a direct result of the policies of
this administration. It is self-inflicted. Day one, this
administration declared war on fossil fuels, resulting in
higher gas prices, resulting in higher inflation, resulting in
higher interest rates. And now we have got the problems that we
have got here, whereas my colleague just pointed out we have
got an abundance of oil here, we have got an abundance.
And again, here we are in a nation that has decreased our
carbon emissions more in the last decade than the next 12
countries combined, while growing our economy.
Ms. Granholm. And we have also--we are still a record
producer of oil and of natural gas. So declaring war has not
happened. In fact, we are at record production.
Mr. Carter. We are at record production, but we can do even
better is the point. And we can--we don't need to decrease
choices, we need to decrease carbon. That is what we should be
doing.
Ms. Granholm. Let's work on it.
Mr. Carter. Madam Secretary, thank you for being here.
Ms. Granholm. Thank you.
Mr. Carter. And I am willing to work on it with you, and I
look forward to that.
Ms. Granholm. Great.
Mr. Duncan. The gentleman's time has expired, and I will go
to the last congresswoman of the day, Ms. Barragan, for 5
minutes.
Ms. Barragan. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Madam Secretary, I have been here for a short time, but
very impressed at your ability to respond to very specific
questions.
Madam Secretary, do you know what environmental justice
means?
Ms. Granholm. I do.
Ms. Barragan. That would be that would mean that you know
more than the last administration's Energy Secretary that sat
before this committee and couldn't describe it or explain it.
So when I hear these very direct questions about specific
numbers and places, I am very impressed.
Secretary Granholm, the infrastructure law President Biden
and Democrats in Congress passed included 84 million for
demonstration projects that use enhanced geothermal technology.
There is a lot of geothermal potential in California and other
parts of the country. How is the Department of Energy using
these funds to meet its enhanced Geothermal Shot goal to cut
geothermal energy costs? And what more can Congress do to
support your work?
Ms. Granholm. I am so glad you asked this question, because
I am such a huge fan of geothermal, the heat beneath our feet,
which is 24/7 dispatchable, baseload, clean power. We need to
do more.
So we do have this Earthshot. The Earthshot is to reduce
the cost of geothermal so that we can see more of it happen.
We also have the ability through the Inflation Reduction
Act and the Bipartisan Infrastructure Law to help invest in
facilities that be--that are able to get to that geothermal.
Honestly, the oil and gas companies should be embracing
this, given their expertise in frack--in hydraulic fracturing.
They know where the hotspots are, and they know how to get to
them, and they know the subsurface, and they have employees who
have a skill set that is ready to go.
So we are very enthusiastic about continuing the technology
advances, particularly on the drill bits as well as on the
extraction processes, whether it is enhanced or advanced
geothermal, closed loop or open loop. We are very interested in
all of it.
Ms. Barragan. Oh, great. And I understand that today the
Department of Energy is holding an Enhanced Geothermal Shot
Summit. And so I want to thank you for your commitment to this
clean energy resource.
And the followup to that, if the Department of Energy can
meet the cost reduction goals of enhanced geothermal, I believe
that is going to unlock 24/7 power in many parts of the United
States. How significant would this be for our climate and clean
energy goals?
Ms. Granholm. Yes, it is--you know, to all of the questions
that we were just talking about clean, dispatchable baseload
power, it would unlock so much. There is the potential for
geothermal, no matter how far down you go--it all depends on
how far down you go--it is everywhere. And so if we could
really unearth that, if we could really crack the code on it,
it could be the Holy Grail.
Ms. Barragan. Great. And this is a bipartisan issue. It is
something I have been working on with my colleague across the
aisle on--who represents Utah, Mr. Curtis.
I want to chat with you about marine energy. Secretary
Granholm, the infrastructure law also provided $70 million to
further develop marine energy. There is a lot of wave energy
potential off the coast of California, and a pilot project soon
underway at AltaSea in my district, which is at the Port of Los
Angeles. Can you tell me how the Department of Energy is using
these funds to advance marine energy?
And what more can Congress do to support the marine energy
research and development?
And just to give you an idea, I recently had a company from
Israel come and share their--what they are doing there to bring
down to the Los Angeles port that can basically produce energy
from waves.
Ms. Granholm. Yes.
Ms. Barragan. And I think it is pretty remarkable. And so I
just thought I would ask about that.
Ms. Granholm. Yes, it is hugely--you know, the--just the
ability for machines under--at the floor of the seabed to be
able to harness that energy is a huge opportunity. We are
trying to reduce the costs of those machines so that it becomes
affordable.
But here is what we have done. The Water Power Technology
Office, they have actually issued now three funding
opportunities to support the impact of the expansion of low-
impact hydropower and pumped storage hydropower, whether it
is--there's dams, but there is also--you can have pumped
storage on a smaller sort of distributed manner. All of those
are technology advances that we are focused on.
We also have put $40 million in the budget for the National
Marine Energy Centers, and the marine energy R&D is that 40
million--excuse me, 70 million funding opportunity that we
announced this week.
Ms. Barragan. Great. Well, thank you, and I appreciate that
you mentioned that in the Inflation Reduction Act Democrats
have included billions in home electrification incentives with
priority for low- and moderate-income households so they can
make that switch.
Again, thank you for your time.
Ms. Granholm. Thank you.
Ms. Barragan. And with that I yield back.
Mr. Duncan. I thank the gentlelady, she yields back.
I ask unanimous consent to insert in the record the
documents included on the staff hearing document list.
Without objection, that will be the order.
[The information appears at the conclusion of the hearing.]
Mr. Duncan. I will remind Members they have 10 business
days to submit questions for the record, and I ask the witness
to respond to the questions promptly. Members should submit
their questions by the close of business on May 25th.
And Madam Secretary, thanks for being here. Thanks for
bearing with us during votes.
Ms. Granholm. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Duncan. And we will stand adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 5:46 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]
[Material submitted for inclusion in the record follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
