- ENERGY AND WATER DEVELOPMENT, AND RELATED AGENCIES APPROPRIATIONS FOR 2025

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

ENERGY AND WATER DEVELOPMENT
APPROPRIATIONS FOR 2025
_______________________________________________________________________

HEARINGS

BEFORE A

SUBCOMMITTEE OF THE

COMMITTEE ON APPROPRIATIONS

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

____________

SUBCOMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND WATER DEVELOPMENT,
AND RELATED AGENCIES

CHARLES J. ``CHUCK'' FLEISCHMANN, Tennessee, Chairman

MICHAEL K. SIMPSON, Idaho
KEN CALVERT, California
DAN NEWHOUSE, Washington
GUY RESCHENTHALER, Pennsylvania
MIKE GARCIA, California
JULIA LETLOW, Louisiana
MICHAEL GUEST, Mississippi
STEPHANIE I. BICE, Oklahoma

MARCY KAPTUR, Ohio
DEBBIE WASSERMAN SCHULTZ, Florida
SUSIE LEE, Nevada
MIKE QUIGLEY, Illinois
JOSEPH D. MORELLE, New York
DEREK KILMER, Washington

NOTE: Under committee rules, Mr. Cole, as chairman of the full
committee, and Ms. DeLauro, as ranking minority member of the full
committee, are authorized to sit as members of all subcommittees.

Laura Cylke, Perry Yates,
Richie O'Connell, and Angelina Casimates
Subcommittee Staff

_____________

PART 1

Page
Fiscal Year 2025 Request for the
Department of Energy....................
1
Members' Day..........................
101
Fiscal Year 2025 Request for the Army
Corps of Engineers (Civil Works) and the
Bureau of Reclamation...................
117

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

______________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Appropriations

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
57-786                      WASHINGTON : 2025

---------------------------------------------------------------------------------

COMMITTEE ON APPROPRIATIONS

----------
TOM COLE, Oklahoma, Chairman

HAROLD ROGERS, Kentucky
Chair Emeritus
KAY GRANGER, Texas
Chair Emeritus
ROBERT B. ADERHOLT, Alabama
MICHAEL K. SIMPSON, Idaho
JOHN R. CARTER, Texas
KEN CALVERT, California
MARIO DIAZ-BALART, Florida
STEVE WOMACK, Arkansas
CHARLES J. ``CHUCK'' FLEISCHMANN,
Tennessee
DAVID P. JOYCE, Ohio
ANDY HARRIS, Maryland
MARK E. AMODEI, Nevada
DAVID G. VALADAO, California
DAN NEWHOUSE, Washington
JOHN R. MOOLENAAR, Michigan
JOHN H. RUTHERFORD, Florida
BEN CLINE, Virginia
GUY RESCHENTHALER, Pennsylvania
MIKE GARCIA, California
ASHLEY HINSON, Iowa
TONY GONZALES, Texas
JULIA LETLOW, Louisiana
MICHAEL CLOUD, Texas
MICHAEL GUEST, Mississippi
RYAN K. ZINKE, Montana
ANDREW S. CLYDE, Georgia
JAKE LaTURNER, Kansas
JERRY L. CARL, Alabama
STEPHANIE I. BICE, Oklahoma
SCOTT FRANKLIN, Florida
JAKE ELLZEY, Texas
JUAN CISCOMANI, Arizona
CHUCK EDWARDS, North Carolina

ROSA L. DeLAURO, Connecticut
STENY H. HOYER, Maryland
MARCY KAPTUR, Ohio
SANFORD D. BISHOP, Jr., Georgia
BARBARA LEE, California
BETTY McCOLLUM, Minnesota
C. A. DUTCH RUPPERSBERGER,
Maryland
DEBBIE WASSERMAN SCHULTZ, Florida
HENRY CUELLAR, Texas
CHELLIE PINGREE, Maine
MIKE QUIGLEY, Illinois
DEREK KILMER, Washington
MATT CARTWRIGHT, Pennsylvania
GRACE MENG, New York
MARK POCAN, Wisconsin
PETE AGUILAR, California
LOIS FRANKEL, Florida
BONNIE WATSON COLEMAN, New Jersey
NORMA J. TORRES, California
ED CASE, Hawaii
ADRIANO ESPAILLAT, New York
JOSH HARDER, California
JENNIFER WEXTON, Virginia
DAVID J. TRONE, Maryland
LAUREN UNDERWOOD, Illinois
SUSIE LEE, Nevada
JOSEPH D. MORELLE, New York

Susan Ross, Clerk and Staff Director

(ii)

C O N T E N T S

----------

FISCAL YEAR 2025 REQUEST FOR THE DEPARTMENT OF ENERGY

Page
Fleischmann, Hon. Charles J. ``Chuck'', a Representative in
Congress from the State of Tennessee, opening statement........     1
Kaptur, Hon. Marcy, a Representative in Congress from the State
of Ohio, opening statement.....................................     3

Witnesses

Granholm, Hon. Jennifer M., Secretary, Department of Energy......     5
Prepared statement...........................................     8
Answers to submitted questions...............................    47

MEMBERS' DAY

Fleischmann, Hon. Charles J. ``Chuck'', a Representative in
Congress from the State of Tennessee, opening statement........   101
Kaptur, Hon. Marcy, a Representative in Congress from the State
of Ohio, opening statement.....................................   101

Witnesses

Ciscomani, Hon. Juan, a Representative in Congress from the State
of Arizona.....................................................   109
Prepared statement...........................................   110
Costa, Hon. Jim, a Representative in Congress from the State of
California.....................................................   106
Prepared statement...........................................   108
Garamendi, Hon. John, a Representative in Congress from the State
of California..................................................   112
Prepared statement...........................................   114
Moylan, Hon James C., a Delegate in Congress from Guam...........   102
Prepared statement...........................................   103
Mullin, Hon. Kevin, a Representative in Congress from the State
of California..................................................   110
Prepared statement...........................................   111
Stanton, Hon. Greg, a Representative in Congress from the State
of Arizona.....................................................   104
Prepared statement...........................................   105

FISCAL YEAR 2025 REQUEST FOR THE ARMY CORPS OF ENGINEEERS (CIVIL WORKS)
AND THE BUREAU OF RECLAMATION

Fleischmann, Hon. Charles J. ``Chuck'', a Representative in
Congress from the State of Tennessee, opening statement........   117
Kaptur, Hon. Marcy, a Representative in Congress from the State
of Ohio, opening statement.....................................   118

Witnesses

Brain, Michael, Principal Deputy Assistant Secretary, Water &
Science, U.S. Department of the Interior.......................   150
Prepared statement...........................................   152

Connor, Hon. Michael L., Assistant Secretary of the Army (Civil
Works).........................................................   121
Prepared statement...........................................   123
Spellmon, Lt. General Scott A., Commanding General, U.S. Army
Corps of Engineers.............................................   134
Prepared statement...........................................   136
Touton, Hon. Camille Calimlim, Commissioner, U.S. Bureau of
Reclamation....................................................   142
Prepared statement...........................................   144
Answers to submitted questions...............................   184

ENERGY AND WATER DEVELOPMENT, AND RELATED AGENCIES APPROPRIATIONS FOR
2025

----------

Wednesday, March 20, 2024.

FISCAL YEAR 2025 REQUEST FOR THE DEPARTMENT OF ENERGY

WITNESSES

HON. JENNIFER M. GRANHOLM, SECRETARY, DEPARTMENT OF
ENERGY

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. CHARLES J. ``CHUCK'' FLEISCHMANN, A
REPRESETNATIVE IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF TENNESSEE

Mr. Fleischmann. The Energy and Water Development
Subcommittee hearing is now open. Welcome everyone. I want to
especially welcome Secretary Jennifer Granholm to the Energy
and Water Subcommittee this morning to discuss the fiscal year
2025 budget request for the Department of Energy.
But before I do that, Madam Secretary, and to my
distinguished ranking member, Ms. Kaptur, and to the staff, I
want to thank you for the job that we all did, our
subcommittee, the Senate, the administration, yourself, to put
together the fiscal 2024 bill that we just recently passed in a
tranche of six bills.
Let's face it, we serve in very arduous times. There are
very strong ideas on both sides and different avocations. But
to put together the energy and water bill that we did for the
people of this great Nation was no small task, and I thank you
and everyone involved with that.
Having said that, we move forward with 2025. Madam
Secretary, thank you again for being here. I want to address
the 2025 issues. But as you know, one of my strongest
priorities in Congress has been, for years, nuclear energy, all
aspects of nuclear energy, the front end of the fuel cycle, the
back end of the fuel cycle, and all that it entails. And, of
course, in 2024 we worked very hard to preserve the Generation
III projects, which was very good with $900 million; HALEU, we
worked together to get $2.7 billion in the budget so that we
can have a domestic American HALEU project, which we will need
for our advanced Gen IV reactors.
So, again, large areas of agreement in that realm, and we
got that done. And it is in that spirit that I hope we can
continue in fiscal 2025.
The Department of Energy's fiscal 2025 budget request is
approximately $52 billion. It is an increase of $1.8 billion
above fiscal 2024. I strongly support many of the programs and
activities of the Department of Energy. For example, our
Nation's strategic defense rests on a strong nuclear deterrent.
So I was pleased to see that the budget request proposes an
increased funding for the National Nuclear Security
Administration, the NNSA. The request would continue funding
the uranium processing facility in my home district in East
Tennessee, as well as plutonium pit production, ongoing life
extension programs, the sea-launched cruise missile nuclear,
and a new variant of the B61 gravity bomb. And I thank you for
that.
We will work with the administration today, and over the
coming weeks, to determine whether the request represents
sufficient funding and the appropriate prioritization for the
continued modernization of our nuclear weapons complex.
Another high priority for me is the Office of Science. I
worked hard to secure increased funding in fiscal 2024 act, one
of the few nondefense increases across the department. A strong
Office of Science is critical, in my view, to America's role as
the global leader of scientific discovery.
Madam Secretary, I look forward to discussing with you
today how the request addresses activities related to fusion
energy, and isotopes in particular.
Unfortunately, I also have concerns with some of the Biden
administration's priorities expressed in the fiscal 2025 budget
request through other actions of the Department. The Department
of Energy is sitting on tens of billions of unobligated dollars
intended to advance a variety of energy technologies. Yet,
rather than focusing on the effective implementation of those
existing programs, the budget, again, proposes many new
programs, including, in my view, disproportionate
nonsustainable increases for energy efficiency and renewable
energy activities.
The administration, again, has highlighted clean energy and
climate change goals as key drivers of the budget request.
Nuclear energy, a baseload, carbon-free source of electricity,
will be, in my view, essential in achieving any climate change
goals. Yet, the nuclear energy program is one of the only cuts
proposed in the budget request.
Especially concerning is that the request includes no
funding for the two ongoing Advanced Reactor Demonstration
projects which we feel have gone very well. We know these
projects will need additional funding, and it would be better
to continue incremental funding each year for these projects,
in our view.
Some of the Department's actions also raise concerns about
energy security for America and for our allies. Numerous energy
efficiency standards have been proposed, in my view, at such
extreme levels as to significantly increase prices for
consumers and cause supply concerns. I was pleased to see the
Department backtrack on the gas stoves rule, and I hope to see
similar adjustment to reality on the distribution transformers
and manufacturing housing rules.
As the Secretary knows, I have been a long-term proponent
of the manufacturing housing industry. This is the beginning of
the American dream for many lower-income Americans, and we want
to make sure that is there.
The Department's recent pause in reviewing pending LNG
export applications is also a serious concern. I hope we will
have the chance to discuss some of these actions in more
detail.
Once again, Secretary Granholm, I appreciate you being here
today to explain your budget requests. I look forward to
working together with you and my colleagues on both sides of
the aisle to move forward a budget that will strengthen our
national security and advance our energy independence.
Please ensure for us that the hearing record, questions for
the record, and any supporting information requested by the
subcommittee are delivered to us in final form to us no later
than 4 weeks from the time you receive them. Members who have
additional questions for the record will have the close of
business Monday to provide them to the subcommittee office.
Before I turn to my ranking member, I do want to say this
again. I thank you, I look forward to working with you. I will
say this: Right now there are ongoing other subcommittee
hearings--so members will come and go--defense, labor,
education, health, and human services. So members are
actually--will be moving in and out. So I did want to let you
know that.
With that, my ranking member, Marcy Kaptur, from the great
State of Ohio, we have worked together very closely for years.
We are neighbors in this building. And I would say this for
those--Ms. Kaptur has the distinction, the high distinction, of
being the longest-serving female member in the United States
House in history.
With that, I yield to my friend, Ranking Member Kaptur, and
I thank you.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. MARCY KAPTUR, A REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS
FROM THE STATE OF OHIO

Ms. Kaptur. Thank you, Chair. Thank you, Chair Fleischmann,
very, very much. It is a pleasure to work with you and with our
very talented members on both sides of the aisle. We like to
say that we are kind of a template for how to find the big
middle and move bills. And I appreciate working with you very,
very much to develop and pass our bipartisan fiscal year 2024
bill, and we want to thank the Secretary for all of her efforts
and that of her department specialists to make that a reality;
one of the first ones after a very long delay that moved
forward.
I truly hope that we can continue in our subcommittee's
bipartisan, button-down working partnership for fiscal year
2025 to benefit the people of our Nation and our future.
Thank you, Secretary Granholm, for joining us today, and we
are so grateful for your exemplary service and leadership on
these energy and water issues vital to every region of this
country and our world. Today we are here to discuss the
Department of Energy's fiscal year 2025 budget request.
Energy security is national security. And since World War
II, America paid a terrible price for its unconscious slide
into foreign dependency on imported energy. To date, our
Nation's path toward U.S. energy independence in perpetuity is
clear, is steady, and successful. But we are not finished yet.
Putin's unprovoked war against Ukraine clearly highlights
the importance of energy security. Russian manipulation of oil
markets and the sharp escalation and geopolitical risk in the
Middle East has oil markets on edge. Never again should America
depend on foreign adversaries to fuel our cars and power our
homes.
Forty-four years ago, as our Nation's economy tanked due to
the first Arab oil embargo, President Carter and my predecessor
in Congress, particularly Thomas Ludlow Ashley of Toledo,
Ohio--God rest his soul--as a Member of this Congress and
heading the special committee that was formed back then by
Speaker Tip O'Neill, they created the U.S. Department of
Energy. They did it on a bipartisan basis for the benefit of
the country.
With their vision and steadfast bipartisan commitment, our
nation has made progress in attaining energy independence.
Over the last 40 years--I often feel like we are at a
mountain and we have just come over the top and we are starting
to see the sun again; we are starting to see it. Our Nation,
over the last 40 years, has made remarkable progress. The
expansion of domestic oil and gas production and developing new
cheaper clean energy sources, such as biofuels, solar,
thermalrecovery, pushing into new energy frontiers of fusion,
advanced hydrogen, and energy storage. And the chair well knows
how difficult but steady this process has been.
U.S. petroleum imports peaked in 2005, and for the last 4
years, the United States was a petroleum net exporter. In fact,
for the past 6 years in a row, the United States produced more
crude oil than any nation at any time in history. Natural gas
exports from the United States reached a record high in the
first half of 2023.
Last year marks the third consecutive year in which the
United States supplied more liquefied natural gas to Europe
than any other country. Last year, overall, biofuels production
capacity reached a record level, with fuel ethanol representing
79 percent of that capacity. That is a win for farmers and for
having an alternative source of energy, and I can still
remember when Senator Tom Harkin of Iowa and I produced the
first legislation to create that market, and the Department of
Agriculture didn't want it. We said, we have forestry, we have
fiber, we have farming. What about fuel? And they didn't want
it. Now you couldn't take it away from them.
However, for sustained U.S. energy security, our Nation
must pursue an all-of-the-above energy strategy. We must also
invest in clean energy to diversify our energy portfolio. Clean
energy technologies in conservation and thermal-heat recovery,
we have to embed that in people's thinking. We will lower costs
for consumers, building materials. New types of building
materials will make a huge difference, creating good-paying
jobs and help address the climate crisis.
We know this approach works. Over the last 12 years, the
Department of Energy's investments have driven down the cost of
clean energy. Onshore wind costs have dropped 69 percent. Solar
photovoltaic costs have dropped 89 percent, and multilayer
solar technologies become more powerful and advanced every day.
Energy drives our private sector's ability to flourish in a
modern economy. Millions of living-wage jobs attend to energy
production, conservation, and the skills of a workforce working
24/7 to power our Nation.
Imaginative energy technologies are being created by
America's amazing inventors--and I have met many of these
folks--in building materials, solar, and electrified windows,
how about that? Biofuels, advanced nuclear, fusion, hydrogen,
geothermal, and thermal-heat recovery, and offshore wind and
wave energy, to name a few.
This year, the movie, ``Oppenheimer,'' won the Academy
Award, and that is the world in which our subcommittee lives
and works. Our subcommittee on both sides of the aisle--and I
know our chairman--knows how important it is that we continue
to support the Department of Energy's balanced portfolio of
transformative investments, including energy efficiency, and
renewable energy to develop clean, affordable, advanced, and
secure American energy.
In other parts of the Department of Energy's budget, the
National Security Administration, which the chair has
referenced, fully assures our Nation's nuclear security assets,
including the excellence--and I mean excellence--of our nuclear
navy around the globe, and they don't get enough credit for all
they do. They are modern and ready, acting as both a deterrent
and a safeguard for our Nation's security.
With Vladimir Putin's recent reckless threats about
launching nuclear weapons and former President Donald Trump's
appeasing reaction, we must maintain strategic investments as
an affirmation of American will to protect and defend our
people and our allies and assure our Nation's security.
However, given the evolving nuclear security landscape, I am
concerned with proposed cuts to nuclear nonproliferation
programs. These investments are crucial to enhancing our
nation's ability to prevent adversaries from acquiring nuclear
weapons and to respond to nuclear or radiological incidents and
accidents domestically and abroad.
With that, I will close our remarks and thank our
colleagues on both sides of the aisle for their attendance
today, and I look forward to discussing this request in more
detail.
Thank you, Chairman Fleischmann, very much.
Mr. Fleischmann. Thank you Ranking Member Kaptur.
Secretary Granholm, thank you again for being here today.
Without objection, your full written testimony will be entered
into the record. With that in mind, we would respectfully ask
that you summarize your opening statement in 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF HON. JENNIFER M. GRANHOLM, SECRETARY, DEPARTMENT OF ENERGY

Secretary Granholm. You bet. Thank you so much, Chairman
Fleischmann, Ranking Member Kaptur, and members of the
subcommittee. I am honored to be here with you today to discuss
President Biden's latest budget request for the Department of
Energy.
Three years ago, I joined this administration believing
that if we came together around a national energy strategy,
that we could restore manufacturing, we could create jobs, we
could address the climate crisis, and we could lead the world
in clean energy. And today, we are doing just that. America is
back.
Thanks to Congress's efforts and the President's vision, we
are executing a focused, deliberate strategy that positions us
to become energy-independent and energy-secure. This strategy
positions our businesses to dominate, our workers to compete,
and our communities to thrive, and it is already working.
Since the passage of the Bipartisan Infrastructure Law, the
first of the three bills that really have transformed our
economic landscape, companies in this clean energy space have
announced 600 new or expanded manufacturing plants on U.S.
soil; $200 billion in planned investment for batteries, for
electric vehicles, for solar, for wind, for nuclear, and more.
Tens of thousands of jobs being created from Tennessee to
Toledo, from Nevada to New York, and everywhere in between,
thanks to the Bipartisan Infrastructure Law and the Inflation
Reduction Act.
Sustaining that kind of growth, though, requires us to
complement the historic funding with durable, long-term
investments. So let me thank all of you for your work on fiscal
year 2024 budget. Mr. Chairman, you referenced this, but I
cannot tell you how much we appreciate the work of you, of this
committee, for including $2.7 billion for domestic and uranium
production, as well as the small modular reactors, as well as
nuclear safety worker training. All of that in that budget, so
very important.
So the President's fiscal year 2025 will build upon those
successes in 2024. Our commercialization tools are giving
American businesses the confidence to capitalize on this moment
while deepening our energy security. But deepening energy
security is an ongoing project, and we need to fund it year
over year. And that is why the budget calls for significant
appropriations for our demonstration and deployment programs,
including our office of manufacturing and energy supply chains,
and our grid deployment office.
We are also making sure every community can benefit from
reliable, affordable energy and efficiency technologies. DOE
does this, for example, through our Weatherization Assistance
Program, which Congress granted transformational funding in the
Bipartisan Infrastructure Law. I have seen firsthand how this
program changes lives, as well as the overwhelming need for it.
This budget will bring us closer to meeting that need for
40,000 additional low-income households.
It also includes dedicated funding for our interagency
working group on coal and power plant communities. I have also
seen firsthand how that program gives communities the gift of
rebirth, and it instills pride for the workers who have defined
America's energy past and will help to power its future.
And it is not just energy workers. After decades of
disinvestment, we are finally rebuilding our manufacturing
base, and we are developing the skilled workforce needed to
power it. We are also planning for the future by doubling down
on R&D with an $8.6 billion request for basic science research,
and $3 billion for applied R&D. We are making sure that each
new generation of energy technologies is more innovative than
the last, from industrial decarbonization solutions to fusion.
We are also requesting $2 billion for critical and emerging
technologies, like AI and quantum. Both are key to economic
competitiveness and defense, and DOE is uniquely positioned to
drive them forward. The budget also includes a $25 billion for
our National Nuclear Security Administration. Russia's
continued war in Ukraine makes nuclear deterrent paramount to
our national defense and the security of our allies. The
President's request would give the NNSA the means to deliver
and adapt in the face of evolving threats, and would advance
the NNSA's wider priorities around arms control and
nonproliferation counterterrorism and the safe use of civil
nuclear power.
Thanks to the bipartisan assistance we have received from
Congress, America is back. We are the envy of the world. We
can't afford to lose momentum, and that depends on your
continued support. I look forward to address you today. Thank
you for the opportunity, and let's answer some questions.
[The prepared statment of Secretary Granholm follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Fleischmann. Thank you, Madam Secretary. My first
question is going to be directed to you about the Uranium
Processing Facility, the UPF, which we did actually the
groundbreaking for that several years ago in Oak Ridge.
Madam Secretary, last year I asked you about the schedule
and costs associated with recapitalization of UPF. As you know,
the current facility, Y-12, are more than 70 years old dating
back to the Manhattan Project. Respectfully, we still have not
seen an updated schedule.
Three questions, if I may. Can you share an updated
schedule and cost estimated for UPF? If not, when does the
Department intend to have a new baseline for UPF?
Second question, please. Do you anticipate any scope being
taken out of the UPF project as part of the re-baselining?
And, thirdly, the fiscal 2025 budget includes $800 million
for the project. Is the project request, in your view, adequate
to ensure the project gets back on track?
Secretary Granholm. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank you,
by the way, for the $50 million increase in this particular
line in 2024.
So the baseline change proposal for the UPF cost is
underway. It is nearing completion, but the numbers for the
cost and the schedule are not yet finalized.
Scope has not been removed from the baseline change
proposal. And acknowledging that the Y-12 Building 9212 is old,
but we also want to keep this on track. So we will continue to
invest in maintaining the old facilities and pre-producing some
weapon components in Y-12 to mitigate the risks associated with
potential delays to UPF. We want to not have that happen.
So we think we are on track, and those estimates will be
coming to you soon.
Mr. Fleischmann. Thank you. Next, I would like to address
HALEU to the advanced reactors. You alluded to that in your
opening statement. I thank you. In fiscal 2024 that $2.7
billion was great.
We provided in fiscal 2024 significant funding for small-
modulor reactor deployment and the Advanced Reactors
Demonstration program. I also made sure we funded, again, $2.7
billion for HALEU needed for a Generation IV advanced reactors.
I want to make sure that those programs are on a path to
success, and I would like you to work with me as those programs
move forward.
Today, can you please tell us, when can we expect to see a
detailed resource loaded plan with programmatic milestones for
domestic uranium enrichment? What is the current budget and
schedule profile for each of the two Advanced Reactor
Demonstration projects? What steps will the Department take to
ensure the projects continue to progress?
And then, finally, given the Department's expertise and
long-standing support for SMR, when can we expect the RFP for
new competition? I thank you.
Secretary Granholm. Thank you. Well, first of all, again,
thank you so much for the investment from 2024.
I will say that the 2024 appropriations bill specifies that
DOE cannot repurpose the CNC funds, which were used for the
HALEU until a law is enacted to ban those supplies from Russia,
and so, I strongly hope and encourage that Congress does that
so that we can move with alacrity.
I know this bill just came out 2 weeks ago, so we are
working on getting you the schedules. I know you have been
briefed on it, and we will be moving at pace. Hopefully, we can
get that ban in place in order to unlock the CNC.
With respect to the ARDP work, we know that those as well
are being re-baselined. They are over--have come in overbudget,
and so, we are working with the recipients to--on their re-
baselining and with their schedules with the fundamental goal,
of course, of ensuring that the program is successful and to be
able to take advance nuclear to the marketplace. We support
those projects.
And with respect to the small modular reactors, you know,
the demonstration money is going through our Office of Clean
Energy Demonstrations, which is the big demonstration arm of
the Department of Energy. We are going to implement a
competitive process to do this. We are working closely with our
office of nuclear energy as well to make sure that the funds
are deployed in a way that is complementary, and we know time
is of the essence, and we are prepared to move quickly to
implement that program as well.
Mr. Fleischmann. Thank you, Madam Secretary. And one small
point of order. Appreciate your answers to our questions.
You accurately reflected what is in the legislation in
regard to the HALEU, but I also believe part of that law is
also that administrative action can also be taken, which may
entail the potential for an executive order to address that.
Secretary Granholm. That is true. That is possible. We are
concerned about the enduring nature of it. And so, if Congress
acts on it, it obviously solidifies it more concretely. So to
the extent that Congress could do that.
I know it is in one of the bills that started in-house, and
hopefully we can see that happen.
Mr. Fleischmann. Thank you. Ranking Member Kaptur.
Ms. Kaptur. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Madam Secretary, I
can't thank you enough for stressing the connection between
energy and job growth and economic opportunity in this country.
I think you are probably the first Secretary that has ever said
that. And coming from a part of the country that has had so
many jobs outsourced, I appreciate that you can see it.
And I just wanted to mention that in the field of
controlled environmental agriculture, the bottom line, as we
return fruit and vegetable production to this country, energy
becomes the critical factor in these large houses now that are
being built. Forty percent of the bottom line is energy. We
simply must solve this scientific challenge to reduce that cost
to producers, and we will feed the world. So I know you know
what I am talking about in that regard. It is a technical
challenge, and we need to be successful in meeting it.
On the industrial side, Ford Motor brought back heavy truck
from Mexico many years ago to our region, and I said to the
CEO, I said, What can I do to keep these jobs here? He said,
Reduce my energy costs 30 percent. I thought, how am I going to
do that? So thank you for seeing the connection.
My first question is, DOE is charged with promulgating
Congressionally mandated energy efficiency standards for
appliances and equipment, and I am concerned that your proposed
rule for distribution transformers will adversely impact
domestic steel production and our national security.
Cleveland-Cliffs, which is helping America's steel industry
rise again under terrible international competition, is our
country's largest flat-rolled steel producer and only producer
of grain-oriented electrical steel for power and distribution
transformers.
They have indicated they will close their Butler,
Pennsylvania, and Zanesville, Ohio, electrical and steel
operations if the rule is finalized as proposed. This would be
tragic for the over 1,300 union workers and undermine domestic
supply chains again, not only for a grain-oriented electrical
steel but for nonoriented electrical steel, which is essential
for EV production.
Could you commit today to work with stakeholders to make
sure the final rule does not adversely impact domestic
production or goes and knows, as they call them, and preserves
the use of goes for distribution transformers?
Secretary Granholm. Thank you. Yes. We have been hearing
and taking in a lot of feedback working with industry, working
with UAW, et cetera, who have weighed in on the proposed rule.
Adjustments have been made.
The final proposed rule is now in the interagency and will
come out before June, which is what is required by the consent
decree that we are under. It is one of the beauties of being
able to do proposed rules and getting that input. That is our
feedback loop, and we have heard, and adjustments have been
made.
Ms. Kaptur. Thank you, Madam Secretary. Good luck on that.
Keep pushing.
Secretary Granholm, the Department of Energy has tremendous
capability at its research labs to develop new technology to
address the needs of the agriculture sector. How can the
Department of Energy partner with other agencies to develop
sensor technology that will allow for the in situ real-time
monitoring of nutrients and pollutants that contribute to
harmful algal blooms, certainly in the western basin of Lake
Erie, throughout the Great Lakes, the Everglades, and so many
other places across our country?
Secretary Granholm. We are happy to work with you on this.
I know a number of our labs, obviously, are focused on the
bioeconomy and on ways to enhance agricultural output,
efficiency, et cetera. So eager to follow-up with you on the
specifics that you are asking about.
We have got a whole slew of labs that are focused on making
sure that they are working with agriculture and the bioeconomy
to ensure that it continues to produce, produce at home, and
that it is efficient.
Ms. Kaptur. Thank you so very much. I appreciate that
openness.
And finally, on this first round, on domestic solar
manufacturing, in my home State for solar manufacturers thin-
film solar modules, as you well know, and it is the only U.S.-
headquartered company in the world--in the world's top 10
module producers. In 2024, over 50 percent of new U.S. power
generation was solar. How about that? And yet, we are ceding
the market to China.
Over 1\1/2\ years' worth of solar module demand is
currently sitting in warehouses according to the International
Energy Agency, and the market for building new facilities is
dire. We are at a make-or-break inflection point when it comes
to reshoring end-to-end solar manufacturing supply chains.
Is the Department of Energy working with the Department of
Treasury to ensure that the Inflation Reduction Act policies
incentivize domestic manufacturing through the solar supply
chains, and do you have any options to help directly in the
critical areas of wafer and polysilicon production?
And then, finally, the Department, through the Federal
Energy Management Program, recently announced funding for the
Department of Defense to make improvements to the Pentagon
campus, including installing solar. Can you commit to ensuring
that if contractors or third parties install the solar or
provide the power, they adhere to the highest standards of
domestic content and labor?
Secretary Granholm. Thank you for this. The solar story is
a really great story in the United States. For solar, in
particular, having backlog now of bookings well into the years
ahead. That is great. It is all because of the Inflation
Reduction Act, and the irresistible incentives that have been
embedded there.
We had a record year last year of 32.4 gigawatts of solar
having been installed in the United States. There is four--on
the demand side, a 30 percent tax credit for homeowners to be
able to install solar; for developers, a similar 30 percent
investment tax credit. And there is a per-unit credit, which
includes polysilicon and wafers.
This also is a huge story for domestic content because
developers who get that solar credit get an extra 10 percent,
so a 40 percent tax credit if they use domestic solar-produced
panels. And this is one of the reasons why our buildout now of
solar manufacturing in the United States is so critical.
You are so right that China had a very strategic plan to be
able to corner the market on solar, and they did. And so, what
we are doing, we are not ceding anything. We are fighting back
to get that manufacturing back in the United States, and it is
working.
Ms. Kaptur. Thank you. Much success. We want to help you.
Thank you, Madam Secretary.
Mr. Fleischmann. Thank you, Ms. Kaptur.
At this time, I would like to recognize my friend Mr.
Garcia of California for 5 minutes.
Mr. Garcia. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you, Madam
Secretary, for coming in again. Appreciate you outlining fiscal
year 2025 and hopefully for that process in the year to come in
the last year.
I want to go back to the conversation--I want to go back to
the conversation that we have had at previous hearings not just
here, but also at SST when you have come and spoke and outlined
the vision.
You mentioned in your opening remarks that we are the envy
of the world right now, and I take issue with that. One, I
don't want us to be necessarily the envy of the world. I want
us to be secure. And that is what our voters want, that is what
our constituents want. They want security.
And one of the key cornerstones of our Nation's security,
national security, is the SPR, our Nation's Strategic Petroleum
Reserve. We are coming up now on the one-year anniversary where
you came in front of us here at E&W and promised a plan to
replenish the SPR. And what is concerning about where we are
right now and what is not enviable or not, frankly, providing
us security from an energy perspective is that you can see we
are sitting here at record low SPR levels in our reserves that
we haven't seen since 1983, which is when we were first
starting to actually ramp up.
So it has been a year since you committed to providing a
plan in this committee hearing. It was 6 months ago that you
committed to bringing a plan. I have yet to see a plan to
replenish the SPR. This is not a 401(k) chart. If you saw this
and this was your 401(k), you would be concerned, and you would
be acting on it. This is not a brokerage account for the
Federal Treasury.
This is, if you want to make a metaphor, it is an insurance
policy for the United States. If we are not going to achieve
100 percent energy independence, we need to at least be in a
position where we have a strong SPR, refill our coffers, and
for rainy days, be able to draw on that.
You have sold off, you know, millions of barrels, 150
million barrels at higher price points. In your last testimony,
you said you were waiting for the price to come down below $72,
and there has been about four months where the price of oil has
been below $72 since you made that testimony, and we have not
been tapping back into that market to replenish the reserves.
So I am not going to ask you what the plan is here, because
I don't think you are going to be able to articulate it here.
But I think you need to deliver to Congress a plan to replenish
the SPR. We are dangerously close to not being not only energy
independent, but not having a backup plan or a safety net when
it comes to some global crisis around oil.
In the span of the last year, oil has been as low as $67
and as high as $93. So I would appreciate if you would treat
SPR more like an insurance policy that you are trying to just
renew and make sure that this country has and is whole. It is
comprehensive, it is going to protect us, rather than an e-
trade account where you are coming in and out of the markets in
order to either make money or prevent the loss of money, or to
try to change the price point of a barrel of oil. I will leave
it at that.
But I would like to get you on the record to commit to
coming back in front of us with the plan to buy back and refill
the SPR.
Secretary Granholm. We do have a plan, and the plan is that
we were going to cancel the congressionally mandated sales,
$140 million worth--140 million barrels' worth that we were
going to begin to repurchase, and we have. We have now
repurchased about 30 million barrels back, and that we are
going to accelerate exchanges.
So by the end of this year, we will be back to,
essentially, where we would have been had we not sold during
the invasion of Ukraine with Putin's weaponization.
Mr. Garcia. So you are saying by the end of this year, we
will be back up here?
Secretary Granholm. To where we would have been. Because
Congress sold--or was going to sell 140 million barrels to--
budget.
Mr. Garcia. Right. But we did not. Right.
Secretary Granholm. Because we--because part of our
strategy was to come in and cancel those sales. We--that is
part of our--
Mr. Garcia. Not to cut you off, but I am getting short on
time. If you have a plan and you are making commitments for the
end of the year, what is the number in the SPR that we should
expect to see in the end of the year?
Secretary Granholm. It will be what it would have been had
we----
Mr. Garcia. What is that number?
Secretary Granholm. We are at about 350 million barrels
right now, 358, something like that. I have to look at what the
exact number would be.
Mr. Garcia. OK. Maybe staff can help you out while we talk
to the other question I have around the nuclear energy, if that
is OK, or we can get the answer for the record.
We, in fiscal year 2024, made great strides in terms of the
recycling of nuclear waste. We have seen the waste side of
nuclear programs be the long pole in the tent in terms of
viability, in terms of appetite, in terms of popularity with
the American people, and we have put provisions in for interim
storage of waste to help mitigate some of those concerns around
the waste factors.
What is preventing us from going quicker in terms of,
rather than doing interim recycling, actually doing more
permanent recycling? I am seeing technologies out there where
we actually can take some of the nuclear waste and recycle it
with great efficiencies and great recycling percentages in a
permanent fashion.
And can also the permanent recycling of fuel be included in
the HALEU buildup conversations as well? Is this something that
we can maybe get, you know, one plus one equals three in those
conversations?
But if we are truly seeking the cleanest source of energy,
which is nuclear power, small modular reactors, we have to be
able to deal with the--and mitigate the waste side of this
equation, and I feel like that technology is there. I just feel
like the acquisition side and the government support for that
technology is what is lagging. How do we get better in fiscal
year 2025?
Secretary Granholm. You may be aware, we have--at our INL
National Lab, Idaho National Lab, they are working--they have a
project where they are working on looking at the recycling and
doing the research associated to make sure that we do it in a
way that is responsible and clean and affordable.
So we are very interested in this solution and hope to see
some progress and some great progress. There are some private
sector companies who are working there in a public/private
partnership at INL to do that. So eager to do that.
I am not sure about using the HALEU money for that because
we have a desperate need to get that going, too, for the
advanced reactors and the SMRs. But nonetheless, there is not
an opposition to it. We are eager to see this happen.
Mr. Garcia. Thank you. My time is up.
Mr. Fleischmann. I want to thank Mr. Garcia. And to further
supplement your answers to that question, we did put 20 million
for recycling. In my opening remarks we talked about dealing
with the rear end of the fuel cycle and how important it was.
The great news, Mr. Garcia, is we have got wonderful
American companies, some of them are in the room today, like
Curio and others, some large, some small, that actually have
American technologies. And I just spoke with Jeff Lyash the
other day--was in Japan--the head of TVA. So many other nations
are reprocessing, friends and foes. The Russians have done it
for years.
So I could not agree more with your comments and the
urgency for dealing with this. We have got the technology, and
we have got the technology to deal with it that deals with the
nonproliferation issues. So I do thank you for that.
Mr. Garcia. Thank you, Chair. And thank you for your
leadership.
Mr. Fleischmann. Yes, sir. At this time I would like to
recognize my friend from Illinois, Mr. Quigley, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Quigley. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Good morning, Madam
Secretary.
Secretary Granholm. Good morning.
Mr. Quigley. So I appreciate the success in becoming more
energy self-sufficient and renewables and everything else we
are doing to provide energy. But obviously, we have to move it
around, and that gets to the issues of an already-congested
electricity grid system.
The added demand from the electrification of the
transportation industry, growth in the manufacturing, which is
a good thing, but all puts additional stress. We are talking
about having to expand the existing regional transmission
system by 128 percent to meet these load-growth projections.
And I see that we have got, in the 2025 budget, proposals
for planning, inter-regional planning and development,
increased from $16 million to $17 million and other studies,
like CTAP. Is this all enough? What else must we do? And what
are the consequences if we are not going to get there?
Secretary Granholm. We basically, as you say, have to more
than double the size of the electric grid in order to take--to
get to the President's goal of 100 percent clean electricity.
We have to add all that clean power on.
But we are also seeing, for the first time, this increase
in demand, which is extremely disconcerting because we have
been flat for a good number of years because of the
efficiencies and the technologies that have been developed, in
large part, by the Department of Energy.
But this increase is due to some good news, which is the
manufacturing facilities that have announced that they are
coming to the U.S., but also AI and data centers. And so, I
think we have to think differently, number one, about how we
power those who are coming with increased demands.
And so a lot of the tech companies, for example, are
willing to have this conversation about if they are building a
data center, maybe they bring the clean power along with it,
additive power, and not just taking from the existing grid.
In addition, the Department of Energy, we have, thanks to
the Bipartisan Infrastructure Law and the Inflation Reduction
Act, about $25 billion in various pockets to address the grid
issues. And we have put out--now we are in the second round of
funding for our grid resilience innovation program. We are
focused on the--yes, planning, important.
Clearly, we have to know where the transmission lines
should be going, where the need will be. And so we are in the
process in that NIETC corridor, the national infrastructure
corridor for electricity in the United States. People are able
to now--or entities are able to nominate, which should be part
of the new corridors. That is happening right now. We are
taking input on that.
And in addition, there is all sorts of technology that we
are incentivizing the funding of. For example, reconductoring
of wires on the existing grid so that we don't have to wait for
years for permitting for new, meaning you can get twice the
power across a transmission line by using advanced conductoring
materials.
And part of that is being--we are asking for funding
opportunity announcement for those who want to come and do
reconductoring. Grid enhancing technologies, using smart
technology to move power when it is absolutely--when it is
necessary. That sort of traffic cop for the grid is another way
of being more efficient with the existing grid.
CTAP is a way for us--that is what you just referenced--is
an administrative effort, executive branch effort to put a 2-
year shot clock on permitting for transmission on public lands.
And that is something that we are very excited about because
currently, the transmission timeline for permitting is insanely
long, unacceptably long. And so, if we can speed up the public
lands permitting, that, too, is very important.
In terms of financing, we are grateful that Congress, the
Bipartisan Infrastructure Law, et cetera, and the Inflation
Reduction Act gave us the ability to do an innovative financing
option to partner with those who want to add more power to the
grid, called the Transmission Facilitation Plan.
We have all sorts of tools that we are working on right now
to bust this open, and we are encouraged by what we are seeing.
Mr. Quigley. Thank you. Mr. Chairman, I see my time is
about up.
Secretary Granholm. Sorry about that.
Mr. Quigley. Thank you. That is all right.
Mr. Fleischmann. Thank you, Mr. Quigley. At this time, I
would like to recognize my dear friend from the state of
Washington, Mr. Newhouse, who is the great Hanford Reservation
and has worked with me for years, as his predecessor did, on
environmental cleanup. Thank you.
Mr. Newhouse, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Newhouse. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Good
morning, Madam Secretary.
Secretary Granholm. Good morning.
Mr. Newhouse. Pleasure to see you today. And thanks for
coming to testify on the proposed DOE's 2025 budget. I
appreciate that very much.
I look forward to discussing our national energy challenges
as well, and the energy issues which impact my district.
Probably no surprise.
First of all, the subject of the Lower Snake River Dams I
would like to address. I believe the preservation of the four
Lower Snake River Dams is absolutely critical and important to
the State of Washington, in fact, to the entire Pacific
Northwest. For years, I have worked to combat what I would call
environmental activists, as well as dam-breaching advocates, in
an effort to--in their effort to breach the dams.
So in December, the administration finalized an agreement
called the Columbia River System Operations litigation. The
agreement acknowledges that only Congress has the authority to
authorize breaching the dams, which I appreciate that
recognition. However, the agreement makes commitments to
develop energy replacement for the dams, as well as
recommending spilling operations.
And a lot of stakeholders have expressed very serious
reservations about this plan. If it comes to fruition, the
results will be catastrophic. Adjusting spilling operations
could make the dams functionally obsolete and useless. Energy
prices will skyrocket. People who depend on the river system
will suffer. And I believe the salmon population will be harmed
as well. It is, in fact, a de facto breaching of the dams.
So my question, Madam Secretary, are you telling us--are
you, through this recommendation, admitting that the
administration is recommending policies that represent de facto
breaching of the dams in an effort to what, essentially,
circumvent the congressional authority to make that decision?
Secretary Granholm. No. No, I am definitely not telling you
that. I am not here telling you that at all. Congress has--
Congress is the only place that has the authority to do the
breaching of the dams.
I think the agreement was a positive step to replenish
salmon, to be able to address hatcheries, you know, to work
with the Tribes on additional power, yes, but that is not to
replace. We need enough power to--there is enough power--there
is not enough power to go around, and we need all the power we
can get.
Mr. Newhouse. I would agree with that statement. We need
more, not less, power.
I would like to transition into talking about something
that we are very proud of in the Northwest, is the Pacific
Northwest National Laboratory. PNNL is a leading hydropower lab
conducting innovative research for DOE's waterpower technology
office.
The agency professes a clean energy agenda focused on
efficiency, low-energy cost, and renewable energy. You, in
fact, even have acknowledged that hydropower's role in
achieving this. I believe April of last year you testified
before the Senate committee on commerce in response to a
question, you said something like hydropower was a renewable
cheap form of power that should be expanding and not reducing,
and I couldn't agree with you more.
Yet, the agency is proposing a $40 million budget cut to
the waterpower technologies office for fiscal year 2025, which
I think would cripple PNNL's hydropower efforts, and this seems
to me a declaration of war on hydropower.
So if you could respond to that. I agree we need cheap,
low-cost, clean, reliable energy now more than ever before. So
why would the agency be proposing this cut?
Secretary Granholm. First of all, let me just say we are in
alignment on making sure that we have hydroelectric power in
this country, and we want to see expansions. In fact, we just
put out a funding opportunity announcement for more
hydroelectric power.
So--and we would love to see, at some point, some
additional plus-up of those efforts financially. We would love
to incentivize additional hydroelectric power across the
country. So the----
Mr. Newhouse. Not a war declaration.
Secretary Granholm. Absolutely not.
Mr. Newhouse. A statement in the reduction----
Secretary Granholm. Not a statement. I think there was some
prioritization that had to be done. But believe me, we are very
much in favor of dam power and would like to see more of it.
Mr. Newhouse. We will get some clarification as your staff
scrambles to get those numbers, and we will look forward to
continuing visiting with you on that.
Secretary Granholm. Thank you.
Mr. Newhouse. Thank you, Madam. Mr. Chair.
Mr. Fleischmann. Thank you, Mr. Newhouse. At this time, I
would like to recognize my friend and colleague, Ms. Lee of
Nevada.
She is my co-chair, Madam Secretary, for the nuclear
cleanup caucus, which is one of the largest caucuses in
Congress. So without further adieu, Ms. Lee of Nevada, you are
recognized for 5 minutes.
Ms. Lee. Thank you, Mr. Chair and Ranking Member Kaptur,
and it is great to see you, Secretary Granholm, today.
And just to reiterate, my partnership with the chair and
the nuclear cleanup caucus, really happy to hear your
commitment to recycling technologies. I think that that is
definitely part of the portfolio.
And speaking of nuclear waste, I just want to ask you if
you can quickly confirm on the record what the Department's
fiscal year 2025 funding request indicates that DOE will not
seek to license, or otherwise force a nuclear waste repository
in my home State.
Secretary Granholm. I can confirm.
Ms. Lee of Nevada. Thank you. Can you briefly update us on
the status of DOE's work towards finding an interim storage
site using the consent base method?
Secretary Granholm. Yes. I know we have talked about this
before. We launched an effort and have funded now 12 different
consortia across the country, modeling somewhat on what has
been done in other nations in a--to a positive end. We are in
that first phase of having these conversations, sharing
information, et cetera.
We will soon move into a second phase with them and then a
third phase, which would be planning for. But we are not quite
at phase 2 yet. We are still proceeding.
Ms. Lee. Great. Thank you. I want to turn now to geothermal
energy. Nevada is home to America's first generation geothermal
plant. Just this week, your Department highlighted just that
such an enhanced geothermal systems or EGS, can unlock clean,
reliable round-the-clock geothermal energy nationwide and
affordably power the equivalent of more than 65 million homes
by 2015.
While I am pleased to have helped prevent any funding cuts
to the DOE's geothermal technology office in fiscal 2024, can
you briefly highlight how greater resources in fiscal year 2025
would better enable DOE to fully realize the immense potential
of EGS?
Secretary Granholm. Yes. I am so glad you raised this. In
fact, just last week, we put out a commercial liftoff report
related to enhanced geothermal, geothermal overall. And it
demonstrates how companies can take advantage, breaking down
some of the barriers. As you referenced, Fervo, for example, as
a geothermal company has, in partnership with what we have done
at the Department of Energy, including the FORGE geothermal
site, we have seen in the past 2 years a reduction of 50
percent of the cost of geothermal because of these efforts and
new ways to be able to drill.
So we are extremely bullish about geothermal. Our goal is
to get 90 gigawatts of geothermal. However, your point, if we
are able to continue to move on this, there are--there is
enough geothermal to power the entire country if we were able
to access all that heat beneath our feet.
We are very bullish on it. We would love to see more
resources go toward it. It is a hugely important form of clean
baseload power, like hydroelectric power is, and we would love
to see more support for that, too.
Ms. Lee. Great. Thank you. I am working on legislation on
my other committee to break down some of the permitting
barriers. As we know, geothermal has some of the same
regulatory issues as oil and gas.
Secretary Granholm. Except----
Ms. Lee. So hopefully, we can unleash that.
Secretary Granholm. The great news is that if the oil and
gas industry were to take advantage of their wells that they
currently have, they don't have to get new permits. They can
simply turn it and use their existing permits to do geothermal
on those wells.
Ms. Lee. Great. Great. Well, listen, I want to turn now to
oil and gas leases. Of the 22,000 Federal oil and gas leases
issued in Nevada since 1953, fewer than 100, or .3 percent,
have ever produced any energy. However, Nevada is now the
second largest producer of geothermal electricity in the U.S.
with many--as you said, many of the technologies are the same.
So it is fair to say that American energy consumers and
taxpayers stand to benefit from Federal Government focusing
more on geothermal, and less on fossil fuels in States like
mine?
Secretary Granholm. I agree with you 100 percent, including
the workforce that is currently in the oil and gas industry.
Same skills required to be able to do geothermal extraction.
So, yes. Appreciate your leadership on this.
Ms. Lee. All right. Thank you very much. And with that, I
yield.
Mr. Fleischmann. Thank you, Ms. Lee.
At this time I would like to recognize Ms. Letlow of
Louisiana. And, Ms. Letlow, as you know, your great State is
very well-represented in this Congress. But I can remember
vividly and fondly when you came to me about being on this
committee, and we could not be more pleased that we made this
selection.
So with that, Ms. Letlow, I recognize you for 5 minutes.
Ms. Letlow. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you ranking
member, and thank you, Madam Secretary, for your testimony, for
being here today.
I know you know all too well how important liquefied
natural gas is to Louisiana, my home State. It is responsible
for over 60 percent of the LNG produced and exported from the
United States is from Louisiana. So I am here to talk to you
about that today.
I have proudly witnessed the growth of Louisiana's energy
industry as my State has emerged as a global energy leader, as
well as a top LNG exporter. In 2021 alone, oil and gas
contributed over $54 billion throughout our State's economy and
accounted for 21 percent of our gross domestic product.
However, I echo the concerns my colleagues have shared
surrounding this administration's catastrophic decision to
delay consideration of new LNG terminals in the U.S. This
administration's decision has hampered Louisiana's growth and
potential, directly hurting Louisianans.
Furthering these restrictions on growth in our energy
sector increasingly strains our markets, eliminates Americans'
jobs, and threatens our national security. As you have heard me
say in the past, Americans deserve better, Louisianans deserve
better.
The administration should embrace the opportunity to turn
the page on these shortsighted energy policies and begin to
empower all types of energy projects instead of picking losers
and winners. It is time to get true energy policy on the table.
Madam Secretary, I would like to ask you about the new
studies the Department will undertake on LNG exports as part of
the pause. You have stated it would take months to conduct new
studies, but I am concerned that it may take much longer. I
understand that it took 19 months for the DOE to complete the
2015 macroeconomic study from DOE's first announcement to its
publication in the Federal Register.
Do you stand by your statements that this will take a few
months, and do I have your commitment that the study will be
completed and published in the Federal Register this calendar
year?
Secretary Granholm. We are moving with alacrity on this
because it is important to get answers to these questions. We
are engaging our national labs. It will not take as long as the
previous studies have taken.
The questions that have to be considered are complicated.
Since the last study was done, we were only exporting four Bcf
of LNG, and we are now exporting 14 Bcf per day, and--with
another 12 Bcf that is under construction, and another 22 Bcf
on top of that that has been authorized. So we have 48 Bcf that
has already been authorized.
And the questions that we have to consider are, if we were
exporting the level of authorization, what would that do to
prices at home? If we were exporting the level of authorization
or even now, how does that impact our allies? How do we make
sure that they have the adequate supplies of energy that they
need? So these questions come on both sides.
What does it do with respect to the lifecycle analysis of
these terminals and climate change? Communities on the ground?
All of these questions. We have gotten letters from all sides
on this issue.
So it is important that we do this right because this will
set up the means for us to evaluate authorizations into the
future, as we are required to do, under the Natural Gas Act,
what is in the public interest.
Ms. Letlow. Are you confident it will happen this calendar
year?
Secretary Granholm. I am confident that it will happen
close to this calendar year.
Ms. Letlow. OK.
Secretary Granholm. I don't want to put a hard date on it
because I don't want to--you know, I want it to be done right.
Ms. Letlow. OK.
Secretary Granholm. But it will be done soon.
Ms. Letlow. Sure. Many Louisianans are hoping for this
calendar year, so--let me ask you an additional question about
that study.
My understanding is the Pacific Northwest Lab will be
responsible for updating lifecycle analysis of greenhouse gas
emissions of projected U.S. LNG exports. However, the 2014 and
2019 reports were conducted by the National Energy Technology
Lab, as you mentioned.
Is the Pacific Northwest Lab conducting the lifecycle
analysis for the updated study, and if so, can you explain why
National Energy Technology Lab isn't involved when they have
carried out the previous two studies?
Secretary Granholm. They are involved.
Ms. Letlow. OK.
Secretary Granholm. In fact, NETL is involved, PNL is
involved, and we may loop in other labs, too, depending on the
level of complexity of the question. But the National Energy
Technology Lab is definitely involved.
Ms. Letlow. OK. Well, that completes my questioning.
I yield back to the chairman. Thank you.
Mr. Fleischmann. Thank you, Ms. Letlow.
At this time, I am very thankful that the ranking member of
the full committee who, as I know, has been working very hard
in the Labor, Education, Health and Human Services
Subcommittee--which I am privileged to sit on as well--is with
us.
And, Ranking Member DeLauro, thank you for taking the time
to come to this very important hearing, and I recognize you for
5 minutes.
Ms. DeLauro. Thank you so much, Mr. Chairman. I want to
thank you, and I want to thank Ranking Member Ms. Kaptur as
well, and just say, welcome to the Secretary.
Thank you so much for your steadfast leadership of the
Department. We are so grateful for the great work that you do.
And I was so pleased to see that the administration is
proposing continued investments in key programs: hydrogen and
fuel cell technologies, the Advanced Research Projects Agency,
ARPA-E, as well as other targeted hydrogen initiatives
throughout the Department.
And it is a parochial interest. Connecticut has been named
a top-three State for fuel cell development, home to two of the
largest fuel cell manufacturers with promising start-ups.
And I know there is a balancing act between policy that
incentivizes newcomers and trying to deal with a level playing
field as well, but Treasury is responsible for finalizing the
so-called 45V guidance, a crucial factor impacting the future
of the domestic hydrogen industry.
Some concerns were raised that the guidance, as proposed,
may inadvertently create a disincentive to use clean energy to
produce hydrogen. We don't want to be in a position where green
hydrogen protection is more economical overseas taking, you
know, projects, jobs, and manufacturers with them.
So this relates to the Tax Code. I know Treasury is in the
driver's seat, but I want to get your perspective on how DOD is
supporting Treasury to update the rulings and address some of
the concerns with the proposal. Can DOE play a larger role to
ensure that Treasury understands the potential of their ruling
on the growing domestic hydrogen industry?
Secretary Granholm. Thank you, Ranking Member DeLauro. It
is so nice to see you. And thanks for your leadership on this
as well. We are very bullish on a clean hydrogen economy, as
you know. We have done these hydrogen hubs. We want them to
succeed.
We have also--in respect to the proposed rule, the comment
period is closed now. We have gotten 30,000 comments on that.
And so Treasury is very specifically asking for comments on
these specific issues that you raise and more. They got those
comments, and they are now evaluating them.
And so we obviously work with Treasury on this. They
understand the importance of this--believe me--and I look
forward to seeing the rule finalized in a way that ensures we
have a clean hydrogen economy.
Ms. DeLauro. Yes. Well, it is just so important that there
really is the cooperation between the two of you on this issue
because I really think it is so important for the future. And,
you know, it is just not for my State, but it is really
nationwide. So thank you.
Let me move to another area, if I can. I really applaud the
way in which you have made it a priority to make
decarbonization funding available to a number of the industrial
sectors. One sector where there is an opportunity is plastic
waste, as I understand it. I am no maven on this issue, but it
is an interesting issue.
A new way of recycling called biological recycling uses
advancements in AI and chemistry and biology to break down, you
know, all kinds of plastic waste, including textiles, and turn
it back into new plastic material. The technology seems
promising. It has potential to cut back on plastic waste, even
in the most contaminated complicated plastics, and turn that
waste into new materials, all without relying on fossil fuels.
Most of the companies doing this today are based in Europe, as
I understand it, and in Australia.
Again, parochial. I am proud to say that there is one
company in the U.S. that is doing this at scale. It is a
company called Protein Evolution. It is based in New Haven,
Connecticut. If you haven't seen it, I want you to come see it.
Can you speak a bit about the Department's approach to
plastic recycling? What types of investments and commitments
have--can you make or DOE can make to support these new
technologies like biological recycling?
Secretary Granholm. Great. Thank you for raising this, too.
This plastics piece of things is something we need to focus
a bit more on. We have got a strategy for plastics innovation,
which is under our Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy
Office, and that strategy identifies three or four prongs that
they are focused on. One is, of course, recycling, including
the mechanics of recycling plastics. Whether you can have, you
know, technology do a lot of that work so that it can be done
more efficiently. Recycling by design, meaning building
recyclable products into the system rather than discarding
them. Upcycling, as you referred to, meaning use the plastics
to create more high-value products.
And then research is being done on deconstruction of
plastics. How do you--whether it is the pathways on thermal
deconstruction or on chemical or biological deconstruction. So
we have an initiative on this, but it is something that we
should work on together to foster because I think it is an
economic opportunity as well for the United States to get their
oar in the water and lead on this.
Ms. DeLauro. I am so glad to hear you say that. I am at the
beginning of knowledge about this, and I am excited about it
and would love to work with you on that. And I have visited
this company in New Haven, and again, I welcome you to come,
you know, to see this and as well as what we are doing in fuel
cell and hydrogen technology.
But it just seems that these are new avenues and efforts
for us at this time with this technology to be able to grasp
these efforts, deal with, you know, the resources or what is
necessary in order to pursue them. So, again, I am looking
forward to being able to work together with you on that.
I am going to dash back to Labor-HHS where I am the ranking
member.
Secretary Granholm. Thank you.
Ms. DeLauro. But thank you so, so much for being here, and
thank you for taking advantage of all of the opportunities for
moving forward of--you know, seizing the moment in terms of
what are the new technologies and how we can use that to our
advantage here. Thank you so much. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, Ranking Member.
Mr. Fleischmann. Thank you, Ms. DeLauro.
At this time, I would like to recognize my friend from the
great State of New York, Mr. Morelle, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Morelle. Thank you so much, Mr. Chairman and Ms.
Kaptur, and certainly to you, Madam Secretary, for your service
and for being here today.
I wanted to start by talking a little bit about NNSA and
the mission of the Stockpile Stewardship Program, which each
day is increasing in importance and complexity. I am very
pleased the Department of Energy and NNSA--it is quite a
mouthful--have committed to funding necessary sustainment at
the premier ICF and high-energy density science facilities
Lawrence Livermore, Sandia, and the University of Rochester
LLE, which is--I am proud to have in my district.
In addition to sustainment, though, it is critical we have
a plan for longer term innovation to meet our stockpile
stewardship needs. I wonder if you could just briefly describe
sort of what your vision is or your strategy to work with the
scientific community at the labs and at research universities
to make sure that we have the right stuff both in terms of
experimental facilities and workforce development to meet the
sort of modernization needs.
Secretary Granholm. Yes. We have the most amazing tools in
the world to ensure that our stockpile is safe, secure, and
effective, that we are doing life extension work in the most
efficient way possible and responsive to the Department of
Defense's needs.
I am pleased to say that we have delivered over 200--this
year, it has been an incredibly effective period of time for
NNSA, and I am really proud of the work that they are doing
using both the tools that we have and even as they are building
all of these facilities to ensure that we continually upgrade.
So we will continue apace.
Mr. Morelle. Terrific. Thank you.
I did want to talk, too, about NIF regarding fusion. NIF is
now regularly able to reach ignition. Just recently, it
achieved a target gain greater than two, which is vitally
important.
And I am also proud, as I said, about the University of
Rochester LLE and the role it plays in the national program to
advancing the science diffusion. I know NIF uses lasers for
fusion, as does the LLE. Others use--and there are others who
use large magnetic systems. But they all share common
technological challenges, including power extraction, first
wall materials, and tritium handling, that must be overcome to
get to the day where we develop a plant and ultimately realize
fusion in terms of commercial use.
In your mind, how high a priority is getting to the
commercial fusion energy for the Department, and could you just
talk a little bit about that?
Secretary Granholm. Yes. Thank you so much. Thank you so
much for your leadership in this as well. It is very exciting.
First, actually, NIF has now achieved over 5 megajoule
outputs. So it is really a great--they continue to see an
increase in power out.
Our budget request has $844 million for fusion and energy
science, and we are excited about that, including funding the
milestone effort which, of course, is in partnership with
commercial fusion developers. You know, we have also
contributed as well to ITER this year also. But all of this is
in furtherance of the President's bold decadal vision for
commercial fusion within a decade.
And we will--you know, our offices both on the NNSA side as
well as on the civil side are eager to continue to push in this
regard, and we are lucky that we have got amazing examples at
NIF and amazing partnerships in the private sector to make this
happen.
Mr. Morelle. Well, thank you. I am grateful for that.
Secretary Granholm. As well as the University of Rochester,
of course.
Mr. Morelle. Thank you. Thank you for mentioning that. They
will be happy to hear that.
I want to go from the really big picture to sort of the
last mile and follow up on Mr. Quigley's question related to
deployment of clean energy and the need on transmission and
distribution.
Just to share a story, in my home district, we have had a
number of projects--housing projects, new manufactures--that
have really struggled to get access to the grid, not in terms
of generation--we seem to have adequate generation--but
transformers, which I am told take 3 to 4 years to build and
install.
And it seems to me, in any system, if you have, you know, a
bottleneck, it really limits your ability to grow. So, from an
economic point of view, it has really been a challenge, and we
have been surprised at the number of projects that have been
held up.
I wonder if you have given any thought to ways the
Department might accelerate the development of transformers,
new industrial facilities to build and construct. And I know
they are all customized, but if you just could say a word.
And I apologize, Mr. Chair. If we could allow her to
answer. And I exceeded my time. I apologize for that.
Mr. Fleischmann. Quite all right.
Mr. Morelle. I will yield.
Secretary Granholm. OK. I will be quick.
We absolutely have given thought to this and have met with
industry and all sorts of stakeholders to identify what the
roadblocks are. There are three main drivers of the supply
chain issues. One is labor availability and training. One is
materials--which is access to GOES, as Ms. Kaptur was referring
to--and the other is manufacturing capacity.
However, we now have started to see manufacturers expand in
the United States to meet that demand. Eaton, a GE affiliate--
Siemens--have all announced that they are expanding, whether it
is distribution transformers or big-power transformers. So we
are encouraged by that, but more needs to be done clearly. And
one would think that the demand out there would create the
opportunity for more supply, and we are working with them on
that.
Mr. Morelle. Well, I would love to work with you, Madam
Secretary, and you, Mr. Chairman. Any way that we can help
assist in increasing that output, it would really be a big
addition, I think, for our economic as well as our energy
needs.
So I yield back. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Fleischmann. Thank you, Mr. Morelle. I appreciate your
line of questioning.
At this point, I am going to begin a second round of
questions, Madam Secretary. I am going to begin with my strong
support of isotopes. I would like to better understand the
Department's funding approach for the Office of Science
Isotopes Research & Development and Production program.
To put it simply, isotopes, in my view, should not become a
high priority only during supplemental requests. While I
appreciate that the fiscal year 2025 budget request includes
nominal increases for facilities construction and production
research, so much more, in my view, can be done.
Madam Secretary, between building new facilities and
providing new resources for current producers, what do you
believe is the right balance that will help us create--will
help us more quickly meet demand and create supply chain
independence?
And my second question in this regard is, how will the
Department ensure isotopes production research results are
shared with our allies while also protecting this research from
falling into the hands of other foreign suppliers? I thank you.
Secretary Granholm. Great. Thank you so much.
As you know, the Isotope R&D and Production program in 2025
is $183 million, which is a 41-percent increase from the 2024
enacted. The SIPRC in Oak Ridge, the Stable Isotope Production
and Research Center, is one of the Department's top priorities.
I know it is a top priority of yours as well. That, too, got an
increase--a 56-percent increase--and our priority is to
complete that facility as soon as possible.
Argonne National Lab also has an isotopes research
component, which we are funding as well. We strongly believe
that isotope production in the United States is critical for
our national security and certainly for the health benefits of
us being able to use those isotopes for cancer cures, et
cetera.
So I agree with you on this and look forward to continuing
to work to support the isotope production in the U.S.
Mr. Fleischmann. Thank you.
I would like to address the issue of nuclear energy. Of
course, in my opening statement, I talked about how this is my
priority and my avocation, my number one issue in Congress, and
has been for quite some time.
Madam Secretary, nuclear energy is carbon-free and can be
deployed on a large scale to supply the United States and the
world with clean, reliable electricity. Yet, again in fiscal
2025, the budget cuts nuclear energy this time by nearly 6
percent. The largest cuts are to the two ongoing Advanced
Reactor Demonstration Projects and the National Reactor
Innovation Center. But almost every energy--every program in
the Office of Nuclear Energy is reduced.
If you could kindly explain the reasoning for such a large
reduction, especially considering the increases to energy
efficiency and renewable energy activities. Thank you.
Secretary Granholm. Thank you so much for giving me a
chance to clarify.
The funding for the Advanced Reactor Demonstration Program
simply was moved to the Office of Clean Energy demonstrations
where the big demonstration projects are. It is not a reduction
in the effort on that.
And the other reduction, as I know you are aware, was to
the clean power--Carbon Free Power Project. And so that
obviously went by the wayside, and we have rightfully done some
good work with what was left of that and repurposed some of
that for SMRs. Thank you so much for your leadership on that.
Mr. Fleischmann. Thank you. I am going to be a little bit
parochial now. Back to the Oak Ridge reservation on the lithium
processing facility.
Madam Secretary, the fiscal 2025 budget justification
identifies a delay of 2 years in completing construction of the
lithium processing facility--which, of course, as you know, is
kind of part and parcel, though it is separate to the UPF--and
a $700 million cost increase. It also discusses an ongoing
reevaluation of the project to determine cost savings options
and if they exist.
To what extent has NNSA determined the impacts to this
program of record from the delay in completing this facility? I
thank you.
Secretary Granholm. Yes. No impacts to the program of
record are expected from the delay from the planned schedule.
So we are good for that. I think we are asking for 260 million
in fiscal year 2025 for the LPF.
Can I just make one clarification?
Mr. Fleischmann. Yes, please.
Secretary Granholm. I said that we repurposed funding from
the Carbon Free Power Project for SMRs. That is not true. We
repurposed money from the Civil Nuclear Credit, and I didn't
want to make a misstatement on the record.
Mr. Fleischmann. Understood. Thank you. And I appreciate
that clarification.
At this time, I am going to yield the round 2 to Ranking
Member Kaptur.
Ms. Kaptur. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And thank you, Madam Secretary, for your endurance this
morning and to all of our Members.
We had a great turnout today, Mr. Chair, a credit to your
leadership.
And I just wanted to move to page 2 of your testimony where
you reference the work of the Department. $1.6 billion to
support the clean energy workforce and infrastructure projects,
including $385 million for weatherizing and retrofitting homes
of low-income Americans.
I can't make you do anything, Madam Secretary, but I would
strongly urge the Department to consider an interagency effort
to address the housing shortage more effectively by working
together, perhaps, in teams in certain areas to test the
following.
If you look at the funding you have, if you look at the
funding that HUD has for housing, the community action program
that comes out of the--not this subcommittee, but another
subcommittee--and also rural housing at the Department of
Agriculture--and create a little working group in cooperation
with outside groups like Habitat for Humanity, I think we would
be very surprised to see how much more effective that kind of
interagency, intergroup effort might work and set some models
up for the country to have even more impact with the funding--
$385 million is not insignificant, but it isn't enough to meet
the huge demand of the country--and with the Department of
Labor for workforce development because one of the problems of
housing deterioration in low-income communities is there aren't
the skills to build.
And so there are many creative things that can be done. You
don't have to provide a long answer to this, but I am just
encouraging you to look across agency to make the maximum use
of the dollars you have.
And, with the incentives we have in the energy bill to
create offsite power feeds into neighborhoods, you could
actually create models around the country of how to reduce
energy bills--right--for an entire neighborhood, not just a
house.
So I am urging you to think creatively. And I know you have
the capacity to do this and your staff does, but I just wanted
to mention that as we proceed in this hearing.
Secretary Granholm. I look forward to--I mean, you are
always so creative and always thinking big picture, and I
totally appreciate that. I mean, we do work, for example, with
the Department of Labor on doing workforce development on
battery--for example, a battery workforce development
initiative.
But your point about working more closely in a holistic way
on all of these things for low-income folks is a really great
point, and point taken.
Ms. Kaptur. Thank you. Thank you very much. Thank you for
listening.
I wanted to also say, based on a situation you are well
aware of, I have had the burden of representing the most
corrupt nuclear commercial plant in the history of the country,
and we are just lucky we are still sitting around the table
here.
I really would urge you to create a standard of excellence
somehow in the Department. If everything fails in terms of
corporate leadership, that somehow a standard of excellence is
something the Department is able to promote for the highly
trained workforce that I can guarantee you, in my area, saved
our necks, and if, in fact, any other commercial nuclear
carrier descends to criminality, that there be something in the
Department. You are not the Nuclear Regulatory Commission. You
are not FERC. They failed us. But maybe there is something the
Department of Energy could do to take what we know from the
Nuclear Navy and create a standard of excellence to mitigate
against failure because, in fact, it was the workers that saved
us more than once.
But something is missing. Something is missing. You say,
``Well, don't regulate the commercial carriers.'' Wrong. Create
a standard of excellence that is fail-safe. I don't know quite
how to do that. I am not the Secretary of Energy. But I know
that it was the workers. It was the plumbers and pipe fitters,
the boilermakers, and the electricians that saved our necks.
How do we respect them? How do we create a Nuclear Navy
standard of excellence in the workforce despite what management
might be doing?
I think some set of people in your Department should be
thinking about this and look at the former Davis-Besse plant as
the worst--not the workforce--the management. They failed us
time and time again. And the Nuclear Regulatory Commission
arrived always too late and a dollar short. FERC didn't pay any
attention. And there we sit. And the commercial industry knew
it was the worst plant in their brotherhood. They did nothing.
They knew it, and they did nothing.
So I am just saying I think there is something else that
can happen. I would urge your Department, now that we have new
management that has taken over, to dig us out of this hole. I
think you could really do something there that would be
transformational for the future.
Secretary Granholm. And, in fact, you all provided the
means for us to do nuclear safety training, and this is
something that we can embed into training that next generation
of nuclear workforce. So thank you for that.
Ms. Kaptur. Thank you, Madam Secretary. Thank you for
seeing this.
I think I am over time, but hopefully we will go to another
round. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Fleischmann. At this time, I would like--oh, thank you,
Ms. Kaptur.
At this time, I would like to recognize Mr. Newhouse of
Washington for 5 minutes.
Mr. Newhouse. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Secretary Granholm. I found the answer.
Mr. Newhouse. So a couple things I wanted to--I hope we can
get through this really quickly in 5 minutes where we both have
time to say what we need to.
Secretary Granholm. Yep.
Mr. Newhouse. Hanford. I want to talk about that just a
little bit.
You know, I have always been and will continue to advocate
for adequate cleanup funding for Hanford. Certainly, it is the
largest environmental cleanup site in the country. We have got
a lot of accomplishments that we can point to. The heating up
of the first large melter and now the second. Making great
progress there. And, as you know, funding has got to continue
to grow as the vitrification process moves forward. But, with
that said, I know there is also cleanup projects around the
country--other cleanup projects.
So, in light of that, within the context of the Energy
Department's budget proposal--and I notice that there is a
decrease in the overall EM budget, which is slightly
concerning.
How does DOE plan to ensure that there is going to be
enough funding to go around as we move forward?
Secretary Granholm. Well, this is something we want to
continue to work, obviously, with Congress on. I know that
Hanford--there still is a significant budget there, $3 billion,
but we also recognize some projects move off, and so there may
be decreases in the EM budget related to that. But Hanford is
just such a big priority, and thank you for your leadership.
And I look forward to working to make sure that EM--you are
going to be going to the Clean-Up Caucus tonight--EM is
supported all the way through.
Mr. Newhouse. So, on that Hanford site, the agency
announced the Cleanup to Clean Energy Initiative--which is
great--to utilize underutilized properties. You also announced
the issuance of requests for qualifications offering 18,000
acres for development, which is all good stuff.
But the Tri-Cities area has expressed--the community has
expressed some concerns about the trajectory of this
initiative, alleging that DOE has been unwilling to transfer
land back to the community and has been favoring short-term
solar projects that disincentivize investors who are looking
for longer term investments in things such as nuclear or
hydrogen development. So I am hopeful that the agency will
listen to the concerns of the community and take their concerns
into consideration.
And could you give me some assurances that the Department
of Energy will work with the Tri-Cities community to
incorporate their requests and their concerns into these land-
use decisions and truly fairly assess all clean energy
applications related to this initiative--make sure they are
considered equally?
Secretary Granholm. Absolutely. I hadn't heard that there
were concerns about it, but we obviously have to work hand-in-
glove with the Tri-Cities area. I know that Ike White, the head
of environmental management, is there all the time. And our
team is there listening and working, and to the extent that we
need to follow up with you on that, we are eager to do that.
Mr. Newhouse. I appreciate that. I am sorry. I am going
real fast here.
But also concerning Hanford is the Office of River
Protection. It is expected to sunset soon and will combine with
the Richland Operations Office. So, as you know, the Office of
River Protection was created to ensure that Hanford's tank
waste operations got adequate appropriate attention.
How can we make sure that that attention will continue and
that their work will not be ignored as we move forward with
both offices getting the equal attention they deserve?
Secretary Granholm. Yes. It is just a top priority. We
cannot allow that part of the mission to be subsumed in any
way, shape, or form. Obviously, it affects the region outside
of just Hanford. It is very, very critical. So it will not be
subsumed. It will not be deprioritized.
Mr. Newhouse. Great. Great. I can tell you, you have
educated yourself a lot in the last 3 years. I appreciate that
very much on Hanford.
And then if I could just return really quickly to the lower
State river dams. You stated that you are not advocating
breaching, even in a de facto manner. So could I ask you to
reconcile that statement with what seems to be very clear from
the administration that the plan is in fact breaching the
damns?
Secretary Granholm. The agreement itself, you know, is a
10-year stop on considering anything like that, right? It
basically holds in place while we build up the capability for
the salmon, for fisheries, for hatcheries, and for the Tribes
to develop their own additional power.
This is what I can tell you. That is what is in the
agreement, and we are--we need power. And I know there is a
study that is embedded with this. So there is no de facto or
subterfuge here. It is an agreement that gets us a 10-year
ability to evaluate.
Mr. Newhouse. Well, again, from your last response earlier,
I would agree with you 100 percent that we need to add power
and capability, not take away. So thank you very much, Madam
Secretary.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Fleischmann. And I thank you, Mr. Newhouse.
At this time, I recognize your colleague and our colleague
from the great State of Washington, Mr. Kilmer, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Kilmer. Thanks, Mr. Chair.
And thanks, Madam Secretary, for being with us, and thanks
for visiting my district a few years back to the Pacific
Northwest National Lab in Sequim, Washington. You are the
first, I think--not just Department of Energy Secretary but, I
think, Cabinet Secretary to visit Sequim, Washington.
Secretary Granholm. Wow, what an honor.
Mr. Kilmer. While there, you got to see the Department's
only marine and coastal research lab, which is really important
to our local economy and really important to the community. As
you may remember from the business and Tribal roundtable we
did, it is very supported by the community.
And, you know, I appreciated the conversation about some of
the lab's unique capabilities and the importance it brings to
developing marine energy, you know, that support some of DOE's
water power priorities for a decarbonized energy system.
I also want to discuss the role of collaboration across DOE
with other agencies to leverage our oceans for clean energy.
Congressman Newhouse and I just reintroduced a bill, called the
Blue Ocean Energy Innovation Act, which would supercharge some
of the work that is happening at PNNL and the Sequim Lab to
develop blue energy, to help provide clean power to coastal
communities, to drive some economic development in those areas,
and to create good jobs. And our hope here is that it will
advance some of the DOE's ongoing work to develop a
crosscutting program for aquatic decarbonization.
So I guess my first question is, how is that going?
Secretary Granholm. Well, we are supportive of what you
guys have introduced, and we are supportive, obviously, of the
Water Power Technologies Office.
And this answers the question that you had as well, which
is the reduction in funding for hydropower demonstration in
irrigation modernization, low-impact hydropower, and hybrids
because 2024 funded these activities, and we just got that. We
didn't need an additional amount in 2025. The demonstrations
that are underway are going to inform the future pathways.
And then there was a cut for the marine energy
infrastructure, the coastal laboratory and PacWaves. PacWaves
is expected complete in the summer of 2024--their construction.
And, again, some of that was one-time funding.
So I just want you to know, this is not a statement of
deprioritizing our commitment to water power overall. And I am
excited to work with you in whatever ways to be able to ensure
that we can get that clean, base load, and safe power.
Mr. Kilmer. Do you want to share any thoughts about the
agency's work in terms of crosscutting programs for aquatic
decarbonization?
Secretary Granholm. Well, I do know that there is--you
know, we want to work with your team on it.
Let's see. I know that we did--oh, right. You guys--we
provided a briefing recently to your office, and I know we are
going to be getting back to you shortly on some of the
questions that you were asking.
We are, you know, eager to focus on this, and we are eager
to work with you on it, and we appreciate your leadership and
your support in the area, and let's see if we can make some
momentum here.
Mr. Kilmer. With the time I have left, you know, I know
everybody is eager to do what we can to reduce energy costs.
How can Congress and DOE work together to support programs like
weatherization assistance to ensure folks can afford to heat
and cool their homes?
And, you know, one thing we heard back home is just ongoing
challenges recruiting workers to fill some of these jobs. Is
that something you are facing, and are there plans to help, and
do you need anything from Congress to remove some of those
potential barriers so that, when we provide funding for
weatherization assistance--that the projects can happen?
Secretary Granholm. Yes. We are focused on working on
weatherization and training on the local levels as we fund the
community action agencies in the States.
We really appreciate the money that came to the Department
to really plus-up weatherization from the Bipartisan
Infrastructure Law, which gives us the ability to fund an
initial 500,000 weatherization. We are asking for more--to do
another 40,000 because there are 33 million homes in America
that would qualify.
Some of the barriers that we are seeing are we need to make
sure that homes are weatherization-ready, and that means having
to make sure they have got the structural capacity to take on
the infrastructure necessary,you know, the insulation, et
cetera, in part--so we have carved out a piece of
weatherization funding to be able to support that. More is
needed to be able to do that as well.
So, with the Department of Labor and ourselves, we are
really focused on the training associated with doing those
weatherization projects on the ground, in community, across the
country. But the need is great, and the resources don't cover
the full need.
Mr. Kilmer. Thank you, again. And we would love to invite
you back to Washington to see us. You know, as the IRA and the
Infrastructure Law dollars get released, there is some good
stuff happening in our region. We would love to invite you.
Secretary Granholm. Yep. I agree. Thank you.
Mr. Kilmer. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Fleischmann. Thank you, Mr. Kilmer.
At this time, I would like to recognize my friend, Ms.
Wasserman Schultz, of Florida.
And, Ms. Wasserman Schultz, thank you for coming back. I
know there are a lot of committees and subcommittees meeting
today, so thank you for being here.
Ms. Wasserman Schultz. You are welcome. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman. And I am going to hop back next door to resume my
ranking member role on the other subcommittee.
But, Madam Secretary, I didn't want to miss the opportunity
to engage with you on this. I want to focus on a new program
that President Biden proposed in his budget request: An Extreme
Heat Program at $100 million.
Being from Florida, you are probably not going to be
surprised that I am focused more on, you know, how hot it gets
rather than how cold people are. We care about both. But this
demonstration program would facilitate community-scale energy
solutions to address the impacts of extreme heat on low-income
and disadvantaged communities.
So, as temperatures continue to rise, the impacts of
climate change are exacerbating existing environmental
injustices. It is especially true in my home State of Florida
because we are particularly susceptible to the impacts of
climate change. I always say that, in south Florida, climate
change is not a someday thing. It is a right now thing.
And I have seen environmental injustice issues in my own
congressional district. For example, Miami Dade County, a
county that I represented for 18 of the years that I have been
here but no longer do--I still love them, but they are
potentially going to do the wrong thing here because they are
considering building a new mass burn facility right on the west
border of the city of Miramar, which is in Broward County, a
city in my district whose population is 50 percent African
American. And this burn facility is less than eight-tenths of a
mile from a very large residential community.
These burn facilities have been known to emit pollutants
that cause cancer, respiratory problems, and reproductive
health risks, potentially exposing hundreds of families in
Miramar. And we have seen, you know, decades later--long before
we had the technology to actually know what the dangers of
these kinds of facilities were--the cleanup necessary and the
cancer clusters and all of the, you know, lead poisoning and
all of the things that too many families go through when they
are near facilities like this. And that is just one of the many
burdens that minority communities face every single day
exacerbated by climate change.
Climate change worsens air quality, and it can
disproportionately affect communities near industrial sites or
highways where low-income and minority populations more likely
reside. We have scorching temperatures that we see now from
climate change. That can exacerbate health issues, heat-related
illnesses, and those disproportionately affect vulnerable
communities.
So can you talk about this new Extreme Heat Program that
President Biden proposed, and how will our local communities
benefit from it? Long preamble, short question.
Secretary Granholm. No, no. It is really important. Really
important. And there are other ways than--I assume these burn
facilities relate to municipal solid waste?
Ms. Wasserman Schultz. Yes.
Secretary Granholm. Yes. There are other ways to deal with
it, including, you know, sustainable aviation fuel, et cetera,
to deal with municipal solid waste.
However, the extreme heat proposal, 70 million of that will
go through our Office of Clean Energy demonstrations, and
really, it is going to be focused on solutions that are
community-driven. So 70 million is there, and 30 million is
with our State and community energy programs to be able to
build a solution with community about what works. Borrowing
from best practices.
For example, it might be district cooling. It might be
community adaptation to reduced heat islands, et cetera,
resilience approaches, greening the area. I mean, there are all
sorts of ways that other nations and other cities have taken
this on. So we are excited to be able to do that, especially as
climate change progresses and things get hotter and hotter.
Ms. Wasserman Schultz. Thank you.
I also wanted to ask, in early January, Senator Ernst and I
revisited Israel and the region post-October 7, and our sole
focus was galvanizing a multinational effort to secure the
release of all of the hostages. And I will be continuing our
work by leading a delegation of women Members to Israel at the
end of this month--in just a few days--to ensure that more
Members of Congress understand what Israel is facing in her
hour of need.
So President Biden has shown time and time again, both
through his actions and in his budget requests, that he stands
firmly with Israel and our relationship. One program in your
Department is funding for the U.S.-Israel Energy Cooperative
Agreement, and that funding facilitates joint research and
development efforts in the fields of alternative power and
energy efficiency. It is a pivotal program that provides grants
to U.S. and Israeli small businesses and academic institutions
that enable them to develop alternative energy, renewable
energy, and energy efficiency technologies.
Can you explain the importance of this program and some
funding success stories from it?
Secretary Granholm. Yes. And particularly through the
Binational Industrial Research and Development Foundation,
BIRD, which has--we have a $2 million request in the budget. It
is located--it is a partnership between the University of Tel
Aviv and the University of Maryland to be able to put forward
clean energy technologies in partnership with businesses
offering micro-grants to businesses and collaboration between
our two countries.
And then there is the U.S.-Israel Energy Center, which is a
$4 million request that we have in the budget, again, to create
consortia that work together on some of the most difficult
energy solutions.
Israel, you know, as a startup nation, et cetera, has got a
lot of technology that they can share. Water technologies, et
cetera, battery technologies. I mean, Israel has been very
advanced in their research and development, as have we. And so
to be able to share common areas of research is what we have
been doing, and we appreciate Congress' support and your
leadership in making sure that partnership exists.
Ms. Wasserman Schultz. Thank you.
Mr. Chairman, the synergies of the expertise in our two
countries is so important to continue to perpetuate, and I am
hopeful that we can seriously consider the President's budget
proposals in this area.
Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Fleischmann. Ms. Wasserman Schultz, again, I strongly
thank you for your strong support of Israel and with this
endeavor, and thank you for leading an all-female delegation
over to Israel at a time like this. I really appreciate that.
At this time, I think I am going to, in the interest of
time--oh, I forgot my good friend from New York. My apologies.
I am going to recognize my Mr. Morelle of New York for 5
minutes.
Mr. Morelle. No apologies necessary, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you for your leadership.
I wanted to--Madam Secretary, I appreciate your comments on
hydrogen. And, although Rochester, New York, was not selected
for the Regional Clean Hydrogen Hub--and I will insert my sad
face here--nonetheless, I am really grateful for your
leadership in this space.
And, in fact, thank you. The Department of Energy was kind
enough to announce two companies in my district. Plug and
Ionomer would be receiving $86 million in capacity grants for
their work in electrolyzers and other ways of expanding
capacity.
So it brings up an interesting point, and I think you
mentioned it briefly, but I just would be curious as to your
thoughts on the state of workforce in the hydrogen sector and
what--if we need to do more--and I suspect we do--more about
workforce development in the hydrogen sector and what thoughts
you have about that.
Secretary Granholm. Yes. I mean, part of--thank you for the
question because it is an important issue. It is a new industry
that we are creating, so we need new skill sets, although a lot
of skills that traditional oil and gas, electrical workers have
can easily be translated.
Each of the hydrogen hubs, for example, require a community
benefits plan where they describe how they are going to be
training the local workforce to be able to take on the skills
associated with these hubs. These hubs are complex. There are a
lot of offtakers that have one type of industry. There are
producers, electrolyzers--there are all sorts of skills that
are required.
And so the community benefits plan requires a comprehensive
pathway for workers in partnership with local community
colleges, local universities, et cetera. That building up of
that workforce is absolutely critical if these hydrogen hubs
are going to be successful, and that is where we are really
focused on it in the community benefits plans, which are
required as part of the hubs.
Mr. Morelle. Very good. Thank you.
Just to shift gears for a moment, I want to take a moment
to highlight the work of the Loan Programs Office in your
Department. Over the past year, I have had the opportunity to
work closely with Director Shah. I greatly appreciate that he
has consistently made himself and his whole team available to
my office.
Under his leadership, the LPO has seen enormous growth. I
know you know this. At the end of 2023, I think they had over
202 applications, totaling over $214 billion in requested loans
for renewable energy, advanced nuclear, hydrogen, and critical
minerals projects, and we have seen those investments in our
region in Rochester, which I am grateful for and continue to
work with his team.
But I wonder if you have any thoughts on how to catalyze
additional private sector investment of these critical projects
and how you work with the private sector to make those
investments a reality.
Secretary Granholm. Yes. The Loan Programs Office is
extremely effective in doing outreach. Particularly, we need to
make sure that there is match when there is a loan or a
financial partner when there is a loan. And so the outreach
that they have done to those banking and financial
institutions, private sector investors, et cetera, has been
really critical.
The reputation of the Loan Programs Office under Director
Shah has been stellar. They have had--people know that when you
go into the Loan Programs Office, you have to go through a
series of steps in order to be vetted and to ensure you have
got not just the right technology but the right business plan.
But, when they come out on the other side, it is a stamp of
approval for the companies that are able to get it.
We have a lot of loan capacity that is still left, and the
favorable rates that the Loan Programs Office offers ensures
that there is a huge amount of companies knocking at the door.
So we are excited by the interest that we are seeing, and
we are going to continue to do that outreach to the private
sector to make sure the Loan Programs Office is fully taken
advantage of.
Mr. Morelle. And I would, just in my closing seconds, just
thank you again for the program. I think the interesting thing
about it is, you know, when you are doing innovative projects--
and I know it involves government money--but it is not always
possible to know with certainty how it is going to work. There
is a degree of risk. And, if we are going to really invest in
innovation, we are going to have to be aware of that risk and
be able to tell taxpayers that they are going to share some of
that risk.
But one of the great things about the program which I just
want to note is, it is really investing in technologies. So,
even if companies struggle, and we have seen challenges by some
companies, it is really important that we continue to invest in
the technologies that will improve innovation and allow us to
meet all the pretty extensive and expansive goals that we have
for this country.
So I just want to thank you, again, for your leadership and
look forward to continuing to work with you.
Secretary Granholm. Thank you.
Mr. Morelle. And I yield back, Mr. Chairman. Thank you.
Mr. Fleischmann. Thank you, Mr. Morelle.
Madam Secretary, in the interest of time, I am going to be
yielding to the ranking member for a few more questions, but I
do want to reaffirm our strong commitment to fusion. I know
yours as well. We spoke together at the White House years ago--
I think probably about 3 years ago--and it has really grown.
I can't go a day without having a new fusion company come
to see me. They are excited about our mutual bipartisan/
bicameral support and administration support for fusion. So I
thank you for that endeavor, and I think that will certainly
continue.
With that, I am going to yield to the ranking member, Ms.
Kaptur.
Ms. Kaptur. Thank you, again, Mr. Chairman, and also just
to say that this is the way Congress should work, along with
the executive branch.
And, Mr. Chairman, I just hope a lot of Americans see this.
On a bipartisan basis, a committee where Members came from
every region of the country expressing their concerns,
expressing their interests, and to have very intelligent,
interested citizens in the audience today. We probably won't
get a lot of publicity, but this is America's system of
government at work.
And, Madam Secretary, we thank you so very, very much. This
is the way it should work.
I just wanted to mention a few issues. One, in terms of the
changing nature of the energy sector, one of the segments of
our society, I think, that has been somewhat wounded is the
Boilermakers Union, and I would urge the proper people at the
Department of Energy to sit down with their national and
regional leadership. These are highly skilled people, but with
the change in the coal industry, for example, they have lost a
great deal of their jobs.
And I truly believe that these individuals are precious to
our country, and there can be other segments of the energy
industry that they can transition into. I would urge your
attention to this segment. And Ohio is one of the impacted
States, and I know there are others.
Number 2, again, I would urge you to work with Secretary
Vilsack in every way that you can to look at energy in both
your Departments and what this means for the future. In my home
counties--and I have seven that are rural--40 percent of the
crop goes to ethanol and biodiesel, and the Department of
Energy, sort of against its own initial reaction, has been
drawn into energy in a way that they never imagined initially.
I think there needs to be closer cooperation with the
Department of Energy to maximize their achievements there.
Thirdly, I wanted to ask your help with the Infrastructure
Investment and Jobs Act and parts of the country that are
struggling to recover from job outsourcing. That has impacted
us for many decades. I would urge your Department to ensure
that communities that have been impacted, both large and small,
are able to use the resources of the Infrastructure Investment
and Jobs Act. Engaging them in a way that they can see what is
happening in other parts of the country that may have benefited
already, how people put projects together, what they are using
those funds for--I think that that kind of sharing could be
very, very important.
And the lower down a region falls in terms of median
income, the harder it is for them to access the Federal
programs that are there. So I wanted to put that on the record.
And, finally, Madam Secretary, I just thought it would be
interesting to hear from you--and I am sure you have had a
thousand such experiences. But in your experience as
secretary--and you have been such an effective voice for the
energy sector--what are one or two experiences you had where
you saw something and you said, ``I have seen the future, I
know I have seen the future''--and that you have been a part of
helping to create it?
Could you give us just one or two examples of something
that has happened in your position now that it was--you know,
it was awesome? Something happened, and you knew you were part
of building the future? Thank you for being with us today.
Secretary Granholm. Thank you so much. I mean, the first
thing that comes to mind when you ask that question--and,
again, it is not me. It is the team--is the fact that we
achieved fusion. I mean, that was obviously the future: The
National Ignition Facility. And, if we can commercialize that,
it is just, you know, Katy bar the door in terms of our ability
to power our Nation. So huge. So important.
I appreciate what you are saying about communities on the
ground, especially smaller communities that may not have the
means to apply for DOE grants, et cetera. It is why we have
beefed up our State and Community Energy Program to offer that
technical assistance to communities on the ground.
I mean, one of the good pieces of news is that the
Inflation Reduction Act does a little bit of that work for us
because, if you put a project in a disadvantaged community, in
a rural community, in a community that is poor, you get an
additional tax credit. And so we are seeing a lot of investment
going to communities that you might not suspect because of the
way the tax structure--thank you very much for voting on that--
is. And so a lot of that work being done, I think, is
addressing it.
But the grant side of things, to your point, is very
important. That is why we have built up this ability through
the State and Community Energy Program where, as you would say,
DOE meets the street.
Ms. Kaptur. Thank you very much.
And, again, Mr. Chairman, thank you for your leadership and
the great turnout at our subcommittee this morning and for your
bipartisan spirit.
Mr. Fleischmann. I thank the ranking member for her kind
comments and great questions and for the great cooperation from
both sides.
With that, I would, again, like to thank you, Madam
Secretary, for being here today before us.
And, with that, the subcommittee stands adjourned.

[Answers to submitted questions follow:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Wednesday, April 10, 2024.

MEMBERS' DAY

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. CHARLES J. ``CHUCK'' FLEISCHMANN, A
REPRESETNATIVE IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF TENNESSEE

Mr. Fleischmann. The hearing will come to order. Good
morning, everyone. I would like to welcome everyone to the
Energy and Water Member Day Hearing. Today, our fellow members
will testify on the issues under the jurisdiction of the
subcommittee that are important to them. Each witness will have
5 minutes to present their testimony. Members of the
subcommittee will have the opportunity to ask questions if they
like. I know everyone has a busy schedule today, so I will
forego any extended remarks. I look forward to learning more
from our colleagues on the priorities for this bill.
But before I go to our members, I would like to thank our
distinguished ranking member, Ms. Kaptur of Ohio, for a few
words. She is my friend. We have worked together. She has
chaired this subcommittee in the past. I am chairing it now.
And we have worked very well together, and I want all the
members to know that.
And with that, I would like to yield to Ms. Kaptur. Thank
you.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. MARCY KAPTUR, A REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS
FROM THE STATE OF OHIO

Ms. Kaptur. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, very much for your
leadership and your collegiality. I have to say I am so proud
to serve on this particular subcommittee. We welcome our guests
today. This subcommittee is an example of how to move bills,
how to work on a bipartisan basis. The chairman is a great
leader. We don't always agree with all of our members, but we
managed to move bills and we were among the first to move to
the floor after an extended delay, not due to the subcommittee.
And so, we just want to thank those who have taken time to
be here today. We are looking at Guam, we are looking at
Arizona and other States that will follow you. But what you say
to us is really important, and we appreciate the time you have
taken to be here. I look forward to hearing from all of our
attendees about your regional priorities, because all of these
building blocks help us to do our job better and how to improve
the Federal programs we have that are of importance to you and
your districts. And I hope you tell us a little bit about what
is happening in your districts environmentally, and then how
your project fits into that architecture. Thank you so very
much, and Mr. Chairman, thank you for the acknowledgement, and
to all the staff and those who are helping us record what is
said here today. I yield back.
Mr. Fleischmann. Again, thank you, Ranking Member Kaptur.
We will now turn to our witnesses. First up, I would like to
welcome distinguished Congressman James Moylan, the delegate of
Guam. Mr. Moylan, you are recognized for 5 minutes, sir.
------

Wednesday, April 10, 2024.

WITNESS

STATEMENT OF HON. JAMES C. MOYLAN, A DELEGATE IN CONGRESS FROM GUAM

Mr. Moylan. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, ranking member, for
holding this hearing and for the work you do in support
necessary agencies like the Department of Energy and the U.S.
Army Corps of Engineers, especially. And I also like to thank
the Guam Water Works Authority and the Guam Power Authority for
their timeless efforts in leading our submitted Water Resource
Development Act for this cycle.
So, to start, I would like to emphasize the importance of
the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers work mission in Guam. Between
the ongoing work that they do for their Water Resource
Development Act, study, proposals I submitted in January, it is
clear that the Army Corps of Engineers are a vital part of our
community in Guam. Now, despite this, the U.S. Army Corps of
Engineers projects on and off the island are severely
underfunded, unfortunately. And with Guam and the Northern
Mariana Islands directly in what is known as Typhoon Alley,
both territories must have a dedicated U.S. Army Corps of
Engineers task force to respond to extreme weather recovery.
Now, while natural disasters are not exclusive to Guam by any
means, we experience them at a higher rate than any State in
the lower 48.
So, Mr. Chairman, I request an appropriation of dedicated
funding for the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers Task Force--Task
Force, related to construction projects in Guam and the
Commonwealth of the Northern Marianas. This task force would
operate similarly to the recent task force, VIPR. VIPR, which
stands for those Task Force in the U.S. Virgin Islands and
Puerto Rico. It exists. The task force, like VIPR, are a
critical step in the right direction for disaster recovery
efforts in the areas affected by extreme weather, both in the
Atlantic and the Pacific.
Throughout my time in Congress, I repeatedly advocated for
more streamlined cooperation between the Department of Defense
and civilians and Infrastructure Development. Now, the
government of Guam agencies refer to this as a One Guam
approach. This requires shared utilities and resources, both
inside and outside defense, allowing for more resilient and
redundant power grid. Typhoons and other extreme weather events
have put Guam's power grid at serious risk. The Guam Power
Authority is in desperate need of Federal funding to prevent
future disasters and mitigate damages.
I am working with the Federal partners to develop an
interagency plan for undergrounding power lines across the
island. This plan can only--only allows for a more resilient
way of disrupting power--distributing power to all parts of the
island, but also makes it more reliable for both civilians and
the island--on the island and Department of Defense. We share
the resources on Guam. INDOPACOM areas is relying on Guam and
the North Marianas. We have one resource. We share the water.
We share the power. It is extremely important for us to keep
this going continuously because of our situation in INDOPACOM.
And in accordance with my letter I sent to the Department of
Energy in March of this year, I respectfully request an
increase in funding for Department of Energy to be directed
towards the One Guam projects.
Mr. Chairman, Guam is in desperate need of Federal
assistance for its energy and water infrastructure. Between the
ever growing Water Resource Development Act project list, our
vulnerable power grid, and an increasing deterioration of cyber
infrastructure, our weaknesses are obvious. We need to address
this. We had some deadlines. We understand our situation. For
the defense of our Nation, the defense of the homeland of Guam.
And I hope that we can work together to deliver Guam its first
successful Water Resource Development Act project in many
years. I thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
[The prepared statement follows:]

PREPARED STATEMENT OF HON. JAMES C. MOYLAN

Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for holding this hearing and for
all the work you do in supporting necessary agencies like the
Department of Energy and the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. I'd
also like to thank the Guam Waterworks Authority and the Guam
Power Authority for their tireless efforts leading to our
submitted Water Resource Development Act projects for this
cycle.
To start, I'd like to emphasize the importance of the US
Army Corps of Engineers' work mission in Guam. Between the
ongoing work they do and the WRDA study proposals I submitted
in January, it is clear that the US Army Corps of Engineers are
a vital part of our community. Despite this, USACE projects on
and off the island are severely underfunded. With Guam and the
Northern Mariana Islands directly placed in ``Typhoon Alley'',
both territories must have a dedicated USACE task force to
respond to extreme weather recovery. While natural disasters
are not exclusive to Guam by any means, we experience them at a
higher rate than any State in the lower 48. I request an
appropriation of dedicated funding for a USACE task force for
disaster related construction projects in Guam and the CNMI.
This task force would operate similarly to the recently created
Task Force VIPR in the U.S. Virgin Islands and Puerto Rico.
Task forces like VIPR are a critical step in the right
direction for disaster recovery efforts in areas affected by
extreme weather, both in the Atlantic and Pacific.
Throughout my time in Congress, I have repeatedly advocated
for more streamlined cooperation between DOD and civilians in
infrastructure development. Gov-Guam agencies refer to this as
the ``One Guam'' approach. This requires shared utilities and
resources both inside and outside the fence, allowing for a
more resilient and redundant power grid. Typhoons and other
extreme weather events have put Guam's power grid at serious
risk. Guam Power Authority is in desperate need of federal
funding to prevent future disasters and mitigate damages. I am
working with federal partners to develop an interagency plan
for undergrounding power lines across the island. This plan not
only allows for a more resilient way of distributing power to
all parts of the island but also makes it more reliable for
both civilians on the island and DOD. In accordance with a
letter I sent to the Department of Energy in March of this
year, I respectfully request an increase in funding for DOE to
be directed towards ``One Guam'' projects.
Mr. Chairman, Guam is in desperate need of Federal
assistance for its energy and water infrastructure. Between an
ever-growing Water Resource Development Act project list, our
vulnerable power grid, and the increasing deterioration of
cyber infrastructure, our weaknesses are obvious. I hope that
we can work together to deliver Guam its first successful WRDA
project m many years.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.

Mr. Fleischmann. Thank you, Mr. Moylan. I now welcome
Congressman Greg Stanton from the State of Arizona. Mr.
Stanton, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
------

Wednesday, April 10, 2024.

WITNESS

STATEMENT OF HON. GREG STANTON, A REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS FROM THE
STATE OF ARIZONA

Mr. Stanton. Thank you so much, Mr. Chairman. Chairman
Fleischmann and Ranking Member Kaptur, thank you for your
strong bipartisan example of leadership in this congress. Thank
you for the opportunity to testify on the importance of Federal
investments to meet Arizona's water resource needs. The
Colorado River Basin has experienced the driest conditions in
more than 1,200 years. An increasing loss of snowpack in the
Rocky Mountains has led to low water levels at Lake Powell. As
a result, hydropower generation at Glen Canyon Dam is under
serious threat. Lake Mead water levels are also at historic
lows.
Arizona's future, and the future of the American Southwest,
depends on how we respond to this mega drought. We are moving
in the right direction, but there is so much more work to be
done. Last year, the Colorado River Basin was in a Tier 2a
shortage which substantially cut Arizona's share of Colorado
River water. It reduced the Central Arizona project's normal
supply by 34 percent and Arizona's total Colorado River
allocation by 21 percent. In addition to these cuts, Arizona
and the other lower basin States have agreed to conserve an
additional 3 million acre feet of Colorado River water through
2026.
I appreciate the past support of this subcommittee in
directing resources to the Bureau of Reclamation to meet its
obligation under the Drought Contingency Plan to conserve
100,000 acre feet of water each year in the Colorado River
system. And I urge you and the members of this committee to
continue to make sure the bureau has sufficient resources, in
fiscal year 2025, to continue these critical conservation
efforts.
Arizona's Tribal Nations and rural communities also need
help, and we must make direct investments to support their
drinking water and wastewater infrastructure during this time
of drought. 4 years ago, the Water Resources Development Act
included my legislation to add Arizona to the section 595
Environmental Infrastructure Program to make these critical
investments. With your help, it was approved, and in the time
since, more Arizona communities are getting the help they need
to better protect their water supply.
New water lines for the city of Maricopa and Pascua Yaqui
tribe. Infrastructure that helps Yavapai-Apache Nation and the
city of Tempe manage their reclaimed water. Mitigating flood
risk in the city of Flagstaff. Restoring the Queen Creek in the
town of Superior. The list goes on and on. And I appreciate
this subcommittee's support for this authority this fiscal year
and ask that you--that you continue strong funding for this
environmental infrastructure program in fiscal year 2025.
Although Arizona is a dry climate, when it does rain, it
can rain a lot and we experience dangerous flash floods. There
are two projects that we can support to safeguard against those
floods. The Rio Salado Oeste Ecosystem Restoration Project
would improve the river channel through Phoenix by restoring
nearly 1,500 acres of riparian and floodplain habitat. I hope
this subcommittee will support this critical project.
Second, the Cave Buttes Dam in Maricopa County provides
flood protection for more than a million people in the Phoenix
metro area and 15 billion in residential and commercial
property. Seepage in the dam has sounded the alarm. To reduce
its risk of failure, we must begin a new feasibility study for
Cave Buttes Dam so the Corps can evaluate flood risk management
needs and safety modifications. Finally, I ask for increased
funds for sections 205 and 206 under the Continuing Authorities
Program, which is currently overextended and underfunded.
Arizona has several projects in the cities of Globe and
Douglas, as well as the Salt River Pima Indian community and
the Aachen Indian community, so you can utilize this program
for important flood control projects.
Thank you so much for the opportunity to testify today and
for your great support of our Nation's water infrastructure.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement follows:]

PREPARED STATEMENT OF HON. GREG STANTON

Chairman Fleischmann, Ranking Member Kaptur, and members of
the subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to testify
today on Arizona's water resource needs and the importance of
federal investments through the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers
and the Bureau of Reclamation.
Arizona has long been a leader in the United States when it
comes to effectively managing water supplies--it's how we have
managed to flourish in a desert for so long.
Climate change, though, presents us with significant
challenges: temperatures rising even higher, less predictable
and consistent rain cycles, and more. These changes have left
us in a prolonged drought in the Southwest. It's created more
wildfires that threaten the entire State. The extreme heat
wears on our water infrastructure and alters our watersheds.
And heavy, intense rains combined with dry, hard ground makes
many parts of our urban areas more prone to dangerous, life-
and property-threatening flash floods.
We know the kind of infrastructure we need to adapt to
these changes, but it requires federal investment--and your
leadership. I've worked with community leaders-from small,
rural, and tribal communities, as well as our major metro
areas-to identify Arizona's highest priority projects to help
us prepare for the challenges ahead. These projects address our
water supply challenges, environmental infrastructure needs,
and flood protection.
Securing our water future in Arizona depends on our ability
to respond to the mega drought in the Colorado River Basin
where we are experiencing the driest conditions in more than
1,200 years. Last year, the Lower Colorado River Basin was in a
Tier 2a shortage, which resulted in a 592,000-acre-foot
reduction to Arizona's Colorado River supply, constituting 34
percent of Central Arizona Project's normal supply and 21
percent of our Colorado River supply. In 2024, the Basin is in
a Tier 1 shortage, representing a 512,000-acre-foot reduction
to Arizona's Colorado River water supply. In addition to these
cuts, Arizona and other Lower Basin states have agreed to
conserve an additional 3-million-acre feet of Colorado River
water through 2026. I appreciate subcommittee's past support
for directing resources to help us implement the Drought
Contingency Plan, which directs the Secretary of the Interior
to create or conserve 100,000 acre-feet per year or more of
water in the Colorado River system to contribute to the
conservation of water in Lake Mead. The Colorado River is the
lifeblood of the Lower Basin States, providing water that is
vital for drinking water in major urban areas including Phoenix
and Tucson as well as a significant resource for tribes,
agriculture, and industry. Historic dry conditions combined
with the current prolonged drought and future effects of
climate change will likely continue to contribute to
significant economic, environmental, and other impacts
throughout the basin. I urge the subcommittee to provide the
Bureau with $100 million in fiscal year 2025 to fulfill its
obligations under the Drought Contingency Plan.
Over the next two decades, Arizona will also need more than
$15 billion in drinking water and wastewater infrastructure
needs, according to the American Society of Civil Engineers. To
begin to address these needs and the fiscal constraints of our
small, rural, and tribal communities to make these investments,
the 2020 Water Resources Development Act included my
legislation to expand the existing section 595 environmental
infrastructure program to include the State of Arizona. Since
this authority was authorized, more than two dozen communities
and tribal nations have received assistance to address their
water infrastructure needs. That means new water lines for the
city of Maricopa and the Pascua Yaqui Tribe, infrastructure
that helps the Yavapai Apache Nation and the city of Tempe use
reclaimed water more efficiently and flood risk management in
the city of Flagstaff. I appreciate the subcommittee's support
for this authority this fiscal year and urge you to continue
strong funding for environmental infrastructure in fiscal year
2025 so more communities and tribes in Arizona can get the
assistance they need.
Although Arizona is a desert State, it is no stranger to
flooding. There are several projects in need of investment to
protect Arizona communities from major flood events.
First, the Cave Buttes Dam in Maricopa County provides
flood protection for more than a million residents within
unincorporated parts of the county as well as the cities of
Phoenix, Glendale, Peoria, Tolleson, and Avondale in an area
with $15 billion in residential and commercial property.
Unfortunately, floodwater seepage in the dam has sounded the
alarm for us to reduce the dam's risk of failure. We must begin
a new feasibility study so the Corps of Engineers can
investigate flood risk management needs as well as potential
modifications to improve the dam's safety so we can strengthen
flood risk protection for the region.
The second project is Rio Salado Oeste, an ecosystem
restoration project that is part of Rio Reimagined. Rio Salado
Oeste would restore nearly 1,500 acres of riparian and flood
plain habitat while connecting two existing projects to create
a contiguous 19-mile corridor along the Salt River through
Phoenix. I appreciate your support for this project in this
year's bill and ask that you provide the remaining funds
necessary in fiscal year 2025 to complete the general re-
evaluation report.
And finally, the Continuing Authorities Program (CAP),
which is authorized by the Flood Control Act of 1948, provides
the Corps of Engineers the authority to solve water-resource,
flood-risk mitigation and environmental restoration challenges
in partnership with local sponsors without the need to obtain
specific Congressional authorization. By cutting the amount of
time required to budget, develop, and approve a potential
project for construction, this program helps the Corps more
efficiently plan and build projects that are smaller, less
complex, and less costly. Arizona has several of these
projects, including McCormick Wash in the city of Globe, Rose
and Palm Garden washes in the city of Douglas, Va Shly'AY
Akimel on the Salt River Pima-Maricopa Indian Community and the
Ak-Chin levee in Pinal County. I am particularly interested in
section 205 for small flood risk management projects and
section 206 for aquatic ecosystem restoration projects. Right
now, though, the CAP program is overextended and underfunded.
For example, section 205 received only $12 million this fiscal
year but is authorized for up to $69.3 million and section 206
was funded at $8 million and is authorized for $63 million. I'm
hopeful that the subcommittee can increase the size of these
CAP programs to help these smaller projects.
Chairman Fleischmann and Ranking Member Kaptur, thank you
for the opportunity to testify today and for your support for
critical investment in our Nation's water infrastructure.

Mr. Fleischmann. Thank you, Mr. Stanton. Good morning, Mr.
Costa. I would now like to recognize gentlemen Mr. Costa,
congressman from California, for 5 minutes. Thank you, sir.
------

Wednesday, April 10, 2024.

WITNESS

STATEMENT OF HON. JIM COSTA, A REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS FROM THE
STATE OF CALIFORNIA

Mr. Costa. Thank you very much, Chairman Fleischmann and
Ranking Member Kaptur, for the opportunity to testify for the
subcommittee. Mr. Chairman, with your own experience over the
years with the Tennessee Valley Authority, and Ms. Kaptur, with
your own experience as well, on Federal projects that provide
necessary funding to support our water infrastructure needs,
the two of you both understand the importance of this
partnership.
Let me outline a couple of areas where the partnership in
California is very important. Water Operations Technical
Support, otherwise known as the WOTS program, provides support
for drought and flood extremes. And it seems with climate
change and other factors that it is either feast or famine. We
have extreme dry periods or we get more atmospheric rivers that
bring water at very short periods of time. We need to better,
with the Army Corps of Engineers, and I would add, extend to
the Bureau of Reclamation, the latest in weather and seasonal
forecasting observations, so that we can improve reservoir
operations so that we can save and conserve all that water that
comes.
The capabilities to predict atmospheric rivers several days
before landfall has become more promising, and the importance
of tools like the Water Operations Technical Support, otherwise
known as WOTS, and the Forecast Informed Reservoir Operations,
otherwise known as FIRO program, cannot be overstated. W We
have seen in recent years the implementation of that technology
allows us to better operate the existing reservoirs and
management in terms of ensuring, in the West, that means we can
track, monitor, and respond to major precipitation events, from
flooding to drought conditions. This is important. During dry
years, water managers must be empowered to retain water that
otherwise would needlessly be released, and during these
excessive water years we can have a more reliable water supply.
And so I request that the committee fund the Water Operations
Technical Support, WOTS, and the FIRO program, the Forecast to
Inform Reservoir Operations, and I think we should extend it
beyond the Army Corps of Engineers to the Bureau of Reclamation
because they have dams and reservoirs that they could benefit
from the management of this technical advice.
WIIN Act is piece of legislation--these are bipartisan
effort, by the way. In 2023, storms helped ease some of the
impacts of the prolonged drought, but further investment is
needed in aging water infrastructure to improve drought
resiliency. Both funding a level that we plushed up in the
Bureau of Reclamations budget and the Army Corps budget
provides additional support. Western States must have the
surface and groundwater storage capacity to capture water
during wet years so that we can use it in dry years. I thank
the committee for the $134 million in funding for the Water
Infrastructure Investments, otherwise known as the WIIN Act, in
fiscal year 2024. I urge the committee to continue to fully
support these projects in fiscal year 2025. The climate change
has continued to cause unprecedented levels of drought, and
these are critical funds for increasing water supply in 17
Reclamation projects in western states.
Also, there is report language for the repair of the
bureau. Canals in California, the Friant-Kern Canal, Delta-
Mendota Canal, and the California Aqueduct, have all been
seriously damaged by subsidence. These defects seriously
jeopardize the ability of the Bureau of Reclamation to convey
water. Water, we say, is the lifeblood in the West. As you all
know, where water flows, food grows. To address the inequity
and feed the Nation, we need to meet our climate goals and
further funds must be allocated to upgrade these crucial
infrastructure projects. I urge the committee to support the
report language that provides up to $30 million for the repair
in Reclamation canals for fiscal year 2025 and advance these
important ongoing projects.
And in addition, projects that protect the San Joaquin
River Restoration Program. This is a contentious issue that was
settled out of court back in 2006. The committee, to avoid
partisan poison bill writers, such as efforts to eliminate the
restoration program, which is moving along. The goals of the
program are to restore and maintain endangered fish populations
on the San Joaquin River and to reduce the adverse water supply
impact on the Friant Division contractors. The Friant Diversion
contractors signed on to the agreement. They very much want to
maintain this project as we go along. It is moving forward and
certainly we would like to continue that funding for the
restoration of the river. There are other projects that you
have in front of you, the Sacramento River anadromous fish
screens. It is very important.
But I will close and thank the subcommittee for your focus
and your support for these important projects.
[The prepared statement follows:]

PREPARED STATEMENT OF HON. JIM COSTA

LThank you, Chairman Fleishmann and Ranking Member
Kaptur for the opportunity to share my priorities for the FY
2025 Energy & Water appropriations bill.

LI look forward to working with the subcommittee
on shared goals including advancing Western water storage
projects, repairing aging water infrastructure, providing
reservoir managers the tools necessary to accurately forecast
for extreme atmospheric river and drought events, and deploying
technology to better care for our environment and wildlife.

Water Operations Technical Support (WOTS) Program

LDrought and flood extremes in the West over this
decade highlight the need for the Army Corps to incorporate the
latest weather and seasonal forecasting observations to improve
reservoir operations.

LAs capabilities to predict Atmospheric Rivers
several days before landfall become more promising, the
importance of tools like the Water Operations Technical Support
(WOTS) and the Forecast-Informed Reservoir Operations (FIRO)
programs cannot be overstated.

LThese tools provide Western reservoirs with the
means to track, monitor, and respond to major precipitation
events from flooding to drought conditions.

LDuring dry years, water managers must be
empowered to retain water that would be otherwise needlessly
released.

LTo have a more reliable water supply, I request
that the Committee fund the WOTS program at $19 million for FY
25, including $15 million for FIRO.

WIIN Act Water Storage

LThe 2023 storms helped ease some of the impacts
of prolonged drought, but further investment is needed in aging
water infrastructure to improve drought resiliency.

LWestern states must have the surface and
groundwater storage capacity to capture water in wet years for
use in dry years.

LI thank the Committee for providing $134 million
in funding for Water Infrastructure Investments for the Nation
(WIIN) Act projects in FY 24 and I urge the Committee to
continue to fully fund these projects in FY 25.

LAs climate change continues to cause
unprecedented levels of drought, these funds are critical for
increasing water storage across the 17 Western Reclamation
States.

Report Language for the Repair of Bureau of Reclamation Canals

LIn California, The Friant-Kern Canal, Delta
Mendota Canal, and California Aqueduct have all been seriously
impaired by factors including land subsidence. These defects
seriously jeopardize the Bureau of Reclamation's ability to
meet water delivery obligations in the San Joaquin Valley.

LWater is the lifeblood of the West. To address
inequality, feed the nation, and meet our climate goals, funds
must be allocated to upgrade this crucial infrastructure,

LI urge the Committee to support report language
to provide up to $30 million to repair Reclamation Canals in FY
25 and advance these important, ongoing projects.

Protect the San Joaquin River Restoration Program

LI urge the Committee to avoid partisan poison
pill riders, such as efforts to eliminate the San Joaquin River
Restoration Program.

LThe goals of the Program are to restore and
maintain endangered fish populations on the San Joaquin River
and reduce adverse water supply impact to Friant Division
Contractors.

LWhile the program is not as far along as we would
all like, it is moving forward, and to eliminate it entirely
would throw water management of the San Joaquin River into
chaos, uncertainty, and subject to the whims of litigation.

Sacramento River Anadromous Fish Screens

LFinally, I request that the Committee provide
$7.8 million to complete the last anadromous fish screen
projects on the Sacramento River and provide sufficient
resources to meet other high priority fish passage and fish
screen projects in the Sacramento-San Joaquin Delta, the San
Joaquin River Basin, and Westwide.

L95 percent of the water diverted from the
Sacramento River will pass through these fish screens. These
projects support the environment and local wildlife, including
salmon, steelhead, and sturgeon all of whom are considered
threatened or endangered by State or Federal agencies.

Mr. Fleischmann. Mr. Costa, thank you. Thank you for your
testimony today.
Mr. Costa. OK, and thank you for your good work.
Mr. Fleischmann. Good morning.
Mr. Ciscomani. Good morning.
Mr. Fleischmann. At this time, I would like to recognize
Representative Juan Ciscomani, from the great State of Arizona,
for 5 minutes.
------

Wednesday, April 10, 2024.

WITNESS

STATEMENT OF HON. JUAN CISCOMANI, A REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS FROM THE
STATE OF ARIZONA

Mr. Ciscomani. Thank you, Chairman Fleischmann, and thank
you, Ranking Member Kaptur, for allowing me to testify today. I
want to speak in support of a program that is crucial, crucial
to my State and every other Western State that relies on the
Colorado River for water.
As you may know, Arizona is facing an unprecedented drought
and desperately needs the Federal Government's support for its
water conservation needs. The Cooperative Watershed Management
Program, CWMP, is a unique Federal resource that provides
critical funding to local stakeholders for the development,
planning, and design of watershed management programs. In
Arizona, dozens of water projects have been made possible by
this program. These projects bring together a variety of local
stakeholders and improve water quantity and quality in areas
that need water security the most.
While the program has been incredibly successful so far,
the demand for capacity-building water projects is immense, and
with its current funding levels, many worthy projects are,
unfortunately, left unfunded. The CWMP is authorized at about
20--will add 20 million annually, but has never received the
regular appropriations close to that level. With the West
current water shortage, I believe it is high time that we
invest in this program and other drought related programs
before the situation becomes even more dire.
Further, Mr. Chairman, as you and your staff work hard to
form this year's Energy and Water Appropriations Bill, I would
urge you to put drought resiliency efforts on your priority
list. In Arizona and other broader--and in the broader West,
water is the most important and threatened resource, and we
need the support of Congress in fighting this drought and
securing a strong water future for all. Thank you, and with
that, I yield back.
[The prepared statement follows:]

PREPARED STATEMENT OF HON. JUAN CISCOMANI

As you may know, Arizona is facing an unprecedented drought
and desperately needs the federal government's support for its
water conservation needs. The Cooperative Watershed Management
Program (CWMP) is a unique federal resource that provides
critical funding to local stakeholders for the development,
planning, and design of watershed management programs.
In Arizona, dozens of water projects have been made
possible by this program; these projects bring together a
variety of local stakeholders and improve water quantity and
quality in areas that need water security the most. While the
program has been incredibly successful so far, the demand for
capacity-building water projects is immense and with its
current funding levels, many worthy projects are left unfunded.
The CWMP is authorized at $20 million annually but has
never received regular appropriations close to that level. With
the West's current water shortage, I believe it is high time
that we invest in this program and other drought-related
programs before the situation becomes even more dire.
Further, Mr. Chairman, as you and your staff work hard to
form this year's Energy and Water appropriations bill, I would
urge you to put drought resiliency efforts on your priority
list. In Arizona and the broader West, water is our most
important and threatened resource and we need the support of
Congress in fighting this drought and securing a strong water
future for all. Thank you and I yield back.

Mr. Fleischmann. Thank you, Mr. Ciscomani. I appreciate
your testimony, sir.
------

Wednesday, April 10, 2024.

WITNESS

STATEMENT OF HON. KEVIN MULLIN, A REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS FROM THE
STATE OF CALIFORNIA

Mr. Mullin. Thank you so much, Mr. Chair, and ranking
member, and committee members. Kevin Mullin from California,
15. Climate change is causing extreme weather events in every
region of the world. It does not matter if you are in a blue
State or a red State. The impacts of climate change are costing
billions of dollars in damage. It has been well documented by
rigorous scientific studies that carbon emissions from fossil
fuels are driving the climate crisis. Carbon capture, carbon
removal technology, can be a tool to address this crisis, but
it will require further investments from the Federal Government
to make it more viable. To date, many Federal investments have
focused on capturing carbon dioxide at the point source of
pollution, like smokestacks. However, this tactic only prolongs
our dependence on fossil fuels and does not address the carbon
emissions that have already been put into the atmosphere. So, I
am advocating today for carbon removal technologies that
permanently pull carbon out of the atmosphere.
Today, companies in my district, and across the country,
are developing technology to do just that. So far, large scale
investments in this technology have been held back by a lack of
standards and clear market value. This is where the Federal
Government must play an important role. By purchasing carbon
removals and setting standards for those removals, Federal
investment would send a signal to the private sector that
carbon removal systems can be trusted to curb climate change.
To that end, I am requesting that the subcommittee include in
this year's appropriations bill $15 million for the carbon
dioxide removal, monitoring, reporting, and verification
account at the National Labs in the Department of Energy. I am
also requesting that report language be included that directs
DOE, the DOE's Office of Fossil Energy and Carbon Management,
to accelerate the commercialization of carbon dioxide removal
technologies through advancements in MRV and encourages FECM to
continue this work in partnership with the National
Laboratories and the Office of Technology Transitions
Technology Commercialization Fund. That is a mouthful.
Further, I request that the subcommittee include in the
bill $35 million for the carbon dioxide removal purchasing
account at DOE, along with report language that directs the
Secretary of Energy to follow through on the competitive
purchasing pilot program that the secretary was directed to
establish in the FY 2023 Energy and Water joint statement, for
the purchase of carbon dioxide removed from the atmosphere.
Thank you again for allowing me to speak this morning, and
I thank the chair and ranking member and their staff for all
the work they will put into preparing this year's bill. Thank
you, sir.
[The prepared statement follows:]

PREPARED STATEMENT OF HON. KEVIN MULLIN

Thank you, Chairman Fleischmann, Ranking Member Kaptur, and
Members of the Committee for this opportunity.
Climate change is causing extreme weather events in every
region of the world. Domestically, it does not matter if you
are in a blue state or a red state, the impacts of climate
change are costing billions of dollars in damage. My California
congressional district sits on the San Francisco Peninsula,
where we see sea level rise all around us. It has been well
documented in the scientific community that carbon emissions
from fossil fuels are driving this climate crisis. America has
the responsibility and the technological capability to lead the
world's transition to a renewableenergy economy by reducing
emissions.
However, although reducing emissions should continue to
remain the primary focus of our global efforts, it will not be
enough. According to recent reports by the Intergovernmental
Panel on Climate Change and the National Academies, we must
also actively remove carbon from the atmosphere to mitigate the
worst impacts of climate change.
Carbon removal technology can be another tool in our tool
belt address this crisis, but it will require even more
investment from the federal government to make it viable.
To date, most Federal investments have focused on capturing
carbon dioxide at the point source of pollution, like
smokestacks. However, this prolongs our dependence on fossil
fuels. Reduced carbon emissions are still carbon emissions.
Moreover, carbon that has already been emitted is not affected
with this approach.
In contrast, I am advocating today for carbon removal:
technologies that permanently pull carbon out of the
atmosphere. Today, there are a number of companies in my
district and across the country that are developing technology
to do just that. So far, much of the funding to develop and
deploy carbon removal technology has relied on private sector
investments. Large scale investment in this technology has been
held back by a lack of standards and clear market value. This
is where the Federal Government must play an important role.
By purchasing carbon removals and setting standards for
those removals, federal investment would send a signal to the
private sector that carbon removal systems can be trusted and
ultimately mitigate the impacts of climate change.
To that end I am requesting that the subcommittee include
in this year's Appropriations bill $15,000,000 for the Carbon
Dioxide Removal MRV account at the National Labs in the
Department of Energy. I am also requesting that report language
be included that directs the Department of Energy Office of
Fossil Energy and Carbon Management (FECM) to accelerate the
commercialization of carbon dioxide removal technologies
through advancements in monitoring, reporting, and verification
(MRV), and encourages FECM to continue this work in partnership
with the National Laboratories and the Office of Technology
Transitions Technology Commercialization Fund.
Further, I request that the subcommittee include in the
bill $35,000,000 for the Carbon Dioxide Removal (CDR)
Purchasing account at the Department of Energy. along with
report language that directs the Secretary of Energy to follow
through on the competitive purchasing pilot program that the
Secretary was directed to establish in the FY 2023 Energy and
Water joint explanatory statement for the purchase of carbon
dioxide removed from the atmosphere or upper hydrosphere.
I want to reiterate that I am advocating for funding for
these programs in addition to those that reduce carbon
emissions overall, including speeding our transition to clean
energy and away from fossil fuels. However, given the magnitude
of the crisis we face, we must bring every innovation to bear
in addressing it and I believe carbon removal is worth
pursuing.
Thank you again for allowing me to speak this morning. And
I thank the Chair and Ranking Member and their staff for all
the work they will put into preparing this year's bill.

Mr. Fleischmann. Thank you, Congressman Mullin. Appreciate
your testimony, sir. At this time, I would like to recognize
the congressman from California, Mr. John Garamendi, for 5
minutes. Thank you, sir.
------

Wednesday, April 10, 2024.

WITNESS

STATEMENT OF HON. JOHN GARAMENDI, A REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS FROM THE
STATE OF CALIFORNIA

Mr.  Garamendi. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member
Kaptur. Thank you very much. How much can we spend on the
nuclear enterprise? Apparently, an awful lot of money. The
Sentinel program, which is the replacement of the Minuteman
III, is at least $130 billion over the next decade to 15 years.
A significant part of that is in the control of your
appropriations. The NNSA--in fact, the $130 billion does not
include the NNSA activities. The Department of Energy has
requesting--some feedback here--the Department of Energy is
requesting $19.8 billion for weapons activity. That is a $2.7
billion increase over the 2023 agnatic levels. These ever
growing costs, just in the Energy Department, are a significant
but small portion of the total cost of replacing the Minuteman
III missile with the new Sentinel system.
Perhaps one of the most illustrative examples is the
modernization of the plutonium pit production. Something the
NNSA said would have to do 80 pits per year. Why 80? Because
Congress told them to produce 80 without any justification for
the 80 other than they may be needed someday in the future.
That is one example, but it's not all. It does not include the
$3 billion that the Department of Energy, NNSA's requested for
plutonium pit production. Modernization is only a small part.
There is $1.4 billion requested for stockpile sustainment--that
is the existing bombs--and $1.1 billion for the W87-1 warhead,
which is supposed to go on the Sentinel. When will the Sentinel
rocket actually be deployed? Well, not for a long time.
So, what I am really wanting to bring to your attention is
that we are probably looking at, just within the NNSA, $6
billion when you put all of the pieces together, and I want you
to take a very, very close look at this. The Minuteman III was
determined a decade ago to not be sustainable. The actual
analysis said that it could not be sustained for 70 years, and
that is accurate. But the Minuteman III can actually be
sustained for at least a decade. And in fact, in the
replacement of the Minuteman III with the Sentinel, the
Minuteman III will be maintained for at least 15 years, because
as a Sentinel comes in, a Minuteman III goes out. Apparently,
we have to have 400 of these, and so we are not going to have
400 Sentinel rockets day one. They will come in a few a year,
maybe a dozen or two a year, and the Minuteman III will
continue to provide the requisite number of missiles, ICBMs.
I really am pleading with you, and your committee, to take
a hard look at the role of the NNSA, the Department of Energy,
in this Sentinel program. The bottom line of it is that the
Sentinel program is way beyond budget. It now is Nunn-McCurdy,
meaning that it has a full stop under the law and a full
review. Part of that review is the weapon and your domain, your
responsibilities. The military will come back with an analysis.
All of us owe to the American people a very careful analysis,
by us, of the military's analysis. We have to force them to
answer the five questions that the law requires in full.
The critical piece of that is the nuclear weapon itself.
The plutonium modernization was originally designed and argued
to build a new bomb, the 87-1, for the Sentinel. The Sentinel
is going to be delayed. Minuteman III will continue to be
refurbished. We are talking $130 billion. If you are concerned
about deterrence, we need to make a choice here. $130 billion
will build perhaps five to seven Columbia-class submarines and
all of the missiles and bombs that would go with those,
providing even greater significant deterrence than the missiles
sitting in a silo in the upper Midwest.
So we are going to make some critical choices here. We are
fortunate to have the Nunn-McCurdy breach give us an
opportunity--in fact, give us the requirement that we carefully
analyze this entire Sentinel program and whether there are
other things we should spend the money on. I was listening to
my colleague, Mr. Mullin, talk about a few tens of billions--
millions of dollars for climate change issues. We are going to
make some very, very important choices.
I will leave you with my written statement here. But my
plea to you as the key members of a critical element in the
Sentinel program, the plutonium pit production, do we really
need to have both a new facility at Savannah River, which is
going to be billions of dollars, and another facility in New
Mexico? Do we really need 80 pits a year for the Sentinel? If
the sentinel would go forward, we do not need 80 pits a year.
The math is actually fifth grade math. The number of pits that
can be produced at Los Alamos are quite sufficient over time to
provide the necessary pits for the 87-1 that would then go onto
the Sentinel. So we have some choices to make here. We are
going to--we must demand, at the very minimum, we must demand
that the Department of Defense do an honest and thorough
analysis, as required by the Nunn-McCurdy breach.
You have been very, very generous with my time. I
appreciate that. This is really an important question. Nuclear
deterrence is critical. What is the best way to achieve it? A
new rocket, ICBM, in silos, which we know exactly where they
are, or five new Columbia-class submarines somewhere out in the
ocean, where our opponents have no idea where they are? So if
it is deterrence, what is the best way to achieve it? What is
the best way to spend $130 billion over the next decade to 15
years? On the sentinel? I think not.
I thank you for your wisdom. I thank you for your attention
and your time. Thank you. Any questions you have, I would be
happy to go back.
[The prepared statement follows:]

Prepared Statement of Hon. John Garamendi

I join you today to call the committee's attention to the
billions of dollars being spent on our nuclear weapons programs
and raise significant' concerns that momentum is leading us in
a dangerous direction. We in Congress have a duty to allocate
the taxpayer dollars on programs in a responsible manner that
avoids unnecessary and excessive expenses, but instead we're
spending billions on wasteful weapons programs.
This year's Department of Energy budget request includes
$19.8 billion for ``Weapons Activities'', a $2.7 billion
increase from the FY 2023 enacted levels. These ever-growing
costs reflect the irrationality which has seized our nuclear
policy. In the name of ``modernization'', we've taken on
billions of dollars of additional spending and every time we're
asked for more, we keep growing the accounts without question
or scrutiny. Even if we accept the need to preserve a ``safe,
secure, and effective deterrent'' as long as nuclear weapons
exist, current modernization plans are not necessary to
maintain a capable deterrent for the foreseeable future.
Perhaps the most illustrative example of this theme is the
modernization of plutonium production. ``Plutonium pits'', the
hollow plutonium shell in nuclear triggers of nuclear weapons,
are only one of the many components necessary to build nuclear
weapons. But this year Department of Energy/NNSA requested
nearly $3 billion for plutonium pit modernization. This number
is incredibly high but doesn't even include the $1.1 billion
requested for the W87-1 warhead, the $1.4 billion for stockpile
sustainment, the $1.2 billion for the W80-4 warhead or the
costs of approximately five other warheads and bombs.
Even for those who believe that we need to modernize our
nuclear program these costs should be concerning. For anyone
who claims that we should cut Government funding, particularly
when it is not justified by need or clear planning, our weapons
programs should be a clear place to demand savings. A January
2023 GAO report, for example, found that NNSA has not developed
a comprehensive schedule or cost estimate that meets GAO best
practices. It has not identified all of the activities or
milestones necessary to achieve an 80-pit-per-year production
capability and senior officials have admitted they will not
meet those deadlines.
In addition, it is not clear that the production levels are
grounded in any true need, since America already has more than
4,000 plutonium pits and we lack scientific data to determine
whether or when the pits need to be replaced. This excessive
requirement will cost taxpayers $18-$24 billion according to
GAO estimates, of which of Savannah River construction will be
$7-$11 billion, nearly triple the original estimate of $3.6
billion
In House Armed Services Committee, I've been closely
following a similar example in the $118 billion dollar Sentinel
Program which has such an egregious overrun that it triggered a
review under a portion of statute known as 'Nunn-McCurdy'. The
recent Nunn-Mccurdy breach was triggered by an over 37 percent
cost overrun for the $118 billion Sentinel program, almost 260
percent higher than the Air Force's first cost estimate in
2015. These costs are incredibly concerning and it demands
carefully scrutiny of whether the program's continuation in its
current form is necessary or possible.
Although portions of that program are outside of this
subcommittee's jurisdiction, the nuclear enterprise is seeing
drastic cost overruns in the lines of effort that support the
program in Energy and Water. For example, the budget request
for development at Livermore National Lab of the warhead for
the Sentinel, the W87-1, is up 63 percent in the FY 2025
budget, and according to the recent Performance Evaluation
Report (PER) for the lab, ``only met a portion of the
deliverables for the W87-1, with some baseline schedule
deliverables missed.''
Likewise, in Sandia's PER, it is said to have, ``missed key
intermediate deliverables for the W87-1 program and experienced
technical challenges in component develop1nent, resulting in a
missed FY 2023 Program Milestone and increased schedule risk.''
Together, these ``schedule'' problems are likely to lead to
program delays and likely major cost overruns for the W87-1.
These costs are unsustainable and, I fear, reflective of
misaligned priorities. When 80 percent ofNNSA's budget request
is going to these modernization programs and only 20 percent to
nonproliferation, we should pause and think hard about where we
should spend our resources.
Inevitably, we must reconcile our infinite desires with our
limited means. That means making hard decisions about how and
where to spend taxpayer dollars. Billions of dollars and at
least a decade has been spent justifying weapons programs,
instead of the energy programs that improve taxpayers' lives.
This must stop. Rather than pouring money into pits, let's
spend our Energy and Water appropriations on renewable energy
and clean water.

Mr. Fleischmann. Mr. Garamendi, I wanted to thank you for
your testimony and your time today, sir.
Mr.  Garamendi. Thank you.
Mr. Fleischmann. At this time, I would like to thank all of
our colleagues for being here today and participating in our
member day. Unless there are anything else from our
distinguished ranking member, the subcommittee will stand
adjourned.

Wednesday, April 17, 2024.

FISCAL YEAR 2025 REQUEST FOR THE ARMY CORPS OF ENGINEERS (CIVIL WORKS)
AND THE BUREAU OF RECLAMATION

WITNESSES

HON. MICHAEL L. CONNOR, ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF THE ARMY (CIVIL WORKS)
LIEUTENANT GENERAL SCOTT A. SPELLMON, CHIEF OF ENGINEERS, COMMANDING
GENERAL, U.S. ARMY CORPS OF ENGINEERS
HON. CAMILLE CALIMLIM TOUTON, COMMISSIONER, U.S. BUREAU OF RECLAMATION
MICHAEL BRAIN, PRINCIPAL DEPUTY ASSISTANT SECRETARY, WATER & SCIENCE,
U.S. DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. CHARLES J. ``CHUCK'' FLEISCHMANN, A
REPRESETNATIVE IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF TENNESSEE

Mr. Fleischmann. The hearing will come to order.
Good morning, everyone. It is my pleasure to welcome
Assistant Secretary of the Army for Civil Works, Mr. Michael
Connor; and the Commanding General and Chief of Engineers,
Lieutenant General Scott Spellmon--General, sir--to discuss the
fiscal 2025 budget request for the U.S. Army Corps of
Engineers; and Commissioner Camille Touton to discuss the
request for the Bureau of Reclamation.
In addition, I am also pleased that we are joined by an
alumnus of this subcommittee, Principal Deputy Assistant
Secretary for Water and Science, Mr. Michael Brain, from the
Interior Department to discuss the request for Western Water.
Mike, welcome back to the committee, sir.
A key focus of this subcommittee is making the necessary
investments to manage and develop America's water resources. We
have once again demonstrated our bipartisan commitment to this
goal by passing a strong fiscal 2024 bill that made robust
investments in these projects critical to public safety and our
Nation's economic competitiveness.
I was particularly proud of the funding to advance and
complete several ongoing inland waterway construction projects,
including the Chickamauga Lock in my district.
The inland waterways system is vital to the American
economy, moving approximately 600 million tons of cargo
annually and supporting billions of dollars in economic
activity. I struggle to understand why the fiscal 2025 budget
request once again proposes no funding for these projects.
Beyond the inland system, the fiscal 2025 budget,
President's budget, continues a trend of proposed reductions to
both the Corps and Reclamation. The request for the Corps
totals $7.2 billion, 17 percent below the enacted level, with
the largest cuts proposed for the Mississippi River and
tributaries and operation and maintenance.
In addition, the budget proposes $1.7 billion for Harbor
Maintenance Trust Fund activities, consistent with recent
budgets, and a reduction of nearly 38 percent from the enacted
level.
The request fails to take advantage of the tools Congress
provided to promote robust investment in our Nation's ports and
harbors, falling nearly $1.4 billion short of the maximum
offset allowed by law.
Similarly, I am disappointed by the proposed reductions for
activities critical for drought preparedness and response,
water supply, and project operations throughout the West. The
President's budget proposes $1.6 billion for the Bureau of
Reclamation and Central Utah Project Completion Account, a
reduction of 16 percent. The request proposes only $17 million
for the Central Utah Project, 26 percent below enacted level,
continuing a downward trend.
For Reclamation, the Water and Related Resources account
would see a reduction of $308 million from fiscal 2024 levels.
While I do not represent a reclamation State, I understand the
importance of Reclamation's mission in the West, and I believe
we must do more in fiscal 2025 to support Western communities
and farmers who rely on Reclamation projects for water and
power.
I appreciate all of our witnesses for being here today to
explain your budget requests. I look forward to working
together with you and my colleagues on both sides of the aisle
to move forward a bill that will enhance public safety and
maximize economic benefit of America's water resources.
Please ensure that the hearing record, questions for the
record, and any supporting information requested by the
subcommittee are delivered to us in final form no later than 4
weeks from the time that you receive them. Members who have
additional questions for the record will have until the close
of business Monday to provide them to the subcommittee office.
With that, I will turn to my distinguished ranking member
and friend, Ms. Kaptur, for her opening statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. MARCY KAPTUR, A REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS
FROM THE STATE OF OHIO

Ms. Kaptur. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank
you for the collegiality with which you lead this committee. I
am proud to say that last year and sort of running into this
year, our bill was one of the first to clear the floor. That is
a credit to every member of this committee and to all the fine
Americans and the professional staff that come before us from
the various departments and agencies, and we appreciate all of
you.
We are here today to discuss the fiscal year 2025 budget
request for the Army Corps of Engineers and the Bureau of
Reclamation. Thank you to our witnesses. Welcome back to many
of you today. Your agencies play a critical role in developing
the resources of our land, mindful of future generations.
Your projects strengthen our economy, sustain life on our
corner of Mother Earth and ensure public safety against the now
constant onslaught of both natural- and human-caused disasters
across our country.
When I arrived home last weekend, I was shocked, actually,
because it had rained for 4 days and one of the rivers that
flows very close to where I live called the Ottawa River, I
have never seen it that high.
So we all are experiencing these changes in the
environment. And the recent collapse of the Francis Scott Key
Bridge was a national tragedy, though not a natural disaster,
but does impact all Americans, because it is one of the sixth
largest ports in the country. We salute the Corps. I really do
salute you for the bravery of many of your members and some of
the private companies that you have hired under very dangerous
circumstances to clear the channel and work to return port
operations to their full capacity.
This incident is another reminder of the importance of
maritime infrastructure, including the major Port of Baltimore
and, as I have mentioned, one of the busiest in the Nation. I
will continue working with my colleagues on both sides of the
aisle to provide the resources necessary to rebuild and recover
this major artery of our commerce and sustainment.
Investments in the critical water infrastructure of our
Nation allow these two agencies to support their significant
missions across our country. To maintain and upgrade the over
25,000 miles--25,000 miles--of navigable waters, allowing goods
to be transported throughout our Nation, even with the added
challenges of climate change.
Flood management, to reduce the risk and impacts of natural
disasters; water supply that serves 130 million people--and our
population now is about 320 million--and provides 10 trillion
gallons of water for municipal, rural, residential and
industrial uses; hydropower production--I wish we could do more
of that--that powers 10 million homes; and emergency response
functions.
Across our Nation, municipal utilities are having to manage
growing fresh water and wastewater loads for which they were
not engineered. And the cost of doing so is bearing down very
heavily on some of the poorest people in our country and cities
as well as rural areas. We simply have to find a better way to
finance these, working with other agents and instrumentalities
across this government.
Farmers are losing crops because of changing rainfall. I
have got pictures on my iPhone. I went and took pictures of the
fields this weekend, just because they were so full of water.
And we have an inability to manage excess water in the fields,
and drainage tiles and ditch systems that were built for a
bygone era. It is a big issue.
In 2023, there were 28 confirmed weather and climate
disaster events, with losses exceeding a billion dollars each,
including drought, flooding, severe storms and wildfires.
Everybody's insurance is going up.
These events cost over $90 billion in economic effects on
the impacted areas, and it is undeniable that we are witnessing
growing weather events stemming from climate change occurring
in real time before our very eyes.
The U.S. Army Corps of Engineers--and thank you very much,
General, for being here--and Bureau of Reclamation are needed
now more than ever to devise new innovative approaches to
changing water flows, whether it is down the Mississippi, in
the Great Lakes and central Chicago, or the dry irrigated West.
With this new normal, it is imperative for agencies like
the Corps and Reclamation to plan and implement solutions to
make our communities more resilient. Both agencies, along with
the Departments of Agriculture and Housing and Urban
Development, must hire additional urban and regional land
planners, environmental engineers, and water, climate, and
conservation specialists. We must understand our sub-watersheds
much more intimately and deal with that reality.
In the Great Lakes region, projects like Soo Locks are a
prime example of investments that will turbocharge our economy
and assure the resiliency and efficiency of our maritime
transportation system.
Similarly, the Brandon Road Project is aimed at arresting
the economic and environmental damage unleashed by invasive
carp species that will exterminate local and regional native
fish and aquatic species, and we simply have to find a way to
work with our brethren in Illinois in order to find the perfect
solution.
I hope we can continue to work together to maintain support
for Ohio's ports. They not only play a vital role to support
continued economic development in vital industries, like steel
and overground transportation, including with our Nation's
largest free trade partner, Canada. They also serve as a source
of dredge material that can be used to increase shoreline
resilience to the increasing impacts of climate change.
As we begin our discussion on fiscal year 2025, I must say
I am disappointed by the proposed reductions of $1.5 billion
for the Corps of Engineers and $307 million for Reclamation. I
join our chairman in that concern.
And while historic investments were made through the
Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act and Inflation Reduction
Act, in both of your agencies we have significant work to do to
better protect Americans against severe drought, flooding, and
storms.
We must restore the physical infrastructure that sustains
life in communities large and small across our Nation, and
there is bipartisan support in Congress for the work that all
your agencies nobly perform and undertake on behalf of the
American people.
Thank you for being here. We all look forward to your
testimony. And, with that, I will close my remarks and look
forward to discussing this request in more detail.
Thank you very much, and I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Fleischmann. Thank you, Ranking Member Kaptur.
And, again, once again, thank you to our witnesses for
being here today. Without objection, your full written
testimonies will be entered into the record. With that in mind,
we would respectfully ask that you please summarize your
opening statement in 5 minutes.
Secretary Connor, you are now recognized for your opening
statement. Thank you.

STATEMENT OF MICHAEL L. CONNER, ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF THE ARMY FOR
CIVIL WORKS

Secretary Connor. Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member Kaptur,
distinguished members, thank you for the opportunity to discuss
the President's 2025 budget request for the Army Civil Works
Program. I have submitted my full statement for the record and
I will quickly summarize.
The 2025 budget request includes over $7.2 billion for the
Civil Works Program, with a focus on investments to facilitate
waterborne transportation, reduce coastal and inland flood
risks, and restore significant aquatic ecosystems. These
investments reinforce President Biden's ongoing commitment to
protect, restore, and improve the Nation's water resources to
strengthen our economy, protect people and property, and
improve the environment.
The water resources challenges of today and tomorrow are
not like yesterday's. Weather extremes are increasingly the
norm, creating risk to communities, the economy, and natural
systems. As a result, understanding vulnerabilities and
increasing our preparedness is of paramount importance.
This budget will spur innovation by investing in research
and development and help ensure we improve our capabilities to
assess risk and aggressively confront these challenges. And our
infrastructure investments through this budget will support
community resilience to better address these extremes while
tackling climate change and promoting equity for underserved
and overburdened communities and Tribal Nations.
With a focus on modernization and innovation, the budget
continues to prioritize the highest performing work within the
three main missions of the Civil Works Program: Commercial
navigation, thereby supporting the Nation's supply chains;
flood and storm damage reduction, protecting communities and
building resilience; and aquatic ecosystem restoration.
And now, with the enacted 2024 appropriations bill with
generally robust funding, which we are greatly appreciative of,
I want to address a serious need that was ignored in our 2024
budget and, therefore, critically important in fiscal year
2025.
The fiscal year 2025 budget includes $6.4 million for the
Office of the Assistant Secretary of the Army for Civil Works.
Since 2009, my office has never received an appropriation
larger than $5 million, in some years less.
However, our costs, salaries, services and rent have all
continued to rise over the past 15 years. Using the latest CPI
data the $5 million my office received in 2009 equates to over
$7.2 million in today's dollars. Nonetheless, funding remains
flat even as our responsibilities grow.
Full funding is critical to provide effective oversight of
the Army Civil Works Program and to help us support timely
actions in response to your requests. It is also critical to
address the many new responsibilities added to the Civil Works
portfolio through numerous statutory provisions enacted in five
Water Resources Development Acts since 2009.
With my remaining time, I would like to highlight the Corps
of Engineers' responsibilities in disaster and emergency
response. Six weeks ago, I met with the incident command team
in Maui responding to 2023's devastating wildfires. And last
week, I visited the incident command center in Baltimore
Harbor, working the recovery and response efforts to the
Francis Scott Key Bridge collapse disaster.
In both situations, the Corps is just one of several
agencies charged with critical responsibilities. In Maui, we
have operated within the FEMA disaster framework and their
available resources. Nonetheless, our responsibilities for
emergency power, debris removal, and building critical
infrastructure requires us to be prepared and maintain the
skills and the contracts necessary to carry out the mission.
With these items in place, the Corps is removing debris and
setting the stage for rebuilding on 1,600-plus properties
devastated by wildfire. It also constructed a temporary but
complete elementary school in 95 days to turn over to the local
school district.
In Baltimore, we are not working within a FEMA framework
but using our own resources to quickly deploy and begin work in
clearing the Federal navigation channel to restore full
operations to the Port of Baltimore, even as we are sensitive
in supporting the recovery efforts associated with the loss of
life caused by this disaster.
One of our smaller accounts, the National Emergency
Preparedness Program, was key to developing the existing
contractual arrangement with Navy supervisory salvage that
enabled the Corps to immediately post disaster begin planning
the actions necessary to clear the navigation channel.
Moreover, and thankfully, we received full year 2024
funding in March for Baltimore Harbor O&M funds, since that has
provided the resources to date to carry out the channel
clearing operations. Once that mission is complete, these
funds, along with any others used, will need to be restored to
carry out other critical operations.
The Corps of Engineers is at its best when called upon to
work with others within the Nation's emergency and disaster
response frameworks. The resources that you, as appropriators,
provide us on a timely basis are key to our and, thus, the
Nation's success in responding in times of crisis.
Thank you for the time. I look forward to your questions.
Mr. Fleischmann. Thank you, Secretary Connor.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Conner follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Fleischmann. At this time, General Spellmon, you are
now recognized for 5 minutes for your opening statement, sir.

STATEMENT OF LT. GENERAL SCOTT A. SPELLMON, USA, CHIEF OF
ENGINEERS, U.S. ARMY CORPS OF ENGINEERS

General Spellmon. Good morning, Chairman Fleischmann,
Ranking Member Kaptur, and distinguished members of the
subcommittee. I am honored to testify before you today, and
thank you for the opportunity to discuss the fiscal year 2025
budget of the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers Civil Works Program.
But before I begin my prepared remarks, I do want to thank
Congress for the ongoing support related to the Francis Scott
Key Bridge response. Foremost, our thoughts are with those who
were impacted by the collapse of this bridge, and our
condolences go out to those families who are still missing
loved ones.
We, along with our partners, are working to remove the
wreckage in an expedition and safe manner, and we are going to
ultimately restore this navigation channel to the Port of
Baltimore.
Today, I look forward to discussing that status of
important Corps projects and programs as well answer any
questions the committee may have regarding our fiscal year 2025
budget request.
We greatly appreciate Congress' continued support for the
Corps' Civil Works Program. Recent appropriations have enabled
significant investments in water resource projects around the
Nation. And just as important, those appropriations allowed us
to further develop innovative approaches to address our most
pressing challenges through focused research and development.
The fiscal year 2025 budget reflects a targeted approach to
continue investing in our water resource infrastructure while
incorporating climate resilience efforts into our commercial
navigation, flood and storm damage reduction, and aquatic
ecosystem restoration missions.
The budget also supports Assistant Secretary Connor's
priorities for the Corps by strengthening the supply chain,
increasing ecosystem resilience, promoting environmental
justice in underserved communities and Tribal Nations,
investing in R&D and, finally, sustaining and improving our
relationships with our many partners across the country.
The budget reflects an emphasis on work that provides the
highest economic, environmental, and public safety returns to
the Nation. We continue to strive for bold and innovative
actions to improve our performance and engineer solutions for
our Nation's toughest challenges.
We are transforming our organization and decision-making
process to deliver quality projects more consistently, safely,
on time and within budget. Our teams are hard at work seeking
out new and better ways to mitigate risk so that we can further
strengthen the safety and security of communities across our
country and its territories.
By evolving our policies, programs, and operations and by
placing an increased emphasis on research and development, we
are working to overcome impacts from challenges such as sea
level rise or changes in precipitation patterns and hydrology
and other effects of climate change, including improvements to
the resilience of our own Corps-owned and operated
infrastructure.
I will conclude by saying that the Corps does not
accomplish anything on its own. Delivering successful Civil
Works projects is a shared responsibility. It is very much a
team sport. We draw from our 249 years of engineering expertise
and build upon our relationships with our non-Federal partners,
project stakeholders, and Congress to enable us to succeed.
I look forward to continuing to work with this committee,
with Congress, and the administration to address the Nation's
critical water resource infrastructure needs.
And thank you again, Chairman Fleischmann, Ranking Member
Kaptur, and members of the committee. I look forward to
answering any questions you may have.
[The prepared statement of Lt. General Spellmon follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Fleischmann. Thank you, General, for your testimony.
At this time, thank you, Commissioner Touton. You are
recognized now for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF CAMILLE CALIMLIM TOUTON, COMMISSIONER, U.S. BUREAU OF
RECLAMATION

Ms. Touton. Good morning. My name is Camille Calimlim
Touton. I am the Commissioner of the Bureau of Reclamation.
Thank you, Chairman Fleischmann, Ranking Member Kaptur,
members of the subcommittee, Congressman Newhouse, for the
opportunity to discuss the President's budget request for the
Bureau of Reclamation. We are grateful for your support and for
our working relationship with the subcommittee.
The Bureau of Reclamation is the largest deliverer and
manager of water in the Nation and the second largest producer
of hydropower. We have 189 projects across the American West
and help to feed the Nation and the world through 10 million
acres of irrigated agriculture, provide water to millions of
Americans and meet our trust responsibility to sovereign
nations and sustain ecosystems across the Western landscape.
The need to secure, maintain, and modernize our Nation's
water infrastructure is an administration priority. And we have
a once-in-a-generation opportunity to utilize our fiscal year
2025 $1.6 billion budget request with that of the Bipartisan
Infrastructure Law and the Inflation Reduction Act.
The cyclical nature of Western hydrology, as we saw from
the last 3 years, highlights the need for immediate actions as
well as thoughtful planning and on-the-ground work to make both
our infrastructure and operational decisions more resilient to
withstand future water resource scarcity and variability.
Our fiscal year 2025 budget priorities reflect a commitment
to drought planning and response activities to promote water
security in short and long term. This approach is illustrated
in the Colorado River Basin, where last month Reclamation
announced a significant milestone in the release of the final
environmental impact statement in our efforts to protect the
stability of the system.
With historic water conservation of 3 million acre-feet, in
collaboration from our partners, made possible by the
President's Investing in America Agenda, we staved off the
immediate threat and stabilized the system to protects water
deliveries, the ecosystem, and power production.
Our focus is now on the future. For the entire Colorado
River System we are guided by the best available science and
engineering to make informed decisions together as a basin. The
stability of our infrastructure and our commitment to
transparency remains our highest priority.
Across the West, Reclamation must plan for the future of
its infrastructure. Reclamation's dams and reservoirs, water
conveyance systems and power-generating facilities serve as the
water and power infrastructure backbone of the American West.
However, as with all infrastructure, these features are
aging and in need of critical maintenance. Our fiscal year 2025
budget includes $74.8 million for extraordinary maintenance,
combined with our BIL investments of $670 million in our fiscal
year 2025 spend plan for aging infrastructure.
This includes projects like the West Canal replacement in
Washington State, where we are investing $4 million to replace
approximately 1,500 feet of canal to conserve water, protect
homes downstream from damage, and ensure uninterrupted water
delivery to farmers.
We are continuing with construction of our largest dam
safety modification at the B.F. Sisk Dam in California,
supported by our fiscal year 2025 Dam Safety program request of
$211.2 million. At B.F. Sisk, we are also undertaking a dam
raise, which will provide increased water storage in
California.
Since 2021, Reclamation has invested $695 million in water
storage projects in California alone. We must also address our
infrastructure needs while considering economic inequities and
the needs of rural and underserved communities.
Reclamation is establishing and rebuilding water
infrastructure for underserved populations by ensuring that
clean drinking water is provided to communities.
Our request includes $58.5 million for a rural water
program and leverages $1 billion in our Bipartisan
Infrastructure Law funding to accelerate the completion of
these long-needed projects, of which we have selected $806
million.
And as PDAS Brain will highlight further, our budget
includes additional funding to support Reclamation's Native
American Affairs Program and Indian Water Rights Settlements
implementation.
Reclamation will continue to manage our operations in real
time and plan for the future, with a focus on people,
partnerships, and investments. We are committed to working with
Congress and the subcommittee and our partners and stakeholders
across the West in carrying out our mission, and our fiscal
year 2025 budget supports these actions.
Again, I thank the subcommittee. I am happy to answer if
there are any questions. Thank you.
Mr. Fleischmann. And I thank you, Commissioner Touton.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Touton follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr.Fleischmann. And now, Mr. Brain, you are now recognized
for 5 minutes for your opening statement. Thank you.

STATEMENT OF MICHAEL BRAIN, PRINCIPAL DEPUTY ASSISTANT
SECRETARY FOR WATER AND SCIENCE, U.S. DEPARTMENT OF
THE INTERIOR

Mr. Brain. Thank you, Chairman Fleischmann, Ranking Member
Kaptur, and members of the subcommittee for the welcome and for
the opportunity to discuss with you the President's fiscal year
2025 budget request for the Department of the Interior's Bureau
of Reclamation and Central Utah Project Completion Act Office.
I am Mike Brain, Interior's Principal Deputy Assistant
Secretary for Water and Science, and it really is an honor to
be here today.
The President's budget request maintains the
administration's commitments to deliver jobs and economic
growth, build up America's infrastructure in a resilient
manner, and strengthen our relationship with Tribal Nations.
The request includes $1.6 billion for the Bureau of
Reclamation, which will help ensure Western communities have
access to a reliable water supply by investing in rural water
projects, water conservation, development of desalination
technologies, and water recycling and reuse projects.
It complements the nearly $8.3 billion provided for Western
Water infrastructure through the Bipartisan Infrastructure Law
as well as the nearly $4.6 billion provided by the Inflation
Reduction Act.
The severe drought that has recently afflicted the United
States is the latest manifestation of climate change on
American communities, and Reclamation's request continues the
Biden-Harris administration's comprehensive approach to
furthering climate resiliency.
As the Commissioner highlighted, the funding requested at
the B.F. Sisk Dam raise and reservoir expansion project is
emblematic of this approach and the Department's commitment to
modernize our water infrastructure.
Reclamation's request further addresses climate change
across the Western United States through the WaterSMART
program, efforts to address fish and wildlife habitat needs,
and funding to provide sound climate science and clean energy.
Reclamation proposes to fund WaterSMART at nearly $66
million. Once complete, projects funded through WaterSMART
since 2010, including WaterSMART grants and Title 16 projects,
are expected to save more than 1.8 million acre-feet of water
each year.
The Department is also focused on the need to continue to
unleash the science, further developing and deploying science-
based drought and aridification adaptation strategies.
Reclamation's WaterSMART and science and technology programs
directly contribute to these priorities, including $22.5
million for research and development.
Additionally, the Department remains committed to upholding
our trust responsibilities to Tribal Nations. Over the past 3
years, Interior has allocated $2.43 billion available through
the Bipartisan Infrastructure Law to address Indian Water
Rights Settlements.
In addition to these investments, the request for
Reclamation includes $181 million to support the White Mountain
Apache Tribe's water settlement agreement.
The budget also includes $45 million in the Bureau of
Indian Affairs to support the Hualapai Tribe Water Rights
Settlement Act of 2022.
The administration also proposes legislation to expand the
Indian Water Rights Settlement Completion Fund, a proposal that
will provide $2.8 billion and mandatory funding over 10 years
to help ensure commitments are honored as well as funding for
operations and maintenance costs.
To promote racial and economic justice, the request
includes $29.5 million for Reclamation's Native American
Affairs Program to increase opportunities for Indian tribes to
develop, manage, and protect their water and related resources.
The Department's 2025 CUPCA budget of $17 million continues
progress and supports construction of the Utah Lake Drainage
Basin Water Delivery System. The completion of the ULS
pipelines will deliver 60,000 acre-feet of municipal and
industrial water to provide increased water security and help
communities increase their resiliency to changing climate
conditions.
The request includes funding for the Central Utah Water
Conservancy District to administer planning and project
construction as well as for water conservation and fish and
wildlife conservation activities.
Lastly, the request also includes $4 million for mitigation
and conservation activities funded through the Utah
Reclamation, Mitigation, and Conservation Commission.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify today. I am happy
to answer any questions you may have.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Brain follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Fleischmann. Thank you, Mr. Brain.
We are now going to begin with questions, starting with my
own.
General Spellmon, sir, I am going to talk about Chickamauga
Lock. As you know, the Chickamauga Lock is very important to my
district. We have faced a number of challenges over the years,
and you and the national team have been helpful and responsive
in keeping the project moving. The fiscal 2024 bill provided
what we expect to be the funding necessary to complete the
project.
What is the timeline, sir, for execution of these fiscal
2024 funds? When does the Corps expect the lock to be
operational, and when will the project be completed, sir?
General Spellmon. Yes, sir. First, I want to thank you for
your leadership on this project and giving us the resources to
finish this job.
Sir, we expect to award the final contract. That is going
to be the upstream approach wall. We have about 10 percent of
the concrete left to place, the site restoration, and we are
going to decommission the existing lock with the funds you have
given us. We are going to award that final contract in
September. The team is working through the plans and specs now.
And that will give us--we will be passing traffic, we will have
an operational lock in November of 2026.
Sir, you remember the concrete placement challenges that we
were having from our last visit and some of the safety--that is
behind us. So we feel we have very good momentum.
Mr. Fleischmann. Thank you, sir.
Commissioner Touton, I appreciate the discussion on Indian
water rights settlements in your testimony. You noted that
Reclamation expects $142 million to be available from existing
funding resources or there is $181 million in the request for a
particular settlement.
Between existing funding sources and the amount in the
budget request, does Reclamation have the funds necessary to
cover fiscal year 2025 needs, and when does Reclamation expect
the $142 million to be allocated to specific settlements? Thank
you.
Ms. Touton. Thank you for that question, Mr. Chairman.
And we are committed to moving forward on these
settlements. In fiscal year 2025, our budget reflects what we
need, using the funds that we have as well as the discretionary
funding requested for White Mountain Apache.
We can follow up for the record on the expenditures moving
forward, but for our budget, it reflects our ability to meet
those settlements.
Mr. Fleischmann. Thank you.
Ms. Touton. Thank you.
Mr. Fleischmann. General Spellmon, I think I am going to
come back to you, sir, on the topic of the invasive carp. This
is an issue that is of increasing importance to Tennessee. I
hear from my constituents almost weekly about this, if the
spread of the invasive carp species beyond their current range.
As you know, WRDA in 2020 authorized the Corps to carry out
projects to prevent the spread of invasive carp further into
Tennessee watersheds. Congress has provided the funding
necessary to initiate this program, but I am concerned, sir,
with the delays in implementation.
Can you kindly provide a status update on finalizing the
program management plan for the section 509 Program. Thank you.
General Spellmon. Chairman Fleischmann, a very important
program that has our full attention. So we took the $500,000
that was given to us, appropriated to the Corps in 2023
funding. And what we did is we did a programmatic assessment
and a program management plan to scope this particular problem.
If we are offered a work plan in the 2025 budget in
environmental infrastructure, we will express the capability of
$10.5 million. And what that will do is we will initiate
designs for barriers at Barkley, at Kentucky, and then one
barrier on the Tennessee-Tombigbee waterway.
And then, sir, that is also going to give us time to line
up the non-Federal sponsors we need to implement this program.
But we are moving forward.
Mr. Fleischmann. Thank you, sir.
The next question is for Secretary Connor and perhaps
General Spellmon, if you would like to address this.
Congress has offset appropriations from the Harbor
Maintenance Trust Fund up to a certain level each year. I am
concerned that the Corps is not adjusting quickly enough to
this new reality, both in terms of executing the funds and
fully capturing the work necessary to bring our Nation's ports
and harbors to authorized dimensions.
The first question, what is the Corps doing to improve
execution of HMTF funds? And the other question, sir, is, the
Fiscal 2024 Act provided funding specifically to assist in
assessing what it would take to get and maintain authorized
widths and depths so that we can be confident that the
capability reflects the true need for HMTF eligible work. How
is the Corps implementing this directive?
Secretary Connor. Thank you for the question, Mr. Chairman.
I think your two-part question is actually the answer there
with respect to the ongoing process of identifying our dredging
needs and prioritizing those needs and ensuring that we
facilitate commerce flowing in all of our waterways, whether
they be ports or the inland waterway system.
So with respect to that ongoing process, now we have added
in the report that was authorized in WRDA 2022, which is now
funded through the 2024 appropriations process. We will do a
deeper dive and focus, identify and prioritize the resources
that we need in the Harbor Maintenance Trust Fund. And we will
continue to identify that as part of the budget process,
recognizing the 2020 WRDA authorized an offset for these
programs.
Mr. Fleischmann. Thank you.
General Spellmon. Chairman Fleischmann, I would say you are
correct. We are not responding quick enough. We have received
generous appropriations for the Harbor Maintenance Trust Funds
to get after a lot of longstanding O&M issues in the 577
Federal navigation channels that we are responsible for.
So we thank you for the appropriations here. The $350,000
this year, that is going to allow us to come back to you with a
set of recommendations on how we can do this better.
Mr. Fleischmann. Thank you very much. At this time, I would
like to recognize Ranking Member Kaptur for her questions.
Ms. Kaptur. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And, again, thank you all for your testimony this morning.
I want to step back from individual projects for a second and
turn to the Bureau of Reclamation first.
Give us a spatial sense of what is really happening in the
West. We read stories about 2 years ago that the Colorado River
was being diverted for the first time in recorded history, I
guess. I don't know. But it was pretty serious.
And then many of our Members from California came up to us
and told us that the reservoirs were running dry. We have read
stories about the--we have read stories about agricultural
production land in California being cut off, and I am curious
how one decides who you cut off.
But spatially, can you give us a sense of--and then we read
about this historic atmospheric rivers happening. What I don't
have is a complete sense of what is happening regionally, and I
am wondering who does.
And so give me a sense, give us a sense, give our listeners
a sense of what is really happening in the so-called dry West.
As we sit here today, is it still dry or do you have too much
water and you don't know what to do with it? People are leaving
California for Texas. What does that mean? Are they leaving
because housing is too high or because our utilities are
costing too much?
Do any of you feel comfortable in kind of giving us a sense
of where to look to get an answer to that question?
Ms. Touton. Good morning, Ranking Member. I am happy to
answer that question.
Ms. Kaptur. Thank you very much. I appreciate that,
Commissioner.
Ms. Touton. What we have seen across the West over the last
3 years is hydrologic variability. I will use the Colorado
River System. When we walked into the door, the Biden-Harris
administration, we were at 25 percent of capacity. And we were
reaching levels that we had never seen before since the filling
of those reservoirs.
Over the last 3 years, working with the States, working
with the country of Mexico and the sovereign nations, we have
been able to stabilize that system and have levels at Lake Mead
now at the highest since they have been since May of 2021.
Ms. Kaptur. Excuse me. I am glad you mentioned Lake Mead. I
almost forgot about that. And, again, it was like every
newspaper had a story about the water going down, down.
So please proceed.
Ms. Touton. That was due to us saving rain from a rainy day
that we received last year, but also historic conservation
efforts by all sectors. And the Colorado River is just one of
the many basins we see. What we are seeing across the West
generally is, again, a change in hydrologic variability. Our
largest reservoir is snow pack. And so when the snow is at
higher elevations, it melts sooner. The soils are dry and,
therefore, they go into the ground and don't end up in the
reservoirs. You have an issue with your water supply.
And so we are committed to deploying the resources that you
all have given us, whether it is water recycling, new storage,
small storage, desalination, efficiencies, to be able to bring
all these tools to the communities across the West. And we will
continue to meet our mission of 120 years.
Ms. Kaptur. So then do we take from this that Lake Mead has
risen?
Ms. Touton. Yes.
Ms. Kaptur. That the Colorado River will not have to be
diverted in the way it was 2 years ago or 2 and a half years
ago?
Ms. Touton. We are able now to focus on the future as a
basin, to figure out how to operate the system in light of
changing hydraulic patterns and to meet all of the needs in the
West. And I am confident, with our partners, we can get to an
operating paradigm for the future.
Ms. Kaptur. And in that regard, then you must have a map
that shows the various basins and how they interconnect.
Ms. Touton. We do.
Ms. Kaptur. OK. Could you provide something to the members
of the committee so they can gain a regional sense of what is
happening? I think that would be very helpful rather than
individual projects.
Ms. Touton. I am happy to do so, Ranking Member. Thank you.
Ms. Kaptur. Thank you. Thank you very much.
Secretary Connor. Ranking member, can I add real quickly on
this particular point that you mentioned?
So feast or famine, that is the story of water in the West
these days. And I think from that standpoint, every flood
control project has to be a water supply project and vice
versa.
An example of how we are tying to integrate ourselves with
Bureau of Reclamation and the atmospheric scientists is how we
operate our facilities, such as Prado Dam, such as Whittier
Dam, Narrows Dam.
We had a situation last year with atmospheric rivers.
Hurricane Hilary came in. We were prepping ourselves from flood
control. Fortunately, it was more of a tropical storm, so we
pivoted and we stored water, metered it out to water agencies
in the area so that they could do managed aquifer recharge.
That is an example. We have got to operate differently. We
have got to understand in the moment how we--are they storing
water, providing flood protection, or storing it for release to
our water suppliers? And we have got to do that across the
West.
Ms. Kaptur. Is this really a new page in American history?
Secretary Connor. I believe so, absolutely. We are not in
stovepipes anymore. We have got to be integrated across our
responsibilities.
Ms. Touton. And if I may, Ranking Member. And us working
together so closely is critical to our success.
Ms. Kaptur. I am really glad to hear that.
I have one question that is related in our region if I can
find it here. Well, I can't find the question, but I know what
I want to ask.
In the western basin of--we are going to move to the Great
Lakes now. I represent the largest watershed in the entire
Great Lakes. One of our problems is, again, project by project,
harbor by harbor, farm by farm, maybe we do something in one
community.
What we don't have and what you are involved in the Western
basin partnership, General Spellmon, is attempting to find ways
to deal with this increased rainfall in the most tiled part of
the United States of America from an agricultural standpoint.
Millions of dollars have been put into this watershed not
just by the Corps, but predominantly by the U.S. Department of
Agriculture, with a new farm bill upcoming.
Can you think of ways across agencies that we could work to
better handle this engineering problem, which is fundamental to
continuing to be able to produce in the region, and to
integrate the knowledge of different Federal departments,
again, in the largest watershed?
If we can get it right there, we can get it right
everywhere. But the problem is we are not getting it right. And
so we have, you know, farmers complaining about, you know, the
cost of repairing fields that have been overcome with water.
The ditches aren't properly maintained by some of the counties.
And we really need an engineering solution if we are going
to continue to produce. You deal with shortages. We deal with
plenty in terms of fresh water. It is the same problem. It is
an engineering problem.
General Spellmon. Ma'am, I would say Congress is helping
and we are doing something about this. In my opening statement
I talked about the power of research and development. On this
very issue we have a number of programs ongoing today in the
State of Florida, and we also have some out in this particular
basin, one in Defiance, Ohio, which I think you have been
there.
But, ma'am, it is not just us. It is our labs. Certainly,
we are working with EPA and we are also working with academia
in both corners of the country where we are seeing this problem
most acute, and look forward to finishing this work and coming
back to you with our report and recommendations.
Ms. Kaptur. We would really appreciate your being able to
work with the other two agencies along with the Great Lakes
Restoration Initiative that EPA handles out of the Chicago
office to come to us with some clarity over this watershed,
because we need the bigger picture in order to make progress in
this region.
And I thank you very much and I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Fleischmann. Thank you, Ms. Kaptur.
At this time, I recognize Mr. Newhouse of Washington for 5
minutes for questions, sir.
Mr. Newhouse. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate
the chance to ask questions today about the Bureau of
Reclamation as well as the Army Corps' fiscal year 2025 budget.
Like the chairman and also Ranking Member Kaptur, I want to
thank you for all the work that you do, and please relay that
to everyone that works with you. And I also want to thank Ms.
Kaptur for her interest in the arid West. As one who lives the
roller coaster of feast and famine, a great analogy. There is a
lot that has been done but certainly a lot more that we can do
to prepare for the vagaries of our weather. So I look forward
to working with you on that.
I would like to talk and ask questions two things
particularly, one the lower Snake River Dams, and also a little
bit about the Columbia River Treaty.
First of all, General Spellmon--and, again, thank you for
being here--in the last year or so a lot has changed regarding
the Columbia River System Operation litigation process, as you
know.
The administration and sovereign nations have come to an
agreement, and that is currently beginning to be implemented.
Your budget proposes over $75 million for the Columbia River
Fish Mitigation Program. As part of the agreement, the Corps is
conducting spillage operations on the Snake River. The purpose
of those operations is to minimize the time it takes for salmon
to move through the dams, to ensure a healthy and abundant
salmon population.
General Spellmon, are you aware that there is scientific
and peer-reviewed research which confirms spilling operations
can negatively impact water quality downstream by increasing
total gas dissolution, which can be very harmful, in fact,
could be fatal for salmon.
General Spellmon. Yes, Congressman, yes, I am aware of that
research.
Mr. Newhouse. So if the outcome of expanded spillage
operations were to be a surge in salmon mortality, wouldn't
that defeat the obvious purpose of this bill?
General Spellmon. Congressman Newhouse, we would adjust our
operations if it were becoming lethal to the juvenile salmon
that you are referencing.
Mr. Newhouse. So that is being monitored.
General Spellmon. That is correct.
Mr. Newhouse. OK, appreciate that.
Mr. Connor, I would like to discuss with you the same
issue. Currently, a large dam removal project is happening
along the Klamath River, dam-breaching advocates tout it as an
effort to improve the salmon population there.
However, recently, I believe approximately 830,000 salmon
were killed when the dams were breached. It is believed that
the fish died due to this same issue, the gas bubble disease,
when they were passing through the tunnels.
So you are aware of this, I am assuming.
Secretary Connor. I am not aware of the mortality
statistics that you just referenced, but I am aware of the dam
removal project.
Mr. Newhouse. It has been reported in several news
organizations over the past short period of time.
Given all this, if there were a point where the lower Snake
River dams were to be physically breached, isn't it possible
that salmon mortality could increase there as well?
Secretary Connor. Thank you for the question, Congressman
Newhouse. I think in any dam removal scenario, one of the
analyses that is most preeminent is, what are the short-term
immediate impacts of dam removal. And certain sediment flows or
other aspects of dam removal are part of the analysis that
certainly was occurring in the Klamath River Basin.
So absolutely. We have to understand how the system will
operate when there is a breach of a system, as is ongoing in
the Klamath River system now. We have to understand the
sediment behind those facilities and understand any
contaminants.
So it is a rigorous analysis. And the Snake River, quite
frankly, is multiple times more complicated than the Klamath
River system.
Mr. Newhouse. Always keeping in mind healthy and abundant.
That is two words that are very important.
Another reservation I have with spillage operations is that
spilling water will decrease the amount of potential
hydroelectric power that could be generated.
Being part of this arid West, Washington also struggles
with weather like droughts and shrinking snow pack. In fact, we
are experiencing that this year with junior water rights
districts being rationed. We need a robust hydropower system
more than ever.
So will spillage operations, in your estimation, decrease
the amount of hydroelectricity that the dams are able to
produce?
Secretary Connor. There are certainly potential impacts to
hydroelectric generation. I think, in developing the agreements
between the four Tribes, the two States, Washington and Oregon,
as well as the Federal agencies, we have looked at the science
to try and have an operational regime that will facilitate more
fish passage, that will take into account what hydropower
production needs are.
And we are incrementally moving to a system that we hope
improves the capacity to restore those healthy and abundant
fisheries. And there are tradeoffs in the system, and so we are
trying to manage all those tradeoffs in different operations.
Mr. Newhouse. I understand that. It truly is a tradeoff or
a balancing situation. But if spillage operations make it so
that not enough hydroelectricity is generated for the dams to
operate, wouldn't they be functionally breached at that point?
Secretary Connor. I don't think we are going to reach the
functionally breached aspect in our operational regime that are
currently being talked about for the lower Snake River dams.
And there is integration of other energy sources into the mix
there, but I think we are far from functionally breaching right
now.
Mr. Newhouse. I appreciate your answers. And I see my time
is expired, but thank you very much. I look forward to further
questions.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Fleischmann. Thank you, Mr. Newhouse.
At this time, I recognize the gentleman from Illinois, Mr.
Quigley, for 5 minutes for questions.
Mr. Quigley. Thank you, Chairman.
General, it is invasive carp day here at E&W. And, as you
well know, the risk in the Great Lakes to the ecosystems and
the economies is at stake here.
And I understand that we don't have a project partnership
agreement signed yet, but the Corps is still moving forward to
the extent it can. How long will that last and at what point do
we absolutely have to have an agreement for you to continue to
move forward?
General Spellmon. Congressman Quigley, we have enough funds
currently to--we will continue with our design efforts through
the month of June. And at June, if we don't have a project
partnership agreement, we could again rely on advance funding
from our partners, but we have enough funding now to take us
through the month of June.
Mr. Quigley. And once there is an agreement, how much
longer till--I mean, how long will the construction take and
have the barrier fully operational?
General Spellmon. That is a great question, sir. So six to
8 years for total construction. After the PPA is signed, within
the first 12 months we are going to issue our first two
increments of work. And we will get started on the outer
barriers for the electrical, initial electrical barrier and the
initial CO2 curtain. And we will also award the rock removal
contract, which is a big part of this project. But that would
be our first set of contracts.
Mr. Quigley. And your sense of how the discussions are
going with the State of Illinois to come to this agreement and
others? Anyone?
Secretary Connor. Congressman, I have been involved in
those discussions. So I think we have got a productive path
forward, certainly engaging not just with ourselves and the
State of Illinois but the State of Michigan also.
The Governor, Governor Pritzker sent me a letter several
weeks back, which he is due a response. So we are currently
trying to schedule a discussion with the Governor so I can talk
to him directly about it before I send a response.
I think overall, the Governor has laid out concerns about
cost increases, concerns about the perpetual O&M issues. We can
work through that. We are going to have a productive
relationship with both States who are contributing to the
project.
So it is my hope that we can respond, we can, you know,
clarify some of the issues that he raised in his letter, and we
can move forward to address the timeline that the General laid
out and trying to get a full PPA in place by June so we can
address the cost increases by moving forward as quickly as we
can, coordinating the initial construction activity with other
works in the Illinois waterway system.
That is how we are going to contain costs and move forward
exponentially. But I think the dialogue is good and productive.
I look forward to talking to Governor Pritzker.
Mr. Quigley. Thank you. September 2020, the Corps approved
a dredged material management plan on a different topic here
that identified vertical expansion of an existing confined
disposal facility.
The Corps shared that this plan was developed because it
believed it was the lowest cost environmentally acceptable
alternative for managing dredge sediment for the next 20 years.
Stakeholders and community members have stated that this
land was originally slated in 1995 to become a parkland at the
mouth of the Calumet River once the site was filled. Obviously,
they have heard from community members who are concerned about
the impact of the dredged material plan.
What is the need for the expanded facility for dredged
material in the area and its purpose? And can you speak about
the findings of the plan and the alternatives that were
explored prior to the approval?
General Spellmon. Congressman, I will start with the
latter. When we did this work, we looked at 61 sites across the
area and we evaluated those 61 sites against nine criteria. We
narrowed that down to six, primarily because of real estate
costs to our non-Federal sponsor and the presence of hazardous
waste in those sites.
Because we did not have, did not see tangible plans for the
recreation area on top of the current dredged material
facility, that was the lowest cost and least environmentally
damaging alternative, and that is why we had that proposal go
forward.
I understand we are now in litigation. We don't have the
State permit. We are going back now to look if we missed
anything on our evaluation of those other 61 sites, because we
know we have to dredge this channel again next year. So time is
short for us.
Mr. Quigley. Once a site like that has dredged material,
what are the prospects for it becoming some sort of community
park?
General Spellmon. Yes, sir. I mean, it has the ability. The
city could certainly convert this land use to a community park.
The material would support that is in there. We have seen that
happen in other places as well.
Mr. Quigley. Very well.
Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Fleischmann. I thank you, Mr. Quigley.
At this time, I would like to recognize Ms. Letlow of
Louisiana for 5 minutes for questions.
Ms. Letlow. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
General Spellmon, thank you for being here today. Last
year, I emphasized to you the importance of inland waterways
and the impact it has on the communities that I represent.
Specifically, how critical it is to provide full funding for
construction projects under the Inland Waterways Trust Fund.
While I was pleased with your response last year, I am now
concerned that this is becoming a reoccurring issue with the
administration. Like last year, White House supporting
documents say, quote, "The budget continues support for
modernizing America's port and waterway infrastructure
initiated under the Bipartisan Infrastructure Law, helping
further address cost pressures."
However, it is difficult for me to believe this is a
priority when reviewing your budget request. Can you please
explain to our committee how providing zero dollars in fiscal
year 2025 for construction activities is supporting the
modernization of our locks and dams within our inland
waterways, specifically in light of the number of projects
awaiting construction?
General Spellmon. Congresswoman, you are referring to the
Inland Waterway Trust Fund?
Ms. Letlow. Yes.
General Spellmon. Yes, ma'am. I will tell you we have a lot
of work out there. We will continue to make our best technical
recommendations to advance these projects.
Ms. Letlow. That is incredibly concerning to me with zero
dollars. How do you plan on doing that with zero dollars?
Secretary Connor. If I could----
Ms. Letlow. Please.
Secretary Connor [continuing]. jump in here. One, we
appreciate greatly the $500 million that was contained in the
2024 appropriations bill. That is going to greatly advance,
allow us to do project completions and move forward on other
projects.
Two, part of that $500 million is $113 million that we had
remaining in the Bipartisan Infrastructure Law resources. We
had been waiting to understand the 2024 appropriations bill so
that we could make allocations when we laid out the 2025
budget.
So I just mention that. I have no disputes with the taking
of that money and putting it in the 2024 budget. You are making
good investments, and I appreciate that. That was our plan to
continue funding construction work on the inland waterway
system.
Overall, absolutely agree. This is a strategic important
resource for our supply chains. So just know that was our plan.
Our plan got altered once the 2024 appropriations bill came
out.
Ms. Letlow. OK. Thank you for your response. It is hopeful
that there will be dollars allocated there.
To Secretary Connor and General Spellmon, I would like to
take a second and talk with you about an issue I have been
hearing from many of my constituents. I am sure you are aware
that it is an ongoing issue with communication between the
Regulatory Division and Civil Works.
It is my understanding that this lack of communication has
been the root cause of many permitting delays. For example, a
port in my district, the Vidalia Port Commission, has been
awaiting a permit decision on a slag water slip project for
nearly 4 years. They submitted their paperwork in June of 2020
and were just informed that they were 120 days out from a
decision.
I believe this could have been a much simpler process. If
Regulatory and Civil Works communicated and worked together on
the same timeline, this would not have taken an extra 14 to 15
months.
As you know, regulations and things change year to year.
And Civil Works took so long on this, by the time they
finished, the Regulatory Division had to update the file again,
causing even a further delay.
Do you acknowledge that this is an ongoing issue with the
Army Corps of Engineers, and what can we do to ensure examples
like this don't continue to happen again and again?
General Spellmon. Congresswoman, let me start. First of
all, last year we did 44,000 permit actions in the Corps. I
will run this one down. I am not familiar with the specifics of
this one.
Last year, also, we hit our metrics 74 percent of the time.
That is not good enough. This year to date, we have done about
20,000 permits. We are just under 80 percent. We are working
hard to get better, but I will take on this communication
challenge that you mentioned.
Ms. Letlow. Thank you. I hear from my constituents about
it. We can get you other examples as well. So I appreciate you
looking into it.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Fleischmann. And I thank you, Ms. Letlow.
At this time, I recognize Ms. Wasserman Schultz from
Florida for 5 minutes for questions.
Ms. Wasserman Schultz. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Chairman, before I begin, I just want to note with
sadness the passing of our former governor--two-term governor
and multiterm U.S. Senator Bob Graham. It is appropriate to
mention him and his life and legacy in this committee given
that, in 1983, when he was governor, he set off the chain of
four decades of legislation that enables us to have--really be
well on our way to restoring the River of Grass. So may his
memory be for a blessing.
Mr. Fleischmann. Ms. Wasserman Schultz, thank you very much
for notifying of this, and we honor his legacy. And we thank
you for making us abreast of that and for your service to your
great State.
Ms. Wasserman Schultz. He was 87 and lived a long and
wonderful life.
Mr. Chairman, with your indulgence, people in Broward, Palm
Beach, and Miami-Dade Counties all depend on a functioning
flood system--flood control system, and that system was first
designed, as you all know, back in the 1940s before the effects
of climate change accelerated to historic levels, and it is
under substantial stress due to increased rainfall intensity
and rising sea levels.
A 2009 study by the South Florida Water Management District
identified 18 water control structures in Miami-Dade and
Broward that are within 6 inches of failure, and experts expect
another 3 inches of sea level rise to occur within the next
decade.
So flood control, global warming, climate change, sea level
rise not a someday thing in south Florida. They are a right now
thing.
Communities across south Florida have been sounding the
alarm. In WRDA 2022, as you know, Congress authorized a
comprehensive restudy of the entire flood control system in
south Florida.
Secretary Connor, last year, I asked you whether the Army
Corps--Secretary Connor, last year, I asked you whether the
Army Corps had the capability to implement the comprehensive
restudy in fiscal year 2024 if it was funded by Congress. And
you said no but that you hoped that that would change next
year, which we are in now.
Since that time, Fort Lauderdale experienced a historic
flash flood event that dumped more than 25 inches of rain in 24
hours. We need to start the comprehensive study--restudy now
before it is too late. Thankfully, the Jacksonville District
for the Army Corps recently told us that they do have the
capability to implement this funding in fiscal year 2025.
So we look forward to submitting this as a community
project funding request this cycle and will be working with you
on this, and I hope that is--that we are all on the same page
in that regard.
And in the interim, we are waiting on Corps headquarter
approval of a memo that outlines a hybrid approach for the more
limited section 216 restudy. So can you provide us with an
update on when you expect final approval for that 216 restudy?
General Spellmon. Yes, ma'am. So, first of all, on the
comprehensive, we are ready to express a capability of 500K to
get that started.
OK. I was just down to visit with the Broward County
resilience staff South Florida Water Management District and
our Jacksonville District, and the district--you are correct.
They have a memo in my headquarters that I am not going to
forward to Secretary Connor asking for many more years and many
more million dollars to evaluate the entirety of this section
216.
We don't need more time and money. What we need is speed
because you are right. I had a chance to see these structures,
and they are loaded. So we want to apply some fresh thought to
how we go about this to get started.
So I have gone back to Jacksonville District and the team
and asked them to think about a narrower set of projects that
would have the highest impact that we can get started on now.
And so, ma'am, we have talked about an authority following
the devastating floods in 2019 on the Missouri River that
helped us do spin-off studies on a larger basin that you are
describing here and then get right to construction. That is an
idea that we are working through.
And we are also working through a novel idea with the
Chief's Report. Maybe I could get a Chief's Report turned in
sooner that deals with a subset, and then I turn in chapter two
and three as we work to expand this out. We have to get started
on this now. I agree with you.
Ms. Wasserman Schultz. Thank you very much.
I will accept his answer unless you have something else.
Secretary Connor. Just I wholly endorse that approach. We
have got to meet the moment and manage risk and move quicker
and parse out these planning processes.
Ms. Wasserman Schultz. Cue me throwing a party up here.
OK. And my next question is about Port Everglades and the
deepening and widening project that we have--I have been
working on since I came to Congress two decades ago.
And so we can now finally see the finish line with the
Corps expected to provide a biological assessment to NOAA
Fisheries in late May to allow the project to move to
construction.
The potential economic impacts to south Florida cannot be
understated, but it is more than just an infrastructure
project. As you know, it is also an environmental restoration
project. More than half of the $1.35 billion project cost is
now earmarked for environmental proportions of the project. It
would be the largest coral restoration project ever undertaken
in the history of the United States. But we still have
outstanding issues that threaten the viability of the entire
project.
I spoke with Assistant Administrator Janet Coit--who you
may know--about how NOAA Fisheries can work with the Corps on
these outstanding issues. Administrator Coit agreed that a
meeting between her and Assistant Secretary Connor would be
ideal to help work through the remaining issues before the May
deadline.
So, Mr. Secretary, are you willing to meet with
Administrator Coit so that--in these next few weeks so we can
work out those outstanding issues? And do you still anticipate
being able to issue a favorable biological assessment in May,
and what is the biggest hurdle to that now?
Secretary Connor. Absolutely willing to meet with Janet
Coit.
Ms. Wasserman Schultz. Great.
Secretary Connor. We talked in a meeting in the aftermath
of your meeting with her with respect to the BA.
I will leave it to the general.
General Spellmon. Ma'am, I would just add to your list.
This is also--this project is also important for maritime
safety, which is on the forefront of everyone's mind. I mean,
those pilots are good, the tug operators are good, but there is
little room for error, and that is why this project is also
important.
Yes, ma'am, we are on track to issue our biological
assessment at the end of May.
Ms. Wasserman Schultz. Phenomenal.
I yield back.
Mr. Fleischmann. Thank you, Ms. Wasserman Schultz.
At this time, I would like to recognize Mrs. Bice of
Oklahoma for 5 minutes.
Mrs. Bice. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I thank the witnesses for being here this morning.
I do have one thing before I get to questions that I find a
little troubling, and I want to point this out. In the
memorandum that was provided to us, the Army Corps of Engineers
overview, it is stated that the assistant secretary, Mr.
Connor, for Civil Works cited three key objectives in
developing the budget, and the second one of those is promoting
environmental justice in underserved and marginalized
communities and Tribal nations in line with the Justice 40
initiative and creating good-paying jobs that provide the free
and fair chance to join a union and collective bargaining. I
have concerns that that is a priority for your organization. I
feel like we should be more focused on how we ensure that our
waterways are being taken care of. So I just want that to be
for the record.
Let me start by saying that you all are aware that I am
from Oklahoma, and MKARNS is incredibly important to our State.
It is a multibeneficiary system and it is crucial for
transportation of goods, aiding in flood control, energy
contributions through the hydroplanes that are at GRDA.
In 2024, the Energy and Water appropriations bill had
$24.97 million providing for O&M backlogs to address multiple
areas of concern. Could you provide some additional details on
the ongoing work to address these needs and the timeline as to
when they expect to be completed?
General Spellmon. Yes, ma'am. I will do my best to give you
a quick summary.
First of all, we are drawing from a large amount of
appropriations that you have given us. $463 million in 2022 and
2023, operations and maintenance. We're in this President's
budget for $112 million, and we will express another in the
2025 budget for $82 million.
So, ma'am, we are trying to modernize and fix 225 Tainter
gates, 36 miter gates, 12 110-foot stoplog conversions, in
addition to numerous valve repairs associated with each one of
those gates. I had Colonel Hudson and the team walk me through
their program from 2024 all the way to 2031 by gate, and I am
happy to share that with you.
Mrs. Bice. I think I have just concerns that you are
working on the Three Rivers Project to prevent the rivers from
converging, and there has been some funds that have been moved
away from MKARNS for the 12-Foot Channel project to increase
that channel depth, and I want to make sure that we are
continuing to focus on that.
General Spellmon. Yes, ma'am. We have all the funding we
need this year to continue our NEPA work and our design work
for the 12-Foot Channel.
Mrs. Bice. Fantastic. Thank you for that.
And then, to follow up, how have--this is sort of specific
to my district.
How has the Army Corps worked with the city of Jones to
mitigate the bank erosion in the North Canadian River? I think
we flagged for you that this may be a topic of conversation. It
has been something that my office has been very mindful of over
the last couple of years, and, you know, I would love to see if
you have any additional insight on that.
General Spellmon. Ma'am, I don't. I will follow up with you
and get the details and answer your questions.
Mrs. Bice. Thank you. I just want to--sorry.
General Spellmon. I am sorry. I am not tracking this
particular issue.
Mrs. Bice. Thank you. Well, I just want to make sure I
raise awareness on the issue. The North Canadian River in
Jones, Oklahoma, which is a suburb community--a bedroom
community of Oklahoma City--there is significant erosion with
the riverbanks that has led to bridge closures, including the
bridge at Triple X Road, and it drastically impacts local
areas. So if I could work with you on this issue, I would love
to see it get addressed.
With that, Mr. Chairman, I yield.
Mr. Fleischmann. And I thank you, Mrs. Bice.
At this point in time, I would like to recognize Mr. Kilmer
of Washington for 5 minutes.
Mr. Kilmer. Thank you, Chairman.
And thanks to all of our witnesses for being with us.
I want to start by highlighting one of my top priorities in
WRDA 2024, which is the Ediz Hook Beach Erosion Control Project
near Port Angeles, Washington where I grew up. It was
originally authorized in WRDA 1974, the year I was born, and it
supports our national security goals by helping maintain access
to our Coast Guard station there in Port Angeles and also
protecting Port Angeles Harbor from erosion.
I was pleased when we passed the Bipartisan Infrastructure
Law that we included $1.5 million in funding for revetment and
repair, which is important.
While the funding is exciting, we have also learned that
this project is the only navigation project overseen by the
Seattle District without a 100 percent Federal cost share for
these purposes.
And Port Angeles isn't a super well-off community, and, you
know, there is important national security concerns for getting
this done since we have a Coast Guard station there. So, you
know, my priority request will be, you know, bringing the
Federal cost share for Ediz Hook into line with the other O&M
navigation projects.
Assistant Secretary Connor, can you just give any updates
on this project from the perspective of the Corps?
Secretary Connor. I think design work and all preparations
to move forward with the project between nourishment and
revetment are moving forward but for the cost share issue. That
is where we have gotten hung up.
So I appreciate--I wasn't aware that this was the only one
the Seattle District was working on that is not 100 percent
Federal cost share, so we will certainly take a look at that in
conjunction with your office.
Mr. Kilmer. I appreciate that. And, again, we really
support the project. We want to see it get done.
Again, Assistant Secretary Connor, my next question is for
you. The State of Washington is hard at work on increasing the
pace and scale of beneficial restoration projects. We have
streamlined State and local permitting for restoration
projects, still taking into account community impacts,
environmental impacts.
I would like to just hear more about what the Corps can do
to streamline permitting processes and dedicate some capacity
for regulators to permit those restoration projects
responsibly, and is there anything that Congress can do to
help?
Secretary Connor. Absolutely. General Spellmon and I have
many, many discussions about this, and the Corps has
implemented a terrific strategy using resources from the
Bipartisan Infrastructure Law. So the combination of actions,
hiring more regulators--certainly, we get, you know, hung up on
the ability of our human resources to work on these issues.
We have a regulatory intake system now that is online. What
that will help is provide the information needed to make sure
applications are complete. And we get hung up and lose months
in processing with incomplete applications.
And then we have a regulatory viewer system now that the
Corps has moved forward implementing, ensuring that we are not
starting from ground zero in each permit with respect to
technical data that we have.
So I think the combination of those actions plus
coordination with other agencies involved in the permitting
process, that is where we are really going to have to implement
all those aspects to make, you know, processing these permit
applications much quicker.
Mr. Kilmer. And do you need anything from us?
Secretary Connor. I think, at this point in time, I
certainly support the President's budget. We have been trying
to keep robust levels for our regulatory program, and as long
as those resources keep flowing, we will be in pretty good
shape.
Mr. Kilmer. I know the chairman asked about the Harbor
Maintenance Trust Fund and the donor and energy transfer port
issue.
You know, the deep and efficient ports like the Port of
Tacoma and Seattle are really important for America's supply
chains. They also generate about half of the--these donor ports
generate about half of the harbor maintenance tax revenues each
year. These ports only receive about 3 percent of
appropriations out of the Harbor Trust Fund--Harbor Maintenance
Trust Fund.
You know, I want to see that figure rise, hopefully to the
12 percent figure that was authorized in WRDA 2020. Earlier
this week, I sent a letter to OMB and to the Corps with some of
my colleagues from across the Hill just requesting that.
Are you able to provide any additional information in terms
of how WRDA set this goal for how much of the Harbor
Maintenance Trust Fund funding should be allocated to donor and
energy transfer ports, and are there any legal or policy
impediments into reaching that 12 percent level that was laid
out in WRDA?
Secretary Connor. Well, as always, Congressman, resources.
The amount of resources are an issue. And we understand, you
know, consistent with the discussion we had with the chairman
earlier, that we haven't kept pace completely with the
projected HMTF resources that were set out in 2020.
We have generally kept consistent with the formula that was
made. We haven't with respect to the expanded uses for donor
and energy ports. We did, in the 2025 budget, have our first-
ever request for resources for expanded uses in the donor and
energy ports and hearing loud and clear--from your letter and
from other Members--the resources provided in the 2024 Work
Plan so that we can execute at a higher level with the Harbor
Maintenance Trust Fund's resources and meet that 12 percent
commitment. That is certainly part of our discussions in
finalizing the work plan.
Mr. Kilmer. Thank you for that.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Fleischmann. And I thank you, Mr. Kilmer.
At this time, I recognize my dear friend, Mr. Simpson, from
Idaho for 5 minutes.
Mr. Simpson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And thank you for being here. Sorry I missed your opening
statement, but I will read it.
As you know, this is--the Army Corps of Engineers is one of
my favorite agencies. As the ranking member is fond of saying,
this is the biggest construction company in the world, and they
do a lot for this country and moving it forward, and I
appreciate all that you do.
A couple of questions that ought to be fairly simple, I
hope. A long-time priority of mine in Congress has been to
secure funding for the rehabilitation of the river walls on the
Gooding Canal in Gooding, Idaho. The walls are failing due to
age and material used and are a present flood risk to the
surrounding areas.
I first recommended funding--I first secured funding for
this progeny in fiscal year 2023 to begin planning and design
phases, and the fiscal year 2024 energy and water bill
contained over $33.5 million for this project, which should
fund the rest of the design and construction. I was glad to see
the city of Gooding and the Army Corps sign their project
partnership agreement in late March of this year.
Lieutenant General Spellmon and Assistant Secretary Connor,
at this hearing last year, I asked if the Army Corps could
commit to completing the Little Wood River Project in a timely
fashion if funds for the project were delivered as part of the
fiscal year 2024 budget process. You both said yes.
Now that this funding has been signed into law, do I still
have both of your commitments that this project is a priority
for the Corps and you will see this through to completion?
General Spellmon.Yes, sir. You have our commitment to
finish this project.
Secretary Connor. He spoke for me.
Mr. Simpson. OK. I hope so because I have often said, you
know, I am going to stay in Congress--unless my constituents
have a different view--but I am going to stay in Congress until
I get this damn thing done. It has been 25 years we have been
working on this. So I appreciate all the hard work we have put
into it and the questions it has brought up.
The Stibnite Mine. The Stibnite Mine Project in Idaho is
positioned to be the United States' only domestic source for
mineral antimony, which is critical for our national security.
Without a domestic supply from the Department of Defense, we
are beholden to imports from China and Russia.
This administration has made the Stibnite project a
priority, as made clear through announcements of the Department
of Defense, funding of up to $70 million, and a recent letter
of interest from the Export-Import Bank for $1.8 billion in
loan authority to develop the mine should the NEPA process be
completed.
As you know, the Army Corps is involved in permitting the
Stibnite project through the section 404 authority. Federal
permitting has now been underway for nearly 8 years, and the
Forest Service is committed to getting the record of decision
in 2024.
Is the Army Corps of Engineers coordinating with the Forest
Service on--are you on track to meet that deadline?
General Spellmon. Yes, sir. So you are correct. We are a
cooperating agency underneath the Fish and Wildlife Service
here. September 24 is when we will have the EIS complete.
The impact of wetlands for the 404 is about 145 acres. We
have a couple of Tribal objections to the project. We are going
to work our way through that and address their concerns.
Mr. Simpson. Thank you. One last question.
Lucky Peak Reservoir in the State park--and State park are
just outside of Boise as one of three facilities that the Idaho
Parks and Recreation lease from the Army Corps.
Just recently, Idaho Parks and Recreation was informed
that, to replace the Turner Gulch boat ramp, the Army Corps was
planning to draw down Lucky Peak Reservoir after--or about a
month early. This decision affects public recreation in the
area as well as irrigators on farm lands and downstream. Idaho
Parks and Recreation has told me that the Corps did not
communicate with them when making this decision and that even
the local Army Corps personnel did not know.
What was the communication strategy from the highest levels
of the Army Corps to both the local Army Corps employees at
Lucky Peak and the Idaho Parks and Recreation when this early
drawdown was being considered? How much did the Corps weigh the
impacts to recreation and irrigation this drawdown could cause
when making this decision? And is it really necessary to draw
down early for the Corps to complete the boat ramp replacement
instead of just waiting a month longer?
General Spellmon. Sir, I will follow up on the
communication gaps. I was not aware of that.
I have been on this boat ramp. It is unsafe. It needs to be
repaired. There would be no impacts to irrigation. We are going
to meter this water out just under a normal irrigation
schedule.
We are doing this in the fall to actually minimize the
impacts of recreation. If we were to do this in the spring, we
would not be able to do as much water capture, and we might
have flood risk management problems. If we did it in the
summer, we would certainly have an impact to recreation.
There is not a perfect time to do this work. It needs to be
done. But we thought this timeline--drawing it down in July. We
are going to award the contract in September, get it done, and
then we will return to normal in the spring. There was not a
perfect time to do this. This one had the least impacts.
Mr. Simpson. OK. Thank you. I have got 10 seconds left.
Let me just ask, what does the water outlook look like in
Idaho right now?
Ms. Touton. Congressman, some parts of the basin are
looking better than others. Some parts of the region are
hugging average.
So, unfortunately, as the congressman from Washington State
mentioned, the Pacific Northwest is at a dryer place because of
this El Nino pattern.
Mr. Simpson. OK. I appreciate that.
If you had asked me 3 months ago, I would have said, we are
going to have a severe drought. And now, all of a sudden, snow
and rain and everything else came in March and early April and
stuff. So it has kind of changed the outlook a little bit.
Ms. Kaptur. Will the gentleman yield?
Mr. Simpson. I appreciate it.
I would be happy to if I--I don't have any time left.
Ms. Kaptur. I am so glad to hear your voice this morning.
We welcome you to the subcommittee that is your home.
Mr. Simpson. Thank you.
Ms. Kaptur. And I just wanted to say to the gentleman that,
earlier today, when it was my turn, I was asking all of our
esteemed witnesses if they couldn't do a job to present a more
regional focus on what is actually happening in different
watersheds in the West.
So rather than project by project, we look at region by
region or subwatershed by subwatershed, however you want to
frame it. I think that would be so interesting to Members in
different regions of the country, certainly in the West, which
has such a different engineering system than those of us who
are east of the Mississippi River.
So Idaho would be extremely interesting and the adjoining
States for what I was trying to reference earlier, so we get a
sense of the whole rather than just the parts.
Mr. Simpson. Yes. It is very different in the West than the
East. I have always said, in the East, you try to get rid of
water. In the West, we try to preserve every drop of water. So,
I mean, it is different. The laws are different and everything
else.
You can ask Congresswoman Lee about what is going to happen
down in southern Nevada.
Ms. Lee of Nevada. I have a few questions about that.
Mr. Simpson. Anyway, I appreciate that.
Thank you, Chairman.
Mr. Fleischmann. My pleasure. Thank you, Mr. Simpson.
At this time, I recognize Ms. Lee of Nevada for 5 minutes.
Ms. Lee of Nevada. Great. Thank you, Mr. Chair and Ranking
Member.
I associate myself completely with your suggestion. I think
that is an excellent suggestion because even the water in Idaho
impacts the water in the Lower Basin.
So, Commissioner Touton, I am sure you know this all too
well. I was really pleased to welcome you to our mutual home of
southern Nevada back in December when we announced the $20
million investment from the Bipartisan Infrastructure Law to
continue to restore the Las Vegas Wash, which carries 200
million gallons of water to Lake Mead each and every day.
I have also been working to direct crucial Federal
resources to Lake Mead in the WASH program throughout my time
on this committee, including the $3.5 million in community
project funding that I was able to secure in fiscal year 2024.
And I think this sort of goes into what was being discussed
earlier. Could you describe the erosion control efforts that
Reclamation is advancing at the wash side by side with the
Southern Nevada Water Authority and why these efforts are
essential, not just to Nevada, but to all of the States within
the Colorado River Basin that depend on Lake Mead?
Ms. Touton. Thank you, Congresswoman.
It was great to be out there with you in December to
announce $20 million as part of the Aquatic Ecosystem Program,
and this will allow us to help construction with the Southern
Nevada Authority which you called the erosion control for Weir
5.
The Las Vegas Wash is a critical length between the Las
Vegas watershed and how water gets into Lake Mead. It provides
an ability through actually, you know, engineering with nature,
providing water quality benefits. The water gets cleaned as it
goes through the Wash.
It provides habitats for certain species. It provides
recreation opportunities for the community. But most
importantly, it is part of the plumbing of the system that
allows Las Vegas to move its water back into Lake Mead.
Ms. Lee of Nevada. And thank you for that.
The Reclamation's fiscal year 2025 request for the WASH
program is, unfortunately, significantly limited by the fact
that the program has an outdated funding cap of $40 million in
place.
Is it accurate for me to underscore to my colleagues who
are here today, Commissioner, that successfully completing the
collaborative efforts you just described will require more
resources than the current appropriations ceiling allows?
Ms. Touton. Our fiscal year 2025 request includes $598,000
for these efforts, which is at the ceiling of the program.
Should we be provided more resources, we can do more work.
Ms. Lee of Nevada. Great. And please know that I am leading
a bicameral legislation with Senator Cortez Masto that would
immediately authorize an additional $25 million for the WASH
program. So we are working to get that done as soon as
possible.
I want to turn now--how much time do I have left?
General Spellmon, when you testified before this committee
last year, you noted that the managed aquifer recharge study
and working group provision that I helped secure in WRDA 2022
was being reviewed by the Department of Defense, which was
looking at any Federal Advisory Committee Act requirements that
would be relevant to the provision's implementation and related
budgetary needs.
I appreciated your shared enthusiasm for this initiative,
which you emphasized was at the forefront of the Corps'
research and development program.
Can you tell us what progress has been made over the past
year towards implementation and what is in store for fiscal
year 2025?
General Spellmon. Yes, ma'am. So I believe the charter is
still at OSD for review. That is the charter.
I think we saw the value of this whole concept with the
incredible atmospheric rivers, everything that was flowing
through California in 2023. We actually employed this.
So, ma'am, what I am saying is we don't need a report--we
don't need a charter to get started. We need a dam--which we
have in Nevada--that has a water supply or water conservation
purpose. We need a downstream retention basin, which is
typically built and operated by a non-Federal sponsor, and the
most important thing we need is the water to put in it.
So, ma'am, we can move out on this by identifying those
areas that are most in need in the State. We are doing this in
other areas while we work on the broader strategy and the
study.
Ms. Lee of Nevada. Yes.
Secretary Connor. Can I just quickly add?
To add on to what General Spellmon said, we are in the
water availability business. And so we are looking at
reoperation of our facilities so that we can work with water
providers to facilitate their managed aquifer recharge.
I am aware of at least four projects right now that we are
funding into construction through our Environmental
Infrastructure Program that are desalination, water reclamation
projects that are going into managed aquifer recharge systems.
So we need to get the charter complete. We need to get the
working group up and running. We need resources to do that. But
we are not waiting around for that to support managed aquifer
recharge out west.
Ms. Lee of Nevada. Great. Thank you.
And I am over my time. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Fleischmann. And thank you, Ms. Lee.
At this time, I would like to, first of all, thank the
witnesses. We are going to engage in a second round of
questions.
And to the witnesses and really to those in the audience
watching this, I think you can tell by watching us work and
interact with you the tremendous cordial relationship we have
on both sides of the dais and our commitment to this Energy and
Water Committee. It is a privilege to chair this and to work
with Ms. Kaptur and our Members.
With that, I am going to begin with a second round of
questions, if I may.
Commissioner Touton and Mr. Brain, we have seen cost
escalations across the construction sector, and water projects
are no exception. What impacts has Reclamation seen for ongoing
projects with a focus on dam safety, rural water, and Indian
water rights settlements?
Ms. Touton. Thank you for that question, Mr. Chairman.
We have seen what many across the Nation have seen, is
rising costs in material and other factors, but what we are
doing now and working with the committee is refining our cost
estimation process to better understand what those costs would
be and to be able to talk to our constituency and our
stakeholders to ensure that we are aligning as far as project
dates and completions.
And so step one for us is recognizing that we need to look
at some of those costs given what the environment is currently
holding and then communicate with you and our partners on what
we see.
Mr. Fleischmann. Thank you.
Mr. Brain.
Mr. Brain. Mr. Chairman, I would just add that, you know, I
am very well aware of the importance of those cost estimates
for multiple different purposes. So I would be happy to talk to
the subcommittee and talk to your about some of the various
efforts underway at Reclamation to get ahold of those.
Mr. Fleischmann. Thank you, sir.
Commissioner Touton, we have heard a great deal about the
long-term drought in the Colorado River Basin, and I know it
has been a major focus for you personally.
Given the promising snow pack and hydrology this year, can
you provide the subcommittee an update on expected operations
for this water year? And, in that regard, what is the status of
negotiations among the basin States on the future of the river?
If you will, please.
Ms. Touton. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The focus for the Bureau of Reclamation and Department of
the Interior is on the future, what the operations post-2026
will be. And so we are currently in the alternative development
stage within our environmental impact statement process,
working with the basin States and the Tribes on what
operational parameters will be for those alternatives.
As we are looking at operations this year, our ability to
operate in the short term is good. We have been able to stave
off the immediate crisis that was there when we walked in the
door. And so we fully expect to make our deliveries across the
basin.
Mr. Fleischmann. And I thank you.
One final question. Secretary Connor and General Spellmon,
please.
As you both know, while recent supplementals require the
Corps to complete certain projects and studies using those
funds, it became apparent that executive branch decisions
greatly oversubscribed available funding. However, those
projects are important to support public safety and America's
economic competitiveness.
Now that these projects are eligible for other sources of
funding, what steps are being taken to integrate them into the
regular program?
Secretary Connor. Mr. Chairman, thank you very much for
that authority and for clarifying--giving us flexibility.
Whether it is in the investigations or whether it is
construction activity, we have experienced cost increases, and
so we needed that flexibility to move forward with these
projects. So they are being integrated. I think that is the
answer to your question.
Now, they are able to compete for budgeted dollars as well
as work plan dollars. So we are taking that into consideration
as we develop, most immediate, the 2024 Work Plan and then as
we put together future budgets. So thank you very much.
Mr. Fleischmann. Thank you, Mr. Secretary.
General, any further comments?
General Spellmon. I would just add, sir, this was huge for
the Corps. We were stuck programmatically on a number of
projects, and this authority is--we have given guidance to the
field, and as Mr. Connor said, we will start expressing these
capabilities in our work plan and our future budget development
process. So thank you.
Mr. Fleischmann. I thank you both.
At this time, I would like to recognize Ms. Kaptur for her
second round of questions for 5 minutes.
Ms. Kaptur. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to associate
myself with your remarks.
All of our Members came this morning. This is a working
committee. This is how Congress should work. I am so very proud
of both sides of the aisle. And this is what we are hired to do
by the American people, not waste time.
So I wanted to ask General Spellmon, several of our
defense-related departments--Army, Navy--have programs that
focus on workforce development.
So, for example, in the Navy, we have the STARBASE program.
And if you go to the Department of Interior, there are certain
Conservation Corps that are being formed. Even the Department
of Energy has a small Conservation Corps now.
Does the Army Corps of Engineers have any similar program
where we look to STEAM--the sciences, engineering, math, and I
always put in the arts because you have to have a little
creativity to do engineering beyond the math.
Do you have a program like that in the Corps? Is that
something that I am maybe unaware of where we attract younger
people, we create relationships with high schools? Do you have
anything like that?
General Spellmon. We do, but we have more work to do on it.
So we have 42 districts in major cities across the country, and
then we have a matrix where we have a relationship for a
district with a specific set of universities.
And we do get out to talk to those students. I do quite a
bit of this myself because, for the engineering field, you have
to start--as you know, you have to start early to light that
fire. But it is something we would want to--certainly, we could
get better at.
Ms. Kaptur. Well, I would be very interested in pursuing
this with our Members to see what we might form because, I am
telling you, with what happened over in Baltimore in the
harbor, all of America was focused on that. And it is tangible.
And young people can identify with that. We have to do
workforce development in the STEAM fields.
And I think the Corps is--because you are in every corner
of the country, I think you have unmet potential to inspire.
And I would love to work with my colleagues on that and, you
know, attract young people who could be involved in rebuilding
this Nation piece by piece, subwatershed by subwatershed. The
engineering, the city and regional planning that goes into
that, the water resource management--these are exciting fields,
and they are real, and we can educate to it.
I would like to have a further conversation with you and
talk with our chairman about that, also, but I don't see the
Corps visible on that as I do some other Federal
instrumentalities. So thank you for the work that you are
doing.
General Spellmon. Ms. Kaptur--yes, ma'am. I would just
humbly add that we are at our highest workforce in the past two
decades. We don't have a hiring problem. We are breaking talent
on board each and every day, and I can't hire fast enough.
But the Secretary of the Army has given us a number of
direct hire authorities. Where it typically takes months to
bring someone into Federal service, we are doing that in days.
Ms. Kaptur. Well, that is a good sign that you can be
successful.
All right. I would like to talk more about that, but I want
to turn to the--and I have asked my staff to hand out a picture
of the Great Lakes. I know you all know where it is.
But, particularly, the Lake Erie issues that deal with our
navigation system and the waterborne transportation network,
that stretches 2,400 miles through all five Great Lakes
reaching deep into the continent to provide benefits to the
entire region as well as the Nation.
And one critical issue--across the lakes, but certainly to
Ohio and the region I represent--is the beneficial use of
dredge materials. And I appreciate your establishment of the
goal of 70 percent use of dredge material for beneficial use by
2030.
I have been working on that for over four decades. So we
have made an inch of progress. And I keep hearing about
challenges for increased beneficial use in Lake Erie and other
areas, particularly regulatory delays and cost-sharing
disparities.
What concrete steps are you taking to address lengthy
permitting timelines for beneficial use in the Great Lakes? And
when do you anticipate executing cost-sharing agreements for
Cedar Point Causeway beneficial use sites and for the Cleveland
Harbor Eastern Embayment Resilience site, and will those sites
be included in the Federal standard for Sandusky Harbor and
Cleveland Harbor respectively?
General Spellmon. Yes, ma'am. I will just take that one at
a time.
So, first, we are making progress on our goal to get to 70
percent beneficial use by 2030. We were at 30. Today, we are
about 40. We are updating our policies, we are investing more
in R&D, and frankly, we are learning from the State of Ohio and
we are learning from the Port of Baltimore who do this very,
very well. So we are making progress.
On the regulatory issue, we are bringing on additional
staff members. And so thanks for the additional funding in the
Bipartisan Infrastructure Law. We wanted to hire an additional
200 regulators for the enterprise. We are at 165, and we are
working hard on hiring the remaining 35.
We are employing new tools. Mr. Connor mentioned the
regulatory requests system. So this is now a portal where an
applicant can go in and get information on the Clean Water Act.
They can submit an application online, and they can get an
updated status on that application from that portal.
And then we have a regulatory viewer. So think of just a
tablet that our regulators are taking to them with the field.
It is a walking encyclopedia, ma'am, for them where they can do
a lot of their technical work from this tablet--from this
portal--without having to return to the office.
Buffalo District, on the regulatory, they have improved
from last year six percentage points. That doesn't sound like
much on individual permits--I am sorry--general permits and 12
percentage points on individual permits. So I think the tools
and the additional hiring is helping them. We are not where we
want to be.
Ma'am, you asked about the cautionary agreements for the
Cedar Point Causeway and the Cleveland Harbor Eastern Embayment
Resilience site. I am going to have to follow up with you on
the specific timeline. I know both of these were alternatives
in the dredge material management plans. They are in there.
If they are selected as the plan--the tentatively selected
plan--that is the point in time when we would enter into a
cost-sharing agreement. But let me get an update on where we
are in that timeline in that planning process, and I will
follow up with your team.
Ms. Kaptur. We are over a minute over time here, but I must
say, with the new farm bill coming up, even though that isn't
your jurisdiction, I would urge you to work with the Department
because of the interest in farmers across our country in
regenerative soils and what has been happening to our arable
lands across the Nation. I think there is a confluence there
that your staff should pay attention to.
I thank you and will yield back for another round.
Mr. Fleischmann. Thank you, Ms. Kaptur.
And I now recognize the gentleman, Mr. Newhouse of
Washington, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Newhouse. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Connor, if we could continue our conversation. As you
know, the Pacific Northwest Delegation--I should say and our
constituents--have concerns over the state of the
administration's negotiations with Canada over the Columbia
River Treaty.
The bottom line is we don't have an agreement yet, and the
treaty has got to be changed to have a balance of payments to
Canada for storage and also develop a suitable agreement for
preplanned flood control. As you know, it has been 5 years
since negotiations began, and I have got to tell you, impacted
stakeholders--this is the biggest question I get the most
often. They are concerned about the flood risk impacts. The
budget request includes $4 million for treaty negotiations, but
I didn't see anything for the flood control payments to Canada.
So could you tell me what the Corps will be doing to handle
flood risk management with respect to domestic measures and
relations with Canada in the interim, and how does the Corps
plan to coordinate with the Mid-Columbia Public Utility
Districts on the future river operations?
Secretary Connor. Yes, absolutely. Great questions.
I want to be cautious with respect to talking about the
treaty negotiations. And the fact is, you know, as you noted,
we don't yet have an agreement in principle, and that is being
addressed at the highest levels of government.
I am concerned that we don't have an operating plan right
now for 2025, and that creates uncertainty. So I think the goal
has been, with respect to 2025, to have that framework deal and
work with Congress on the parameters of that deal with respect
to funding needs in 2025.
So we still now have to be working with you to look at--we
have some resources in hand, but if we have a significant water
year and we need to, you know, result to operate in an ad hoc
storage type of situation in our discussions with Canada to
ensure that we have got flood risk management in place with the
expiration of the treaty, we are going to have to work very
closely with all of you in Congress and keep you apprised of
what those needs are with respect to funding in 2025.
Mr. Newhouse. I would admonish as well that the public
utility districts have to be partners in this.
Secretary Connor. Absolutely.
Mr. Newhouse. They have to be able to plan.
Secretary Connor. So we are moving forward to look at our
operations and how we would need to work in 2025. We will have
a public process here that will be rolling out here very soon
to work with all the stakeholders in the region.
Mr. Newhouse. I appreciate that.
Commissioner Touton, great to see you.
Mr. Brain as well.
Commissioner Touton, thank you very much for mentioning the
West Canal.
He is not here anymore, but I wanted to also thank Mr.
Simpson for his help on the Urban Canal Modernization Act,
which addresses not only a capacity issue but truly a safety
issue for the public. So thank you for your work there.
I also wanted to thank you for your budget request for the
Yakima River Basin Enhancement Project, which is in my part of
the world and very--this project is certainly vital to central
Washington for our water supply and for irrigation.
And let me just say that we are facing some of our junior
water districts perhaps only receiving half of their normal
water that they would in a normal year. So it could be a
challenging year.
But, right now, I would like to talk a little bit about the
Lower Snake River Dams, if I could. In your testimony, you
referenced a request for $500,000 for the WaterSMART program.
Through that program, BOR can fund dam removal, but you said
dam removal would only be done if the projects are supported by
a broad multi-stakeholder group.
Those stakeholders, though not directly involved with the
litigation, they still have to deal with the consequences, and
they have complained about a lack of outreach by the
administration.
So, Commissioner, since dam breaching is being considered,
what, if any, outreach has BOR done with these stakeholders to
help them understand the impact of dam removal and what it
would have on Washingtonians?
Ms. Touton. Thank you for that question, Congressman.
And, first, one, you mentioned the Yakima Project. For the
committee, the Yakima Project is the model for the West on how
we deal with changing hydrology and balancing the needs of a
vibrant agricultural community, and sovereign nations, are the
ecosystem. And so I look forward, as we have a more detailed
discussion on the successes that we have learned, to working
with you there.
On your question, we are engaged from a regional
perspective as well as in DC with our stakeholders, and I
commit to you, Congressman, to going out there and having those
conversations in more detail.
I am happy to also turn it over to PDAS Brain for more
information.
Mr. Brain. Certainly. I would be more than willing to join
in that conversation to further it. It is a critically
important issue, so I think it deserves the time to make the
trip out there.
Mr. Newhouse. I appreciate that. And thank you. I think
that openness and transparency is vitally important.
Mr. Chairman, do I have time for one more small question?
Mr. Fleischmann. Sure.
Mr. Newhouse. OK. I will make it--
Mr. Fleischmann. And then we are going to go to the ranking
member for one more question, and then we will wrap up.
Mr. Newhouse. Thank you for your indulgence.
You also included 2.8 billion for the Indian water rights
settlements as well as 34 million for the requirements of the
CRSO agreement. The purpose of the Indian water rights
settlements is to help Tribes secure historical water and land.
While the CRSO agreement never explicitly calls for dam
breaching, it does commit to funding for studies, projects, and
operations if Congress approves dam breaching.
So I want to ask, why would the Bureau be proposing such a
large financial set-aside for water rights settlements unless,
along with the administration, the Bureau is anticipating and
has already predetermined that a dam breaching is going to be
the ultimate outcome?
Mr. Brain. Congressman, if I may take a chance in answering
that question.
Really, the purpose of the legislative proposal--and I
appreciate the opportunity to highlight it here--is to
replenish the completion fund which was created by the
Bipartisan Infrastructure Law and is nearing exhaustion. It is
one that is of the utmost importance to the administration, and
I would be happy to work with the subcommittee staff and
Members as well as yourself on the mechanisms and means of that
proposal. I am happy to provide more information.
Mr. Newhouse. But is that in anticipation of dam breaching?
Mr. Brain. It would be funding the existing water rights
settlements, sir, that are currently legislatively authorized
by Congress.
Mr. Newhouse. Anything to add, Commissioner?
Ms. Touton. No, Congressman. Thank you.
Mr. Newhouse. All right.
Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman, for your indulgence.
Mr. Fleischmann. And I thank you, Mr. Newhouse.
At this time, I would like to recognize the ranking member
for an additional question.
Ms. Kaptur. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
I have asked my staff to give each of you a map that has
the watershed of the Great Lakes outlined in green. If you go
to Ohio, you'll see a number nine. That is the district I
represent, the largest watershed in the Great Lakes. Of course,
the Great Lakes are critical to millions and millions and
millions of people in two countries.
And, General Spellmon and Commissioner--Secretary Connor,
the Corps is one of three Federal agencies cochairing the
Western Lake Erie Basin Partnership, which, in recent years,
has focused on nutrient reduction and algal blooms.
General Spellmon, I am going to ask for your advice. Are
there opportunities to apply the already substantial amount of
Federal funding in investments in this watershed across
agencies in a manner that more effectively addresses the
nutrient-loading problem, including the detection of dissolved
reactive phosphorus? I have a map I am going to give each of
you afterwards that is even more detailed about the watershed.
Mr. Connor, does the Corps require additional authority and
direction from Congress to utilize your expansive research and
development capabilities and funding streams to develop, test,
and apply two technologies: One, Insitu sensor technology to
monitor and detect dissolved reactive phosphorus and, No. 2,
telecommunications infrastructure and technology to support the
internet of things related to direct detection, monitoring, and
tracking of contaminants and conditions affecting water quality
so we can better pinpoint where this is coming from, where it
is a big problem--thousands of acres, thousands of square miles
of land.
But if we don't--Lake Erie and Ontario are the two most
impacted Great Lakes. If we don't fix this, they are going to
turn into swamps. And this is the first year in our part of the
country where the Great Lakes haven't frozen over. This is
unprecedented. And so we have to deal with the runoff in a much
more intelligent manner.
So I am asking you about Insitu sensor technologies and
telecommunications infrastructure where you could detect the
ingredients of the components that cause the problem and to
support the internet of things related to detection.
Secretary Connor. I am going to give you a high-level
response to your question and then, because it is so detailed,
I want to follow up.
But with respect to the overarching question, do we need
authority? You know, several WRDAs, including 2022--I think it
was 8160--gave us broad R&D authority that we now have, and I
think we are well positioned to use that expansive authority to
participate in the initiatives that you describe.
We also participate with the Great Lakes Restoration
Initiative and receive funding through that mechanism to carry
out some of the pilot projects.
So it is a resources issue. The chief and I have been
completely in sync with respect to our approach on R&D. We have
had an R&D initiative in the 2024 budget that--a lot of that
was represented in the final appropriations bill. So thank you
for that. We have another $79-80 million R&D initiative. Algal
blooms, new technologies--those are a part of our initiatives
with respect to R & D.
So we are trying to fund these efforts and not just rely on
Congress, although we will take your assistance anytime, Madam.
General Spellmon. Yes, ma'am.
And just on your nutrient-loading question, the answer is
yes. Those opportunities absolutely exist. And I also want to
thank the committee for the significant increase we have seen
in our R&D budget. It is absolutely helping.
We do have GLRI funding for a phosphorus reduction project,
and that is ongoing. The one I mentioned earlier, it is in
Defiance, Ohio. I think you have been there, ma'am. But this is
one that we are working not only with the State and the
district but also with EPA on this particular project and the
local partners. We are going to learn a lot here that we can
take to the broader basin map that you described.
And I just want to add, we are also learning a lot in
Florida that is going to apply elsewhere in the country as
well. These are very, very important R&D programs.
Ms. Kaptur. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And thank you for spending time with us this morning. I
wish all the American people could hear the quality that we
have today.
Mr. Fleischmann. I thank the ranking member for her
questions and participation and sentiments.
To all the witnesses, thank you. We have learned a lot. I
hope we have helped you all. And it has been a wonderful
hearing, and I so appreciate each and every one of you all.
And, with that, the subcommittee stands adjourned.

[Answers to submitted questions follow:]

QUESTIONS FOR THE RECORD

Questions for Commissioner Touton form Ranking Member Kaptur

According to a U.S. Geological Survey study, quagga and
zebra mussels are estimated to cause $1 billion dollars per
year in damages to water infrastructure and industries.

These invasive mussels were introduced into the Great Lakes
in the late 1980's through water discharges from transoceanic
ships, so we are aware of the catastrophic impacts they have on
our water infrastructure, such as clogging water intake
structures for water treatment and power plants.

The FY 2025 budget request for the Bureau of Reclamation
includes funding to manage, protect, and control mussels at
Reclamation facilities and reservoirs, as well as conduct
research focused on combatting these invasive species.

What specific research projects will be conducted in
fiscal year 2025 on these mussels?

In FY 2024 the Science and Technology Program is funding 12
invasive mussel research projects (listed below) that will
continue into FY 2025. The 12 research projects that are
already approved and anticipated to continue into FY 2025 fall
into three categories: optimizing early detection and
monitoring methods (5 projects), developing methods to control
mussel fouling at hydropower facilities (5 projects), and
development of innovative methods for control of mussel
populations in reservoirs (2 projects). Four additional
invasive mussel research project proposals were received for
funding consideration in FY 2025. The Science and Technology
Program will announce projects selected for funding at the
beginning of FY 2025.
Reclamation's Prize Competition Program is also developing
a prize competition to identify innovative watercraft
decontamination procedures to prevent the spread of invasive
mussels.
In addition to the Science and Technology Program,
Reclamation's Mussels Spend Plan through the Mission Assurance
and Protection Office (MAPO) provides funding for research
projects and other mussel project activities. Projects include
development of autonomous water samplers, enhance eDNA analysis
techniques, and new detection methods. Project proposals are
submitted for review to MAPO and are ranked by a selection
panel. Anticipated selection of FY 2025 projects is expected
during the first quarter of the fiscal year. The FY 2024
invasive mussel research projects selected for funding are:

Optimizing early detection and monitoring methods

LInferring the Provenance of Invasive Dreissenid
Mussel Veliger Shells Through Trace Element Analysis

LOptimization of Sample Analysis Methods for the
Early Detection of Invasive Dreissenid Mussels in Reclamation
Reservoirs

LDevelopment of Environmental RNA (eRNA) as A Tool
for Dreissenid Mussel Detection and Assessment of invasive
Mussel Populations

LInvestigation of Remote Sensing Tools for Harmful
Algal Blooms, Invasive Mussels, and Invasive Aquatic Vegetation

LFactors Limiting Invasive Mussel Establishment at
Salt River Project Reservoirs

Developing methods to control mussel fouling at hydropower facilities

LSelf-Cleaning Strainers and Filtration to
Mitigate Mussel Impacts

LPilot Scale Carbon Dioxide Treatment for
Dreissinids

LDetermining the Lowest Effective Liquid Copper
Concentration to Prevent Invasive Mussel Fouling at Hydropower
Plants

LAssessment of Invasive Mussel and Hydroid
Biofouling in the Glen Canyon Forebay to Inform a Fish and
Thermal Barrier Design

LNext Generation Coatings for Mussel Mitigation on
Infrastructure

Development of innovative methods for control of mussel populations in
reservoirs

LAnalysis of the Quagga Mussel Genome for
Development ofBiocontrols

LSurvey of ``Cousin'' Dreissenid Species in
Eurasia for Potential Biocontrol Agents to Control Invasive
Quagga and Zebra Mussels in North America

How does Reclamation work with other federal agencies such
as the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers or other bureaus in the
Department of the Interior to leverage research dollars on
these invasive species?

Reclamation's Science and Technology Program has a charter
with the Army Corps of Engineers (USACE) to promote
collaboration on research projects. The charter has facilitated
many successful collaborative invasive mussel projects that
have leveraged both agency's funding and expertise. Reclamation
participates in national invasive mussel working groups where
research efforts are presented and collaborative efforts are
initiated, including Western Regional Panel on Aquatic Invasive
Species, Invasive Mussel Collaborative, and the Department of
the Interior's (DOI) Invasive Mussel Team. Reclamation and the
US Geological Survey have also initiated a yearly invasive
mussel research symposium to share results and facilitate
collaboration. Reclamation is currently funding 15 invasive
mussel research projects, of which 5 include a USACE partner
and another 5 include a partner from another DOI agency.

[all]
