- FINANCIAL SERVICES AND GENERAL GOVERNMENT APPROPRIATIONS FOR 2024

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

FINANCIAL SERVICES AND GENERAL GOVERNMENT APPROPRIATIONS FOR 2024

_______________________________________________________________________

HEARINGS

BEFORE A

SUBCOMMITTEE OF THE

COMMITTEE ON APPROPRIATIONS

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

___________________________________

SUBCOMMITTEE ON FINANCIAL SERVICES AND GENERAL GOVERNMENT

STEVE WOMACK, Arkansas, Chairman

MARK E. AMODEI, Nevada        STENY H. HOYER, Maryland
DAVID P. JOYCE, Ohio        MATT CARTWRIGHT, Pennsylvania
JOHN R. MOOLENAAR, Michigan        MARK POCAN, Wisconsin
ASHLEY HINSON, Iowa        SANFORD D. BISHOP, Jr., Georgia
MICHAEL CLOUD, Texas        NORMA J. TORRES, California
JERRY L. CARL, Alabama
JUAN CISCOMANI, Arizona

NOTE: Under committee rules, Ms. Granger, as chairwoman of the full
committee, and Ms. DeLauro, as ranking minority member of the full
committee, are authorized to sit as members of all subcommittees.

Lauren Flynn, Marybeth Nassif, Kathryn Maxwell,
Rob Yavor, and Nick Goranites
Subcommittee Staff

___________________________________

PART 1

Page
President Biden's Fiscal Year 2024 Budget Request
and Economic Outlook...........................                     1
U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission Fiscal Year
2024 Budget Request............................                    69
Federal Trade Commission Fiscal Year 2024 Budget
Request........................................                   207

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

______________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Appropriations

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

53-669                    WASHINGTON : 2023

COMMITTEE ON APPROPRIATIONS

KAY GRANGER, Texas, Chairwoman

HAROLD ROGERS, Kentucky                    ROSA L. DeLAURO, Connecticut
ROBERT B. ADERHOLT, Alabama      STENY H. HOYER, Maryland
MICHAEL K. SIMPSON, Idaho      MARCY KAPTUR, Ohio
JOHN R. CARTER, Texas      SANFORD D. BISHOP, Jr., Georgia
KEN CALVERT, California      BARBARA LEE, California
TOM COLE, Oklahoma      BETTY McCOLLUM, Minnesota
MARIO DIAZ-BALART, Florida      C. A. DUTCH RUPPERSBERGER, Maryland
STEVE WOMACK, Arkansas      DEBBIE WASSERMAN SCHULTZ, Florida
CHARLES J. ``CHUCK'' FLEISCHMANN,      HENRY CUELLAR, Texas
Tennessee      CHELLIE PINGREE, Maine
DAVID P. JOYCE, Ohio      MIKE QUIGLEY, Illinois
ANDY HARRIS, Maryland      DEREK KILMER, Washington
MARK E. AMODEI, Nevada      MATT CARTWRIGHT, Pennsylvania
CHRIS STEWART, Utah      GRACE MENG, New York
DAVID G. VALADAO, California      MARK POCAN, Wisconsin
DAN NEWHOUSE, Washington      PETE AGUILAR, California
JOHN R. MOOLENAAR, Michigan      LOIS FRANKEL, Florida
JOHN H. RUTHERFORD, Florida      BONNIE WATSON COLEMAN, New Jersey
BEN CLINE, Virginia      NORMA J. TORRES, California
GUY RESCHENTHALER, Pennsylvania      ED CASE, Hawaii
MIKE GARCIA, California      ADRIANO ESPAILLAT, New York
ASHLEY HINSON, Iowa      JOSH HARDER, California
TONY GONZALES, Texas      JENNIFER WEXTON, Virginia
JULIA LETLOW, Louisiana      DAVID J. TRONE, Maryland
MICHAEL CLOUD, Texas      LAUREN UNDERWOOD, Illinois
MICHAEL GUEST, Mississippi      SUSIE LEE, Nevada
RYAN K. ZINKE, Montana      JOSEPH D. MORELLE, New York
ANDREW S. CLYDE, Georgia
JAKE LaTURNER, Kansas
JERRY L. CARL, Alabama
STEPHANIE I. BICE, Oklahoma
C. SCOTT FRANKLIN, Florida
JAKE ELLZEY, Texas
JUAN CISCOMANI, Arizona

Anne Marie Chotvacs, Clerk and Staff Director

(ii)

FINANCIAL SERVICES AND GENERAL GOVERNMENT APPROPRIATIONS FOR 2024

----------

Thursday, March 23, 2023.

PRESIDENT BIDEN'S FISCAL YEAR 2024 BUDGET
REQUEST AND ECONOMIC OUTLOOK

WITNESSES

HON. JANET YELLEN, SECRETARY, DEPARTMENT OF THE TREASURY
HON. SHALANDA YOUNG, DIRECTOR, OFFICE OF MANAGEMENT AND BUDGET
Mr. Womack. Well, the clock shows a couple of minutes after
the appointed time, so I am going to call this subcommittee
hearing to order.
Since this is our first hearing, I would like to remind
everyone that we will follow the 5-minute rule for opening
remarks, questions, and comments.
Members will be recognized in order of seniority based on
who is seated at the beginning of the hearing, going back and
forth between the parties. Latecomers will be recognized in the
order of their arrival, going back and forth between the
parties.
I will keep my opening statement brief so we can get right
into the questions. And I don't want it to look too much like
it is us against Mark Pocan, so reinforcements are en route.
And as they are taking their seats, the Subcommittee on
Financial Services and General Government has come to order.
Appearing before the subcommittee today is Treasury
Secretary Janet Yellen and Office of Management and Budget
Director Shalanda Young. We thank you for joining us today. We
were looking forward to receiving testimony from the Council of
Economic Advisers' Chief Chair Cecilia Rouse but wish her well.
We are here today to discuss the administration's fiscal
outlook, 2024 budget request, and our Nation's economic
outlook.
This hearing has not occurred in over a decade, and it
could not be more timely than in the midst of a great economic
turmoil. It is my opinion that the reckless spending and out-
of-control regulatory expansion unleashed by President Biden
and Democrats has pushed us into a recession. It has been
anything but a transitory cycle.
Our unsustainable trajectory is one of the greatest threats
to American prosperity, security, and future generations.
If we are to be guided by past performance, then I have
great concern about the administration's budget. This
administration and its agencies have failed to help Americans
who have seen their personal savings crippled.
It is not only fiscally irresponsible to continue down the
path that we have been on, but it is intellectually dishonest
to claim that it has been working.
The annual inflation rate is 6 percent and out of touch in
stark contrast to the 3 percent assumed in the President's
budget. It is disappointing that the administration not only
proposes even higher spending but also incorporates optimistic
economic assumptions.
I was hoping that the fiscal 2024 budget request would
begin to limit Federal spending, but instead, it increases the
public debt to 110 percent of GDP by 2033.
I have consistently advocated for solutions to chart a
responsible way forward. We must change gears and get going in
the right direction to help Americans get the relief they need.
The committee does not care to hear any excuses today, so
we want you to focus on how we can turn this economy around
with new and different policies than those that have failed us
since mid-2020.
I would be remiss if I did not mention something that is
also on Americans' minds--the current banking crisis and how
American taxpayers are on the hook for it. Whether through fees
passed on by the banks Americans rely on or taxpayer funded
backstops, I ask you today to be frank with us about the real
impact.
In conclusion, I will not be able to support the level of
spending included in the President's budget. Our members are
taking a hard look at the spending request line by line and
will determine what level of funding can be appropriated that
puts our fiscal house on a sustainable path. I look forward to
your testimony today and working with you on these important
issues.
I am also excited to welcome the participation of
Chairwoman Granger at our hearing today, and I will now
recognize my colleague and my friend, the ranking member from
Maryland, Mr. Hoyer, for his opening statement.
Mr. Hoyer. Well, thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I won't
go into a long exposition of how much I disagree with some of
the points just raised by my dear friend. That is not
surprising--or any of my colleagues to my right, I am sure.
But I am pleased to be back on this subcommittee, on which
I served for 23 years prior to my becoming majority leader 20
years ago. I am glad to be back.
This subcommittee is sometimes not looked at as a sexy
subcommittee, with issues that galvanize people, but it deals
with, as the chairman has just noted, some of the most
important issues that confront our country and confront the
administration and the Congress.
So I am pleased to be back here, in particular, pleased to
be back here with my friend Steve Womack, who I believe to be
one of the most responsible and hardworking and focused Members
of the Congress of the United States on either side of the
aisle, and I am pleased to be his friend, and have been his
friend, for a very long period of time, since he came to the
Congress almost. And I am looking forward to us working
together very, very well.
But we are going to have very significant differences.
There is no doubt about that. I have a chart, and I am going to
do a Special Order if anybody wants to see it next week, which
outlines 70 some-odd years--plus years since 1948, and it
outlines the economic progress made under Democratic
administrations and under Republican administrations.
And in terms of jobs created, one of the most stunning
numbers, Republicans had six more years during those years from
1948 to 2022--or 1949 to 2022.
Under Democratic presidents, 75 million jobs were created.
Under Republican Presidents, less than 35 million jobs were
created during those years.
This President's economic program has created 12 million
jobs in 2 years. Unprecedented. Now, part of that, of course,
is because of the pandemic and the loss of--hemorrhaging of
jobs clearly.
But the economic program that we put in place under the
Rescue Plan brought this economy back more quickly, frankly,
than any other economy in the world. So I am proud of what we
have done, and we are going to defend what we have done.
But we are going to have legitimate differences. We are
going to have discussions about the level of funding. There are
significant increases in many of the programs that we will
confront. I am not surprised that we will have a robust debate
on that, and we are going to discuss justifications for those
increases.
But from investing in American workers and families to
shoring up Medicare and other vital programs, it truly is a
budget, in my view, for the people.
Additionally, it advances many priorities that fall under
our subcommittee's jurisdiction. It includes, for example, a
5.2 percent cost-of-living adjustment for our Nation's
hardworking Federal employees to keep pace with inflation.
I might say as an aside, almost every nation in the world
has experienced inflation, not a result of policies that we
adopted but the result of the pandemic, a shortage of supplies,
disruption of supply chains, all of those issues which make an
impact on the economy.
As someone who has long been an advocate for America's
Federal workforce, I will keep working tirelessly with my
colleagues on the committee to ensure that these public
servants receive the fair pay and benefits they have earned.
I was also pleased to see President Biden request
additional funding for the IRS. I know that is going to be a
big item of contention. Mr. Womack and I have discussed that.
We have a very, very substantially different viewpoint.
And, Madam Secretary, I know you are going to be speaking
to that.
My view is that there is nobody who wants to pay more than
their fair share. None of us want to see our taxes increased.
But every one of us ought to pay our fair share. That is the
price of freedom. That is the price of our democracy. That is
the price of our serving our people.
We want to give them the highest quality customer service
for American taxpayers and rein in tax evasion and fraud on
those making more than $400,000 a year.
Similarly, the proposed budget would strengthen the
Treasury Department and other agencies overseeing our financial
systems. Clearly, we have seen a very recent example of how
important that oversight is.
The recent turmoil surrounding Silicon Valley Bank and a
handful of others reminds us of how crucial it is for the
Treasury to receive the resources it needs to coordinate with
the FDIC and the Federal Reserve to safeguard our economy.
I might observe that no one probably in America has had
more experience with those agencies than our Secretary of the
Treasury.
Our subcommittee must see to it that the Treasury is fully
equipped to tackle these challenges quickly and effectively.
The budget also includes robust funding for our election
infrastructure, including Election Assistance Commission. I am
proud to be the author of that Commission, and I am proud that
a Republican President signed the bill, George Bush, that
created that in the Help America Vote Act, which Bob May of
Ohio, Republican of Ohio, was a critical partner in seeing that
adopted.
These HAVA programs must receive the funding they need to
ensure that our elections remain secure, accurate, and
accessible.
Without evidence, many people have raised the question as
to whether the last election was a legitimate election--
actually, the election 2 years before that. If that premise is
adopted, that somehow the election may have been done
incorrectly, then I would think everybody would want to support
the Election Assistance Commission to give oversight to that
very proposition.
These provisions, like the rest of President Biden's
budget, would help set our Nation up for success for
generations to come.
In this morning's hearing on the Labor Health Committee, I
talked about the expenditures, that they are investments,
investments in a stronger and better country, in a stronger
economy, the growth in jobs.
They stand in startling contrast to proposals, frankly, we
have heard recently to roll back Federal appropriations to
their fiscal year 2022 level. The senior member on our side may
have some words to say about this.
This extreme course of action would lead to a cut of at
least 22 percent for essential programs--essential programs.
These cuts would also deal a severe blow to airport and
railway safety. Millions would lose access to healthcare
services provided by community health centers. These are just a
few of the plethora of adverse effects these cuts would have on
our country.
One more minute?
Mr. Womack. I am going to yield the gentleman another
minute, and I want to remind him that he does not have magic
minutes in the committee like he is accustomed to in the
majority. But we do need to move on.
Mr. Hoyer. It is such a sad truth that the chairman reminds
me of. I miss the magic minute more than I miss any other perk
in being majority leader, and I had that for a long period of
time, so I have just become accustomed to it, Mr. Chairman. I
am glad that you will discipline me properly.
It is not fair to put that immense burden on the American
people, those cuts. Instead, we must make sure that the
Americans have the resources, opportunities, and support they
need to get ahead.
I think this budget is subject to oversight, as the
Appropriations Committee ought to do. We are not the agent of
the administration. We are the agent of the American people, as
you are.
And I want to say, in closing, how proud I am, I have had
the opportunity and pleasure of working with Janet Yellen for
many, many years.
Madam Secretary, you are credit to our country, you are a
credit to this administration, and you are a credit worldwide.
Thank you very much.
And then Shalanda Young, all of you know Shalanda Young.
Shalanda Young is one of the great resources of this country.
She was a great resource to our committee. She is now a great
resource to the Biden administration, but much more than that,
she is a great resource to the country. Thank you very much,
Shalanda, and I hope Charlie is doing well.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back the time that I did
not have.
Mr. Womack. The magic eight words from Steny Hoyer, I yield
back the balance of my time.
I would like now to take this time to recognize the
honorable chairwoman of the full committee, of the
Appropriations Committee, Ms. Granger, for her opening remarks.
The Chairwoman. Thank you very much. Thank you, Chairman,
for yielding, and I would like to give an especially warm
welcome to Shalanda Young, who I have known since she was the
staff director of this committee, and Ms. Yellen, who is here
and always speaks so well. So I thank you both for being here.
Shalanda is a very tough negotiator, but she gets what she
asks for, and she does it really well.
We are here today to discuss the administration's fiscal
year 2024 budget request and our Nation's economic outlook is
an extremely important topic, and I want to thank the
subcommittee chair, Steve Womack, for calling us all together.
During the State of the Union address, President Biden said
the economy is strong. However, I think the numbers tell a very
different story. American people are struggling to make ends
meet because of high inflation. Everyday items, such as gas and
groceries, still cost too much.
I look closer at the economic situation, when I do that,
there is a cause for alarm. The Congressional Budget Office
recently said if current policies continue, more than $20
trillion will be added to our debt over the next 10 years.
This leads me to believe that something has to change. We
can't afford to continue down this path. Instead of reining in
spending, the President's budget proposes that more money be
spent on unnecessary programs.
It is not clear to me how this plan would get the high
prices and high debt we are currently experiencing under
control.
Well, I have concerns about the proposal. I think it is
important to have an honest conversation about these issues so
we can then begin to find common ground.
Secretary Yellen and Director Young, we look forward to
hearing from you. Thank you.
Mr. Womack. We are also delighted to have the distinguished
ranking member of the full Appropriations Committee, Ms.
DeLauro, and you are welcome to give your opening remarks,
ma'am.
Ms. DeLauro. Thank you. Thank you very, very much, Mr.
Chairman, and to you and the ranking member, thank you for
hosting this important hearing.
Delighted to welcome our guests today, Secretary Yellen and
Director Young, both of whom I have had the honor, as many of
you have, of working with over the years. And thank you, Madam
Secretary, and with regard to Shalanda, I worked with her when
I was ranking member on Labor-H, but when I got to be the chair
of it, she only spent a very few weeks before she was just, you
know, snatched away by the White House.
But on both iterations, it is a delight and a pleasure to
work with you, and thank you for the great job you both do.
Like the Appropriations Committee, the Office of Management
and Budget and the Department of Treasury touch every corner of
our Nation, and impact people at every stage of their lives--
OMB, by preparing the budget request and then distributing
funding bills after enactment, Treasury, by paying the Nation's
bills and collecting our revenue.
You directly impact the government programs and services
that our communities rely on and help us to create jobs, lower
cost for families, improve public safety, support small
businesses, and strengthen economic opportunity.
This committee knows this well because over the past 2
years, with support from you and Democrats and Republicans, in
both the House and the Senate, we passed and we enacted
government funding bills that reversed decades of under
investment while lowering drug and energy costs, creating jobs,
supporting our police, making our Nation and our communities
safer.
To continue this critical work, President Biden's 2024
budget allows for vital increases in investments in the
programs and services that hardworking people, small
businesses, communities in need rely on.
And with an increase in taxes on big corporations,
President Biden is proposing a plan that rewards work, not
wealth. I know that this budget blueprint would not be possible
without the tireless and dedicated work of the staff in your
agencies that adapt and respond to the economic challenges of
the day.
Secretary Yellen, I am glad to see a request for increased
funding to the Department of Treasury. I look forward to
discussing how this will ensure that wealthy and large
corporations pay their taxes, improve taxpayer experience,
increase equities for community development, job creation,
combat money laundering, helping to implement a new outbound
investment review program, and support sanctions activity
related to the war in Ukraine.
I look forward to discussing the requests, and to reviewing
the President's full request in the coming weeks.
Secretary Yellen, I just have to say a thank you, and I
will be--for all of the work, your work and the Department's
work on the Child Tax Credit. We would not have been able to
implement the Child Tax Credit without the Treasury and without
the IRS.
You distributed $93 billion to families of approximately 61
million children around this country in 5 months; 4 million
children lifted out of poverty, the largest decrease in child
poverty in history and the largest tax cut for working families
in generations.
I have not seen a Federal program that has such a profound
effect in such a short period of time and has worked in such a
short period of time. I believe it is really an essential tool
to fight rising costs and bring people and families to
financial stability.
I just have to mention that, as Mr. Hoyer mentioned, I am
worried about the House Republicans' leadership, the reported
proposal to cut 2024 discretionary spending back to the 2022
levels.
I have received responses to most of my letters to Cabinet
Secretaries and to senior leaders, outlining the dangers posed
to the American people if the cuts were enacted. The numbers
are really horrifying.
Cuts cause irreparable damage to communities, gut programs
that every single American relies on. The proposals in my view
are unrealistic, not sustainable, and put people at risk.
So I look forward to discussing this with our witnesses
today. During the weeks to come, I will continue to work with
my colleagues in both Chambers, on both sides of the aisle, to
pass final funding bills. We did, we passed final funding
bills. Two years in a row we did that, with help from both
sides of the aisle and with both Houses.
So we can't--no Member, no Senator, no party, no chamber
can do it on its own, so thank you for being witnesses here
today, for your testimony. It could not be more timely. And
again, I want to say thank you to Chairman Womack and to
Ranking Member Hoyer and yield back. Thank you.
Mr. Womack. Thank you, Ms. DeLauro.
It is time now to hear our testimony today. Let me remind
both witnesses that your prepared statements will be entered
into the record, and you will each be given 5 minutes to
summarize your opening statements for the benefit of the
committee.
And with that, Madam Secretary, I invite your testimony,
and you are now recognized. Thank you very much for being here.

STATEMENT OF HON. JANET YELLEN

Secretary Yellen. Thank you, Chairman Womack and Ranking
Member Hoyer. Thank you for inviting me to join you today, and
I would also like to thank you for your leadership of this
subcommittee and support of the Treasury Department.
Two years into this administration, Treasury continues to
serve at the forefront of our Nation's response to some of its
most urgent challenges.
We have advanced our country's domestic and international
economic priorities thanks to the resources that you have
provided us. Our top priority is to protect the health of the
U.S. economy.
Two weeks ago, we learned of problems at two banks that
could have had significant impacts on the broader banking
system and the American economy. In the days that followed,
Treasury worked with the Federal Reserve and the FDIC to take
decisive and forceful actions to strengthen public confidence
in the U.S. banking system.
We took actions to protect all depositors at the two failed
institutions and provide additional liquidity for banks. This
was designed to mitigate risks to the banking system.
It is important to be clear, shareholders and debt holders
of the failed banks are not being protected by the government,
and no losses from the resolution of these banks are being
borne by the taxpayer.
Deposit protection is provided by the Deposit Insurance
Fund, which is funded by fees on insured banks.
As I have said, we have used important tools to act quickly
to prevent contagion, and they are tools we could use again.
The strong actions we have taken ensure that Americans'
deposits are safe. Certainly, we would be prepared to take
additional actions if warranted.
Beyond our work on the financial system, Treasury has also
led our administration's broader efforts to recover and
stabilize our economy from a once-in-a-century pandemic shock.
Our Office of Recovery programs help drive the fastest and
most inclusive labor market recovery in history by coordinating
the effective implementation of the American Rescue Plan
relief.
Today the unemployment rate is near historic lows. Our
economy has added over 12 million jobs since the start of 2021.
Our administration is now building on that progress by
effectively implementing long-term investments enacted by
Congress.
Internationally, Treasury continues to mount a swift, bold,
and enduring response to Russia's illegal war against Ukraine.
In my visit to Kyiv a month ago, Ukrainian officials told me
firsthand about the critical impact of our work.
As part of a broad coalition, we are responsibly disbursing
vital economic assistance to Ukraine. Since last February,
Treasury has also implemented over 2,500 Russian-related
sanctions.
We have degraded the Kremlin's ability to replace more than
9,000 pieces of heavy military equipment that it has lost on
the battlefield, and we have also stabilized global energy
markets and cut into the Kremlin's revenues by implementing
innovative caps on the price of Russian oil.
The President's fiscal year 2024 budget requests the
necessary resources to continue advancing our Nation's
priorities. I will highlight three imperatives.
First, the budget requests $14 billion in discretionary
resources for the IRS. For too long, the IRS has been woefully
underfunded. We are changing that. Our budget request provides
steady state operational funding that will allow taxpayers to
receive the best service possible. It will complement the one-
time, long-term investment in the IRS from the Inflation
Reduction Act.
We have already seen our investments pay off. For example,
the IRS has answered a million more phone calls during this
filing season than at this time last year, and now is the time
to build on this progress.
Second, our budget request shores up our capacity to
respond to Russia's immoral war and advance other national
security priorities. It includes $244 million for the Office of
Terrorism and Financial Intelligence to continue to administer,
enforce, and modernize our sanctions regime.
It also allows the office to expand financial intelligence
and sanctions-related economic analysis.
Further, the budget requests $229 million for FinCEN to
support its efforts to address deficiencies that illicit actors
exploit to evade scrutiny.
Third, this request enables us to continue our work to
bolster the long-term foundations of the American economy.
We are requesting $332 million for Treasury's departmental
offices which craft and implement policies to advance our
economic priorities and coordinate government-wide efforts to
promote financial stability and growth.
We are also asking for an increase for the Community
Development Financial Institutions Fund which expands credit
and financial support to historically underserved communities.
I want to end by thanking the men and women of the Treasury
Department for their service. Their dedication and commitment
inspire me every day, and I could not be prouder to call them
my colleagues. With that, I am happy to take your questions.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Womack. Thank you, Madam Secretary.
Madam Director, Ms. Shalanda Young, the time is yours.

STATEMENT OF SHALANDA YOUNG

Ms. Young. You will be happy to know I cut back. No need to
repeat some of the things the Treasury Secretary touched on,
but thank you for having me here today. I don't think you see
many witnesses who are happy to come and do this, but when one
returns home, it is a very happy day for me to get to come and
do this, and I still pinch myself and really because I get to
sit next to Secretary of the Treasury, Janet Yellen. So thank
you for having me.
President Biden came into this office with a very clear
plan, and you have heard him talk about this--to grow not from
the top down, but from the middle out and the bottom up. Over
the past 2 years, in the face of significant challenges, that
strategy has produced historic results for the American people.
You heard the Secretary of the Treasury talk about the
strong labor market, and the President's economic plan promotes
workers, has fueled a manufacturing boom--close to 800,000 jobs
in manufacturing added back--and is strengthening parts of the
country that have long been left behind.
And this President has done all of that while being
fiscally responsible. During his first 2 years in office the
deficit fell by more than $1.7 trillion, the largest decline in
American history. And the Inflation Reduction Act will reduce
the deficit by hundreds of billions more over the next decade.
The President's 2024 budget details a blueprint to build on
this progress and finish the job. It is built around four key
values--because budgets are values--investing in the American
people, lowering costs for families, protecting and
strengthening Social Security and Medicare, and reducing the
deficit.
And it does all of this while ensuring that no one earning
less than $400,000 per year will pay a penny more in new taxes.
The budget more than fully pays for its investments,
cutting deficits by nearly $3 trillion over the next decade by
asking the wealthy and large corporations to begin to pay their
fair share and cutting wasteful spending to special interests.
The budget builds on the progress made over the last 2
years and proposes additional policies to lower costs for
working families, including for health insurance, prescription
drugs, childcare, utilities, housing, college, energy, and
more.
When working families have a little bit more breathing
room, they can help power our economy.
The President believes that Social Security and Medicare
are more than just programs. They are promises we have made to
generations of America's seniors. The budget keeps that
promise, protecting and strengthening these programs without
cutting benefits for our seniors that have paid into these
programs their entire working lives.
It also invests in America and working families by
bolstering manufacturing, making our communities safer,
providing paid leave, supporting research in cancer, delivering
for our veterans, cutting taxes for families with children, and
more.
These investments will pay dividends for decades to come,
and in what will be a decisive decade for America and the
world, this budget reflects the National Security Strategy by
including robust investments in military readiness, our
diplomatic and development tools, and honors the sacred
commitment to our veterans.
I would like to end by saying a few words about OMB's
budget, and thank you to the members of this committee for
supporting OMB in the 2023 omnibus. Those resources have
allowed us to fill critical career staff vacancies, investing
in our outstanding workforce, and restoring OMB to its historic
staffing levels, overcoming what had been the second lowest
staffing level in 15 years, so thank you.
And it comes at a moment when OMB continues to take on
significant new areas of responsibility. To just list a few of
those, we are leading the President's Made in America agenda--
that office is based at OMB--implementing the Bipartisan
Infrastructure Law, transforming Federal customer service
delivery, and much more. So thank you for your support.
Our fiscal year 2024 request will allow OMB to continue
rebuilding and maintaining our career staff, which is necessary
for us to advance OMB's mission. Thank you for the opportunity
to appear before the committee today, and I look forward to
your questions.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Womack. Thank you, Director Young.
Members are advised that you have a timer in front of you,
and if that timer is working correctly, when it gets into the
yellow, that means you have got a minute left. In the case of
Steny Hoyer, we are going to start in the yellow.
I am only kidding, Steny. He is my friend.
Mr. Hoyer. Everybody else was hoping you were accurate.
Mr. Womack. But we will start our Q&A now with our
witnesses, and I will lead.
First of all, stabilizing the national debt should be a top
priority, not just this administration, but I think there is a
clarion call around the country for us to do something about
this unsustainable trajectory that we are on.
It is my belief that the President's 2024 budget falls
short of the deficit reduction needed to put our country on a
sustainable path.
Director Young, when you testified here last on the 2023
budget, we discussed the debt and the need for solutions to
address runaway spending and the national ledger.
So I have a couple of questions. The first one is a pretty
simple question. Do you believe that government spending
contributes to inflation?
Ms. Young. I have the Secretary of Treasury here who
probably can speak to inflation better than I can, but I will
point out, and it was mentioned by Mr. Hoyer, we see inflation
in most economies across the world. So what tells us is that
coming out of the pandemic, supply chain shortages have much
more to do with inflationary pressures we see across the globe.
Mr. Womack. Secretary Yellen.
Secretary Yellen. So, I would agree with that. We have now
had 7 months in which 12-month inflation has been declining. We
are seeing reduced pressures on supply chains, dramatic decline
in shipping costs, for example. That was an indicator of supply
chain problems.
The shifts in work--means of work during the pandemic gave
rise to big increases in housing prices and rental prices, and
that's--we can see in current indicators, that's now
stabilizing or coming down, and that will eventually pass
through into lower inflation.
So it is the first job--it is first the job of the Federal
Reserve to take actions to bring inflation down, but these
factors are lowering it, and the administration has taken
actions to bring down healthcare costs, to bring down energy
prices, and to lower the costs that burden American families.
Mr. Womack. So it is my opinion that Federal spending,
excessive Federal--I mean, we've got to spend money to finance
the role of government, but excessive Federal spending, in my
opinion, does contribute to inflation.
So the next question is, how much inflation should we
endure, and at what point will it be necessary for us to roll
back Federal spending?
Irrespective of the fact that has been suggested by the
ranker and by the two witnesses here today that the entire
world is suffering from inflationary spirals, so it is natural
that we--I don't necessarily subscribe to that notion that we
have to be like the rest of the world. We have some unique
opportunities to control it ourselves, to include the Federal
budget.
So at what point in time, Ms. Young, does it become
necessary for us to reduce Federal spending?
Ms. Young. So I will certainly answer that. You asked a
couple of different ways, should we keep our pressure on to
bring down inflation. My answer to that is absolutely. We share
that goal. We should understand what causes it.
As the Secretary has pointed out, the Fed has tools in
which to deal with inflation with regards to raising rates.
This administration has also taken action through the Inflation
Reduction Act.
But you are right, we share your concerns that Americans
are paying too much for household goods. But I would also point
out some of the investments you see here, like in childcare,
and housing, and college, is exactly to help American families
have a little more breathing room when they are trying to do
their budgets.
So we agree, and I understand there will be disagreements
on how to deal with that and bring that in, but my concern if
we go under the axe on some of these programs, I think about
low-income heating assistance, what happens to those families
if those Federal programs are pulled back so far that they hurt
the very people I think all of us want to help?
Mr. Womack. Thank you. I am out of time.
I will recognize now the ranking member, Mr. Hoyer.
Mr. Hoyer. I will try to stay in my time. First of all, let
me observe, Mr. Chairman, nobody likes inflation. Inflation
eats away particularly at those with fixed incomes. But.
I have served here, as all of you know, a long time, and
inflation under Ronald Reagan going into his third year, I
believe, was 10.7, so--as a comparison. But we need to bring
inflation down.
But I want to add something about a broader thing.
Madam Secretary, if we fail to increase the national debt
to allow headroom so that America can pay its bills, what
impact will that have on inflation?
Secretary Yellen. You're talking about the debt ceiling?
Mr. Hoyer. Yes.
Secretary Yellen. I think it is utterly imperative that we
raise the debt ceiling. That is about allowing the government
to pay the bills it has already incurred. It has nothing to do
with future spending.
And a failure by the government to pay the bills it has
incurred is something that would be economically and
financially catastrophic. It would have a horrendous effect on
financial markets where the United States is seen as an utterly
secure country in which to invest.
U.S. Treasury securities are seen as the safest bedrock of
our global financial system. The U.S. dollar serves as the
world's reserve currency.
We would be undermining that, and even coming close to the
debt ceiling without raising it, we saw in 2011 that led to a
downgrade of the U.S. credit rating, and this will raise
borrowing costs for American households and businesses for a
good long time.
If we fail to raise the debt ceiling and had to cut
spending to match the inflow of revenues that we had, we would
be certain to have a recession or worse. It would be a dramatic
cut in spending, and the financial market consequences would be
disastrous.
I strongly urge Congress to raise the debt ceiling, and to
fail to do so would lead to economic and financial chaos.
Mr. Hoyer. Madam Secretary, would it be fair to say that
every one of your predecessors, whether they be Republicans or
Democrats, shared that view.
Secretary Yellen. Absolutely.
Mr. Hoyer. Would it be fair to say that the last time we
raised that limit, it was a bipartisan vote in which the
Democrats joined with Republicans to avoid that irresponsible
action?
Secretary Yellen. There have been many occasions, 90 or
more occasions in which Democrats and Republicans have joined
together to raise the debt ceiling which simply allows the
Treasury Department to pay the bills the government has
incurred.
Mr. Hoyer. Madam Secretary, the last question I would ask
of you is, we passed an $80 billion--or $87 billion increase in
the Treasury--excuse me--in the IRS budget in the Inflation
Reduction Act. That was to get them back to a position they had
been over a decade ago, while the population of our country has
substantially increased and the complexity of our tax system
has increased.
The proposition was made that we had done so, so that there
would be armed guards at everybody's doorstep demanding that
they pay their taxes.
Everybody ought to pay their fair share but no more than
their fair share. Would you comment on what we need to do with
IRS? You mentioned it in your statement, but elaborate on what
the consequences of cutting that increase to get them to a
level where they can service the American people.
Secretary Yellen. So the IRS needs both discretionary
appropriations that are adequate to service a base level of
spending on an ongoing basis, and that budget for ongoing
expenditures has fallen by 20 percent in real terms just
between 2011 and 2019.
The staffing levels at the IRS are at 1970 levels in spite
of the fact that our GDP has risen enormously since that time,
and the need for staffing has increased. The consequence of
that has been a tax gap that, over a decade, is estimated at
$6- or $7 trillion.
Mr. Hoyer. Those are taxes due but not paid?
Secretary Yellen. Due but not paid. And the money that we
spend on the IRS, both discretionary and mandatory, contributes
to lowering the deficit because it enables more tax
collections.
And importantly it is also a question of service to the
American people, of do they get the phone calls they make
answered.
I promised that with this additional funding, this tax
season, the IRS response rate would be, in customer service,
would reach 85 percent from a level under 20 percent last year.
And so far, IRS is meeting that.
So Americans can see, as they have contact with the IRS,
that the IRS is going to be servicing their needs, and the
money that was allocated for mandatory spending over the next
decade will serve to modernize the IRS and transform it into a
modern agency that will work with businesses, work with
households, make it easy for them to pay their taxes and----
Mr. Hoyer. Thank you, Madam Secretary. My time is long
expired.
Secretary Yellen. Thank you.
Mr. Womack. Thank you.
Mr. Amodei.
Mr. Amodei. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I also want to say
that I would, like, to take up something with the ranking
member offline, but I was told this committee was a sexy
committee, and so we will need to straighten that out before we
go much further in this process.
Mr. Hoyer. Well, I am new to it, maybe I will find out
differently.
Mr. Amodei. We would be happy to put you through the new
charm school. Thank you, sir.
Madam Secretary, can you tell me how much the IRS budget
was increased in this last budget cycle?
Secretary Yellen. Sir, you mean between 2022 and 2023?
Mr. Amodei. Yes, ma'am.
Secretary Yellen. Or with the request?
Mr. Amodei. No. Between 2022 and 2023, the budget you are
operating now, how does it compare to the budget that you were
operating with the year before, if you know generally? And you
can get back to me later, but----
Secretary Yellen. There was $100 million decrease.
Mr. Amodei. Okay. And so can you tell me, if you have an
opinion, on what the IRS' reputation is amongst the country?
Have you done any polling or anything like that to see what
generally taxpayers think, middle, wealthy people, bottom--
bottom--I mean, are they kind of like the National Park
Service? Are they a little different? What do you think their
impression is?
Secretary Yellen. Well, it is extremely negative because
the IRS has been starved for resources, and so, there are
insufficient people----
Mr. Amodei. I don't mean to cut you off, but I have got
even less time than the ranking member does. So you think it is
resource-related that they have----
Secretary Yellen. Absolutely.
Mr. Amodei [continuing]. Have a bad reputation? It is
nothing to do with historical culture in the agency or anything
like that? Is that your testimony?
Secretary Yellen. The agency has been resource-starved, and
it's not been able to invest in the kind of technology that
makes it----
Mr. Amodei. Is it your testimony that you think it is
because of resource starvation that the IRS has an alleged
reputation amongst taxpayers in this country? Is that your
testimony? Is it because they were starved of resources in
order to have a better reputation?
Secretary Yellen. People know that if you call the IRS, the
phone isn't answered, and you--it's difficult to do business
with the IRS, and that reflects a shortage of resources.
Mr. Amodei. I will accept that as your answer.
Can you tell me the specific energy jurisdiction that is
housed in the Department of Treasury under the United States
Code?
Secretary Yellen. I am sorry?
Mr. Amodei. Can you tell me the specific energy
jurisdiction that is housed in the Department of Treasury under
the United States Code?
Secretary Yellen. Energy jurisdiction?
Mr. Amodei. Yes, ma'am.
Secretary Yellen. I am not sure I understand what that
means.
Mr. Amodei. Okay. Well, then let's try this one. Can you
tell me what the election jurisdiction is of the Department of
Treasury as reflected in the United States Code?
And I am just going off the statements that were made
earlier, ma'am, about, you know, I mean, they ranged--they were
wide-ranging, as well they could. I am just looking for
specific jurisdiction in existing statute for energy policy
from the Department of Treasury, from elections policy from the
Department of Treasury?
Secretary Yellen. Well, with respect to energy policy, for
example, our Office of Tax Policy has responsibility for
writing the regulations to implement all of the clean energy
tax credits that are part of the Inflation Reduction Act and
earlier----
Mr. Amodei. So that is--do you collaborate with anybody,
like the Department of Energy, or is that all Treasury's
bailiwick, when you are writing those regulations?
Secretary Yellen. We certainly collaborate with the
Department of Energy and other agencies that have expertise in
this area.
Mr. Amodei. Okay. And I was listening and I understand how
important programs like childcare or low-income energy
assistance, those are all good things. Is there any analysis
that takes place? Because unfortunately a lot of this is
multitasking, and some of it, quite frankly, is value
judgments.
But when you talk about, we have got to continue the
childcare tax credit, and we have got to continue low ener--is
there any analysis that takes place in terms of trying to find
a sweet spot between what that costs and what is unfunded in
the context of the debt?
Ms. Young. It is okay if I take it?
Mr. Amodei. Yes, ma'am.
Ms. Young. This is where I say, we have disagreements, but
this President believes it is incredibly important, if we put
proposals forward, like the Child Tax Credit, we should pay for
those.
Mr. Amodei. And I get that. I am just saying, we don't have
the luxury, as the Budget Committee--not the Budget Committee
formal, but the funding committee, to say, we are not going to
make this competitive in any way, shape, or form with other
Federal spending whether it be deficit spending or paid for by
some revenue stream.
So am I correct that the testimony is, we don't evaluate
what that does in the context of the overall appropriations
bill, those things are untouchable in terms of a budget
request?
Ms. Young. So I spent 3\1/2\ hours with your colleagues at
House budget who you know look at both sides of the ledger,
discretionary and mandatory revenues----
Mr. Amodei. Yeah, but Shalanda, that is a B committee.
Ms. Young. Don't make me do that. I really like Chairman
Arrington. Don't do that to me.
Mr. Amodei. I withdraw the comment.
Ms. Young. But that is the committee, and as the former
chairman of the Budget Committee sits there, we know
jurisdiction in Congresses are complicated, but what Budget
does bring to the table is, we look at spending, revenue, all
those things in one place, and see how our fiscal house is
doing.
Mr. Amodei. Thank you, and because I do not want to follow
in the esteemed ranking member of the committee's footsteps, I
will yield back, even though I have no time to yield back.
Mr. Womack. Thank you, Mr. Amodei.
I was about to have his words taken down about this comment
about Budget Committee. You know, that was unacceptable. Who is
next?
Ms. DeLauro. Me.
Mr. Womack. Ms. DeLauro, you are recognized.
Ms. DeLauro. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I will just
make one quick point. Mr. Amodei's point, there was never
ending connection made in the past about what contributes to
the deficit in terms of $1.7 trillion and a tax cut to the
richest one-tenth of 1 percent of the people in this country
and to the biggest corporations who pay no tax.
With that, Director Young, give us an idea of the real
impacts of the cuts that are being proposed, with regard to
using 2022 numbers, to the 2024 budget. Describe the human
consequences--children, families, seniors, veterans, and
millions of people across the country.
Ms. Young. Ms. DeLauro, you asked the administration, you
sent letters. We responded to those, and I will highlight a few
things we let you know in letter form in response.
We are concerned with budget cuts that would take us back,
that we would lose 11,000 FBI personnel, that we would lose
400,000 local law enforcement through cutting back on State and
local grants at the Department of Justice----
Ms. DeLauro. So we defund the police. Go ahead.
Ms. Young. We are concerned that 11,000 fewer rail safety
inspections would happen, 30,000 fewer miles of track
inspected, shut down of 125 air traffic control towers, TSA
wait times go up because fewer people, Pell grants for 80,000
students would be eliminated and reducing the maximum award by
$1,000.
Ms. DeLauro. It goes go on and on and on.
Ms. Young. So there are a lot of examples, and we
highlighted many of those in response to your letter.
Ms. DeLauro. Thank you, and I thank you for helping me to
get those response.
Have you heard, either Director Young or Secretary Young
(sic), my colleagues on the other side of the aisle made any
similar requests for information about the impact of the cuts
that they intend to try to make?
Ms. Young. Well, I certainly don't monitor everyone who
they call. If you are asking, have I entered into this
dialogue, not specifically about these cuts.
Ms. DeLauro. You haven't heard from the other side in terms
of the implication of the cuts.
Let me move to Director Yellen, because I want to try to
keep to the amount of time I have, Mr. Chair.
I appreciate your partnership on the outbound investment
review. Pleased that you, Commerce, et cetera, requested $60
million. This is a mechanism, through executive order, that
review and look at the outflow of U.S. capital and what effect
that would have on our supply chains, our economy, our economy
overall.
And so it is my understanding that the executive order will
look at artificial intelligence, quantum computing, and
semiconductors.
As you know, I want to make this stronger. I have tried to
look at, that we ought to include in this large-capacity
batteries, critical minerals, active pharmaceutical
ingredients.
And that is why I have introduced the National Critical
Capabilities Defense Act, which I might add is bipartisan, both
in the House and in the Senate.
How will the potential executive order on outbound
investment include or add sectors outside of those that will be
originally outlined by the administration? What is your plan to
expand and modify the executive order going forward?
Secretary Yellen. So we are working on this order and
trying to determine exactly what it should cover. We have been
focused on the most sensitive technologies and sectors that are
critical to our national security.
We think it is important to work with other countries to
make these restrictions effective, and these are areas where I
think we have the greatest chance of working collaboratively
with our partners.
But we are certainly open to engaging with you to discuss
what the right coverage is. Would look forward to conversations
there, I would say, around supply chain issues.
There are many initiatives underway to strengthen our
supply chains. That is a very important focus of the Inflation
Reduction Act when it comes to batteries, clean energy, and
reducing our dependence on China, for example, where many of
the critical minerals--so we are taking a range of actions on
those critical issues, in any event.
Ms. DeLauro. I would just add, with regard to active
pharmaceutical ingredients, let me just put it in real terms.
We had a pandemic where we found that the active pharmaceutical
ingredient in drugs efforts were not manufactured in the U.S.
but manufactured in China or in India. We need to bring that
back.
Secretary Yellen. I think supply chain issues are
critically important.
Ms. DeLauro. I thank you both very, very much for your
work.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Womack. Mr. Joyce.
Mr. Joyce. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Secretary Yellen, I am sure you know earlier this year the
European Union's Corporate Sustainability Reporting Directive
went into effect. This EU law has unprecedented scope and will
impose ESG-related requirements on many U.S. businesses,
requiring that they gather detailed information from their
suppliers, which include American small businesses. These rules
go farther than even the most aggressive proposals by our own
regulators.
As you know, SEC Chairman Gensler's proposal would mandate
disclosure of Scope 3 greenhouse gas emissions for American
companies. This proposal has been widely criticized for the
burden that it imposes on businesses of all sizes.
And as bad as the SEC's proposal is, the EU has now imposed
a standard that is much more burdensome in which many American
businesses are already preparing to comply with.
I am sure you can understand why this proposal is troubling
to Members of Congress when foreign governments mandate--put
their mandates on U.S. businesses.
On this matter, what is the administration doing to protect
U.S. businesses from burdensome foreign regulation and prevent
efforts which undermine our sovereignty?
Secretary Yellen. Well, different countries are moving at
different speeds and in different ways to address climate
change, and we are encountering conflicts with other countries
because of differences in our approaches.
I think as a fundamental, we agree with the European Union
that disclosure of climate-related risks is important so that
investors are able to make good choices about where they invest
and understand the risks in different companies.
So as a general matter, we believe, as the Europeans do, in
disclosure, which is behind Chair Gensler's proposal. I know he
has received many comments on.
But we are engaging with the European Commission to
understand the implications of their proposals. We want to
avoid unnecessary market fragmentation which different
approaches can produce.
We want to maintain a level playing field for U.S.
companies and make sure that they are not burdened with
incompatible regulatory requirements around the world. So this
is an important issue that we are focused on addressing.
Mr. Joyce. All right. I accept that.
Secretary, also this administration and you just claimed
prior, that billions of dollars in additional funding, provided
to the IRS in 2023 for increased enforcement, will somehow not
be used to target individuals making less than $400,000 per
year.
I got to tell you, I am a little skeptical of that claim,
and, you know, which specific mechanisms has your Department
and the IRS put into place to make sure that this money is not
used on burdensome audits for ordinary Americans?
Secretary Yellen. I have issued a directive to the IRS that
clearly prohibits them from using these funds to target
individuals or small businesses making under $400,000.
And let's be clear, the reason--the focus of this, there
are really two focuses of this money that has been allocated.
One is to greatly improve customer service, both for
individuals and for businesses, modernizing the IRS.
And the second is to address the tax gap, and the tax gap
isn't related to individuals or small businesses making under
$400,000 a year. It is wealthy, very high income individuals,
complex partnerships, and corporations that are, by and large,
underreporting and underpaying their tax.
And the money will go to hiring trained, experienced
accountants and techs, professionals who are able to do the
complex audits that are necessary to recover those funds.
So there would be no motivation to want to target taxpayers
making under $400,000, and I have directed the IRS that they
may not do so.
Mr. Joyce. For 10 years now I have been on this committee,
and money has been given year after year to automate the
processes at the IRS. And now you are saying that they need
more manpower versus automation?
Secretary Yellen. They need manpower and automation. And
there will be, for example, of the resources in the budget for
2024, the lion's share will go toward technology and
operations, some toward net increases and enforcement.
That will take time, but there will be massive improvements
over time in technology, and we will end up with a modern
agency that people will have much better experience and
companies interacting with.
Mr. Joyce. I yield back.
Mr. Womack. Mr. Pocan.
Mr. Pocan. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thanks for holding
this hearing. I appreciate it. And thanks to our witnesses. I
would like to try to get to two areas. So let me start first
kind of just talking about the economy, worried about the debt
ceiling that we are facing. So we just talked a little bit
about interest rates and Moody's Analytics. They had economists
who predicted that we would have global market panic in the
scale of the 2008 financial crisis that would result in more
than 7 million job loss, and unemployment rate of over 8
percent, elimination of 10 trillion in household wealth and
decline in real GDP of more than 4 percent. So that means
people are paying more for small business loans, for cars, for
homes.
The second part that I would like to ask Director Young
specifically about that a debt limit breach could disrupt
expected payments to the military, veterans, and seniors,
specifically, 65 million Americans who receive Social Security
and Medicare benefits, and 18 million veterans who could lose
access to their benefits, that is 330,000 people in my State.
Could you just briefly address that aspect of the debt ceiling?
Ms. Young. Many of us have experienced shutdowns where
people don't get paid until the government reopens, and we--
this is not that. You have heard the Secretary of Treasury lay
out the catastrophic economic fallout from a default and what
it means if we can get close to flirting with. But it also
means those people who have payments, like our military, like
our veterans, like our seniors who are on Social Security and
Medicare. We will know the revenues we have as Treasury
processes those. So we cannot guarantee what gets paid. And it
will be a very chaotic situation where those who are allowing
the government for salaries and services, that is what default
is. That means we cannot guarantee that they will receive their
paychecks or the services in which many of them have paid into
their entire lives.
Mr. Pocan. Thank you. I just think back home people don't
talk about raising the debt limit. That is very Washington-
speak. But they talk about whether or not they get their Social
Security check, their veterans benefit, whether interest rates
are going to rise when they buy something. And I think those
are the real ramifications that we should be talking about more
as we do this.
Second area--and this is I will admit is a little bit out
of left field--but I have a real concern where we are at right
now with the fed and raising of interest rates. And, Secretary
Yellen, this is specifically for you, I respect your opinion so
much. I know you are not in charge of the Fed, but I do respect
your opinion.
So the normal business, the normal model, I guess, is if
inflation is high, the Fed has kind of a singular blunt tool of
raising interest rates until people lose jobs. I guess that is
best way of putting it in a blunt way. But I don't feel that
this is a normal time that interest rates go up and that works.
I feel like--and I am a small business owner for 35 years. And
I could tell you what I am seeing right now.
First of all, our offices--I am guessing everyone has
unprecedented requests for passports right now, because people
after three years of not traveling want to get out and go
somewhere. And that is not going to be stopping. And in our
business, we deal business-to-business trade association
nonprofit, that is not stopping. They haven't had some of the
events for the last 3 years. They are doing it no matter what
happens. So demand isn't necessarily going down at the rate you
would expect. Yet, we are affecting the housing market. We are
affecting banks right now. We are having a lot of negative
effects by continuing to raise the interest rates, but we are
not--it is not normal model. I just don't feel like it from
everything I am seeing and experiencing from being on the
planet for 58 years.
So my question is, in your opinion, are we doing the right
effort--corporate profits are way high. There is a lot of
things that are askew as you look at the model that is
happening. I feel like, ultimately, this could have some really
negative recession-type ramifications and other ramifications,
and I am worried about continuing to raise interest rates.
Secretary Yellen. So first let me say, I don't want to
comment on the Fed's interest rate decisions. I respect their
independence. While I was over there myself and had to make
these decisions, I wear a different hat now and don't want to
comment on theirs. But I have long said, I do believe there is
a path by which we can maintain a strong labor market by--and
also bring down inflation. And I believe that is the path that
the Fed would ideally like to follow. The labor market at the
moment is extremely tight. There are roughly two vacancies for
every person looking for a job. And that pressure is--it is
certainly not the only factor involved in inflation, but it is
contributing to inflation, particularly in services. So while
some inflation is coming down because of supply chain or
reasons and impact of Russia's war on Ukraine, the Fed is
concerned that they need to relieve some of that pressure.
That doesn't mean we have to have a recession. I would
admit that it is a risk whenever monetary policy is being
tightened. But I believe that there was a path that will bring
it down without really damaging the labor market. And that is
what I hope we will see.
Mr. Pocan. I appreciate it. I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Womack. Thank you. Mr. Moolenaar.
Mr. Moolenaar. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Secretary Yellen,
Director Young, thanks for being here with us here today.
Secretary Yellen, on February 17, over a month ago, I sent
you a letter and asked you in your capacity as chair of the
Committee on Foreign Investment in the U.S., CFIUS, to provide
an update regarding large foreign investments in Michigan. Are
you familiar with that letter?
Secretary Yellen. Yes, I am familiar with the letter.
Mr. Moolenaar. To date, I have not received a response. And
my constituencies wanted to know that you are reviewing
investments that could pose a possible risk to our country and
are doing it in a timely manner. When can I expect a response
to my letter regarding a CFIUS review?
Secretary Yellen. I apologize that we haven't responded and
promise that we will do so quickly. But I do want you to know
that in the work we do in sharing CFIUS, that we are very
focused on evaluating foreign investments in the United States
that can impose national security risks. I can't speak to
whether particular transactions are or are not being reviewed
by CFIUS. That is subject to strict confidentiality. But the
issues that you raise in your letter are ones that CFIUS takes
very seriously and is attentive to.
Mr. Moolenaar. Okay. So I understand you don't want to
comment on specific situations. But can you comment on what, in
your view, would constitute a risk? You know, if a China-based
company has CCP members on their boards, do you believe that
company with CCP members on its board constitutes a risk in the
United States if it is located here?
Secretary Yellen. I don't want to make a blanket assertion
about that. It certainly could. But what CFIUS does is a
thorough and detailed analysis of whether or not the investment
is in areas or involves technologies or things that would
involve a national security risk.
Mr. Moolenaar. Okay. Would a company investing in the
United States, if it has in its articles of association the
requirement for the company to set up a CCP organization to
carry out party activities in accordance with the Constitution
of the CCP, would you see that as a risk to the United States?
Secretary Yellen. Well, it certainly could be a risk. I
think I would need to know a little bit more about what the
activity is and what the investment is, but certainly, that is
something that could certainly constitute.
Mr. Moolenaar. You know, if a company was requiring
Americans to adhere to the principles of a hostile foreign
government, would that constitute a risk?
Secretary Yellen. Well, I think we would need to know
exactly what the business is of the company and how it impacts
national security, because the focus of CFIUS is really on
national security. So we would have to take these concerns to
national security.
Mr. Moolenaar. And if a foreign company requires its
subsidiaries to promote influence and intelligence operations
by foreign governments within the U.S., would that constitute a
risk?
Secretary Yellen. Well, that certainly seems to go directly
to national security.
Mr. Moolenaar. You know, as the committee with
responsibility to oversight, what you are telling me is this is
a very important matter.
Secretary Yellen. Absolutely.
Mr. Moolenaar. But we don't have the information on how
many CFIUS reviews are being conducted, which, you know,
priority projects are being looked at. When communities or
States are looking at different projects, how do they know how
to make their decision? You had said earlier how transparency
is very important in making decisions, and I agree with that.
What guidelines do you have for communication of this?
Secretary Yellen. I can have my staff get back to you and
give you more detail on this. And they may be able to offer
briefings without going into details about----
Mr. Moolenaar. Sure.
Secretary Yellen [continuing]. Specifics that could be
helpful.
Mr. Moolenaar. And I think it is simply because you know,
and I noticed and I appreciated your comments about Russia, the
situation in Ukraine. You mentioned China recently. Obviously,
there is a--you know, new Select Committee on China. I happen
to be part of that, as others do. And, you know, in looking at
that, we want to make sure we consider the threats posed by the
CCP. And obviously, they are doing a lot of investments in the
United States. And you are on point for this with the CFIUS
reviews?
Secretary Yellen. These investments get very detailed
analysis and serious review. And it is a very thorough process
and taken very seriously to try to identify national security
risks. I would ask my staff to give you more details on this.
Mr. Moolenaar. Thank you.
Secretary Yellen. But----
Mr. Moolenaar. Thank you, Madam Secretary. Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Womack. Mr. Bishop.
Mr. Bishop. Thank you very much. Let me welcome our two
witnesses, Secretary Yellen, Director Young. The President's
budget invests in America are lowering costs, strengthening
Social Security, Medicare, and attacking the deficit. On the
other hand, the proposed unprecedented cuts in fiscal year 2024
to fiscal year 2022 levels that the Republicans have offered,
seems to, or will have a--seems to have a tremendous effect on
education, public safety, research, and nutrition. Would this
have a real damaging effect on our families, communities, and
economy and competitiveness?
The Treasury provides some critical services that American
people rely on every day: payments, tax refunds, taxpayer
assistance. It appears to me that if we go back to 2022 levels,
it would be devastating to the American people. Treasury is
responsible for revenue collection, financial management,
borrowing, and debt collection for the entire government, and
promoting international economic stability.
You protect the integrity of our financial system, and you
combat global financial crime and corruption. And, of course,
it would appear that going back to 2022 levels would certainly
impair the ability to monitor risks to ensure an effective and
unified approach to promoting financial stability as we are
faced with right now. Our national security would appear to be
impacted. And if either of you can comment on this.
The Office of Terrorism and Financial Intelligence would be
jeopardized--our national security would be jeopardized because
you wouldn't be able to enforce sanctions, including the
sanctions targeting Russia and the--when we are supporting
Ukraine, this would appear to send the wrong message to Mr.
Putin. So it seems like your ability to carry out your
functions would be tremendously limited. And, of course,
looking here domestically, you have the responsibility of the
community of government financial institutions grants and
assistance. And, of course, if you have to cut that back, if
means that many of America's most economically disadvantaged
communities would be hurt because there would be fewer resource
for small business living, affordable housing, and consumer
products and services to help with our economic development and
job growth. It just seems as if all of this is a big, big
problem and a step backwards.
Can the two of you comment on what that really means for
the American people; what the Republicans are trying to do by
going back from the proposed increases that the President has
offered to the 2022 levels?
Secretary Yellen. Well, you have given an excellent list of
ways in which Treasury programs would be impacted. The Internal
Revenue Service, you would see, is we now are operating with an
85 percent level of customer service. It would revert to the
abysmal levels we had before funding was increased. And the
money that is allocated to the Inflation Reduction Act for
modernization of the agency would have to go for the basics of
processing returns. As you said, cuts for the Office of
Terrorism and Financial Intelligence would compromise our
ability to put in place sanctions. Cuts to FINCEN would mean we
are less able to combat corruption and money laundering
globally; cuts to the CDFI fund would mean we are less able to
support disadvantaged communities and financing there. And
really, these are all important ways in which Treasury would be
effective.
Mr. Bishop. Would you say that to do that would really be
to fly in the face of common sense and the protection of the
American people?
Secretary Yellen. Yes, absolutely. And with respect to the
IRS, it would be deficit increasing, not deficit reducing,
because the money that we provide to the IRS has a great impact
on its ability to collect taxes. And so it would be a false
economy.
Mr. Bishop. I think my time has expired.
Mr. Womack. Mrs. Hinson.
Mrs. Hinson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Good afternoon,
ladies. Secretary Yellen, thank you for coming before our
committee today. It is nice to meet you in person and get the
opportunity to ask you some questions. And, Shalanda, Madam
Director, it is great to talk to you. It was great to have a
conversation yesterday as well. I really appreciate your time
in answering some of my questions yesterday before the
committee hearing.
So what I want to start with, Secretary Yellen, is I want
to follow up a little bit on your comments that my colleague
was kind of asking about CFIUS, specific to national security.
Obviously, with Treasury's role in making sure we are taking a
better look at transactions and foreign investments.
Specifically, the foreign investments by entities like the
Chinese Communist Party, I am also on the Select Committee on
Competition with China. So we are working to, of course, combat
their efforts to gain control over critical areas of our
society. It has never been more vital in my mind to conduct
that critical oversight of our foreign investments that do risk
our national security.
And so, a hot topic on the Hill today. I want to touch on
TikTok. Because for the past several years, TikTok has been
negotiating a national security agreement contract with CFIUS
in response to the criticisms that the app is putting American
data at risk. But earlier today, we learned that TikTok had
published a video. There was a video on of a date of an Energy
and Commerce hearing before it was publicly noticed. And this
video--I have a clip here--but it was inciting violence against
Members. And I seek unanimous consent to enter this reporting
into the record, if I may, sir?
Mr. Womack. Any objection? Without objection.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mrs. Hinson. But I see this as directly threatening, and
this is something that this platform enabled by the Chinese
Communist Party has enabled. So believe the time to act frankly
was yesterday here. And, additionally, the Treasury Department
issued a statement just today that CFIUS will not clear any
transaction unless it determines that there are no unresolved
national security concerns.
So will you commit to us today that if CFIUS is aware of
any, any outstanding unresolved national security concerns,
that a TikTok transaction will not be cleared?
Secretary Yellen. So I regret that I cannot talk about an
individual transaction, even to indicate whether or not CFIUS
is looking at it. There are strict confidentiality obligations.
But on the more general point, absolutely, CFIUS looks very
carefully at these transactions, and will not clear a
transaction if there are national security concerns. And when
it comes to data, we are seeing an increasing number of cases
that do present risks around this issue of the type that have
been mentioned in connection with TikTok.
Mrs. Hinson. Well, obviously, time is of the essence here,
right? We talked about this post that lived online for over 40
days. It has taken years to get to a place where we would have
a decision. So why is it taking so long? We are at 3 years now.
Secretary Yellen. There is ongoing litigation over TikTok
that is not yet resolved.
Mrs. Hinson. So if that litigation is playing out, and if
you have legitimate concerns about national security, is there
any tool that you can use to put a stop to this? Is there any
tool that you have in your toolbox?
Secretary Yellen. I mean, yes, there are tools that are in
the toolbox.
Mrs. Hinson. What would you use then? I mean, while this
litigation is ongoing, what mechanisms could you turn to to
help protect the American people in this case against the
Communists--Chinese Communist Party-enabled platform?
Secretary Yellen. So I am sorry, I really can't talk about
the details of this case. But there can be----
Mrs. Hinson. Can you talk about it in generalities in terms
of the tools that you might use. Maybe let's take TikTok's name
off of it. If it is, in general, a threatening entity, what
would be the tools that you would use?
Secretary Yellen. Requirements that the business of the
company be structured in the United States in a way that
protects national security.
Mrs. Hinson. Okay. While we are on the subject of national
security, I will move on, but what is the Department doing to
make sure that its core services are protected from cyber
attacks. Cyber hygiene is obviously a very crucial part of
protecting Americans' information. What is the agency doing to
make sure that you are hardened?
Secretary Yellen. So we are greatly enhancing our
cybersecurity investments. We have requested increases to be
able to do that, especially given the role that the Department
plays in imposing sanctions. We are a target of a serious
number of cyber attacks, and we are investing very heavily in
cybersecurity to meet very high standards.
Mrs. Hinson. All right. Thank you, Madam Secretary. I yield
back.
Mr. Womack. Mr. Cartwright.
Mr. Cartwright. Chairman Womack, Ranking Member Hoyer,
thank you for holding this very important hearing. And,
Secretary Yellen, thank you for coming, and Director Young, you
as well.
Director Young, my question is for you. It was January 1,
2006, that Medicare part D came into play. And that is when it
started to be used in this country. And it meant that the
pharmaceuticals were provided to seniors on Medicare. But it
came with a gimmick. And the gimmick was that Medicare was not
able to use its purchasing power. Medicare was not able to talk
price. Medicare was not able to negotiate with drug companies
as it bought its supply for the seniors who depended on it. You
tell people that, Well, wait a minute, why couldn't Medicare
negotiate with drug companies? And the answer is it was part of
American law. We made that part of American law here before
2006. And people have a hard time believing that that happened.
But with the Inflation Reduction Act, Congress has begun to
break that logjam. And, certainly, it is a limited formulary.
Formulary being the $50 word, which means a list of
medications. It is a limited formulary to start with. But
Medicare has now been authorized to negotiate prices for some
of these drugs. And we have seen the effects. We have seen the
effect of insulin prices calming, crashing down. And all of
those people who depended on insulin, you know that they
appreciate that.
My question for you, Director Young, is what next steps do
you think are necessary? And what more can we do to lower drug
prices for seniors in this country?
Ms. Young. You have laid out what the Inflation Reduction
Act does. I don't need to repeat that. But you are absolutely
right, that law began to change the government's ability to
negotiate drug prices. I don't need to tell all of you what
this country pays for drugs. It is vastly higher than other
economies around the world. You just have to ask yourself why
that is. In this budget, we go further in the Inflation
Reduction Act where more drugs will be brought into
negotiation. The timeframe will be brought forward. It not only
reduces money for seniors; the government would save $160
billion by doing more drugs in negotiation and bringing that
forward.
In addition, 40 more billion dollars would be saved for
taxpayers by instituting the inflation rebate. Meaning, drug
company, if you are raising your drug more than inflation, you
have to pay the American taxpayer back. And it is really using
the purchasing power of Medicare to do two things: Bring down
costs for seniors and taxpayers, and extend the life of
Medicare. That is part of our proposal to help the insolvency
issue for Medicare.
Mr. Cartwright. Thank you for that. Of course, we had a
State of the Union address not too long ago, and the President
could not have made it clearer his commitment to ensuring the
benefits provided by Social Security and Medicare. There have
been voices, not everyone's voice, but there have been voices
that are calling for cuts to those programs, for those
insurance programs.
And my question for you is how can Congress work to reject
any efforts to cut Medicare and Social Security benefits that
people paid into their whole work lives and that people depend
on in their seniority and in times of disability?
Ms. Young. Look, I work for the President of the United
States who has made clear that he will oppose any reductions to
benefits in both the Social Security and Medicare programs. He
believes, as I mention in my opening statements, these aren't
just programs, they are promises to generations of America's
seniors, like my 94\1/2\-year-old grandmother, all of the money
they have put into the system should be available to them, and
their government promised that to them, and this President will
keep that promise.
Mr. Cartwright. Well, I thank you both for appearing this
afternoon. And I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Womack. Mr. Carl.
Mr. Carl. Oh, thank you, Secretary Yellen and Director
Young. Thank you for being here and being able to speak in
front of the committee. I would like to make a quick statement
here, though. I have not heard one single member in the
Republican Party say anything about cutting Medicare and social
benefits here. So I think that is a falsehood that is being
brought up and spun for political purposes.
With that said, Secretary, in regards to the bailout of the
Silicon Valley Bank and Signature Bank, I want to ask you a
couple of questions. I talked to local bankers. I try to stay
in tune with them. And they tell me that the problem of this
bank being upside down, for lack of better words, should have
been caught by the board review on the call report 12/31 was
it? Was it flagged?
Secretary Yellen. Well, I am not responsible for
supervision of these banks. So that is a question that should
be addressed to the appropriate banking----
Mr. Carl. But how about the government overseeing of these
committees, did anyone catch it, did anyone review it.
Secretary Yellen. Well, this is not the job of Treasury to
be overseeing the regulatory agencies, either the Federal
Reserve or the FDIC.
Mr. Carl. Okay. All right.
Secretary Yellen. They have supervisory authority here.
Mr. Carl. Okay. So I watched quite a few videos on you last
night and read a lot. So very impressive, thank you. I watched
your question from Senator Lankford from last week, I believe
it was. And, again, it seems the administration is putting
itself in a position to depict the winners and the losers in
our business community, and that bothers me. I have been in
business for myself for close to 40 years, various businesses.
And the biggest problem I always had, especially in the
healthcare field, was the government itself getting in the way.
So I am always very sensitive to that.
I developed my opinion about this from a statement that you
made, and it said that the board would have to have a super
majority vote to cover 100 percent of the investors in other
banks in the future, like you are doing in the Silicon Valley
Bank.
Secretary Yellen. Well, let me be clear in what I said.
Mr. Carl. Okay.
Secretary Yellen. In the case of the two banks that were
put into resolution, Silicon Valley Bank and Signature Bank, we
invoked a so-called systemic risk exception. And we did that
because we determined--and when I say ``we,'' I mean super
majorities of the FDIC--actually the vote was unanimous--the
FDIC Board, the Federal Reserve Board, and myself after
consulting with the President, we felt that the failure to
protect uninsured depositors would create contagion, and that
there was a risk of runs on many banks that would not only
undermine the security of the depositors, but also compromise
the ability of the American banking system to meet the credit
needs of our country, of households, and businesses. So we took
this step. The Federal Reserve also took a step to create a
facility that would improve access to liquidity for banks that
are faced with deposit runs. I believe our tools worked. And
what I have said is that these are tools we could use again for
an institution of any size if we judge that its failure would
pose contagion that----
Mr. Carl. With all due respect, I am running out of time.
And I have got six more questions here I know I won't get to,
so I apologize for this. But, you know, my question is simple
with this short time I have got left. I am glad to see that you
brought the community banks to the small banks into the
conversation, because they were really feeling like they were
being fed to the wolves, for lack of better terms, and the big
banks were taking over the conversation. So the small bank--and
I appreciate you doing that. And that was something I pulled
from that conversation last night.
But let me ask you a question. If a small rural community
bank in Alabama that invests into the rich coal mine
communities and/or our oil drilling in the Gulf of Mexico
investments or doesn't adhere to the policies of the ESG, the
political left-wing policies that are pushed on, do you think
they would get 100 percent bailout, too?
Secretary Yellen. Really, this has nothing to do with the
particular business of the bank in question. It really is a
judgment about whether or not the failure of the bank and the
losses imposed on uninsured depositors threaten contagion that
could undermine the broader banking system.
Mr. Carl. And I am out of time. Thank you, ma'am. I
disagree with you. I think a lot of the voters disagree with
you too. But thank you for your time, and I yield back.
Mr. Womack. Mr. Ciscomani.
Mr. Ciscomani. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chair. And
Secretary Yellen, thank you for being here. And Director Young,
nice to meet you, both. I appreciate your time. And thank you
for coming before the committee to testify today. The state of
our economy is one of the most important challenges that we are
facing, here in Congress and everywhere it goes, especially in
District Six that I know well. I am worried about the rampant
inflation, unchecked government spending, and our national debt
as well. And as we have seen in the past few weeks, information
is spreading at a very quicker pace than ever before. A much
quicker pace than ever before. And stability is needed in that.
Now, Secretary Yellen, I would like to follow up on some of
the questions here by my colleagues regarding the recent bank
failures. So I have just a series of short questions. And maybe
you can just help me answer as many of them as we can get to in
this short period of time. Have you determined whether a
special assessment will be needed to replenish the FDIC's
deposit insurance fund?
Secretary Yellen. If there are losses, then a special
assessment would be needed. It is not clear yet, I believe the
FDIC, as a preliminary matter, assessed that there would be a
$2.5 billion loss in the case of Signature, but that is not--
that is not a final determination.
Mr. Ciscomani. And also to follow up in the question
regarding--thank you for that--on the regional banks and
community banks, for example, in Arizona, will Arizona
community banks be on the hook for this special assessment?
Secretary Yellen. It would be determined by the FDIC's
formulas and decisions.
Mr. Ciscomani. I am sorry, is that a yes or a no?
Secretary Yellen. I think it is a yes.
Mr. Ciscomani. It is a yes. Okay. And you stated the
Treasury Exchange--that the Treasury's Exchange Civilization
Fund may serve as a backstop. How much money is there currently
in the fund?
Secretary Yellen. Including SDR, I believe there is about
$200 billion in the fund.
Mr. Ciscomani. And the funding as depleted in that fund,
would taxpayers be on the hook to replenish it?
Secretary Yellen. No.
Mr. Ciscomani. And do you believe that the Fed's decision
to raise interest rates will result in additional bank runs?
Secretary Yellen. I am not going to discuss the Fed's
decisions on interest rates.
Mr. Ciscomani. How do you think that would impact this
subject and the conversation, the raising of the interest
rates?
Secretary Yellen. The Fed is addressing a significant
inflation problem. Making decisions that in its independent
judgment are best. Also, I know taking account of financial
stability concerns. And I am not going to comment on their
decisions.
Mr. Ciscomani. Thank you, Madam Secretary. Mr. Chairman, I
yield back.
Mr. Womack. I think Mr. Cloud is on his way back, and we
will get to Mr. Cloud when he returns. So we are going to move
into round two of our Q&A with the witnesses. And I will lead.
I am going to, Director Young, put my budget hat back on. I
can't help but do that. And I want to talk about improper
payments. And, frankly, it is a subject that causes me to
scratch my head. It is reported by the GAO that federal
agencies disburse an estimated $281 billion in improper
payments in fiscal year 2021 with cumulative improper payments
totaling $2.2 trillion over the past 20 years. Let's repeat
that. $2.2 trillion in improper payments. Now, what has always
kind of been a mystery to me is if we know we have paid it, and
we know it is improper, how do we continue to live with that
reality?
So, Director Young, help me understand how OMB is focused
on reducing improper payments? And I have just given you some
numbers, so if I am off base, if I am out of bounds on the
subject, let me know. But I remember when we were doing, as
budget chair, when we were doing the fiscal year 2019 budget,
obviously, reducing improper payments was a critical component
of us getting to achievable balance. So help me understand this
improper payment phenomenon.
Ms. Young. Look, I think this is the place we can find
commonality in wanting to find solutions. You know, not to--
with the Secretary here not to speak in her stead here, but one
thing--and I have talked to Senator Kennedy from Louisiana
about this, who is interested in making sure that Treasury has
access to the Social Security death data to make sure that we
are paying living human beings. That seems common sense to us,
and we have taken steps to make sure that that happens.
Unemployment insurance is, I believe, especially during the
pandemic, the poster child for having this conversation. The
budget has a proposal that would give us more tools to go
after--look we saw criminal syndicates taking advantage of
programs that American citizens needed during the pandemic. We
should lock arms, in my opinion, and come together and make
sure they cannot take advantage. Part of the problem in
unemployment insurance is it is 50 different systems. Each
State runs their own system which means it is hard to stabilize
those systems from a Federal level because each State are in
different places. We have got to do something about that. And I
hope we can work together on going after fraud, especially in
the unemployment system. And we have proposals to do this. And
I am happy to work with anyone to go after this, because these
programs need to be there for hardworking Americans who need
the stopgap between jobs and should not be taken advantage by
fraudsters, and, frankly, big criminal organizations who have
just gotten very good at gaming the system.
Mr. Womack. Do we not have the proper controls in place to
prevent it?
Ms. Young. Not currently. And part of the problem, as I
said, is this very bifurcated State-led system. It is a
federal-funded program run by the States. And we have got to do
a better job of just getting in the weeds with each State,
meeting them where they are, but it has got to improve.
Mr. Womack. Yeah, well, people have testified in this
hearing today, including my friend, Steny, have indicated--and
I agree that we all want people to pay their fair share. And
nobody should be asked to pay really more than their fair
share. But I think the American public would be just as
concerned, if not more concerned, with the alarming rate of
improper payments coming out of the Federal Treasury and going
to people who should not be collecting that money. Would you
not agree with that?
Ms. Young. Yeah, and this is exactly----
Mr. Womack. I mean, it is outrageous.
Ms. Young. That is exactly why we ever posed the--look, it
shows that an investment in doing away with the fraud that you
talked about has a return on investment of 10-to-one. Why
wouldn't we do that? And I think that is a place for
commonality as we work through these--what is going to be a
very complex budget and appropriations season. So I look
forward to working with you on that.
Mr. Womack. Last question is regarding the Federal
workforce, and maybe we can just take this for the record and
get back to me on it. But the increase in Federal workforce by
82,000 people, 3.6 percent, a lot of these people are working
from home. I will submit a question for the record on this,
because I am curious as to what--how we are justifying the
work-from-home piece and not reducing our footprint, if you
will, from a facilities point of view. But we will submit that
for the record later. And I will yield my six seconds to the
distinguished ranking member, Mr. Hoyer.
Mr. Hoyer. Thank you for your generosity. Let me ask a
question to follow up on the chairman's question. A, we all
agree fraud on the Federal Government that undermines the
ability of the Federal Government to help people who are in
need, legitimately, ought to be ferreted out and prosecuted,
period.
Madam Secretary, I want to ask you a question, and I have
talked to the chair about it, and it bugs us both. I hear
advertisements all the time on TV about people who, for
whatever reason, didn't pay their taxes. And this company is
going to make sure that they cut their taxes in half or a third
or a quarter. Now, if I am listening to that ad, and I haven't
paid my taxes, or am about to pay them, and I don't have the--
whatever, that encourages me not to pay them and get a better
deal. It is not really a question. But you ought to look at
that. I am going to ask the IRS Commissioner the same question
because it is--as if you really don't have to pay your taxes,
and we will get you a deal. Whether you are making $4 or $4
billion, we will make you a deal. And I think that undermines
the voluntary compliance, which the U.S. has been very high on.
Let me go back--and you don't need to answer that question, but
it is a concern.
Madam Director, you mentioned a figure in terms of getting
rid of fraud and what the return is on enforcement. What is the
return on money in enforcement on IRS?
Ms. Young. I think the Secretary has spoken to this. What
the Inflation Reduction Act did, if that is rescinded, the CBO
has made clear that that will add to the deficit to the tune of
about $100 billion, because they will estimate as much as all
budget scorekeepers will, that that will bring in less to close
this tax gap. So we will lose money for the Treasury.
Mr. Hoyer. The figure I recall from my previous life was
about seven-, eight-, nine-to-one return on the investment in
enforcement. You get $7 or $8 or $9 in return. If that is the
case, then cutting that has that $100 billion consequence that
you just referred to.
Let me close with this: We won't have a third round, and
this is not a question. But we talked about debt. And I am very
concerned about debt. And I would like to think that we are
fiscally responsible. We need to be fiscally responsible. In
the last Congress, we spent a lot of money as a result of the
pandemic. Excuse me, the Congress before that, the 116th with
the signature of Donald Trump, and the agreement of the
Secretary of Treasury. Why? Because we had an extraordinary
challenge if it was not resolved would have cost much more than
the money we actually spent. Notwithstanding the fact it was a
large number. And so, I think we need to work together as we
worked together on the debt limit in the Trump administration,
as we worked together on meeting the pandemic in the Trump
administration, we need to work together to get our country on
sound, fiscal footing, while at the same time, investing in
making sure that our economy grows as vibrant, which will also
reduce the deficit.
Now, lastly, this is not a question. None of these are
questions. I am pontificating. As it will come as a great shock
to everybody in this committee, I have a passing interest in
where the FBI is going to be located in the future.
Mr. Womack. No.
Mr. Hoyer. I knew that would shock the chairman.
A consolidated FBI headquarters remains among my top
priorities. I remain concerned about the low waiting of the
cost criteria as only 10 percent. If we are concerned about
deficit, we have got to be concerned about costs for what we
buy. Ten percent being ascribed--this is not a question--is, in
my opinion, not justifiable. The chairman can speak for
himself, but we have had conversations about that.
In 2016, the House resolution authorizing this project,
Congress made it clear that GSA should consider the total cost
of the government relocation site preparation and site
acquisition. Congress has made clear that whatever pocket of
money comes out of it should be counted as part of the cost of
this site, whatever pocket it comes out of. I just made that
observation. I don't want a response at this point in time, but
I will continue to express my concern on that case. And, Mr.
Chairman, you and I have discussed that, and we will continue
to discuss it.
Ms. Young. Mr. Chairman, if I could thank the ranking
member for his passion on this. I appreciate it, and I will
take it back.
Mr. Womack. I look forward to the conversation. Welcome
back, Mr. Cloud. Your turn.
Mr. Cloud. Thank you, Chairman. And thank you, Secretary
and Director, for being here today. I wanted to ask the
Secretary some questions. First of all--and I know you will
probably give us a 3-hour lecture on this and still have more
to say about it, but if you can give us the 30- to 60-second
version on how important is it that the U.S. remain the world
reserve currency?
Secretary Yellen. Well, I believe we derive significant
benefit from the dollars serving as the reserve currency. It is
an important way in which we lower the costs, the borrowing
costs that the Federal Government pays on its outstanding debt.
And I would say that in imposing sanctions and trying to
address global problems like Russia's invasion of Ukraine, the
fact that the U.S. dollar is used so widely in transactions,
is--facilitates our ability to impose those sanctions.
Mr. Cloud. Now, this week, Russia and China got together,
and Russia has said they are going to start using the yuan to
settle trade deals. Does this concern you? They also said that
this would help accelerate the process of establishing a
multipolar world order, which, of course, would mean weakened
U.S. on the net, on the global stage.
Secretary Yellen. Well, I certainly want to see the dollar
remain as the world's reserve currency. And there is a
motivation that Russia and China have to try to develop another
system that avoids the use of the dollar. But this is something
that is tremendously difficult to accomplish. And I have
confidence that the dollar will remain the world's reserve
currency for a long time to come in spite of there being
various efforts to create systems to get around it.
Mr. Cloud. Now, in 2008, the U.S. National Intelligence
Council said in a report they produced that there is an
unprecedented shift in relative wealth and economic power from
the West to the East now underway, and they expected it to
continue; that our relative strength will decline. And they
said it was because of this--they said the transfer of global
wealth and economic power is now underway. It is unprecedented
in modern history. And they said it comes from two sources: We
are sending oil and gas revenues overseas, and we are sending
manufacturing overseas. Yet, a number of the policies that this
administration continues to embrace, support ESG, which we have
seen. You know, China is not following that. Russia is not
following that. They continue with the coal plants. China and
Russia are talking about building another pipeline. And yet, we
seem to just be hamstringing Western countries on the front
when we were producing energy, oil, and gas petroleum products
more responsibly to be cleaner than anyone else.
One of the things I am concerned about is this. We talked
about to a number of banks. I realize most of this is the SEC
pushing this. But from your standpoint, we had European
countries trying to impose these regulations on U.S. banks that
work in their market. And, therefore, the U.S. businesses that
do companies in that, from a diplomatic perspective, it would
seem that regardless of where you are on the ESG front or again
from a diplomatic perspective, you would be standing up for
U.S. banks and U.S. businesses against what other--any other
country's regulators would be trying to enforce on that. Do you
have diplomatic efforts underway, or what could be done to
combat that?
Secretary Yellen. Well, we do have frictions with various
countries, including the European Union when we have
differences in our regulations. When it comes to things like
disclosure of climate-related risks, ideally, we would have a
common system globally. I think that would level the playing
field and reduce the burdens on businesses of what they are
forced to disclose. But countries are making significant
efforts to address climate change now, which I regard as a good
thing. And tensions arise when we go about doing that in
different ways. But we do have conversations----
Mr. Cloud. I am sorry. I only have 20 seconds left. I
wanted to ask you one more question. You mentioned leveling the
playing field. I would think we want the U.S. to be more
competitive than other countries. Biden has stated policy--he
has said himself that he is trying to create a multipolar
world. It is an objective he shares with Putin and Xi. Do you
also share the goal of a multipolar world?
Secretary Yellen. I am not sure exactly what it is you are
driving at here, but----
Mr. Cloud. Well, monetary policy affects global dynamics.
And if the President's agenda is to help create a multipolar
world, I am wondering how our financial policies would affect
that and certainly the diplomatic efforts that you were
incorporating with other countries?
Secretary Yellen. Well, I am not going to comment on
multipolar world. Cause I am not sure exactly what you are
driving at there. But certainly, we work with other countries
in order to make sure that American businesses are treated
fairly in international commerce.
Mr. Cloud. Okay. Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Womack. Mr. Pocan.
Mr. Pocan. I am going to yield 20 seconds to the ranking
member.
Mr. Womack. Just 20 seconds?
Mr. Pocan. Twenty-two.
Mr. Hoyer. Let me make a comment. The entire effort of the
117th Congress to make sure that the American economy and the
American democracy was transcended democracy and economy in the
world. That was our whole objective, and I think if we confirm
it, it will be achieved. Thank you.
Mr. Pocan. Okay. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. So,
Secretary Yellen, I understand you are not going to speak for
the Fed, but I am going to ask the question in another way,
that you as an economist, could it be that there is an
economic--the economic conditions right now are substantially
different than in the past, given we just came out of 100-year
pandemic, where the Nation was largely disrupted for about 30
full years, before we are getting to, where demand is
incredibly resilient. And after nine interest rate hikes,
demand has not moved a whole lot, that as an economist, could
that sort of set of conditions, once-in-a-year pandemic be
different enough that we should be looking, perhaps, at some
other measures to reduce demand?
Secretary Yellen. Look, I am just going to say, of course,
the pandemic was a very unique event. And in terms of its
economic impact, we have really never seen anything like it
before. It led to enormous shifts from services, goods and
services, away from services toward goods, and then back again
away from goods towards services.
We saw enormous supply-chain issues developed that
contributed to inflation. Because of this shift toward goods,
those are receding now, lowering inflation, but we have a shift
back in the direction of services. Services are having a hard
time reemploying a workforce in tight labor markets. This is
extremely unique. And consumer spending has proven to be
robust. But GDP growth has slowed. We had a very rapid
recovery. It has slowed. And we are back at full employment
again. And I think there is a chance here that what the Fed is
doing will serve to bring down inflation while maintaining a
strong labor market.
Mr. Pocan. I appreciate it. Thank you. I just think
sometimes, you know, I know that is their only tool they have.
Sometimes when your only tool is a hammer, everything looks
like a nail. And I kind of feel like at this point we need some
other approaches, whether it be a windfall profits tax, because
corporate profits are still soaring. Some kind of limited price
control. But something else. But thank you very much for that
answer.
Director Young, so here is the question. Before it was
inferred that no one has ever, ever in the life of Republicans
talked about cutting Medicare or Social Security, even though
my Senator, Ron Johnson, has recommended we put it on the
chopping block every single year. At least that is one
Republican. I have heard several Republicans this year said
that we should raise the retirement age perhaps to 70.
Now, to me, I think I would call that a cut. If it is not a
direct cut, it is at least a bait-and-switch. But could you
talk just a little bit about if we actually raised the
retirement age to 70 how that would impact people who have paid
into it, and whether or not it is fair to call that a cut or
whatever we would exactly call that?
Ms. Young. Look, and I will be very simple. That is a cut
to benefits in our estimation. I know there is some
disagreement with that, but that is fewer years, receiving
benefits from Social Security after people, what, for 20 years
of their career, paid into a system and expected to start
collecting Social Security at a certain age, and then the goal
post is moved, that is a benefit cut.
Mr. Pocan. Yeah. Thank you. There is a lot of people who
work in the trades, in particular, in my district who I know
quite well who, you know, at some point, even if we are living
younger, your body isn't necessarily allowing you still to lay
brick or be an iron worker. And just to raise that age would be
certainly a bait-and-switch to those folks and have a negative
effect. And I would call that a cut. So that is the only reason
I wanted to put that out for clarification. I yield back, Mr.
Chairman.
Mr. Womack. Mr. Moolenaar.
Mr. Moolenaar. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Secretary Yellen,
first of all, thank you for being willing to brief me at my
office on the CFIUS review process and where things are. I
appreciate that very much.
Director Young, I wanted to ask you a couple of questions.
The Government Accountability Office reported that as of
January 31, 2023, there was $90 billion in the American Rescue
Plan funding remaining that is unobligated. That is a huge sum
of money. Unfortunately, we haven't received timely updates
about available balances from this recent legislation. Can you
confirm that number?
Ms. Young. Sir, I am sorry to hear you have not. We have
sent up to Congress--I will make sure this committee has the
balances. I have it here. We will put it in the record and make
sure your office has it. I will say for COVID funding, writ
large, the bills in total, 98 percent is obligated. Of ARP,
specifically, 95 percent is obligated.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Moolenaar. But is $90 billion the amount----
Ms. Young. I will make sure that is the amount, but it
sounds in the range. I want to be exact with you and provide
that information.
Mr. Moolenaar. No, I appreciate that. But the fact--would
you agree that we are no longer in an emergency.
Ms. Young. If I can, I will let you know where the majority
of those funds are. And you are right, the public health
emergency--the administration, the President is lifting that
order May 11.
Mr. Moolenaar. So we no longer have a need for a rescue
plan, would you agree with that? I mean, the emergency is over.
I mean, that is what those funds were intended for, right?
Ms. Young. Mr. Moolenaar, I just want to make sure you know
where the majority of funds remain unobligated. And, of course,
it is Congress' discretion, if they want to go pull those funds
back. The majority of those funds remain in pensions, which, as
you know, it has a long outlay, and it remains in veterans'
benefits. And there is some money in HHS that after not
receiving more money, we plan on using for next-generation
vaccines.
Mr. Moolenaar. So what you are saying is you have already
figured out how you want to spend it next time, rather than
saying we have an opportunity to pay down the debt? I mean, $90
billion would go a long ways to paying down some debt?
Ms. Young. No, I said it is Congress' decision. I am, as
you know, very attuned to the Appropriations Committee's
constitutional role here. But I am saying that as you make
those decisions, no, that most of the money remains from
pensions.
Mr. Moolenaar. But unobligated based on an emergency that
is no longer there, right?
Ms. Young. Well, pension funding in ARP was always intended
to spend out over a longer period of time. So you would be
taking funding back that a lot of pensioners would depend on.
Veterans care----
Mr. Moolenaar. Well, let me ask you this.
Ms. Young. Sure.
Mr. Moolenaar. Through the appropriations process--you are
the expert--couldn't we fund those pensions as part of the
appropriations process like we normally do, rather than using
emergency funding that is no longer for an emergency?
Ms. Young. I will say, typically, multiemployer pensions is
not done by this committee, but I am sure you all will weigh
in. Look, we will provide the data, and we will have a robust
back-and-forth to see what makes sense here. I am just simply
pointing out that the majority of the money that remains was
always intended to have a tail. And the question on resources
for HHS is do we want next-generation vaccines for COVID.
Mr. Moolenaar. Well--and I approve of the idea of going
through the appropriations process. I am in the Labor-H
Subcommittee, and we can certainly look at that.
But why would we tell the American people we need to spend
$6 trillion of emergency funding in this last Congress, and
then find out we are no longer in an emergency and we still are
going to spend that money? That, to me, seems like fraud
itself.
Ms. Young. Well, Mr. Moolenaar, I will be just very candid.
We asked Congress multiple times for additional funding for
next-generation vaccines and therapeutics. A lot of, as you
know, immunocompromised people, current therapeutics do not
work. We were told no by Congress.
So what we are doing now is looking at the unobligated
balances at HHS and going to focus on those things. Now, what
won't happen are things like long-term research in long COVID,
which we don't know a lot about. So we will have to relook at
our priorities here.
Mr. Moolenaar. Well, I trust you are very capable in this
process, and that when you come and talk to our Appropriations
Committee, you are someone who has tremendous credibility.
Ms. Young. They told me no.
Mr. Moolenaar. Well, you know, I think it is a matter of,
let's figure out what the top priority is. There is a lot that
we spend that wouldn't be maybe as top a priority, and you
might have to agree to cut back on some of that. But I just
think taking the people's money that was based on an emergency
when there is no longer an emergency and spending $90 billion
seems irresponsible to me.
Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Womack. Mr. Cartwright.
Mr. Cartwright. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Well, Director Young, it was--we are coming up on the 87th
anniversary of the Rural Electrification Act. 1936, it was. It
was a time in our country when we had electricity. We had
electricity in most places. But we didn't have electricity in
some places, in the back roads, in the hollows. In the places
off the beaten path, we did not have electricity, and these
places were being left behind.
We are kind of coming up on a similar thing right now. We
have broadband internet access in most places in this country
right now, but there are places being left behind. And in the
IIJA, we legislated $45 billion to make sure this doesn't
happen, that we follow the pattern of the Rural Electrification
Act, and that rural places get broadband internet.
And, of course, the President requested an additional $400
million for the ReConnect Program--you are familiar with--which
provides grants and loans to deploy broadband to unserved
areas, especially Tribal areas.
What do you see as the most important things to be
accomplished so that we can accelerate access to broadband
internet in rural places?
Ms. Young. Well, the Bipartisan Infrastructure Law was a
game changer, so thank you for that. We believe the--in
shorthand, the ACP program at FCC will bring broadband to 15
million homes in this country.
You are looking at a caution light girl. I grew up in a
town with less than 2,000 with a caution light. So I am very
aware of those communities who often don't have adequate
attention from their Federal Government or State government.
This is meant to change that.
And you have my commitment. We have just started to
implement this. If more needs to be done, we will be right here
making the case, working with Congress, because, you know, this
is not a luxury. We saw children sitting in the parking lot of
McDonald's during the pandemic. That should not happen in this
country. It is a necessity for kids, teachers, parents, to have
high-functioning internet. And it is no longer--it is like 20
years ago saying having a cell phone was a luxury. Now, most
people consider it something they can't do without in life. I
would suggest that internet is the same way.
Mr. Cartwright. Thank you for that.
And now, there was a comment or question made in this room
that seemed to imply that this administration is not doing
everything that it could do to outcompete China, to counter
China. And my question to you is, is that a correct narrative?
Ms. Young. Well, look, I am going to be very clear. This
President says it over and over again. His Made in America
agenda, his manufacturing boom, bringing 800,000 jobs back,
that is directly about making sure that the United States of
America remains the world leader, not China.
And this budget has several proposals I hope we can work
with on a bipartisan basis. I know Mrs. Hinson has an interest
in this, and Mr. Moolenaar is on the China subcommittee. We
have a proposal that would put vast resources, $6 billion, into
efforts like infrastructure across the globe.
Look, China goes into these places, like the continent of
Africa, throws a little here, a little there, has vast access
to their resources. Where are we? And we have to make sure that
the United States remains the beacon I know we are and that we
have presence in those places and make sure we are investing
responsibly through our Development Finance Corporation,
through our Millennium Challenge Corporation. Because if we
aren't there, China will be there. So I certainly hope we can
work together to implement these proposals.
Mr. Cartwright. Thank you, Madam Director.
And I yield back, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Womack. Mrs. Hinson.
Mrs. Hinson. All right. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Some sobering statistics, numbers. $31.6 trillion in debt.
That is about $94,000 per citizen. $246,000 per taxpayer. So I
want to talk a little bit about what that cost looks like for
Iowans.
And so, Director Young, can you speak a little bit today to
the rising interest costs, how that fits into these numbers as
we are seeing the debt balloon? What are some of the tangible
impacts to working families as a result of those rising
interest costs?
Ms. Young. Thank you for that. And we like to use--publicly
held debt is about $24 trillion. I believe you are using both
debt points together. But either way, this is why this
President put forward proposals that bring down the deficit,
because we do also believe that our investment should be paid
for.
And if we don't go about investing tax cuts in a fiscally
responsible way and pay for them, our deficit and debt problem
will be worse, Congresswoman. And I know there is disagreement
on how you do that, but this President has put forward a tax
reform that would save $3 trillion and nearly $3 trillion over
10 years.
Mrs. Hinson. I see this as a complete tax shift. But if you
talk about rising costs and the impact that has, I think one of
the quickest ways we could address that is energy, and I think
we have different perspectives as well on lowering energy
costs. But I have been advocating for that, and I would
encourage you to continue to look at Iowa's biofuels as an
answer, and please take that feedback back to the President. We
need an answer on E15, if you can.
I would also like to ask and follow up on the CCP
challenges that we are facing, since you referenced that again.
And it is very clear that this committee has a very unified
interest in that. Since you do have kind of an all-of-
government look through OMB, do you have any recommendations on
how we can better leverage our spending? You referenced that $6
billion number, but ways where we can truly counter the CCP's
aggression through government.
Ms. Young. So I mentioned two agencies in particular whose
money can be used. The budget authority, the funding amount,
but also, they have the ability to finance projects. So their
money goes a little further.
So I would love to have you talk to us about the
Development Finance Corporation. They have some innovative ways
of financing projects across the globe. Again, I mentioned the
Millennium Challenge Corporation. They go and sign compacts and
really try to leverage private dollars. So it is not just what
we are investing here. What programs do we have that are
leverage points that would attract private sector interest? And
those two in particular are quite interesting in that way.
Mrs. Hinson. Are there any agencies engaged in related work
to counter the CCP that you think could be doing a better job
of collaborating and finding that--either that outreach within
the private sector or better outreach within government?
Ms. Young. So those are two agencies, certainly. They will
tell you they are resource constrained, which is one reason we
put it here. And we have to--in order to attract private
interest, they need to know the Federal Government is serious
and is going to show up with resources. So that is what we are
trying to do, have those programs be much more aggressive. And
to do that, this is--I look at this as capital, especially for
DFC, to make sure that their finance tools can be put to use.
You and I also talked about COFA, Compact for Free
Associations. Those tiny little places like Palau in the South
Pacific. We need a presence there. We often talk about COFA in
the Department of Interior. We put it under the Department of
State because we think it is a strong diplomatic tool to
counter China and make sure we have a presence where we know
they want to be.
Mrs. Hinson. Finally, I just want to talk a little bit
about the regulatory burden and cost on farmers, small
businesses, and families. What plans do you have in place to
more appropriately account for the cost of regulations on
people before they are actually implemented?
Ms. Young. Yeah. So you know a part of OMB is the Office of
Regulatory Affairs. And it is part of our duty, our executive
order that governs us. 12866 says we have to look at cost-
benefit analysis for regulations. We are committed to continue
that. We are not going to change that. What we are doing is
looking to modernize.
Far too many rules come into OR that the amount of
economically significant has not changed in, I believe, about
30 years. And we need to raise that so that fewer things come
in for review. So we are modernizing. But what we are is
committed to making sure we keep a robust cost-benefit analysis
in the regulatory system.
Mrs. Hinson. Director Young, this is one of the number one
issues I hear about from my constituents, is the cost of the
regulation on doing business, and we can truly unleash this
economy if we take that into consideration and reduce that
burden on our businesses and our taxpayers.
Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Womack. Mr. Cloud.
Mr. Cloud. Thank you, Chair.
I wasn't going to bring this up, but since it was
mentioned, I wanted to go back to it. It is then Vice President
Biden's own words. He said, ``We are trying to build a
multipolar world.'' Those aren't my words. That is not my
interpretation. That is an exact quote.
So is it your understanding that now he has joined the
America First movement or does this maintain that continues to
be his policies, and do you endorse that?
Ms. Young. If that is directed at me, I am with Secretary
Yellen. I tend not to answer things I don't fully understand.
And multipolar world--I will leave it at that.
What I do know, and what I have heard this President say,
is that we have to regain footing in several ways. We have to,
of course, maintain a strong defense. We have to do things in a
diplomatic front, like the programs I talked about. But we
also--what are we spending in research?
China is growing their footprint in manufacturing of things
we are far behind in. That is part of what the Inflation
Reduction Act will change. We will build more of that clean
energy here and bring jobs back here.
So this President has been crystal clear that he believes
America's role is to be first in those places including in
research.
Mr. Cloud. America was already leading in producing clean
energy. We were the best at producing oil and gas. We are the
best in what you would call green energy. We are leading the
world in that. And so the Inflation Reduction Act was not
necessary in reaching that goal. We were already leading the
world in that.
You said, let's not hold the debt ceiling hostage to really
draconian cuts that all help the wealthiest in this country.
And then, Secretary Yellen, you said, I don't think that we
should--you said--in speaking of prioritization in relation to
the debt ceiling, you said that prioritization is simply not
paying all the government's bills when they come due. That is
something we have never done. It is really just default by
another name.
And I was kind of puzzled by that because, you know, our
job in Congress is to prioritize what the spending should be.
The President submits a budget, and then we weigh it, and then
we send it in. And I am a little puzzled to see some of the
things we are spending money on. We are spending money on
watching hamsters fight on steroids, turning mice into binge
drinking alcohol, drag shows in Ecuador. The Biden
administration is filtering tax dollars to Colombian LGBT
groups that back prostitution. We have 77,000 empty Federal
buildings. One of the big things going on at the border is no-
bid contracting. That is under investigation now.
So there is a lot of areas, it seems, that we could cut
that wouldn't be considered a default. Would you agree?
Secretary Yellen. No, I wouldn't agree, because it is
certainly up to Congress and this committee to decide about the
budget for 2024 and years after that, what future commitments
Congress chooses to make about spending levels. But the debt
ceiling is about paying bills for programs Congress already
approved----
Mr. Cloud. No. But there are some. There are some, for
example, the COVID funding that was mentioned, it was $90
billion, I think, of funding----
Secretary Yellen. Well, the bills that come to Treasury to
pay cover expenses that Congress has authorized. And they have
gotten to the point of services have been provided, whether it
is by the Federal Government's own workforce or contractors who
have bills to pay for workers that they have hired to provide
government services. And it is about paying those bills when
they come due. And if you don't pay bills that come due for
services that you have ordered and authorized, that is default.
Mr. Cloud. I think I get what you are saying, and I am kind
of running out of time here. If I can move on.
As someone new on this committee, one of the things that I
have been doing is I have been trying to go through numbers, me
and my team and everything. That has been difficult. The things
that I mentioned, one of the reasons I mentioned them is
because most of them are not line items in a budget. They have
to do with the grants and contracting, which is kind of opaque
to us even as--it is very difficult to find--we send a top line
in a budget. You know, we will appropriate dollars toward a
budget. But then the grant is--it is really opaque to what is
going on. And that is where a lot of the policy initiatives
are, and really a lot of the nefarious action is going on.
And I would wonder if you would work with us and help come
up with some transparency mechanism to where--not just us, but
the American people can see not only what we are attempting to
spend money on, but what the actual grants are going to, how
they are being approved, where they are going.
Because, as you know, one of the things I mentioned was
training mice to binge drink. That is an NIH thing. You know,
while they were doing gain-of-function and everything else that
we are looking into, if we could have had transparency on where
these grants are going, it would have helped.
Is that something that we could work with you on? Kind of a
technicality of how to----
Ms. Young. This subcommittee in particular certainly knows
how to mandate transparency. OMB currently puts every single
action that authorizes agencies to go out and execute on their
appropriation. So you have heard a lot about apportion, as I am
sure, in the last administration. This committee in particular
directed OMB to put every single last apportionment, which is
transparency we have never seen the level of. So this committee
has certainly led in transparency.
I will also point to USA spending, which has obligation
data. There is a lag. So people complained you don't see it
real time. But the goal was--and in past Congresses and
administrations, it made sense to put those obligations online,
and usaspending.gov does that.
And I will point out, just at NIH, you know, peer-review
panels do pick those research grants. So I am not sure about
the ones you have mentioned, but I am happy to go back and look
at those. But, you know, we just have to be very careful that
we don't do anything to insert politics into a peer-review
process as we select research grants.
Mr. Cloud. I can appreciate that. But peer review is what
gave us a lot of faulty information during COVID too. So we
probably need to look at that as well. But thank you.
I yield back.
Mr. Womack. Mr. Ciscomani, bring us home.
Ms. Young. What a tall order.
Mr. Ciscomani. Yeah. Put the freshman to that task. That is
great.
Well, let me just actually close with a bit of a different
topic. And let me touch on Iran real quick. Sanctions in Iran
are a key component of the U.S. strategy to increase the
pressure on the Iranian regime to abandon its ambitions for
nuclear weapons and its support for terrorism and cease other
illicit activities.
Now, with nuclear negotiations not currently on the agenda
and Iran's nuclear program continuing to expand, increasing the
economic pressure on Iran is essential. Given nuclear
negotiations seem to be at a standstill, is it fair to say that
the administration views maximum enforcement of sanctions as a
key component of our Iran strategy?
Secretary Yellen. The Treasury Department has leveled
extremely tough--the toughest possible sanctions on Iran and is
enforcing those sanctions and constantly trying to identify
ways in which they may be violated and taking further
enforcement actions. So Iran is subject to exceptionally tough
sanctions, and we look to strengthen them and continue to take
actions to do so.
Mr. Ciscomani. Now, on that, with all due respect on that,
do you really think that Iran does feel the type of economic
pressure that would be necessary to force the regime to change
their policies? I don't get that sense, to be very honest with
you, that they feel that pressure at the level that it would
actually change their behavior significantly.
So what do you think--or some examples that that is
happening in your opinion? And if we could be doing better,
what are ways that we could increase the enforcement of our
sanctions?
Secretary Yellen. So my sense is that our sanctions on Iran
have created a real economic crisis in the country. And Iran is
greatly suffering economically because of the sanctions. I
would say the same thing is true of North Korea. On the other
hand, if you ask, has that forced change in behavior, the
answer is much less than we would ideally like.
Mr. Ciscomani. Okay. So let's close with that. What do you
think would be the way to increase that--the enforcement on
that or be more forceful to get the result that we would want?
Secretary Yellen. You know, we are constantly looking for
ways to broaden the sanctions to enable them to better
accomplish our objectives. But sometimes a regime is so
committed to a program that even when the population of that
country is suffering immensely because of sanctions we have
imposed, they continue to prioritize activities that are ones
that we are trying to stop. And so my sense is that we need a
broader toolkit and do have a broader toolkit to use. You know,
sanctions can play a role in changing behavior, but they may
not be sufficient in----
Mr. Ciscomani. I agree with you on that. And I think it is
troublesome that that is a reality that we are seeing here. So
I do encourage Treasury to continue to look for the broader
opportunities, as you mentioned, and be forceful on those
approaches. Thank you.
Mr. Womack. Steny, closing word?
Mr. Hoyer. I think all of us believe that we want to see
America grow, be successful, and be preeminent. The bipolar
world or the multipolar world is a reality. We used to have the
Soviets and ourselves, and that was a bipolar world. It is now
obvious that a number of nations have increased their economic
opportunity--abilities, particularly China.
So the issue is, in my opinion, Mr. Chairman, whether we
are going to continue to invest in America, in basic research,
in manufacturing. I have had a make-it-in-America agenda for 13
years. This is all about making it in America. Not only in
terms of making it physically, but making it in success terms.
So I am hopeful, Mr. Chairman, that we can work together,
as I said at the beginning, to achieve the objective that I
think we all share, and that America continues to be the
greatest and best Nation on Earth and plays a significant role
in keeping a world, if not at peace, at least at bay.
Mr. Womack. Yeah. Well stated. And I think that would get
universal agreement around the table.
To our witnesses, we promised we would get you out of here
in 2.5 hours and in one piece, and we met the objective. So
thank you, Madam Secretary, Director Young. Thank you for your
testimony here this morning. Well received.
To my colleagues, thank you. If you have questions for the
record, you have 7 days to get those to the relevant
subcommittee staff so that we can get those to the relevant
agencies.
And if there are no further comments, then this
subcommittee hearing is adjourned. Thank you.

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Wednesday, March 29, 2023.

U.S. SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION

WITNESS

HON. GARY GENSLER, CHAIR, U.S. SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION
Mr. Womack. The Subcommittee on Financial Services and
General Government will come to order.
Good afternoon, everyone.
And, Chair Gensler, welcome back to the subcommittee. My
colleagues and I are looking forward to today's conversation
with you.
The Nation's economy remains in a precarious position. The
banking sector is in a state of unrest. Prices continue to be
inflated due to excessive spending, and the country's debt is
on an unsustainable trajectory, yet this administration is
proposing a budget that is more of the same. Unfortunately, the
Securities and Exchange Commission is following suit.
The fiscal year 2024 budget request for the SEC is $265
million above fiscal year 2023 enacted levels, which is a
double-digit percentage increase. Now, some will say the SEC's
budget is fully offset by transaction fees. I get that. But
that is only part of the story. And it completely ignores how
bloated our government has become.
Simply put, the sheer size and magnitude of our government
is too large, and the SEC's budget is a prime example. After
years of funding increases, we have an SEC that is heavy-handed
with enforcement and examinations, and one that doesn't think
twice about proposing new regulations to completely rethink our
markets.
The blistering pace of the SEC rulemaking is a cause for
concern. We will talk about that today. And this isn't just
coming from Members of Congress. The SEC's own Office of
Inspector General in the fall outlined that SEC division
offices raise concerns about increased risks and difficulties
managing resources and other mission-related work because of
the increase in the SEC's rulemaking activities. Again, this is
your own Office of Inspector General.
This is critically important, especially when the SEC is
wading into areas that are not within their expertise and
constitutionally questionable, such as requiring public
companies to report on greenhouse gas emissions while claiming
private enterprises wouldn't be impacted.
Unfortunately, the steps taken by the SEC are more examples
of their attempt to shift shareholder and board member
responsibilities to others that deter from the betterment of
these companies. The trend is diminishing the authority of
boards, continues to expand outward at the agency, and can be
truly disruptive.
Let's be clear: The SEC's mission is to protect investors,
ensure fair markets, and to support capital formation. However,
conspicuously absent from all actions taken by the SEC is that
of capital formation. Why does this continue to be the case?
Private markets flourish while public markets stagnate.
Examinations, enforcements, and regulations are top of mind for
many at the SEC, but serious and practical capital formation
conversations seem to be missing. The SEC must concentrate on
all three tenants of their mission, not some over the other.
Additionally, I have mentioned in past hearings, data
security as it pertains to the Consolidated Audit Trail, also
known as CAT, remains a top concern. And I am hopeful that,
too, can be explored thoroughly in today's hearing.
Chair Gensler, I look forward to discussing these issues
and others with you today. And, with that, I will now recognize
my good friend and colleague, the ranking member from Maryland,
Mr. Hoyer, for his opening statement.
Mr. Hoyer. I thank the chairman very much.
I will turn this on.
I thank the chairman very much for his comments and for his
friendship. And, while we will disagree from time to time, we
hope we are going to work towards what all of us believe to be
in the best interest of the United States of America and its
people.
As we discussed in last week's hearing, the unrest
surrounding Silicon Valley Bank and others ought to remind us
how important it is that our Federal agencies receive the
resources they need to safeguard and strengthen our economy.
The recent bank failures were not simply a product of
inflation. They came on the heels of a previous
administration's effort to roll back many of the regulations we
adopted after the 2008 financial crisis. That reckless course
of action left our economy vulnerable to these types of
failures. We need to ensure that critical safeguards and high
standards are in place in order to protect consumers and
prevent the type of instability that led to the financial
crisis in 2008.
Last week, Secretary Yellen made it clear that Congress
must provide funding necessary for the Treasury Department and
other agencies to work together to prevent this economic
unease. The SEC plays a critical role in that mission.
We oversee a number of regulatory commissions: the IRS, to
make sure people pay their taxes that are fairly due; the
Consumer Product Safety Commission, to make sure the consumers
are protected from corporations that they couldn't possibly
oversee themselves; the SEC, which tries to keep the market a
fair, open, and transparent growth factor in our economy; and
the Election Assistance Commission, which tries to make sure
that we have fair and transparent elections.
From supporting cryptocurrency enforcement to promoting
climate change disclosures, the SEC is also working to address
other emerging challenges facing our economy. As a firm
believer in the public's right to petition their government, I
want to ensure that the SEC is also providing robust
opportunity for public input into its proposals.
Now more than ever, Mr. Chairman, we must maintain the
integrity of our markets, protect investors and consumers, and
promote greater accountability in the financial sector. We
cannot let new shocks derail the economic momentum we built in
the last 2 years, especially at a time when Americans are
facing rising costs.
As an aside, this economy has created 12 million jobs in
the last 24 months, more than any other administration in the
history of our country. Is inflation too high? It is. Is
inflation being high all over the world a reality? It is. But
this economy is one of the more robust economies, if not the
most robust economy, in the world today. We cannot do that. We
cannot achieve those ends without a fully funded, fully
equipped SEC.
We have a hundred-trillion-dollar market, and we cannot
oversee that market and make sure it is fair and that
confidence remains in the market's fairness if we do not have
the sufficient number of people. That is why I believe we ought
to execute on the President's budget proposal, which requests
$2.436 billion for SEC. Approximately, as you indicated, more
than $200 million additional. It is paid for, of course, out of
fees. But the people necessary to do that are absolutely
essential.
Like the rest of his budget, the funding is investment in
America's economic future. Conversely, making cuts to the SEC
and other agencies like it would only leave our economy more
vulnerable to turmoil like what transpired in the Silicon
Valley Bank.
I think I am over time, and I apologize for that. But I am
pleased to welcome Gary Gensler. For full disclosure, I have
known Gary Gensler for probably 40 years, maybe more than that.
His father was a good friend of mine. So I am not totally
objective when it comes to Mr. Gensler himself. I hope I am
totally objective as it relates to the SEC.
I yield back.
Mr. Womack. Let the record reflect that he yielded back
with 30 seconds remaining. Only kidding.
Chair Gensler, it is--you have a very important job, and it
is truly important for you to be here today. And for that, we
thank you.
And, with that, I am going to recognize you for your
opening statement. Your prepared remarks will be entered into
the record.

STATEMENT OF HON. GARY GENSLER

Mr. Gensler. I thank you so much, Chair Womack, Ranking
Member Hoyer.
A point of personal privilege, it is remarkable to be in
front of Representative Hoyer, who was a good friend of my
father's, I guess. When I was a little kid, I would hear about
Steny this and Steny that. That is where I am going to end. But
I thank you. It is really good to be in front of you and
testify the first time before you.
And, members of this subcommittee, thank you for inviting
me to testify on behalf--on the SEC's fiscal year 2024 budget.
I always have to say--this is customary--these are my own
views, and I am not speaking on behalf of my fellow
Commissioners or SEC staff. That is just standard language.
The SEC. What are we? Who are we? We are critical to the
American public. For 90 years, the Federal securities laws and
our work to oversee them have played a crucial role in good
times and in times of stress, and these laws benefit, as the
chair said, investors on one side of the market, issuers,
capital formation on the other, and then the markets in the
middle. That is our three-part mission. But it is about those
investors and the issuers on the other side, and then trying to
ensure that the middle of the market is efficient, competitive,
transparent, and, yes, as these times of stress remind us,
resilient.
The agency's clients are 330 million Americans, your
constituents, who invest in their 401(k)s, IRAs, trade through
brokerage apps, take out mortgages, auto loans, and alike. They
are Americans accessing the capital markets to fund their
businesses from small to large, their new ideas, their
innovations, and the like. It is for the investing public and
issuers that our staff must continue to drive efficiencies and
protect for financial stability in what the ranking member said
is a hundred-trillion-dollar capital market.
We have seen tremendous growth in this market. More people
than ever participating. Just two quick statistics. Just in the
last 5 years, since 2017, the number of clients of investment
advisers has grown 60 percent to 53 million from just about 36
or -7 million.
Another statistic. The actual transactions in our stock
markets, equity markets, has doubled in the last number of
years. Technology also rapidly transforming our markets from
electronic trading to cloud to artificial intelligence to
predictive data analytics. Just the dynamism of our markets is
a great thing. It is sort of, like, important to our capital
markets, and it shows the innovation itself of America.
Further, we have seen the Wild West of the cryptomarkets
rife with noncompliance, where investors have put hard-earned
assets at risk in a highly speculative asset class. Such growth
and rapid change also means more possibility for wrongdoing. As
a cop on the beat--and about a quarter of our workforce is
enforcement, another quarter is examination, so fully half of
our staff--is also--we have to be funded enough to meet the
match of bad actors. Thus, it makes sense that the SEC grow
along with expansion of these markets.
So, just to put some context on the funding to meet the
scale of our mission, what we have had is--I am pleased to
support the 2024 request for $2.4 billion. We actually shrank
in the years from 2016 to 2021 about 4 percent or so. And with
this committee's help and the full Congress' help, just in
2023, we have gotten back to about 2 or 3 percent more in head
count than we were 7 years ago.
You authorized in your appropriations 400 new positions in
2023. But those positions come on in the latter part of this
year because we have to go out and recruit and hire all those
folks. So, for year 2024, part of that is to fund those people
for the full time.
We are asking for 170 more positions. That is about a 3-
percent growth on where we are. As this committee considers the
request, of course, we are deficit neutral. Appropriations are
offset by a transaction fee. It is tiny. It is $8 per million
dollars of trading. So it is very tiny.
Nearly 2 years into this role, I am grateful to work
alongside the remarkable staff and fellow Commissioners to help
maintain America's capital markets. I truly think the best in
the world, but we want to keep it that way. I thank you. I
yield back 22 seconds.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Womack. I thank the chairman.
And we will begin our round of questions. And let me remind
everyone, we are on the 5-minute rule. You guys have got a
timer in front of you. You know what you have. And we will
acknowledge people--call on people in the order they were
seated at the time the hearing started. We may have some other
folks show up a little bit later.
Mr. Chairman, at the SEC, enforcement actions,
examinations, and regulations are at the forefront supported by
weekly, if not daily, actions by your agency. Unfortunately,
one of the SEC's core tenants, capital formation, continues to
be an afterthought or an outlier as I said in my opening
remarks.
Chair Gensler, how do we ensure that public markets are
thriving and that capital formation continues to be a priority
at your organization?
Mr. Gensler. It is very much a priority. It is a priority
of the staff. As I said in my opening remarks, investors on one
side, capital formation on the other side. Whether it is small
or large corporations, whether it is somebody tapping into the
mortgage markets to get capital so they can buy a home or
borrow for the auto markets, every rule that we put out for
public comment has an economic analysis and, as Congress has
mandated, around efficiency, competition, and capital
formations. So we benefit from the public's feedback and this
committee's feedback on efficiency, competition, capital
formation. So it is at the heart of what we do every day.
Mr. Womack. Would your Republican Commissioners--would they
be in agreement on that?
Mr. Gensler. I think that they would agree that it is core
to our three-part mission. I think they would agree that it is
a congressional mandate. And I think that--based upon public
comment, we get feedback as to how we best promote investors on
one hand, capital formation, and, as I say, the markets in the
middle.
Mr. Womack. Would they agree that it is an appropriate
priority with the agency?
Mr. Gensler. Again, I don't want to speak for them because
I am only allowed to speak for myself. I agree it is an
appropriate priority.
Mr. Womack. Would you be willing to testify alongside them
and commit to doing that in the future?
Mr. Gensler. I testify whenever Congress calls me.
Mr. Womack. Okay. I will take that as a yes.
The SEC budget requests $265 million in new funding, which
is a double-digit percentage increase. However, over the last
few years, regulations have been on the rise. If the SEC
receives this increase, should we expect more of the same?
Because how does burdensome reporting requirements and other
disclosures, especially those related to the climate, possibly
enhance capital formation and increase American taxpayer
wealth?
Mr. Gensler. We have put out to the public not only each of
the rules but also our unified agenda, these 50 or 55 projects
that we have, that are very public. We are not planning to add
to that based upon this appropriation. This appropriation
request is really about making sure we have the examiners, the
cops on the beat. Over half of our staff is examination and
enforcement, and the increase of the 400 positions this current
year and the 170 next year--the vast majority of those are in
really four areas: examination, enforcement, the Division of
Corporate Finance to review filings, and in our technology
area.
Mr. Womack. Finally, I want to ask about what you are doing
with the money that Congress already has provided. And this is
more of a people question. The SEC is relying almost
exclusively on an academic fellowship program for the leaders
of some of your critical divisions.
Is it true that at least four of the SEC's top six
divisions are headed by directors that have long been in
academics? And, if so, why is that the case?
Mr. Gensler. Yes, it is true. Four of our divisions are run
by extremely talented individuals that are willing to serve
their country and partake in this great experiment called
democracy and to actually help us. The Division of Economic
Risk and Analysis has an economist, a world-class economist,
from the University of Pennsylvania, and the other three
divisions are run by really strong individuals that are
committed to the same three-part mission that the Congress has
laid out.
Mr. Womack. I understand that. But would it not be
important for there to be an experience factor? Folks running
these key divisions that have experience.
And let me just quote from the inspector general's report
that I highlighted in my opening statement. It reads, and I
quote: Some reported an overall increase in attrition and
difficulties hiring individuals with rulemaking experience.
Managers reported relying on detailees, in some cases with
little or no experience in rulemaking.
So--and that is in your own IG report. So help me
understand why this is the case and why we should not be
expecting and demanding more experience.
Mr. Gensler. One, the leadership are terrific. These
individuals of all six divisions are really quite talented
individuals and lending their time and experience to the
American public.
Two, in terms of your question about attrition, we run
about 6 percent attrition right now, which is consistent with
many of the other agencies that you will be reviewing in the
Federal workforce. And we have consistently also ranked as one
of the best small- to mid-size agencies to work at by outside
ranking services and surveys.
So I am really proud of the SEC staff. I am proud to say
that I am part of it, these remarkable 4,600 people, and their
leadership of these divisions.
Mr. Womack. Thank you.
And I have gone over my time. I am going to yield to the
ranking member.
Mr. Hoyer. Thank you.
So we can complete the answer to that question, he asked
about relying on detailees as opposed to--as I understand it,
relying on the expertise of the principals involved as opposed
to detailees who had been sent over and getting their advice.
Did you want to comment on that before I ask my question?
Mr. Gensler. All right. Thank you.
The individuals in our divisions, whether it is economists,
whether it is lawyers in these various divisions, work for the
SEC. And there are rule-writing shops in each of these groups,
talented individuals. And we don't have detailees from outside
the SEC. They are people in the SEC.
What we do do is, each of those units internally find the
best people to work on these projects. And they form teams
between the Office of General Counsel, the economists, and they
look at the legal authorities. They look at the market data.
They look at the economics, and they make their best staff
recommendations. And, of course, ultimately, it is the five
Commissioners, and we form a consensus and put things out to
public comment.
Mr. Hoyer. Thank you. Let me ask you generally because the
chairman has made a point of the increase that has been
requested. And you indicated that you have some 40-percent
growth in the market that you are looking at. Congress provided
400 additional slots. You have not expanded to that, and you
are still in that process.
Can you discuss what limiting SEC funding would do for the
fairness of markets and what the real-world impact would be to
investors, including individual retirement accounts?
Mr. Gensler. Thank you. I think the real world nature is
that it comes back to human nature. Human nature is such that
most people in the markets are good faith and do things well,
but there are still some bad actors.
And so we examine nearly 40,000 different registrants on a
basis, and we do about 3,000 examinations a year. So you can
see the math. We are not examining all of the registrants on a
regular basis. We bring 700 or 800 enforcement actions a year,
but the markets are so vast.
So, in terms of real people's lives, it is protecting them
against fraud. It is protecting them against Ponzi schemes and
the like. And so that is really the bread and butter of this
agency, and reviewing filings, whether it is a mutual fund
filing or other filings.
Mr. Hoyer. So, given the expansion of the market and the
expansion of the participants--which is, I would say, analogous
to the IRS, who has a lot more taxpayers and a lot more complex
tax questions to resolve--if you do not get the personnel that
you want, there will be a lack of oversight and a lack of
enforcement?
Mr. Gensler. Yes. Let me give you another statistic. We get
between 2,000 and 4,000 tips, complaints, and referrals a
month. 25,000 to 40,000 a year. And so our dedicated staff has
to sort of sort through that, be responsive to the public, see
what is there, and then, where appropriate, follow the facts
and the law and try to get money back to the public, you know,
through disgorgements and penalties and the like if the facts
and law deem that to be appropriate.
And so less dedicated lawyers and investigators and
economists in an agency like ours means less protection for the
public.
Mr. Hoyer. And, if there is less protection for the public,
would it be reasonable to conclude that the public would have
less confidence in participating in growing the capital
markets?
Mr. Gensler. I think it is. And I think, to the chair's
question, it is about capital formation and investors because
investor protection means more people are confident in a
market. It means people raising money and have a--in essence,
can raise money cheaper because there is less of a premium for,
you know, misdeeds in a market.
Mr. Hoyer. Thank you.
I yield back.
Mr. Womack. Mr. Moolenaar.
Mr. Moolenaar. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Gensler, thank you for being with us today.
The Office of Inspector General October 22 report, you are
very familiar with that, I understand.
Mr. Gensler. Yes. I am. And the chair and I just chatted
about it.
Mr. Moolenaar. Okay. And the concerns raised by managers
from the SEC's various divisions about the increased risks and
difficulties managing resources due to the aggressive
rulemaking agenda at the SEC. Are you familiar with that?
Mr. Gensler. I have read it. Yes, sir.
Mr. Moolenaar. Okay. And you have had 11 Commission
rulemaking--you had to reopen public comment periods for 11
proposed rules. Is that true?
Mr. Gensler. I think we have actually reopened more. What
we do, from time to time, is we reopen if new items come up.
Sometimes if new economic information comes up, we might
reopen. Sometimes we reopen for other reasons. And I think it
is actually more than 11 that we have reopened.
Mr. Moolenaar. Okay. But, anyway, you have had a pretty
aggressive rulemaking----
Mr. Gensler. Well, actually, let me just put this in
context. My predecessor, Chair Clayton, during his 4-year
tenure, did 64 final rules. We have put out publicly that we
are looking at this 50 to 55 projects. I could go back to my
fellow Chair Mary Jo White, Chair. Schapiro. Chair Schapiro
probably set the record. She had way more than either Chair
Clayton or what we are looking at.
Mr. Moolenaar. Well, in the report, it talks about the
significant attrition rate with senior officers and attorneys
being the highest percentage lost. It talks about data entry
issues in 91 percent of the job postings reviewed; the
inability to hire individuals with rulemaking experience, what
the chairman had mentioned; dependency on detailees with little
or no experience with rulemaking, potentially leading to more
errors in decisionmaking; limited time available to research
and analyze these rules and their effect on other rules;
increased odds of litigation against the Federal Government and
taxpayers; the inability to complete other core mission-related
work due to rulemaking teams borrowing staff from other areas.
And these appear to be things that have really bled into
the entirety of the day-to-day life at the SEC. And it seems to
highlight the need for effective resource management and
prioritization in achieving organizational goals.
And, when you think about your mission--and I know you
think about that every day--accurate data entry is essential to
ensure that the decisions are made. And, in fact, U.S.
financial markets are based on reliable and accurate
information.
And it just appears, from this review by the Office of
Inspector General, that there is a lot lacking there. And it
really brings to--you know, questions. When you increase
rulemaking activities, you don't have the staff capable of
doing these things. The explosion of data entry errors. It
really raises questions and confidence in your ability to lead
the organization.
And I am just asking, if this aggressive rulemaking agenda
has placed a strain on your staff, are you concerned that the
quality of the work proposed in final rules is slipping?
Mr. Gensler. Sir, I am quite confident in the staff. We are
in a very tight labor market. You all know this. We are in a
very tight labor market. And the attorneys and the economists
and the other folks at the SEC are sought after. They are
deeply sought after by law firms and outside folks. But our
turnover is consistent with what other agencies have been.
And I also would say that our rulemaking agenda is actually
consistent with what Chair Clayton was doing and other chairs
were doing earlier. But do we look at each of the data entry
pieces that you said and each of the parts of the inspector
general's report? You betcha. We look at that. And we benefit
from having a robust inspector general and tell us--give us
good advice.
Mr. Moolenaar. Well, it seems like it is more of a review
in talking about areas that are really lacking. And I am just
wondering, do other SEC divisions rely on data entry in their
cost-benefit analysis?
Mr. Gensler. We look at data, and we absolutely do. We do
cost-benefit analysis or what is technically called efficiency,
competition, and capital formation analysis in each one of our
rules.
Mr. Moolenaar. Well, I just wonder, if you have that many
data entry issues in the job posting, you know, review those.
It just creates a question of kind of the capabilities and how
solid the efforts are.
Mr. Gensler. If I might just say, we spend about $380
million, $390 million a year on technology. And that is part of
being in front of this committee. It is, like--we spend, in a
year, what some large banks or investment banks or investment
advisers spend in a month. So we are trying diligently to make
resources for cloud, for data security, for data analytics work
within that part of our budget. And that is an important part
as well. We could do better if we had more dollars for
technology.
Mr. Moolenaar. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Womack. Mr. Cartwright.
Mr. Cartwright. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chair Gensler, I was listening to Ranking Member Hoyer's
questioning of you. And forgive us. There was some whispering
up here.
It is not true that he is actually your Godfather, is it?
Mr. Gensler. We are going to keep that one a little quiet.
Mr. Cartwright. But, seriously, I was listening to his
questioning, and he was making some important points about
confidence in the capital markets and how that flows from
protection of the investors. Is that basically what you said?
Mr. Gensler. Absolutely. And I think it helps capital
formation as well as investors because confidence and trust
underlies any financial system.
Mr. Cartwright. Part of protecting investors starts at the
point of sale with the broker-dealers. Am I correct in that?
Mr. Gensler. Yes.
Mr. Cartwright. So what we have is the Financial Industry
Regulatory Authority, FINRA, that is charged with that. And
people go to arbitration put together by FINRA. The SEC is
tasked with conducting oversight of FINRA. Am I correct in
that?
Mr. Gensler. That is correct, sir.
Mr. Cartwright. And certainly ensuring that it acts in the
public interest for the protection of investors and in
furtherance of the purposes of the securities laws. That is
obviously in the Code.
And, if the SEC finds that FINRA has failed to protect
investors, the SEC may add to or amend FINRA's rule book or
compel changes. And you are aware of that, Chair Gensler?
Mr. Gensler. Yes. We got those authorities way back in the
1930s.
Mr. Cartwright. Okay. FINRA has the problem of uncollected
awards. You are familiar with that problem, I take it?
Mr. Gensler. In a general manner, I am familiar with it.
Mr. Cartwright. Right. It does. And in fact, the problem is
that--well, it started in a 2000 report from a nonpartisan GAO.
And I do request unanimous consent to enter this report
into the record, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Womack. Without objection.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Cartwright. Okay. In 2000, the GAO found that a large
percent of arbitration awards from 1998 went entirely unpaid by
broker-dealers, and that an additional amount were only
partially paid. GAO, at that time, in 2000, recommended that
the self-regulatory organizations, quote, develop procedures
addressing the problem of unpaid awards caused by failed
broker-dealers.
But a generation later, up to now, FINRA has not
established any such procedures. In fact, FINRA's data show
that nearly $200 million in awards went uncollected between
2012 and 2016. And, even now, the latest information shows
that, between 2017 and 2021, $94 million in arbitration awards
went uncollected.
And so the question is, will the SEC become more active in
investigating this problem and laying down the law with FINRA
to make them actually make changes so that--by definition,
these are meritorious claims brought by investors who were in
some fashion fleeced by broker-dealers and didn't get their
awards paid.
Will you undertake to put the hammer down on FINRA, as you
are charged to do in the statute, so that they change their
procedures and end this injustice?
Mr. Gensler. So our oversight of the FINRA, as you said, is
a really important part of our capital markets. It is a self-
regulatory organization that oversees and investigates and
registers broker-dealers. And part of that is, of course, this
matter that you just raised through our examination function
and our division of trading and markets.
And I know that they have already had discussions and will
continue to highlight the importance of this, the importance
that--whether it is through arbitration or through the courts,
that, when somebody is awarded a disgorgement in penalties and
so forth, that they are paid. I would note that sometimes those
broker-dealers are out of business. So there is some of that
that goes on, too.
But I couldn't concur with you more that it is important
for the confidence of investors that they are duly awarded
something because of their claim.
Mr. Cartwright. Right. Well, good. We agree, then, Chair
Gensler.
And will you undertake to make that more of a priority with
the SEC?
Mr. Gensler. I think it already is a priority. But I will
commit to you that I will check with the staff and make sure
that they understand the importance of this issue.
Mr. Cartwright. Perfect. Thank you.
I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Womack. Mrs. Hinson.
Mrs. Hinson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and Mr. Ranking Member
Hoyer.
And thank you, Chair Gensler, for appearing before our
committee today.
Iowans care about accountability. They care about focus on
mission, jurisdiction. And you already mentioned the
congressional mandate for the SEC in an earlier answer. And so,
I think, to put it bluntly, we have seen you sprint outside of
your congressional jurisdiction, specifically when it comes to
the climate disclosure rule. I see it as a true weaponization
of the department, and Iowa farmers, Iowa businesses, and Iowa
workers see it that way, too. And I think it is high time that
you reel it in. That is what I am here to tell you today on
behalf of my constituents.
And I dug into the place where you say in statutory
authority--that you are citing 10 different sections of the
Exchange or Securities Act in your proposal. And so my first
question to you today is, where in here specifically did
Congress give you the statutory authority, the jurisdiction, to
enact this climate rule?
Mr. Gensler. I thank you for asking. So our agreement, all
the way back from the 1930s, is to ensure that investors get to
decide based on full, fair, and truthful disclosure.
Mrs. Hinson. I am asking you specifically about where your
statutory authority is in sections 7, 10, 19(a), 28 of the
Securities Act, sections 3(b), 12, 13, 15, 23(a), and 36 of the
Exchange Act.
Can you cite where it gives you the actual authority?
Because I went through all these sections, and nowhere does it
say ``climate,'' ``emissions,'' or ``greenhouse gas.''
Mr. Gensler. But what it does say is that a company, when
it is offering securities and offering sale of security to the
public, that the public gets the description of the business,
the material information, and that they can't mislead the
public.
And what is happening now is there is hundreds, if not well
over a thousand, companies today in the markets that are
putting out disclosures about climate risk. And there are
investors that are relying on those disclosures. And all we are
doing--we are not--with all respect, we are merit neutral. And
that is an important part of our capital markets. We are merit
neutral----
Mrs. Hinson [continuing]. I think there needs----
Mr. Gensler. We are trying to bring consistency and
comparability to those disclosures.
Mrs. Hinson. Well, it is very clear that--in these
sections, it is not explicit as far as your lane is concerned
there. And that is when I say it is time to reel it in. You
need to be explicit about where your authority is. And I don't
see that in these sections of Code that you reference.
And I am also very concerned by the expansive reporting
requirements for scope 3 greenhouse gas emissions, the
devastating impact that that would have for Iowa farmers.
Because under this rule--you know, you look at large
corporations, they have teams of attorneys that can help them
comply. Iowa farmers don't have that. So I am very concerned
about the precedent that is being set here with these policies
and what you are asking for here.
So can you give me some examples of where the Commission
has asked for this type of nonfinancial information to be
disclosed in the past?
Mr. Gensler. So our agreement is just over the public
companies, the 7,000 or 8,000 companies. It is not the farmers
that you are referencing. So that is probably--we share that
view.
And what this is about is the disclosures that the public
companies are making. And we put out a proposal about trying to
bring consistency to that. We heard a lot of comments back. So-
called scope 3 disclosures that you referenced is one of the
handful--but important handful--of areas where people--public
comment--we got 15,000 comments--came to us; 49 different farm
bureaus came to us. And so I think that----
Mrs. Hinson. Well, I understand----
Mr. Gensler. And so I think----
Mrs. Hinson [continuing]. Precedent for this. That is what
I am asking.
Is there any point in time where you can cite anything
precedentwise where you have required this amount of
disclosure?
Mr. Gensler. It is just to bring consistency to the
disclosure they are already making as it relates to this issue
about--there is no intent or focus of the Securities and
Exchange Commission to ask for disclosures from private-sector
farmers in Iowa or in any of your States.
Mrs. Hinson. Well, what I am hearing here is that this is
unprecedented in your answer because you are not mentioning
anything precedent. And I do believe that the focus of your
agency should be on fraud, detecting Ponzi schemes, not on
enacting a climate agenda, which, again, I believe exceeds your
statutory authority here.
Thank you, sir. I yield back.
Mr. Womack. Mr. Pocan.
Mr. Pocan. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Ranking Member.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, for being with us.
First off, just a budget question. Do you, right now with
your current budget, have adequate resources to investigate
emerging cryptocurrency issues?
Mr. Gensler. We are stretched thin, sir. This is a field--
it is small compared to our vast hundred-trillion-dollar
capital markets, but it is a field that has a significant
amount of noncompliance in it, without prejudging any one token
or one platform. We have increased our resources there, but we
could always use more.
Mr. Pocan. Yeah. Just with the volatility--I mean, we
talked about confidence in markets. I think this is one area--I
am concerned when some in the Republican leadership have talked
about a cut. Going back to 2022 levels. Or this morning, Mr.
Harris actually said pre-COVID levels. Going back even more
years. You know, what impact that could have when there are
emerging issues that you are going to need resources for. So
thank you for that answer.
Also, we have been reminded recently very clearly why
Congress passed strong banking regulations like the Dodd-Frank
law and why it was a mistake in 2018 to roll back some of those
protections. We can likely agree that mismanagement and greed
on the part of the executives at the Silicon Valley Bank led
them to make some risky decisions that endangered their
customers.
I am particularly concerned about section 956 of Dodd-
Frank, which required a number of financial regulators,
including the SEC, to set guidelines around responsible
compensation incentives for bank executives and even prohibit
compensation structures that drive executives to engage in
risky behavior that may gain their shareholders bigger profits
but also endanger the broader economy.
So, to you and the Commission's credit, the SEC is the only
regulator that has even attempted to fulfill this requirement
that was passed into law a dozen years ago, but the rulemaking
was never finished.
Chair Gensler, do you plan on tackling these reckless and
greedy incentives by having the SEC pursue a rulemaking process
on this long overdue requirement?
Mr. Gensler. Yes.
Mr. Pocan. Great. Glad to hear that. I think, in talking
about confidence in markets, this is clearly something front of
mind for a lot of people.
Let me talk to you a little bit about congressional insider
trading. I know that New York Times recently said 18 percent of
lawmakers or their family members bought or sold financial
assets over a 3-year span.
And, you know, again, for confidence in Congress--this
isn't even in the markets. I know we have the 2012 STOCK Act
that allows Members to buy and sell individual stocks, provided
that they don't trade on inside information and disclose
transactions over $1,000 within 45 days. There has been bills
introduced to change that, to make it so we can't buy
individual stock.
And I will tell you, I am not one of the millionaires
around here, so I don't have to buy a lot of individual stock,
anyway. But I do get a lot of insider information almost on a
weekly basis from companies and people that come in because of
the access to people that talk to Members of Congress.
How does the SEC conduct oversight on congressional
trading? And how is a determination made if they believe a
Member is violating the STOCK Act? And how would you define
insider information?
Mr. Gensler. A lot of questions there. But we follow the
facts and the law. And so insider information--material
nonpublic information that a company has that the public
doesn't have. It is not yet disclosed in their press releases,
their filings, and the like--is not meant to be traded upon by
those insiders or people they share that information with,
whether it is the broad public or a Member of Congress.
And so we just follow the facts and the law. And we keep it
confidential if we have an investigation, as we would whether
it is somebody in the broad public or, of course, a Member of
Congress.
Mr. Pocan. In the minute I have left, just a quick
question. I think a lot of us are concerned whether or not we
are going to lift the debt ceiling and what could happen to
markets.
As someone who is watching markets and concerned about the
faith in markets, are you concerned? And, if you are concerned,
why? In case we don't lift the debt ceiling, what type of
impact that could have?
Mr. Gensler. Well, it would be historic, of course. And it
would be--I mean, in terms of trust--we were talking about
trust and confidence in capital markets. The capital markets
themselves would take a real hit. I mean, we have the gold
standard of capital markets around the globe. And part of that,
at the base, is the U.S. Treasury market. There is 24 trillion,
about a quarter of our capital markets. It is called risk-free,
but you would add a great deal of uncertainty, and it would be
frankly one heck of a shock to the capital markets.
Mr. Pocan. Great. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
I yield back.
Mr. Womack. Mr. Cloud.
Mr. Cloud. Thank you, Chair, Ranking Member.
And thank you, Chair, for being here today. I wanted to
continue on with the line of questioning Mrs. Hinson and other
colleagues have had.
The Securities Act of 1933 and the Securities Exchange Act
of 1934--I am sure you are aware--defines what is your role and
what the Commission's role is. You would agree?
Mr. Gensler. Yes. Very important, it is also the 1940 acts
on investment advisers--investment companies.
Mr. Cloud. Right. And, of course, the job of the Executive
Branch is to execute the laws, not create the laws. And we also
have the Antideficiency Act that ensures that Federal employees
don't use Federal resources to do things that they are not
authorized and appropriated to do.
I brought them with me today, the Securities Exchange Act
of 1933, and, of course, we have 1934 right here. Are you aware
of how many times--of course, we want good governance. We are
all concerned right now. When I talk to banks, they are really
concerned about the ESG initiatives that are being enforced. We
want good governance.
But do you want to guess how many times ``climate'' appears
in these documents?
Mr. Gensler. I understand the question. It is about full,
fair, and truthful disclosure about the business----
Mr. Cloud. It is zero. It is zero.
Do you know how many times the word ``social'' appears? It
is also zero.
Right now, the SEC is currently working a rule that would
require companies to report on the cost of climate change for
their businesses above a certain threshold. It has been talked
about scope 3, and you are saying that that is not going to
hurt farmers. But the thing is, when a business is trying to
get a loan, but they can't get a loan until they report on the
next person in the supply chain who has to report on the next
person in the supply chain, it does get down to the farmers.
And so, you know, I am really concerned about mission
creep. And, you know, it is really hard to see where the SEC
and certainly you, as chair, would have any sort of authority
to be enacting these things.
And I would just keep in light of that, that the
Democratic-led House last term passed H.R. 1187 to try to
require the collection of this kind of information. It passed
by one vote with a lot of wrangling from Democratic leadership.
Speaker Pelosi, at the time, had to actually come down and vote
herself to give them that one vote to pass. And it would
mandate public companies disclose climate information.
My point is, is it didn't pass. It wasn't taken up in the
Senate. And, therefore, it is not law. And, therefore, there is
no authority to collect this kind of information.
Are you aware of West Virginia v. EPA?
Mr. Gensler. It is a Supreme Court case of last year. Yes,
very so.
Mr. Cloud. Right. There are a number of findings in that.
But, in one of them, the Court held that an administrative
agency has no power to make decisions on major questions unless
Congress clearly gave it such authority. And, as Mrs. Hinson
pointed out, you don't have clear authority. You may be trying
to skew authority or find authorities in law somewhere to do
it, but you do not have clear authority to implement climate-
related data gathering on people participating in our markets.
And it is very concerning.
And I would just point out, we have watched bank failures
happen, and a lot of it happened because regulators were asleep
at the wheel. At the same time, we see unauthorized rulemaking
going on. And it is very concerning.
And I would point out to the chair's comments. You are
asking for more employees to do your job, but then it seems
like some are tasked to doing something that you do not have
the authority to do.
And so, you know, we are trying to provide efficient
government. We want you to do your core functions. You are
needed. No one is debating that. You need to have funding to do
your core functions. But I am concerned about the argument for
plussing up employees when you have employees tasked doing
stuff they have no authority to do. And it is placing a burden
on the American people. And it is trying to enforce policy that
has not passed Congress.
And so could you speak to your--can you--will you retask
your employees--if you are asking for more employees, will you
retask the ones you have working on these sorts of things to do
what is their actually authorized core functions?
Mr. Gensler. So let me speak to the climate rule and to the
employees. On the employees, most of the staff we are asking
for in the funding is about our core, and the growth is in
exams, enforcement, technology, and disclosure review is the
bulk.
But in terms of the climate rule, if I could--if you wish--
it really is authorized by our statutes. And what we are doing
is we are hearing from the public about where we potentially
should look at economics, look at authority. We are aware of
the Supreme Court case that you referenced. And we do
everything we do within the authorities as interpreted by the
courts. And that is important.
Mr. Cloud. I want to remind you----
Mr. Gensler. That is an important----
Mr. Cloud. Public opinion flows through the Representatives
of Congress, and then we tell you what the public are thinking,
and then you go and do it.
And I am out of time, so I will yield back to the chair.
Mr. Gensler. Thank you.
Mr. Womack. Mr. Bishop.
Mr. Bishop. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
And welcome, Mr. Gensler. And I would like to follow up on
that line of questioning. The environmental, social, and
governance data that is up for disclosure and up for discussion
today, is that consistent--isn't that consistent with your
mission to protect investors, to maintain fair, orderly, and
efficient markets, and to facilitate capital markets? Is that
data--would that data be beneficial to investors to have? Or
would it be harmful to investors not to have it, in your
capacity as a regulator?
Mr. Gensler. To answer your question and the other--
Representative Cloud's question, right now today, hundreds, if
not over a thousand, companies are making such disclosures
about climate risk. And so our role is not only to help bring
consistency but to make sure that folks aren't misleading the
public about these disclosures because investors--and we heard
from 15,000 comments--thousands of investors wrote in and said:
We currently use this information. We would benefit to ensure
that it is at least consistent and not misleading. That helps
capital formation. That helps investors. And it helps
regardless of whether you are pro-green or pro---you know, you
want to invest----
Mr. Bishop. Is this consistent with your obligation?
Mr. Gensler. It is consistent with what Congress
authorities and mission that we have.
Mr. Bishop. Thank you. Chair Gensler, for purposes of
cryptocurrency, you have the unique experience of chairing both
the Commodities Futures Trading Commission and the Securities
and Exchange Commission. It is my understanding that
cryptocurrency and the underlying blockchain technology
typically defy categorization as either a security or a
commodity because, quite frankly, they are neither.
You understand more than most people the interplay between
both Commissions and the extent of their jurisdictions. With
that in mind, I would like to hear your thoughts on the
regulation of the cryptocurrency market and, in particular, how
you ensure that consumers are protected from fraudulent and
predatory activity.
Can you elaborate on what you think the SEC's role is when
it comes to regulating the cryptomarket? And can you also
follow that up by saying whether the SEC has any plans to issue
a rule clarifying how securities law applies to digital assets?
Mr. Gensler. At its core, when Congress set up the SEC, it
was about protecting the investing public and thus the capital
formation on the other side with this disclosure. And it was
about--if somebody is raising money and the public is giving
them money based on their efforts--the Supreme Court in 1946
actually defined it, and then Thurgood Marshall wrote it so
beautifully a few decades later. It was--Congress painted with
a broad brush to protect the investing public when the
investing public is basically investing or betting on a group
of entrepreneurs.
Now, cryptotokens. Without prejudging any one of them, you
can look almost on nearly most of them--I am not going to say a
number--and you can find a group of entrepreneurs with a
Twitter site, with a website, with individuals. And I bet that
most of you are not visited by decentralized, nonexistent
management. If you are going to get a meeting with somebody
from cryptotokens. There is a human. There is a group of
entrepreneurs, or they are paying a lobbyist, or they are
paying a lawyer to meet with you. There is some--and the public
is basically giving up their hard-earned dollars to invest in
that token. And that token entrepreneur should give them full,
fair, and truthful disclosure.
That is the core. So, frankly, of the 10,000 or 12,000
tokens. There are very few that don't have a group of
entrepreneurs in the middle that the public is counting on.
So those are securities, sir, under the securities law.
Mr. Bishop. So are you going to issue regulations?
Mr. Gensler. The regulations actually already exist, sir.
They are called the securities regulation. And so they are
disclosure regulations for when somebody tries to raise money
from the public. They are exchanged. The storefronts in this
business--the storefronts call themselves either crypto-
exchanges or crypto-lending platforms. But those storefronts
should come into compliance.
And our goal is the investor protection and capital
formation we have talked about earlier. But, even in the crypto
space, they should come into compliance, and they should
disaggregate. Right now, they are commingling with--it is rife
with conflicts, that they are taking investors' funds and
trading against the investors. And they are saying: Catch us if
you can.
That is the nature of this field right now. Or: Excuse me,
we are offshore. Try to find us if we are offshore.
And I have been around finance for 40-plus years. And there
is--by and large, most folks are trying to comply with the laws
as Congress writes them and so forth. But this is a field that,
at its core, is sort of--it has got a lot of noncompliance and
a lot--and it is with the anti-money-laundering laws and not
just the securities laws.
Mr. Bishop. Mr. Chairman, would you indulge me one quick
question?
Mr. Womack. The chair will indulge you, Mr. Bishop, only
because your office is right across the street from mine.
Mr. Bishop. Thank you, sir.
We were approached--Members of Congress were approached
with the proposition that we needed to regulate it by people
who are in that offshore area. I am trying to understand how
the regulation would have helped those people in that offshore
area who now seem to be accused with wrongdoing.
Mr. Gensler. Well, whether it is the Commodity Futures
Trading Commission--which I was honored to chair, and I love
that agency--or the Securities and Exchange Commission, both of
us oversee parts of the market. And it is--if you are touching
U.S. investors, selling these tokens to U.S. investors, then
you come under either the securities laws or the laws that are
of the Commodity Futures Trading Commission.
Mr. Womack. Mr. Carl.
Mr. Carl. Welcome, sir.
Mr. Gensler. Thank you. Good to see you, sir.
Mr. Carl. You are doing a great job so far. You are staying
above water.
Let me read this to you, though, because I am a little
confused. Congresswoman Hinson and Cloud almost took all my
thunder, and I almost didn't have anything to ask you. So I am
scratching around here.
But the primary purpose of the SEC is to enforce the law
against market manipulation. Easy for you to say. Its three-
part mission is to protect investors; maintain fair, orderly,
and efficient markets; and facilitate capital formation. What
in the world has that got to do with emissions?
Before you answer that, I am a little confused. Let me be a
little sarcastic. I have got a friend of mine in the coffee
business. If I want to know how all these 7,000 companies--what
kind of coffee they use, can I get a question put on there to
ask what kind of coffee they use so I can give it back to my
coffee producer? Doesn't sound fair to me.
So why is SEC getting involved in emissions with this
climate change? And I am not a fan of it. I have not hidden
that. For the last 3 days, I have been preaching from the
highest rock. We can't afford the direction we are going. We
cannot afford everything we are doing in this.
Now, you have brought your very important group into this
mission asking questions for whom? 10,000 people that wrote in,
maybe? You said 10,000. How many people do you represent? 354
million, you said? So can I find out what kind of coffee they
are making?
Mr. Gensler. It really comes down to this. And it is a good
question. And Representative Cloud and Hinson asked really good
questions, too.
Mr. Carl. Yeah.
Mr. Gensler. It is a much narrower remit. We are not merit-
based. It is not about what type of coffee you--was it drink?
Mr. Carl. Yeah.
Mr. Gensler. It is that investors today around the globe,
thinking about the value of those investments that they make,
are taking into consideration climate risk. And companies today
are already making disclosures.
Now, you could say, well, we shouldn't be involved. But
there are already hundreds of companies making disclosures
about their greenhouse gas emissions.
Mr. Carl. And that is their personal choice to do that. I
am not arguing. I am talking about your rules and your
regulations that you are enforcing.
Mr. Gensler. So our role is to ensure that those
disclosures, to the extent--there is this concept of
materiality as well--but those disclosures that investors are
getting are not misleading those investors and that those
investors are getting full, fair, and truthful disclosures.
Mr. Carl. Yeah. I really question your motive there. I am
sorry. I am going to have to push back on that one.
Let me ask you this, then. Recently, you said the scope 3
emissions regulations aren't well developed. I believe you then
said you didn't want to get ahead of the process when you were
asked about getting rid of these regulations. Can you quickly
tell me if they are planning to get rid of these scope 3
regulations?
Mr. Gensler. Again, I don't want to prejudge. I am a member
of a five-member Commission. It is how we all deliberate and
what staff recommendations come up.
Mr. Carl. So what is your personal opinion?
Mr. Gensler. But, in terms of the comments that we have
received, there is a handful of areas that are well known; all
these comments are public. But this area of greenhouse gas
emissions of a company--scope 1 and scope 2 is their
electricity purchases--there is much more support in the
comment file, both from investors and issuers, than there was
for so-called scope 3, which relates to the supply chain.
And it is not as well developed. We said this. I said this
a year and a half ago. We took a layered approach. Even in
their proposal, we said that that would only be done by fewer
companies and have a big--sort of a safe harbor. But we are
considering what to do there----
Mr. Carl. I----
Mr. Gensler. Because we really did get a lot of comments
about this----
Mr. Carl. I am sorry. I am running out of time.
When are you going to have an answer on that? Yes or no?
Mr. Gensler. I don't want to prejudge. Staff is working
through----
Mr. Carl. All right.
Mr. Gensler. We have never had a comment file as big as
this. On average, it takes us 12 to 15 months from a proposal
to when we finish the rule.
Mr. Carl. Yeah. You know, the idea of forcing these
companies to figure out how much they calculated in their
disclosure--carbon emissions produced by themselves as well as
all their vendors, partners, and suppliers--is about as
antibusiness as I have heard in a long time.
And, given your background, you would think you would be a
little more business friendly. Quite honestly, it goes against
everything that--your bio that I actually read. Because this is
very un-business-friendly. And we are in the business to help
and assist companies to produce jobs, to produce a product, to
stimulate this environment, so it creates taxes, so it pays
bills to keep the air conditioner on in this room.
So do we want to just--and I am out of time, but I will
make this last statement. Why would we want to just keep
sticking it to the businesses to just keep on piling on
regulations, when all we need to do is leave them alone? There
is enough people checking their emissions. We don't need the
SEC doing the same thing.
Mr. Gensler. I concur with you. That is not our role. Our
role is to help----
Mr. Carl. Then why do we do it?
Mr. Gensler. So it is those raising money from the public,
those companies raising money from the public, are currently
making disclosures. And it is trying to make consistency. It is
also trying to sort of tamp down greenwashing, if you have
heard that phrase as well. It is trying to bring some
consistency to those disclosures. And, also, based upon the
comments that are coming in, to sort through, but we literally
have hundreds of public companies that are supportive of pieces
of this rule. And they say, you know, over here----
Mr. Carl. They are supportive, sir, because they know they
are getting pressure on them to do this. That is the reason
they are doing it. They don't want any more regulations either.
So, Mr. Chairman, I retire my time. Thank you.
Mr. Womack. Mrs. Torres.
Mr. Hoyer. Mr. Chairman, could I have one second?
Mr. Womack. Mrs. Torres, if you would pause for just a
moment.
I will yield to the ranking member.
Mr. Hoyer. I thank you.
I want to get this straight. What the SEC is to do is to
make sure the representations being made by those sellers of
assets or companies trying to raise capital are accurate. That
is your role?
Mr. Gensler. Absolutely. Full, fair, and truthful.
Mr. Hoyer. What you are saying is that 800, 900, a thousand
companies have chosen to make a representation based upon
climate or other factors, that you have not required that?
Now, there was statute, as Mr. Clyde, I believe, pointed
out, that failed, but you have not required that. But what I
understand you are saying is, once the company makes a
representation, it is your responsibility to make sure that
that representation is accurate and true.
Is that what you are saying?
Mr. Gensler. That it is accurate, but it goes further than
that because we put out a proposal that would--and many of the
disclosures are exactly what you say. But we did put out
something that, if it was, for instance, the scope 3 that we
were talking about, our proposal--we don't know where we will
end up, but, if it was material to the--in essence, to the
business, if it was material to the investors, that you had
some mandatory disclosure. And I think that is probably part of
this----
Mr. Hoyer. I understand.
Mr. Gensler [continuing]. Discussion.
Mr. Hoyer. Okay. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Womack. Mrs. Torres.
Mrs. Torres. Thank you, Chairman, and thank you for
allowing this flow of information to continue----
Mr. Womack. Absolutely.
Mrs. Torres [continuing]. Even though we are literally
under the clock.
Thank you for coming to our subcommittee, Chair Gensler.
You know, I understand that my colleagues disagree with
your work on climate disclosures. My region, the State that I
come from, is home to 40 million people. We know that climate
change is leading to an increase in devastating fires, major
floods with this rainstorms that we have had, tornado warnings.
We have--don't know what a tornado is in California. We know
all about earthquakes, but not about tornados.
In most cases--well, in all cases, as property owners are
trying to renew their fire insurance to fulfill the commitment
that they have made to their--to the bank when they apply for a
mortgage loan, in the last 5 years, our mortgages--our fire
insurance has doubled in some years, and it has gone up at
least 10 to 20 percent in other years. It is incredible what is
happening.
If--my point is that corporate America knows that climate
change is real. Contrary to what some of us may want to
believe, they are making real business decisions that impact
the people that I represent. We must ensure that communities
like mine are getting the information that they need in order
to make financial decisions in light of climate change.
So I urge you to continue to provide this information,
because it is critical, at the very least, for the 40 million
people in my home State of California.
I want to go back to the issues with Silicon Valley Bank.
Can you update us on--I know that you are in the midst of an
investigation, but will there be an, you know, after-action
report to find any lessons learned and implement them moving
forward as to what you can do? What more can you do to ensure
that we try to avoid another chaotic event?
Mr. Gensler. Though I can't speak to any particular
investigation or any----
Mrs. Torres. I am not asking that.
Mr. Gensler [continuing]. Enforcement.
Mrs. Torres. Yeah.
Mr. Gensler. But, when market events occur, sort of the
playbook, if you wish, what we look at is where they are--what
are the disclosures companies have made? We have had a lot of
discussion about disclosures, but were they truthful? Were they
accurate and full and fair?
We look at were any--we look at, to the extent we can, was
there any inside training, material, nonpublic information? We
look at whether there was any market manipulation. These are
the things that we look at in our enforcement regime.
And we also look at, more broadly, how to--are there
lessons learned to help make the system more resilient? There
is always risk in capital markets. We are not--that is part of
the dynamism of capitalism. But it is also ensuring that those
risks don't spill out to, you know, regular folks.
And let's just not forget that, in 2008, 8 million to 10
million people lost their jobs. So part of an agency like ours
is to try to look at lessons learned; is there resiliency in
the capital markets around broker-dealers and asset managers
and the like?
Mrs. Torres. In 2009, you know, that many more people lost
their homes to foreclosure because of, you know, terrible bank
investments. They were investing against, you know, the people
that they were mortgaging.
So, with the cuts--I know that you oversee so many
programs. You have had--what is that--numerous comments online,
more than you have ever had over the 5--the last 5 years. What
will a 30-percent cut across the board do to you?
Mr. Gensler. I hope we are not talking about that,
Congresswoman.
Mrs. Torres. We have to talk about that because it is on
the table as it relates to the majority's proposal.
Mr. Gensler. Okay. I think the investing public would be
shortchanged, and the capital formation--the companies that
want to do right by their investors and raise money, that the
investing public wouldn't have as much trust in those capital
markets.
I think that what we do as an agency on a day-to-day basis
is really--is responsive to, you know, the world's gold
standard of capital markets.
Mrs. Torres. Thank you, and I yield back.
Mr. Womack. Mr. Ciscomani.
Mr. Ciscomani. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And thank you, Chair Gensler, for coming before the
committee today.
You know, as the new guy on this table, I am going to,
after listening to my colleagues here discuss really the scope
and the depth of the SEC's rulemaking authority, I am going to
start a little broader just to get a better understanding of
some questions that I have.
Would you mind outlining for the subcommittee how much
funding goes towards the activities related to each individual
part of the SEC's core mission of protecting investors, free
markets, and capital formation?
And, additionally, how many FTEs are associated with each
one of those missions?
Mr. Gensler. It is a good question. They are so
intertwined. I mean, we promote capital formation by also
protecting investors. We promote both by having the markets in
the middle more competitive, more transparent.
So we don't--we don't keep our books and records and
separate out the three missions because they complement each
other, especially the--I think of the first two, the capital
formation, investors, or investors and capital formation,
those--and so we don't--we don't--I like your question, but we
don't keep our books that way because they are so intertwined
really.
Mr. Ciscomani. So I will follow up on that, on the
spending, then. So how much of the budget for the SEC on the
request--on the increase requested is dedicated to enforcement
and examinations?
Mr. Gensler. So a little over half our staff is enforcement
and examination, and well in excess of half of the growth--I am
just thinking--of the 170 more folks, I think about a hundred
come from exams enforcement technology to support that.
But, if I am off, we should come back to you.
Mr. Ciscomani. Yeah. I would love to get some details on
that. And, even if it can get a little muddy on my first
question regarding a range of, you know, where the resources
are being put. When I look at those three core missions, it
would help me get an idea of where the majority of the efforts
are going. So especially if half the staff or more is going
towards the enforcement side and the examinations.
In your fiscal year 2024 budget request, the SEC is asking
for elevated FTE levels seemingly across the board, and can you
please outline again, in the same vein of my questioning, which
divisions will see the largest growth of FTEs and why?
Mr. Gensler. Okay. The largest growth, which I think was
actually in the--I--we put a little chart in the document, but
let me just reference it so I am not mistaken.
But the largest growth was, like--again, it is in
enforcement and in exams. But third would probably be--I just
want to make sure. It is actually the Division of Economic Risk
Analysis is probably third.
Mr. Ciscomani. Uh-huh.
Mr. Gensler. No. I apologize. Our Division of Corporate
Finance that reviews the filings of public companies is third,
and then the Division of Economic Risk Analysis.
Mr. Ciscomani. Thank you. I have about a minute and a half
left. I will ask you one more question.
We had Secretary Yellen here before the subcommittee last
week, and I asked about how the system of--as a whole is
reacting to Silicon Valley Bank.
And so, Chair Gensler, as a voting member of the Financial
Stability Oversight Council, did the SEC identify warning signs
regarding the banks that recently experienced trouble when it
came to rising interest rates, and why or why not?
Mr. Gensler. So the Financial Stability Oversight Council,
in its 2022 annual report, so late last year, identified
interest rate risk as an important risk in the financial system
and within banks. There was a whole section in the report. And,
when interest rates rise, the value of securities and loans can
fall, and so that puts pressure on the people holding those
debt securities. And so it was identified, as I say, late in
2022 in our annual report.
Mr. Ciscomani. Mr. Chairman, I yield back. Thank you.
Mr. Womack. Mr. Joyce.
Mr. Joyce. Thank you, Chair.
Chair Gensler, it is nice to see you again.
Mr. Gensler. Good to see you, sir.
Mr. Joyce. It--I can tell from the questions of my
colleagues that this ESG question is still out there and
remains ready to ripen.
But I want to ask you: Do you support the double
materiality standard which has been adopted by the Europeans in
their corporate sustainability reporting directive?
Mr. Gensler. Congress' mandate to us is about investors,
and it is really about just what is material to an investor
making an investment decision, and those decisions are buying
or selling or voting a proxy. And that is--that is our remit,
and it doesn't go further, and that is all we are looking at.
So that is what some people would call single materiality.
Mr. Joyce. Well, the Europeans now believe that not only
material risk should be disclosed by public firms, but also
risk posed by the firm's operations to society and the
environment should be disclosed.
What kind of information, if any, that progressive ESG
advocates demand from public companies do you believe may not
fit within the materiality standard or constitute a real risk?
Mr. Gensler. Well, it is really about what investors--and
we have heard from a remarkable number of investors about they
are looking as client--as climate risk in terms of their
investment decision, and that is the extent of our remit, which
is different, as you said, than in Europe. And it is really
about what climate risk might mean to their revenues, their
profits, their suppliers, their competitors, what legislative
bodies around the world, not just here in the U.S., might do to
change their business and requirements.
So that is what investors have told us. It is really about
what is going to be the effect on the future financials and
operations and competitive landscape and supply side of these
businesses.
Mr. Joyce. Well, the Appropriation Committee is serious
about ensuring funds provided the SEC will be used to carry out
the agency's mission as directed by Congress.
Last year, we had some discussion on the request for
funding that you had with cryptocurrency. I guess that didn't
go so well, but I am concerned that the high volume of new
rulemaking has prevented the SEC from fulfilling its basic due
diligence obligations.
For example, the agency's proposed rule requiring increased
cybersecurity disclosures does not consider existing
requirements established by Congress and agencies that
specialize in cybersecurity, like CISA. As the chairman of the
Homeland Security Appropriations Subcommittee, I am concerned
that public reporting and cyber practice provide a roadmap for
bad actors. Investors won't be protected by this rule if the
firms they invest in are harmed.
Are you working with CISA to make sure the SEC's required
disclosures don't reveal sensitive information to
cybercriminals?
Mr. Gensler. We have had a good dialogue with Jen Easterly
and her team. She is the head of CISA.
Mr. Joyce. Oh, I know. She was in before our committee just
this week. So that is why--
Mr. Gensler. Yeah. And our remit, again--and it--we had
this discussion about climate. It is really just investors
making investment decisions. So, if a cyber incident happened
at a company and hypothetically tens of millions of client
files have been stolen or hacked or something, is that material
to the company, sort of, in a sense, like a factory were to
burn down, but, instead, a hundred million files are taken or
something, is that material and then investors getting that
information?
We did put a proposal out, but it is a proposal about
summary information. It is the information that would be
material to investors, not the details of how the breach
happened or so forth.
Mr. Joyce. But, in order to accumulate that, they are going
to have to create the document that somehow a bad actor may
find, correct?
Mr. Gensler. Well, they also have to sort of accumulate it
for their board of directors--
Mr. Joyce. Right.
Mr. Gensler [continuing]. And discuss it with their board
of directors. And, if they are discussing it with their senior
leadership and their board, then to let their owners--the
owners of the company, the investors, understand if--and our
proposal was about material incidents.
Mr. Joyce. I understand. And I understand I only have 40
seconds left, or now--and decreasing, but I just want to follow
up, too, on what they were talking about, the small business.
You and I had this exchange last year, and you said it was only
the publicly held companies.
Yet in some of the comments that were received from NFIB
indicate that they are still concerned that somehow this is
going to affect the small businesses, or, as my colleague,
about the farmers and other ones.
Have you worked on trying to make sure they are excluded
from that requirement because, obviously, they are not--they
don't have the law firms and the people necessary to report
this on a daily basis?
Mr. Gensler. Right. Again, without prejudging what staff
recommendations would be or my fellow Commissioners, I think
that this has been an important exchange here today, but also
with--the American public has weighed in as to we oversee the
disclosures of these 7,000 or so public companies, not other
companies that are not. And so sorting through some of these
comments is part of what the staff is thinking through.
Mr. Joyce. But, again, that would eliminate the mom and
pops who are doing business with those publicly held companies
because they fall in that same chain.
But I am out of time, and I will give you 30 seconds extra
that I took out. Thank you.
Mr. Womack. Thank the gentleman.
We are going to do a quick round two. I know Steny's group,
for the most part, has left, but we have got several of our
members remaining.
Let me go back--I am going to close out my last question on
the academics. And I got your answer, and I understand that.
But, you know, academics that want to serve, that is a noble
thing. And I am grateful for that, but I certainly would think
that we should be incorporating academics that have some real-
world experience. That would be my ultimate goal were I sitting
in your seat.
I want to follow up on what Mr. Joyce was just talking
about, scope 3, notwithstanding the SEC does an evaluation--an
economic analysis of rulemaking procedures.
Do the down-the-chain costs--are they considered? I mean,
they are--particularly as it relates to the climate rule, this
has a potential significant effect on small- and medium-sized
businesses that are part of that whole supply chain, and, in my
opinion, these costs are large, and may not have had the
opportunity to comment.
So your response to that?
Mr. Gensler. If I can, with your permission, the heads of
our Divisions of Investment Management, Trading and Markets,
and Corporate Finance have served their public well but also
have real-world experience. The heads of Investment Management
and Corporate Finance are leading lawyers. Yes, they were at
academia, but they were also--one of them was at a big law firm
before he was in academia. I mean, they really are true experts
on investment law and on corporate finance disclosure law.
Our head of Trading and Markets is one of the leading
people on what is called micromarket structure, but thinking
about and really understanding how the details of a market
work, and what we are trying to do on our Treasury market
reforms and equity market reforms and the like are so incumbent
to, again, promote capital formation and investors by trying to
get more efficiency in the middle for the investing public.
So, again, sir, I think they have very real-world economic
experience. We are often told at the SEC to do our economics
right. To have a world-class economist heading our Division of
Economic Risk Analysis and Trading and Markets----
Mr. Womack. All right. Let's move to----
Mr. Gensler [continuing]. I like going into battle with
these----
Mr. Womack. Let's move to the impact on small business.
Mr. Gensler. So, on small business, again, in the
discussion, we look at the impact on small business across all
our rule writing. But, in terms of this climate disclosure,
again, we are looking at that because it is really about--our
remit is just about those companies that are publicly filing,
publicly raising money, and their climate risk disclosures.
Mr. Womack. On the--we have got a very diversified economy.
We have got a $20-trillion-plus economy.
These disclosures--and you mentioned the consistent, you
know, across this diversified economy. These disclosures are
different from company to company. Are they not?
Mr. Gensler. They can be, because some companies are in
different sectors and so forth.
Mr. Womack. Well, I guess my question, then, would be:
Don't the companies know a lot more about their risks than a
government agency like the SEC? I mean, would that not be the
case?
Mr. Gensler. What we lay out is rules--and we have for
decades--like on material risk, we laid a rule out in the 1970s
to disclose your material risks. We also, in the 1970s, laid
out rules about environmental disclosures.
What has come along is investors now are getting a lot of
disclosures about climate risk. And, as we were chatting with
Representative Hoyer, that they are already making these
disclosures, and trying to bring consistency to that helps
investors make their decisions. And it also helps the companies
as well to have some consistency.
Mr. Womack. I just guess my point is that, in your search
for consistency, that the SEC is becoming judge and jury over
which risks are important and which risks are not. And that is
the basis of my argument.
And I am going to--if my team will indulge me here for a
minute, I wanted to--well, let me just do my data security and
CAT question, I will submit for the record because I am out of
time, and I want to be fair to all of the other members.
I want to be fair to you, too, with your time. Thank you so
much.
And I yield back to the ranking member.
Mr. Hoyer. I continue to struggle about the chick and the
egg here, but I will pursue that later because I am not sure I
have as deep an understanding, because it could well be a
problem.
On the other hand, the persons who determine whether or not
there is a risk or--that they are willing to take are the
investors, based upon the information that is disclosed, which
you have the responsibility to make sure is accurate
information.
Now, I understand there is a process underway in which
there would be a more active, positive, or some would say not
positive, step that the SEC would be taking to require certain
disclosures on energy or climate or actions.
Am I accurate so far?
Mr. Gensler. That is correct. And, also, there was a part
of it that we proposed that it be put in the annual reports
rather than just on your websites and other reports.
Mr. Hoyer. Okay. So the concern is that we are making that
a requirement. And as I understand the concerns being raised by
some of my colleagues is that is beyond the scope of your
authority to do?
Mr. Gensler. Well, we think it is----
Mr. Hoyer [continuing]. It is their premise.
Mr. Gensler. And let me say we think it is within our
authority. We have had mandatory disclosures about material
risks to the business since the 1970s. We have had mandatory
disclosures about management discussion and analysis since--
going back, again, 50 to 60 years. We have had mandatory
disclosures about other environmental issues going for about 50
years.
So we do think that it is within our authority. But, in
this space, in this climate risk disclosure, most of what we
have done--not all of it--is about, if you make a disclosure,
for instance, about your scenario plan or if you make a
disclosure about your targets--make it accurate.
Mr. Hoyer. Let me stop you there.
The implication of ``if you make'' is, if the company makes
a determination whether or not they want to make such a
disclosure, clearly with the interest of encouraging greater
investment, your role at that point in time is ensuring that
that is accurate information that is being put forward?
Mr. Gensler. Yes, or not material misleading, in the words
of the statute.
Mr. Hoyer. Oh, okay.
Mr. Gensler. But there are parts of it that we proposed
were mandatory, particularly around what was called scope 1 and
scope 2 greenhouse gas. And then, in scope 3, we took a
narrower remit and just said it was if material.
Mr. Hoyer. All right. I am going to look into that further
because I want to understand my colleagues' real concern to see
whether I share their view that may have an effect on small
enterprises which do not have the ability to respond to that or
may not be--may be implicated by association, if you will.
Mr. Gensler. If I could help the member out, most of those
comments of--by your colleagues and the investing public is
around what is called--so-called scope 3, the suppliers and
customers of a business and what are their greenhouse gas
emissions. And that discussion is an ongoing one by the staff
and the Commissioners at the SEC because we did get a lot of
feedback on that.
Mr. Hoyer. So that is not a resolved question at this point
in time?
Mr. Gensler. It was proposed, but you are right. Nothing is
resolved really in proposal adoptions or, you know, when that
happens.
Mr. Hoyer. Okay. Last question, which I know is not your
direct responsibility, but I am interested in your thoughts on
it. To what extent did the reduction in the level of capital
reserves that was passed under the last administration, in your
opinion, did it have on the failure of the SVB Bank--SVB?
Mr. Gensler. I am sorry, sir. Are you talking about the law
that was passed in 2018?
Mr. Hoyer. 2018, yes. To--what effect, if any, do you think
that had on the failure?
Mr. Gensler. I think it would be better for me to leave
some of those questions to the banking regulators that I know
that are going to be reporting come May on that. It is probably
a matter of public record that I was not supportive of that
legislative initiative back in 2018.
Mr. Hoyer. Why?
Mr. Gensler. I thought at the time--and I have to remember
the letter I wrote, but I thought at the time that there was a
risk of correlation, that even these banks that are in this--I
think it was raising the limit from 50 billion to a higher
number, but that these banks--that there could be a correlation
in the market.
There was also some provisions about custodial banks and
foreign banks, as I recall, that I raised some questions about.
Mr. Hoyer. I will pursue that further.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Womack. Mr. Moolenaar.
Mr. Moolenaar. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And thank you for your time. You have been very generous
with your time.
I am trying to get a better understanding of kind of how
you view this role. The way I hear you, it is almost like you
feel that you are providing a service to the businesses, the
public companies--service to the investors, I should say, by
vetting whether the companies' statements on climate are
accurate, and you view that as a key role for the agency?
Mr. Gensler. I think Congress set us up that that key role
is that disclosures are there about the financials, the
description of the business, as I say, over the decades, key
risk.
Mr. Moolenaar. Right.
Mr. Gensler. And investors really get to decide what they
think is material.
Mr. Moolenaar. Right.
Mr. Gensler. And, over the last 10 years, investors more
and more have been looking for and companies are making these
disclosures.
Mr. Moolenaar. Well, I--no, I get it. There are activist
investors with a political agenda. I mean, that is clear. And
they want certain types of information.
But what I hear you saying is this Federal agency really is
in the--has the job of vetting to see whether those agendas are
being carried out is really what I hear you saying. Almost--and
I will contrast it because when I hear of a billionaire flying
a private jet to Davos to talk about climate risks and then
going off to the Super Bowl and Hollywood parties and saying
they have been able to offset their credits doing some other
project that they are involved in, I think that person is being
hypocritical, but I don't think they are breaking any laws.
And what I view a Federal agency like the SEC would be, you
would be responsible for making sure people aren't breaking
laws, not the fact that they are being hypocrites.
And so that is where I want to understand really what your
philosophy is when it comes to evaluating climate as part of
your role of an agency.
Mr. Gensler. It is far narrower than the word that you
chose. It is not about vetting. It is about two things. We had
this discussion. It is ensuring that those disclosures being
made, particularly the material disclosures, are not misleading
the public; they are full, fair and accurate.
And there is also a part of our responsibility that, on
certain disclosures, that they be made, they be required, like
the financials, like the executive----
Mr. Moolenaar. Right.
Mr. Gensler [continuing]. Compensation, things like that.
Mr. Moolenaar. Right. But, in the case of sort of the
disclosures, why not have a private entity, like Standard &
Poor's or Moody's or someone who can look at all the stuff
these companies are saying to appeal to a certain agenda and
let them do that, and you stay in the business of the
regulation and, you know, preventing fraud, which, in my mind,
when you say, you know, the SEC has been involved with--when it
comes to environmental liabilities, you know, let's say there
is a major clean-up that a company has to have or a consent
decree that they are part of with the EPA that is going to
cause them financial risk--I get why you would evaluate that.
But, when it comes to them putting stuff on their website
and saying they are following all these sort of social norms,
why in the world would you want to expend valuable resources
for your agency being in that role?
Mr. Gensler. It is really to protect the public that there
is not materially misleading disclosures, and it is also to
promote the capital formation that investors get something
consistent and they can make a comparative--there is a
comparison between these investment choices.
Mr. Moolenaar. But, if I am an investor in a company like
that, can't I hire someone to give me advice on, okay, this
company is doing what they say they are going to do, this
company isn't? Why is it the SEC's role?
Mr. Gensler. I think Congress decided many decades ago that
it is our role because it is a role to help promote capital
formation in this country and promoting it by having a Federal
agency like ours to help bring some consistency. And some of
that consistency is well established, of course, like generally
accepted accounting principles and how you book revenues, and
some is more emerging in these last dozen years that there is a
lot of disclosures around climate risk and how to help bring
some consistency. But it is merit neutral.
Mr. Moolenaar. Well, I do feel like you are--you know, when
the administration wanted to create this disinformation
governance board--do you remember when the administration
wanted to do that through Homeland Security? It feels very much
like this, like you are putting yourself in this role of
evaluating the claims of these businesses and really outside of
your jurisdiction.
Mr. Gensler. It is really up to the investors to evaluate.
It is our role just to help bring some, as I say, truthfulness
in advertising, if you wish, and, yes, some requirements on
material disclosures.
Mr. Moolenaar. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Womack. Mrs. Hinson.
Mrs. Hinson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And, just to follow up on that briefly, I think it is very
clear that, with Mr. Cloud's comments that Congress felt the
need to pass something in the last--in the 117th Congress to
clarify the position, that it wanted to give you the authority,
which, again, I would argue you don't have. And we can disagree
on that, but I think that congressional intent could not be
clearer there.
I do want to go back to something, though, that, since we
have had such a conversation today about the rulemaking
process, you know, under Democrat and Republican
administrations, we have seen the public comment periods be
historically 90 to 120 days, 3 to 4 months, for those public
comment periods. But all of yours--almost all of yours--I
should say almost all have been dropped to 30 days.
Why?
Mr. Gensler. Our--actually, on average, from the time we
vote on our proposals and put them on our websites, we have
averaged 78 days for----
Mrs. Hinson. But for public comment, that narrow time when
you are accepting those, 30 days, correct?
Mr. Gensler. No. We accept comments throughout a period of
time when it goes in the Federal Register--it takes some time
to get in the Federal Register, but----
Mrs. Hinson. Right, but you are saying average, right?
Average is 78 days, but that includes the ones that are longer,
so when I am looking at the intent of dropping most of them to
30 days, to me, that is a transparency problem. It--to me, it
says that you want to limit the number of viewpoints that are
coming in by limiting it to 30 days.
So that is highly concerning. I am hearing a lot about that
from a lot of folks, let's say, about how much time they have
to actually formulate and get their opinions in.
We talk about that climate rule. Making sure that there is
enough time for feedback on both sides of an issue, I think, is
very, very important.
I want to also go back to the inspector general's report
for just a moment. Have any SEC managers expressed any concerns
to you that, with the reduced comment time in some of these
cases, that they are having trouble getting data from all
stakeholders?
Mr. Gensler. We--I want to assure the members, too. We get
comments even after the comment period. We take meetings. Even
this discussion today is part of our administrative record on a
number of rules like the climate rule. And we consider that, a
five-member Commission.
So that is just the nature of these things. We have an end
of a comment period, but we also often receive and consider
comments well beyond this----
Mrs. Hinson. So, even though the deadline may have passed,
you are still actively considering the feedback that you are
getting in?
Mr. Gensler. Yes.
Mrs. Hinson. Is that fair to say?
I think it is concerning, though, when, in the report, it
shows that staff do have concerns, here on page 3, that they
have not received as much feedback during the rulemaking
processes or--either as a result of shortened timelines during
the drafting process or because of shortened public comment
periods.
So I think that is concerning when we are seeing that in
the IG's report directly. There is a direct line there between
a shortened comment period and this feedback in the report.
Would you agree?
Mr. Gensler. Well, I think there is a sentence in the
document that says that.
Mrs. Hinson. So, yeah, directly connected. So that is where
my concern is specifically with the timing there.
As far as recommendations from the IG, how many of them are
withstanding? How many have been resolved?
Mr. Gensler. We--we work with the Inspector General's
Office to resolve comments. Most of--if I recall, were about
human resources and hiring, and we go through that process with
them. We would have to get back to you to tell you----
Mrs. Hinson. Yeah. I would appreciate----
Mr. Gensler [continuing]. That answer.
Mrs. Hinson [continuing]. Within--I think we are asking for
about 15 business days. If you would get those back to me
within the next couple of weeks, I would certainly appreciate
that.
Mr. Gensler. You got that?
Mrs. Hinson. Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Womack. Mr. Cloud.
Mr. Cloud. Thank you.
Chair, you continue to kind of say over and over that,
okay, these businesses, they are already producing these
reports and, therefore--but there is a difference between a
company who voluntarily is doing something of their own
initiative because they want to and the strong arm of the
Federal Government coming in and requiring it for every
business because there is a few businesses that want it.
Can you not acknowledge that there is a big difference in
that?
Mr. Gensler. As we have discussed, there is attributes of
our disclosure regime for decades that are mandatory and we
require. There are some that are----
Mr. Cloud. Your proposed rule requires businesses to do
this, not only requires businesses to report it; requires them
to report on their entire supply chain and their supply chain's
supply chain in a sense. And it really--to anyone looking at
this, really seems as--I think it as Mr. Moolenaar was saying,
you know, really cognizant of a lot of the things we are
seeing. And you said that your main job is basically to see if
they are accurate and true. Is that right?
Mr. Gensler. It is to bring efficiency--as Congress' words,
it is also to bring efficiency, competition in capital
formation, and so investors----
Mr. Cloud. If your job is to make sure that these climate
reports are true, are you planning to hire a bunch of
scientists, or how do you plan to go about that?
Mr. Gensler. The same way we do on other disclosures. It is
really to set in place a set of rules, if we were to adopt
this, but to set in place a set of rules. And then issuers
follow the rules, and investors get to make their investment
choices.
Mr. Cloud. The other regulations that you talk about, that
you require reporting on, things like executive salary or
capital that is available, and those kind of things, those are
all internal metrics that have to do with the financial
stability of a company.
To have climate regulations is something--it is a whole
different thing, and you are comparing apples and oranges here
and pretending they are the same thing, but they are not at
all. It is kind of a bizarre approach.
There has been values-based investing for a long time, I
mean, people can look at companies and decide whether or not--
but, for the Federal Government to come in and decide that
these are the particular values that we want to force reporting
on, I think is very, very troubling.
I mean, I am very concerned about human trafficking and
slavery, and a number of the Green New Deal energy sources are
mined with child labor in countries throughout Africa--the
Congo, for example--and solar panels, a lot of them are built
with slave labor in China.
Are you planning on requiring reporting on that as well?
Mr. Gensler. Again, this is driven by investors currently
are making investment decisions based upon climate risk for
the----
Mr. Cloud. But that doesn't change your mandate at all. If
every business in the country came to you and said, ``We want
this,'' it doesn't change your mandate at all, does it, until
Congress acts?
Mr. Gensler. No----
Mr. Cloud. You don't have any new authorities because a
hundred businesses, as you said, want this--want new
regulations?
Mr. Gensler. I believe and our lawyers believe it is within
the mandate Congress has already granted us.
Mr. Cloud. Have you considered that a number of businesses
actually like regulation because it creates an uncompetitive
environment, particularly large companies that can afford
lawyers and the likes to create these reports and--they are
much more able to compete in that environment, and it squashes
the competition of--it helps create the wealth gap. Have you
considered that into your consideration on whether to promote
these rules or not?
Mr. Gensler. We do consider promoting competition for small
business as well as competition among all the issuers as well.
Mr. Cloud. And I only have a minute left, so I wanted to
touch on this while we can. It is a different topic. And that
is there was a mention about people in Congress stock trading.
It is certainly a concern that is worth looking into.
One thing that is completely overlooked that there is no
transparency on--I have an act to--it is called the DIVEST
Act--is to look into agency heads at a certain level and up who
are investing in stocks in areas that they are regulating as
well. Are you familiar with The Wall Street Journal report that
came out in--I think it was August of last year, August of
2022, that touched on this?
Mr. Gensler. I am--I am generally familiar that there was
some reporting--I don't recall which paper--about investing----
Mr. Cloud. It highlights 25 percent of Federal officials
who file public financial disclosures at the SEC were investing
in stocks of firms that were lobbying that very agency. And so
is that a concern that you are looking into, and would you work
with me and maybe even perhaps support legislation like the
DIVEST Act that would make sure that regulators are not
investing in the areas that they are overseeing and regulating?
Mr. Gensler. So, yes, we would work with you on technical
assistance on any--and this is true of any Member, but we would
work with you on it.
In terms of the SEC--just in terms of the SEC, we have some
of the highest level of restrictions on any trading, partly
because of the nature of who we are and so forth. And we work
with the Office of Government Ethics.
For instance, none of our employees can invest in the--sort
of the individual--the broker-dealers, investment advisers that
we oversee and so forth, or any of the companies that we might
be investigating or and so forth.
There is a lot of--a lot of restrictions. At my level, it
is not even allowed to--you know, the Commissioners, we don't
even invest in any individual stocks. It is just the broad-
based indexes.
Mr. Cloud. I apologize.
Mr. Womack. Mr. Joyce.
Mr. Joyce. Thank you, Chair.
Chair Gensler, how has the huge number of proposed
rulemakings at your agency impacted the quality of these rules
and your ability to effectively consider comments submitted?
Mr. Gensler. I think that the quality is quite strong. And,
again, the--what we are doing is fairly consistent with what my
predecessors have done.
Mr. Joyce. Do you think this has affected your attrition
rates?
Mr. Gensler. I think that the attrition rate is driven by a
tight labor market, really talented staff that are taken, but
it is also consistent with other Federal agencies at this
roughly 6 percent level.
Mr. Joyce. As you know, the markets certainly don't like
uncertainty. Are you concerned that so many transformative new
rules, likely to be litigated for years, and massive swings in
policy at the SEC would create uncertainty for many years to
come?
Mr. Gensler. I think of our agenda as helping the American
public, whether they be issuers or investors, for many years to
come.
Mr. Joyce. Okay. Well, I mean, a new collective-bargaining
agreement with the SEC Employee Union, I understand most
employees will only be required to be in the office 4 days per
month.
How do you expect to effectively consider comments and
perform adequate analysis on over 50 proposed rules with a
workforce that barely comes into the office?
Mr. Gensler. The workforce is fully engaged, and it is--I
think we have all learned something over these 3 years. We
brought--we did 3,000 examinations in fiscal year 2022. We did
760 enforcement actions. We reviewed thousands of companies'
filings, and largely through telework.
It is--I am old enough to think, you know--this just--this
is new technologies, adapting, and people find different work-
life balances.
Mr. Joyce. Well, I think the best work that we do is when
we are actually together on the floor and have the, you know,
ability to interact with each other. But I will take your word
for it.
I am--give you back the remainder of my time, sir.
Mr. Womack. For the good of the order, Mr. Hoyer?
Mr. Hoyer. I think, for the good of the order, I will say I
think we are about at an end, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Womack. We are, indeed.
And, with that, I want to thank the members, both my
friend's side and on our side. Very good hearing.
I want to remind our members that they have 7 days to
submit questions for the record with the appropriate
subcommittee staff.
Chair Gensler, as I said in my opening, it is a very
important conversation we are having today. You have got a very
important job in this country. We thank you for the time that
you have given us today. We look forward to working with you as
we complete the fiscal year 2024 FSGG Appropriations process.
Mr. Gensler. And I look forward to working with you, and
the conversation was helpful for me as well.
Thank you.
Mr. Womack. Thank you.
And, with that, this subcommittee stands adjourned.

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Thursday, April 27, 2023.

FISCAL YEAR 2024 REQUEST FOR THE FEDERAL TRADE COMMISSION

WITNESS

HON. LINA KHAN, CHAIR, FEDERAL TRADE COMMISSION
Mr. Womack. The subcommittee will come to order. I would
like to remind everybody as a reminder, we will follow the 5-
minute rule for opening remarks, questions, and comments.
Members will be recognized in order of seniority based on
who is seated at the beginning of the hearing, rotating between
the parties. Members that arrive after the gavel will be
recognized in the order of arrival. So let us begin.
I would like to welcome everybody to the Subcommittee on
Financial Services and General Government, and I would like to
welcome back to the subcommittee chair of the Federal Trade
Commission, Lina Khan.
As we all know, Congress is locked in a fierce debate
regarding the fiscal trajectory of our Nation. One path, the
path that we have been on, leads to the $31 trillion-plus debt
mountain that skyrocketed inflation to 40-year highs and has
most recently resulted in a rising interest rate environment.
Excessive spending has consequences.
The other path, which will require constraint, control, and
cooperation has the makings of fiscal responsibility.
Now during this debate, my colleagues on the other side
have said that our plans to examine and potentially limit our
reckless spending to fiscal year 2022 levels is Draconian,
drastic.
I would like to just point out to my friends that the
fiscal year 2023 spending bill was settled just a few months
ago. That means that we just started to operate at 2023 levels.
The sky didn't fall for Federal agencies during fiscal year
2022.
Given this debate, it is appropriate for the subcommittee
to carefully examine the budget for all of the agencies that
fall under our jurisdiction.
Today, we will explore the FTC's budget request that is
asking for $160 million more over last year's enacted levels.
This is, once again, a significant funding level for an
independent agency that has received yearly increases. Requests
of this magnitude must be explained and justified thoroughly.
Questions of whether the FTC is performing its critical mission
of protecting consumers and promoting competition appropriately
need to be asked.
Unfortunately, a once-bipartisan Commission has been
reduced to one-party rule, and we are witnessing the effects of
this change.
The FTC, with a cavalier attitude, is weighing in on areas
that are outside of its authority and deciding on issues
through subjective means.
We all agree that the work conducted to protect our seniors
and our military through the FTC's consumer protections is
critically important, but expanding the scope and following a
philosophy of ``big is bad'' for its antitrust work is
dangerous.
Competition has always been measured through pricing and
product availability, as well as the dynamic nature of business
innovation. Moving beyond the objective to the subjective is
discouraging to all kinds of business activity.
Chair Khan, these are important topics, and I look forward
to today's discussion, but to be clear, to no surprise, I can't
support a massive increase for the FTC's budget, especially
given the Commission's recent track record and given the
Nation's current fiscal outlook.
With that, I now recognize my colleague, and sitting in for
the ranking member from Maryland, Mr. Hoyer, Mr. Pocan, for his
opening statement.
Mr. Pocan. Thank you, Chairman Womack. I would like to
welcome Lina Khan, the Chair of the Federal Trade Commission,
to today's hearing. I look forward to discussing what the FTC
has accomplished and the direction it is going, as well as how
the fiscal year 2024 budget request will provide the resources
they need.
The FTC protects consumers across vast swaths of the
economy. They set rules and expectations for corporate
behavior, ensure Americans have the information they need to
make prudent decisions and investigate allegations of
wrongdoing.
The FTC assesses mergers and acquisitions and other
competition issues for much of the U.S. economy, including
technology, healthcare, energy, and pharmaceuticals.
It also investigates unfair and deceptive practices related
to privacy, cybersecurity, security, credit reporting,
misleading advertising, and numerous other areas.
The FTC has some of the brightest and hardest working
employees in government, but these broad responsibilities mean
that the agency must make hard decisions about what
investigations to pursue.
We have heard reports that when you go to court, FTC is
often out-staffed dramatically by corporations in high profile
litigation.
I appreciate that you have requested substantial funding
increases in the fiscal year 2024 to support the FTC's
enforcement, rulemaking, and research priorities.
The FTC is requesting a significant funding increase of
$160 million, or 37 percent above the fiscal year 2023 enacted
level for a total of $590 million. This funding would go
towards additional staffing in the areas of competition and
consumer protection, as well as support IT needs and expert
witness testimony.
This increase in resources will further empower the FTC to
improve fairness in the marketplace and lower costs for
American taxpayers.
Additionally, because of the continuing surge in merger and
acquisition activity, as well as changes to the FTC's fee
structure, we anticipate the FTC will also increase its revenue
by collecting more filing fees, which will offset a portion of
the requested funding increase.
Needless to say, the FTC is one of only a handful of
agencies whose own fee structure helps to offset taxpayer
funding.
We look forward to discussing how the FTC will use these
funds effectively to support its consumer protection and
competition work.
Before I yield back, I would like to note that this week my
colleagues from the other side of the aisle have advanced a
debt ceiling bill that would impose drastic cuts to Federal
agencies.
For the FSGG bill, that means cuts to agencies like the
FTC, which protects Americans from fraudsters and scammers.
The Consumer Product Safety Commission, which keeps unsafe
products off the market, and the Securities and Exchange
Commission, which protects the financial interest for investors
and the IRS, which just received a much-needed increase in
funding for enforcement efforts to crack down on wealthy tax
cheats.
I hope that my colleagues reject these ill-advised cuts and
we can work together to protect Americans from those who seek
to commit fraud and cheat the system.
Chair Khan, I look forward to your statement and our
discussion this morning.
Thank you, Mr. Womack, and I will yield back the balance of
my time.
Mr. Womack. I thank the gentleman.
I now recognize Chair Lina Khan. Your full written
testimony will be placed in the record, and the floor is yours,
ma'am.

STATEMENT OF HON. LINDA KHAN

Ms. Khan. Chairman Womack, Ranking Member Hoyer, and
members of the subcommittee, thank you for inviting me to
testify today. It is an honor to be here. In my remarks, I will
share with you some of the tremendous accomplishments by FTC
staff over the last year and discuss the Commission's budget
request for fiscal year 2024.
We are grateful for the increased funding Congress has
provided in recent years, particularly in this current fiscal
year.
We put the resources that Congress gives us to take on some
of the pressing challenges that Americans face in our economy.
As the Commission's written testimony lays out, the FTC has
accomplished an enormous amount over the last year, despite
significant hurdles. These accomplishments are a testament to
the hard work and creativity of the FTC staff who, day after
day, are fighting to protect American consumers, workers, and
honest businesses, even when it means taking on some of the
most powerful corporations in our economy.
The FTC is small but mighty. During fiscal year 2022, the
FTC returned $497 million to consumers and to the U.S. Treasury
General Fund.
To continue to fight for consumers and fair competition,
the Commission is requesting $590 million for this upcoming
fiscal year. This would increase our budget by $160 million and
fund an additional 310 FTEs over our planned fiscal year 2023
level.
For fiscal year 2022, every dollar of the FTC's costs
returned an estimated $30 in FTC-provided benefits to the
American public. We expect that a larger budget would position
us to further grow on this return on investment.
We are making this request because Congress has given the
FTC a critical job, but our resources have not kept up. Despite
some of the recent increases in our budget, the agency today
remains smaller than we were in 1980, even as the Nation's
economy has grown six-fold since then.
Demands on the FTC continue to grow as we review
multibillion dollar corporate mergers, tackle major litigations
against unfair or deceptive practices, review millions of
consumer complaints a year, and respond to a steady stream of
requests from Congress for research and investigation of
various economic sectors.
Additional resources would allow us to expand the critical
work that the FTC staff is doing. On the consumer protection
side, we have been redoubling our efforts in traditional areas
of enforcement, like protecting Americans' privacy, and
combating fraud, while also activating additional authorities
that Congress has given us.
In the last year alone, we have used, for the first time, a
number of authorities that Congress has given us, including to
tackle health privacy breaches and ``Made in U.S.A.'' fraud.
We have also been racking up record monetary judgments,
including the largest ever judgment to protect children's
privacy, the largest monetary judgment in a fair lending case,
and the largest administrative judgment ever.
The Commission is also using all of its authorities
provided by Congress to tackle illegal mergers and
anticompetitive practices. Over the past 16 months, the FTC has
moved to challenge major transactions in critical sectors of
the economy, including semiconductors, defense, energy,
healthcare, and digital markets.
This includes filing suit to block eight mergers outright,
as well as 11 other anticompetitive deals that the parties
abandoned after the FTC indicated concerns.
We have also been partnering up with the States to tackle
anticompetitive practices, including a lawsuit that we filed
last year against two large pesticide manufacturers, Syngenta
and Corteva, whose pay-to-block schemes have been inflating the
prices that farmers have to pay for pesticides.
The Commission is also using its authorities to engage in
marketwide inquiries, including studies that are taking a close
look at the practices of pharmacy benefit managers, the
middlemen that sit in between the pharmaceutical supply chain.
We have also launched a study looking closely at the
factors that contributed to the supply chain disruptions and
trying to understand whether potential unlawful practices
exacerbated the impact of those disruptions.
We are also continuing to invest in our expertise. We
recently launched an Office of Technology so that we can keep
pace with an increasingly digitized economy.
This new office is hiring data scientists and engineers, AI
experts and technologists with expertise across a range of
additional specialties. These talented individuals would
partner up with our attorneys and economists to strengthen our
enforcement work.
In short, the FTC is on the front lines of some of the most
pressing challenges that Americans face. Ensuring that we can
fully execute on the mandate that Congress has given us
requires a greater commitment of resources.
Thank you for the opportunity to appear before you today. I
look forward to your questions.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Womack. Thank you, Chair Khan. We will move now to our
questions and answers, and I will lead. My first question, I am
going to cut to the chase here, and I am going to use a
military term in so doing.
We continue to hear that there is a command-and-control
issue at the FTC, from anecdotal conversations, to abysmal
employee survey results, to an Inspector General audit that
cited the Commission's limited controls in place for
consultants, to news reports of a mass exodus of senior staff
over the last 2 years, as well as the resignation of the only
Republican on the Commission this year.
I have to ask, Chair Khan, what is going on at the agency?
While I am interested in the steps that you will take to
correct it, I am more interested in frankly how we got to this
place. To ensure this never happens again, please detail for us
how we got here. Your turn.
Ms. Khan. Thanks for the question, Congressman. Look, I am
incredibly proud of the work that the FTC staff is doing day
in, day out. We are on the front lines of some of the most
critical challenges that Americans face.
There is no question that there are things early in my
tenure that we could have done better, and since then, we have
been closely trying to understand some of the source of the
decline in morale and identifying ways to improve that.
Since then, we have been working closely with the staff to
improve on those fronts, and are already seeing significant
payoffs.
As for the Commission, look, it is my firm belief that the
Commission is at its best when we have five commissioners, and
I am really looking forward to additional colleagues as soon as
the President nominates them and the Senate confirms them.
Mr. Womack. Do you encourage collaboration? Do you have an
open-door policy? Do people use your--do you have one?
Ms. Khan. Absolutely.
Mr. Womack. Is it stated? Is it published? I mean, people
know they can come talk to you?
Ms. Khan. Absolutely. In fact, one of the things we have
introduced under my tenure is open Commission meetings. So for
the first time the Commission is conducting some of its
business in public.
Each Commission meeting, people can sign up. You know,
regular members of the public can sign up and come speak
directly to the Commission. And so in addition to this, we have
also been regularly opening public dockets.
And so on many fronts, the FTC is increasingly hearing from
the public at greater levels than we ever have before, and we
really benefit from hearing directly from the public and
learning firsthand what are some of the key issues that
Americans are facing.
Mr. Womack. Do you encourage candor?
Ms. Khan. Absolutely.
Mr. Womack. I want to turn attention now to the FTC's
productivity levels over the last few years. Specifically, how
much time are you spending on consumer protection enforcement
actions as compared to antitrust actions?
Your budget reflects a larger request for the competition
side when compared to your mission for protecting consumers.
Please walk the subcommittee through your levels of
productivity, and should we anticipate that this trend of more
dollars being used on mergers and antitrust will continue?
Ms. Khan. It is an important question, and currently, our
efforts are organized by a Bureau of Consumer Protection that
is bigger than the Bureau of Competition. What we have seen in
practice is that bringing antitrust cases is more resource-
intensive than bringing consumer protection cases.
So on average, we can bring a consumer protection case
with, say, around 8 to 10 FTEs. On the antitrust side, bringing
a single case requires at least 15 people, oftentimes 20 or 25.
So we see just a significant resource asymmetry in terms of the
number of people needed to bring these law enforcement actions.
We have also seen an asymmetry in the level of expert
costs. So expert costs, on the consumer protection side, can
sometimes be in the tens-of-thousands or hundreds-of thousands-
of-dollar range, whereas expert costs on the antitrust side are
routinely in the millions-of-dollar range.
And so we just see, at a basic level, an asymmetry of what
is needed to even bring antitrust cases in the first place, and
that is what accounts for some of the discrepancy in the
request.
Mr. Womack. Yeah. Finally, Chair Khan, the $160 million
increase, as I state in my opening, it is on top of significant
increases in previous years.
As we know, part of your budget is offset by merger filing
fees. Walk the subcommittee through your take on the level of
merger activity taking place in the country.
Ms. Khan. So the merger activity that we saw over the last
few years was off the charts. We saw about a 70 percent
increase year on year, and that was as our staff levels
remained the same. And so, our staff were under enormous strain
to be investigating a dramatic expansion in number of merger
filings that have been coming in.
We have more recently seen some of these merger filing
numbers decline, but they are still somewhat higher than year-
on-year averages historically.
It is true that our budget is partly offset by money we are
collecting through the merger filing fees, as well as fees
collected through our Do Not Call Registry. And so, the amount
that we are dependent on the General Fund is quite a bit
smaller.
Mr. Womack. Mr. Pocan.
Mr. Pocan. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
First, let me just ask about the conversation that there is
going to be 22 percent cuts to the budget coming forward. For
your agency in particular--and I would argue antitrust is
consumer protection by the way--what would that type of budget
cut mean?
And even though your agency is a little different, that you
get some funding from fees, what would that have as an impact
on consumers?
Ms. Khan. In short, it would be devastating. You know, we
are on the front lines of hearing about fraud and scams day in
after day out. This includes crypto fraud. It includes fraud
and scams that are targeted at elderly Americans, at veterans.
We have, you know, significant resources devoted to
protecting Americans from these types of behaviors, and if we
were to ultimately see the types of cuts that have been
proposed, it would require potentially us to--you know, at the
very least, would lead to a hiring freeze, and ultimately could
even see a reduction in somewhere from 140 to 180 FTEs.
Again, we are already at a stage where we can barely keep
up with the work that is coming in, and so any further cuts
would be quite devastating.
Mr. Pocan. Thank you. Chair Khan, many of my colleagues
are, I guess the word I would use is, obsessed with cracking
down on an apparently pressing issue of our time, the social
media platform, TikTok.
While I think there is a target out there about data
privacy in social media platforms that is broader than just
TikTok, it does come as no surprise to my colleagues that the
largest FTC penalty ever levied happened not too long ago on
this broader issue of data privacy.
In fact, just last year the FTC found that Twitter deceived
users and sold data that was meant to protect their accounts.
In 2019, the FTC slapped Facebook, now Meta, with a record
$5 billion penalty and required them to modify their practices.
We now know that 87 million Americans were affected by this
rampant selling of user data.
These companies aren't owned by the CCP. These are American
social media companies. With regard to these platforms, what
privacy concerns do you think exist for consumers, and what is
a fair--and is it fair to say this is a widespread issue?
Ms. Khan. I think it is absolutely fair to say that this is
a widespread issue. As you have mentioned, there have been
several major social media companies that have received FTC
scrutiny and that the FTC had determined had potentially
violated the law.
I think if you step back, we see that some of this stems
potentially from business models that are incentivizing endless
vacuuming up of user data.
I think especially when you have business models that are
based on behavioral ads, the businesses can be incentivized to
endlessly collect, and that can clearly come into tension with
consumer privacy.
Mr. Pocan. Great. Thank you. And Chair Khan, numerous
reports indicate that health data collected by mobile apps is
available for sale widely and at very affordable prices.
I am concerned that this type of sensitive data collected
and sold by the apps, that is meant to help consumers find
cheaper prescription drug prices, or get access to behavioral
of mental health services, is being sold en masse to data
brokers.
What actions has the FTC taken to reduce the amount of
highly personal data that is being collected and resold by
mobile apps, especially behavioral and mental health-related,
often without a user's knowledge, and often this data is sold
on a aggregated basis. But researchers have found that it is
often not difficult to identify a specific person within that.
How does the FTC factor the risk that personally
identifiable information could be easily revealed through its
enforcement work?
Ms. Khan. This is a huge area of concern for us. We have
recently brought several enforcement actions focused on the
abuse of sensitive health information, including two cases that
we brought against GoodRx and BetterHelp.
In both of these instances we saw that companies had
collected sensitive health information and then made it
available for targeted advertising.
And it is fair to say, I think, consumers are not expecting
that when they are handing over this sensitive data, it is
going to be made available for those purposes.
So we brought an enforcement action, made it clear that
these types of practices can be unlawful.
We also, last summer, sued a major data broker, Kochava,
for making available very sensitive geolocation information
that could be easily purchased and used to identify whether
people were going to sensitive locations, be it places of
worship, addiction facilities, or other health services.
And so, that litigation is ongoing, but needless to say, I
think the explosion in user data that is available for sale,
oftentimes very sensitive data, is a top area of concern for
us.
Mr. Pocan. Great. Thank you, Chairman.
In my remaining seconds, the fact that they recently have
an office to advise to technology, Congress had that prior to
1995, and, you know, given our workshop yesterday on AI, all
these other technology issues, this might be interesting to
revisit when we actually have the full Appropriations Committee
meet.
Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Womack. Mrs. Hinson.
Mrs. Hinson. Thank you, Mr. Chair, for holding this hearing
today.
Chair Khan, thank you so much for coming before us today
and answering our questions. Obviously, the FTC serves a very
important role in making sure that competitive practices can
continue to exist in this country in the marketplace while
still protecting consumers.
But I am going to focus today on just some of my concerns
surrounding what I perceive to be maybe going a little bit far
outside of your jurisdiction on some of the rules and the
process that when it comes to regulations is driving up the
cost of doing business in this country.
And when we talked yesterday, we talked about big business
and small business and making sure we can protect our small
businesses, and so one rule that I am concerned about and is
moving forward, is the Commission's proposed Motor Vehicle
Dealers Trade Regulation Rule.
Obviously, the rule's intent is to help consumers, but many
of the new paperwork provisions associated with the rule really
haven't been tested, and from my count, there is at least four
new disclosures that car buyers will have to both read and
sign.
And, you know, I have bought a vehicle myself. I know how
complicated it can be, and we are adding a layer of
complication here, so I just want to know why. Why are you
enacting this new rule that really puts that onus on the
consumer?
Ms. Khan. Thanks, Congresswoman, and I really enjoyed our
conversation yesterday about the importance of small business.
So the FTC's work in this area and the proposed rule really
follows years and years of enforcement activity. We all know
that buying a car is one of the most significant and expensive
purchases that an American makes, and unfortunately, we have
seen certain practices persist.
This can include certain bait-and-switch practices so that
companies may be representing one set of commitments, but then
ultimately switching what consumers are ultimately on the hook
for.
Mrs. Hinson. But aren't those things already illegal? I
mean, where do you not feel that you don't already have the
enforcement--that the enforcement capability doesn't already
exist?
I mean, when you look at the amount of time and effort that
this is going to take on the consumer side, I just see this as
an incredible burden, not only to our dealers who are now going
to have to dedicate more additional staff time there, but to
the consumer.
I have been in and bought a car, right? I understand how
many papers you already have to sign, and now we are putting
that onus on the consumer.
Do you not feel that you already have that enforcement
capability, that things are already illegal that you are
describing?
Ms. Khan. So it is true that under section 5 of the FTC
Act, we are able to reach some of those practices. I think in
practice, what we have seen is that this case-by-case approach
is not effectively deterring these illegal business practices.
And so, codifying the illegality of these practices through a
rule, we think, will both provide businesses much clearer
notice about what is unlawful, make it crystal clear, and then
also, give us more remedial authority so that if companies
violate these rules and engage in these illegal practices, we
can actually get money back to consumers. And so that is----
Mrs. Hinson. With all due respect, I believe that is
Congress' job to decide what needs to be in code here, not--
this shouldn't be happening through the rulemaking process.
And another question I have in this regard, what is the
cost to consumers? Have you actually accounted for that cost of
additional time with this mandated rule and the paperwork here?
Ms. Khan. So our proposed rule lays out some preliminary
analysis, but it is just a proposed rule. We put out the
proposal for comment. We received somewhere between 10- to
11,000 comments, including commenting on some of these issues,
and so our staff is currently looking closely at some of the
input and will determine how to move forward.
I will say, the rulemaking is pursuant to the authority
Congress gave us in Dodd-Frank where they authorized us to
issue a rule addressing practices by auto dealers.
Mrs. Hinson. Have you done any qualitative research in this
case?
Ms. Khan. Our economists have been doing quantitative
research, which is in the rule. I believe some of the input we
are getting is more on the qualitative side.
Mrs. Hinson. Yeah, I would say it is prudent to consumer-
test when you look at the paperwork requirements before you
propose them to see if they are working as intended. So I would
ask you to seriously consider that before any further movement
on this rule.
And since we don't know if they will actually work, and
they haven't been tested in practical application, if you wind
up confusing customers and this doesn't work going forward,
what action are you prepared to take at the FTC to reverse
course on this if it is a damaging rule?
Ms. Khan. Yeah, look, we all share the goal of making sure
that this is improving the process for consumers, not adding
any type of confusion. And so if ultimately we ended up getting
data or input or research that suggested it wasn't working as
intended, of course we would revisit that.
Mrs. Hinson. Well, I would like to submit, Mr. Chair, for
the record, a letter that I, along with many other Members,
bipartisan Members, wrote to the chair and the FTC to ask her
to back off this rule.
And I believe it is going to be damaging to consumers in
the long run, and really will hurt our small businesses, right?
Many of our auto dealers are small businesses. From my
district, I have many who employ dozens and dozens of people
from techs to sales people. So, they are supporting a lot of
families, and this will create a more challenging process on
the consumer side.
So without objection, Mr. Chair, I would ask that this be
submitted for the record.
Mr. Womack. Without objection.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mrs. Hinson. Thank you, Mr. Chair. I yield back.
Mr. Womack. Mrs. Torres.
Mrs. Torres. Hello, good afternoon, Chair Khan. It is
really good to see you, and thank you for responding to my most
recent letter about reducing gasoline prices. As you know,
Californians in my district have been hit hard by high gas
prices this last winter, and I look forward to continuing to
work with you to address this issue.
I also want to follow up on an important issue of companies
profiting off of people's sensitive location data. As you know,
I remain concerned that companies' unfair data practices can
allow opportunists and extremists to hunt down women seeking
abortion.
It is why a sent a letter last year, joined by 71 of my
colleagues, urging you to do everything in your power to
protect women from extremists.
In State after State in this country, conservative
activists have gone after women, trying to stop them from
receiving safe abortions and threatening to punish them with
prison if they do so.
If these conservative operatives have access to a woman's
data, they could track her, know if she Googled ``abortion,''
know if she went to an abortion clinic, know if she missed her
period in the app.
This is the world that we live in, where a woman told by
her doctor that her fetus won't live outside of the womb,
someone who needs an abortion now has to worry about being
hunted down as a criminal. No one should be hunted down and
persecuted for seeking an abortion.
The FTC must continue doing everything in its power to
protect Americans from unfair data practices, and stealing
sensitive data also has real-world consequences for people
visiting a church, a temple, an addiction center, or trying to
evade a stalker, such as a victim of domestic violence.
Can you talk about the actions the FTC has taken to reduce
the amount of highly personal data being collected and resold
by mobile apps, especially geolocation data often without the
users' knowledge.
Ms. Khan. Yeah. Cracking down on the abuse and misuse of
sensitive personal information is a top priority for us. Last
year, we brought a lawsuit against a major data broker that was
making some of this very sensitive information, including
geolocation information, available for sale quite easily.
And that data could actually be used to precisely identify
where specific individuals were traveling.
So as you noted, that could reveal whether they were going
to church or temple, whether they were seeking healthcare. And
so we have a lawsuit----
Mrs. Torres. Or if they are a targeted Member of Congress,
where they are going.
Ms. Khan. Exactly. We have also brought cases addressing
stalkerware, instances in which this data is being abused to,
you know, perpetuate stalking. So this is a top priority.
We also currently have a rulemaking ongoing that would
consider whether we need marketwide rules to address some of
these practices head on.
Mrs. Torres. Thank you, I appreciate your response.
I also believe that the FTC plays a tremendously important
role protecting people from scams. I hear a lot from my
constituents how they invested, you know, hard-earned money,
what they thought was in a safe way, and later lost all of it
because it was a scam.
These scam artists target vulnerable people. They find an
elderly veteran, a very young person, status family, and they
lie to steal their money.
If I use a credit card for one of these scams, most likely
I am able to get the money back, but if I use an ATM card, I
will not be able to get any of that money back.
We know that both scams and hate crimes are underreported
often because the victim is afraid or ashamed that--or doesn't
believe that there is anyone out there, you know, who cares to
protect them.
The FTC actually, you know, doesn't cost taxpayers
anything. The work that you do saves our taxpayers money. In
looking at the cuts proposed by the Republican Congress
majority, can you talk a little bit about how that will impact
day-to-day consumers that are often targets of scams?
Ms. Khan. So it is absolutely true, we receive huge amounts
of complaints about ongoing fraud and scams. We receive around
6 million complaints a year. Around 4 million of those
oftentimes relate to fraud in particular.
We have also seen particularly that fraud targeting elders
or people of color may be underreported, and so even the data
may understate the degree to which these practices are ongoing.
It is absolutely true that the types of cuts that are being
proposed would come at a serious expense of our being able to
fight hard to go after those practices, and also to critically
get back money for consumers.
We have current rulemakings in place that would go after
things like imposter scams, or fake earnings claims that
exaggerate the amount of money people can make, that make it
easier for us to get that money back, but some of these cuts
would certainly come at the expense of that work.
Mrs. Torres. Thank you. I appreciate it and I yield back.
Mr. Womack. Mr. Cloud.
Mr. Cloud. Thanks for being here today. I wanted to talk to
you about a proposed rule about noncompetes. And I know it was
mentioned in the State of the Union about noncompetes with
burger chains.
I am not sure that is a huge deal, but some small
businesses are very concerned about the proposed rule in the
sense of, you know, they want to be able to bring on new
workers, they want to bring on and be able to train people into
a new career or profession, but also do have the need to be
able to protect their intellectual property, their business
practices, and especially non-solicitation in the sense of
having someone come in, study the business, learn the business
for 5 years and then, you know, go off start their own and call
on their customers immediately.
You know, we are all for fair competition in the
marketplace and if they want to build their own business and do
whatever, but in the sense of using a business simply to abuse
the privileges and everything you learn at that business to
undermine the very business that taught you those things.
So could you speak to that and address those concerns and
how you will take them into account?
Ms. Khan. Yeah, we absolutely are interested in hearing
from small businesses. Our comment period on this proposed rule
actually closed just last week, and we received around 26,000
comments, including from small businesses, and so, we are keen
to look closely at those comments and determine where to land.
Interestingly, we have also heard from small businesses
about the ways that noncompetes can impede their ability to get
talent and expand.
So one thing that we have heard is that businesses that
have been able to secure financing, that have been able to
build factories and are looking to enter markets that are quite
concentrated, have ultimately realized that they are not able
to access the necessary workers because those workers are all
locked up in noncompete----
Mr. Cloud. But isn't that a solution of the marketplace
to--you know, if a business is having a problem finding
workers, then it is behooves them to adjust their practices and
how they address their own noncompetes.
It doesn't require a top-down approach to manipulate the
market if that is the concern you are trying to address.
Ms. Khan. So in instances where it is new businesses
entering that don't currently have the workers with the
relevant skill set, it is really in their competitors' interest
to keep those workers locked up. And so I don't think we have
seen the type of market response we would.
One thing that our proposed rule asked was whether
alternatives----
Mr. Cloud. Businesses will generally respond to their
competitive interests. It doesn't need the government
intervening to help a business find its competitive edge.
Ms. Khan. So one thing that we asked in the proposed rule
is whether alternatives to noncompetes, like tailored
nondisclosure agreements or trade secrets laws, can help
account for some of the concerns that you mentioned, and so
that will be one area where we will be looking closely in the
comment record.
Mr. Cloud. Okay. Well, I would urge you to be very careful.
A lot of States also regulate this on their own, and as we
know, in a Federal system, you know it is best left to States
to manage what they can manage and then us to take on the rest.
One other issue I wanted to talk about is the concern,
broad concern, bipartisan, on data collection, specifically,
you know, I was really concerned with COVID and the data
collection on kids.
And, you know, many of the--I remember trying to log on,
and I had data protection on my kids' computers and all those
kind of privacy protections on my kids' computers and
everything. And literally to log on to one of the educational
apps, I had to type in a password 50 times just to get them
into what they needed to do for the couple weeks, you know,
they were distance learning.
I am curious as to what you are doing to look into these
companies--a lot of these parental applications seemed designed
by lawyers, not really for the benefit of the kid or the
parent--and what we can do to protect those kids.
And also, I think one of the things, when we talk about
data privacy, is, we kind of assume that the data is owned by
the collector as opposed to the person who is creating the
data, and whether or not this should be addressed as almost a
property rights issue to where if you are creating the data, it
is your data, it is your information, as to whether or not we
should even not accept the premise of the question, and whether
or not we should look at this as more the individual has more
rights in this space.
Ms. Khan. Yeah, it is a really interesting question, and I
think some of the proposals that Congress is considering to
further loose protections in this area would hopefully address
that. For us at the FTC, we are working hard to protect
children's data, including in the EdTech context that you
mentioned.
Early in my tenure, we put out a policy statement, putting
EdTech providers on notice, that they are not permitted, even
under existing children's privacy law, to require that kids, or
their parents, surrender to endless data collection in order to
use these critical technologies because I saw----
Mr. Cloud. And it is also just the pragmatics of, you know,
as a parent, they almost get in the choice of, I get to try to
sign on to this Byzantine process that protects the company and
the lawyers, and the Big Tech company or software company can
say, Look, we have these protections.
But they are so impractical to use that the parent is
actually sitting there with their kid and like, Okay, I either
have to open this up so they can actually use this, or I can't
really practically use this tool. And that is kind of the
choice sometimes parents seem to have.
Ms. Khan. That is exactly what we have seen, and that is
what we put EdTech providers on notice that even under existing
law, they can't require parents to just surrender to endless
data collection because we saw, absolutely, especially during
the pandemic, when overnight, kids were having to use these
apps to do their homework, those privacy concerns really went
off the charts.
We also recently brought an enforcement action against Epic
Games for engaging these practices that were really putting
kids' data--exposing kids' data and leading to all sorts of
very troubling practices. So this is a big area of focus for
us.
Mr. Cloud. Thank you.
Mr. Womack. Mr. Bishop.
Mr. Bishop. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, and welcome,
Ms. Khan. Thank you for the courtesy call we had earlier in the
week.
The FTC is an independent agency with two major
responsibility areas, of course one of which is the promoting
competition authority which administers the pre-merger
notification program, reviews proposed mergers and
acquisitions, and enforces the antitrust laws along with the
DOJ.
You also have the responsibility of protecting consumers,
investigating unfair and deceptive acts or practices that
affect commerce.
In December of last year, the FTC issued an administrative
complaint to block the merger of Microsoft and Activision
Blizzard, two of the large U.S. video game companies.
And I understand that FTC has opposed the Microsoft
acquisition of Activision, which the U.K.'s competition
regulator announced yesterday they would block.
Microsoft and Activision have said that they will appeal
it. Of course, the European Union Commission has not yet ruled.
I wonder if this whole process is losing sight of a more
important issue, which is U.S. competitiveness in the global
marketplace.
American jobs depend on American global competitiveness,
and as I understand it, Sony dominates gaming, and blocking
this deal seems virtually certain to ensure that Sony will
dominate for years to come.
Surely there has to be some room for a more pragmatic
approach that allows the benefits of the deal while
simultaneously protecting competition.
I understand that you can't discuss the details of the
Microsoft-Activision merger, but I am interested to understand
how you direct your staff to approach merger remedies.
Am I correct that the FTC takes into account a
transaction's potential to promote or to restrict competition
against foreign rivals and to foster fair and equitable
economic opportunity for Americans?
Ms. Khan. It is an important question, and I think
historically what we have seen, is that strong, robust
competition domestically has been what has best positioned
America on the international front.
Historically, we saw that, you know, when other companies
were doubling down on protecting their national champions, the
U.S. instead took a different route, be it with AT&T or IBM.
And actually taking strong antitrust enforcement in those
contexts was critical for unleashing innovation, including the
multi trillion-dollar software industry that we have.
So stepping back, we have seen how strong competition
domestically is best positioning us for competition
internationally and really key to promoting innovation.
Mr. Bishop. Well, that merger would probably limit
competition domestically if you block it.
Let me move on to another area, and that is the pharmacy
benefit managers. I have been hearing from my constituents
numerous complaints about the practices of pharmacy benefit
managers which they say drive up the prices of drugs, are
making it harder for the small, independent pharmacists to stay
open, particularly in rural areas where pharmacies are few and
far between.
Last year, FTC announced it would look into the industry
and the impact of the vertically integrated pharmacy benefit
managers on the access and affordability of prescriptions
drugs.
Can you let us know the status of this inquiry, and does
FTC have sufficient resources to address what appears to be a
large issue of affordability of prescriptions drugs? And can
we, in Congress, help you with those resources?
Ms. Khan. Yeah, this is a key initiative for us. Early in
my tenure, we opened a public docket to hear about potentially
unfair contract terms, and we heard an enormous amount from
pharmacies, as well as patients who suspect that the practices
by the big PBMs are depriving them of access to critical
medicines.
So this study is underway. Candidly, additional resources
would be a big boon to us here. This is definitely one of the
projects that, if we were to ultimately get a cut in funding,
could potentially be compromised.
Mr. Bishop. Thank you. My final question has to do with
competitiveness in the grocery and pharmacy business. You have
promoted revival of the Robinson-Patman Act as a means of
restoring competitiveness in independent grocers and
pharmacies.
And you know that it is an antitrust law preventing large
franchises and chains from engaging in price discrimination
against small businesses.
If a wholesale supplier sells products to a franchise at a
discounted price not available to the smaller business, such as
a volume price, well, they could in violation of the Robinson-
Patman Act.
Can you discuss how this tool might help our rural
communities, which often rely on family-owned groceries and
pharmacies forhousehold necessities? What kinds of challenges
does FTC face in managing a law that hasn't been enforced for
more than two decades?
Ms. Khan. It is a great question, and one of my top
priorities when I came into this job was making sure that the
FTC is fully enforcing all of the laws that Congress has
charged us with administering. Robinson-Patman is one of these
laws, it is on the books, and so we take enforcing it very
seriously.
We have certainly heard concerns from independent grocers
in particular, including those in rural areas, about how price
discrimination, particularly by the big wholesalers or big
retailers, could be coming at the expense of independents, and
really leading to food deserts and exacerbating supply
shortages that we are seeing especially in rural areas.
So we take that very seriously. We have a terrific staff
that are looking closely at what it would take to reactivate
the Robinson-Patman muscle, and we are hoping that we will be
able to share some of that publicly in the coming months.
Mr. Bishop. Thank you very much. My time is expired.
I thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Womack. Mr. Carl.
Mr. Carl. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Chair Khan, the proposed Motor Vehicle Dealers Trade
Regulation Rule--that is a mouthful--is expected to cost over
$1 billion by the FTC's own estimates, and these extra costs
will likely end up being paid for by the car buyers, as we all
are fully aware of.
Any time a government rules and regulations makes products
more expensive for the consumers, there are fewer people who
can afford them. That is common sense, right?
I am also concerned with how this rule will affect the
industry as a whole, including the distributors who play a
unique role in that difference from manufacturers and dealers.
The question is, with all that said, have you taken all
those factors into consideration, and can you tell me how much
this proposed rule will increase the price of a new car for
consumers?
Ms. Khan. So that is certainly something that we take into
account when we are proposing these rules. We have to do a
cost-benefit analysis, and the proposal we put out offers some
of those numbers.
Stepping back, you know, this rule would really address
bait-and-switch tactics, and also hidden fees that ultimately
end up inflating the cost that consumers are paying for cars.
So in our view, making sure the companies are not able to
engage in these hidden fees and surprises fees would ultimately
help consumers, including by reducing the cost of the cars that
they are paying.
As I said, this has been an ongoing proposal. We received
10,000 comments, and so we are looking closely at them to
determine next steps.
Mr. Carl. But the buyer does have a responsibility. They
can say no and walk away. I mean, you are talking about the
hidden fees, I mean, that come out at some point, place, and
time. We can walk away from the deal.
I don't see where the government getting involved in trying
to enforce this, and more regulations on top of regulations,
costing the consumer more money on the other end, is any better
than what we have got now, I guess is what I am trying to get
at.
Speaking of the price of vehicles, I am concerned about the
EPA's proposed rule that would increase the average, up-front
cost of an electric vehicle by $1,400 in just a few years.
I am not at all against electric vehicles. In fact, I would
like to buy one if it was more dependable for use in rural
areas. It is a little tough where I am at to have electric
vehicles.
Although I have a huge problem with this administration
trying to force ``go electric'' on everybody, despite the fact
the average price of an EV is already about $59,000 per
vehicle.
These cars are already expensive enough, and now the Biden
administration wants to make them even less affordable with
these more fees on top.
Is anyone at the administration looking at the bigger
picture here regarding how these rules and regulations impact
the Americans when buying a new car?
Ms. Khan. So I can't speak directly to some of the
initiatives being taken by other agencies. I will say for the
FTC, anytime we propose a rule or initiative, we are thinking
about the potential benefits as well as the cost. So that is
kind of baked into our processes.
Mr. Carl. Well, I understand you are taking the same
mentality as most engineers I have had to work with. They want
to build it just as tough as it possibly can, but when they get
through with it, nobody can afford it.
And I think that is where the Federal Government is going.
We just keep compiling all these rules and regulations on the
premises of taking care of the consumer. In reality, we are
just creating a nightmare here with our independent car
companies.
I live in a small town. I know--I knew, before I got in
politics, the owners of these companies. So it is my
responsibility, when I go car shopping, to know their
reputation.
So I think the Federal Government getting more and more
involved is wrong. I am just--I am being quite honest with you.
And I appreciate your phone call yesterday, by the way,
thank you. I can't get some of your other colleagues to even
return a phone call, much less take the initiative to make one.
But I think we have got some real problems here. I don't
think this has been thought through. I think the car dealers
are going to take the brunt of it, because they are going to be
responsible for that $1,400 price increase.
In reality, it is your department, not the car dealers
themselves. And with that said, Chairman, I think my time is
up. Thank you.
Mr. Womack. Mr. Moolenaar.
Mr. Moolenaar. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chair Khan, thank you for being with us today, appreciate
your testimony.
I received a copy of an article, Perspectives. It is an
article by George S. Ford, who is a Ph.D. It is called, ``An
Agency in Crisis, Employee Satisfaction At the FTC Continues to
Decline.'' I think it was recently released. Are you familiar
with this article at all?
Ms. Khan. Not specifically with that one, no.
Mr. Moolenaar. Okay. What it does is, it looks at the
beginning of your chairmanship. It says the FTC was the highest
rated Federal agency on employee satisfaction.
It says, largely due to Chair Khan's mismanagement and
politicization of the once highly respected agency, surveys
conducted by both the Office of Management and Budget and best
places to work in the Federal Government rankings revealed that
employee satisfaction at the agency sharply declined in the
year following her confirmation.
Are you familiar with those surveys at all?
Ms. Khan. Yes, I am.
Mr. Moolenaar. Okay. I would just like to, with unanimous
consent, ask that this could be read into the record.
Mr. Womack. Without objection.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Moolenaar. Thank you.
Do you have any comments on that? Early on, you had
mentioned maybe there were some rough steps at the initial part
of your chairmanship and that has been corrected, or how do you
address these concerns?
Ms. Khan. Yeah, absolutely. I take those concerns
seriously. The staff of the FTC is our greatest asset. We
can't, without them, do any of this really important work. So
since then, we have been working closely to hear directly from
staff about what we can do to make it easier for them to do
their jobs.
We have put in practice certain processes to be better at
sharing information with them more regularly, streamlining
processes, so decisions can be made more quickly, and so all of
that is now underway, and I think it is having results inside.
Mr. Moolenaar. Okay. Thank you.
I wanted to follow up on Representative Bishop's question
about the Microsoft-Activision merger. What strikes me is, you
have got multiple jurisdictions involved. I wonder if you or
your staff consult or have consulted with the U.K. Competition
and Markets Authority in something like this. Is that something
you communicate with them on?
Ms. Khan. So as a general matter, we have information-
sharing and cooperation in place with authorities around the
world.
Actually, a lot of this work was initiated under my
predecessor, Republican Chair Debbie Majoras, who launched our
Office of International Affairs, and has enabled the FTC to be
a world leader, both on the competition and consumer protection
fronts.
Mr. Moolenaar. So I would take that to mean you have
consulted with the British agency on that?
Ms. Khan. As a general matter, we are in touch about
concurrent investigations where our authorities allow for us to
do so.
Mr. Moolenaar. Okay. So that is a yes, right?
Ms. Khan. Yes. As a general matter, yes.
Mr. Moolenaar. Okay. All right. Thank you.
Do you get concerned that, you know, those jurisdictions
might get clouded, and that their authority might supersede,
and you are almost delegating authority to them?
Ms. Khan. I am not worried about that, because at the end
of the day, every enforcer is making its own independent
judgment about how the laws of that jurisdiction apply to the
facts before them.
The facts can vary, based on how a particular merger is
affecting one country versus another. As you noted, our laws
and authorities differ as well. And so, while we have
information-sharing in place, that is not coming at the expense
of any enforcer making their own independent judgment and
determination.
Mr. Moolenaar. Okay. Thank you. In July of 2022, you were
asked by a bipartisan couple of Senators regarding TikTok. You
had mentioned protecting children's privacy is an important
part of your mandate. Since that request in July, what has the
FTC--what have you done relative to TikTok?
Ms. Khan. So as you know, I can't entirely share non-public
information but would be happy to see what we can provide you
on a non-public basis. As a general matter I will note that
TikTok is already under FTC order.
The FTC, before I even arrived, found that TikTok had
engaged in potentially unlawful practices, and so now, if they
further violate that order, that could lead to even more relief
and remedies.
Mr. Moolenaar. Okay.
Ms. Khan. And so obviously we follow some of the news
reports very closely, and, again, happy to see what more we can
provide on a non-public basis.
Mr. Moolenaar. Okay. And then just quickly, one of the
concerns, protecting older consumers, it seems that there is a
significant increase in investment scams, imposter scams,
consumers losing a lot of money.
Shouldn't your resources be devoted more to that front as
opposed to some of the other areas you are involved?
Ms. Khan. We absolutely have resources devoted to that,
and, in fact, what we have been doing is looking to make our
enforcement on the fraud front more efficient. So by codifying
some of these rules against, say, imposter scams, it means that
we will be able to expedite how we can bring these enforcement
actions and actually return money back to the elder Americans
that are being defrauded.
Mr. Moolenaar. Just one of the concerns raised was the
amount of fraud was more than double the amount report lost in
2021. The amount in 2022, $3.8 billion was double the amount
reported lost in 2021. Are you familiar with that statistic?
Ms. Khan. Not specifically. I will say, we did see a surge,
both in crypto fraud, as well as COVID-related fraud, over the
last few years.
Mr. Moolenaar. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Thank you.
Mr. Womack. Mr. Joyce.
Mr. Joyce. Thank you, Chair. Madam Chair, your budget
request includes a $90 million increase for actions relating to
promoting competition. However, I have concerns how the
Commission would deploy these resources.
For example, the FTC has undertaken a multiyear effort to
block the Illumina-Grail acquisition, even after its chief
administration law judge issued an opinion that this
acquisition would not hurt competition, following an extensive
trial on the merits.
FTC's actions to block this merger are delaying technology
that could save lives in pursuit of a speculative antitrust
theory that lack legal support.
What assurance do we have that the Commission will properly
balance the need to promote competition with the need to
protect innovative companies from speculative antitrust
litigation that delays important technologies from reaching the
public?
Ms. Khan. So, look, we enforce the laws that Congress has
given us. Congress has noted that competition is critical to a
thriving economy and best promotes innovation. And so whenever
there is a deal before us, we just see how a law applies in
that context.
I think historically we have seen that innovation is best
promoted by actually allowing more robust competition, and that
being assertive on the merger front and merger enforcement
front can best enable new technologies and new innovations to
come to the market.
Mr. Joyce. If no one else is in the space and it is saving
lives, and it is 5 to 7 years before you are actually going to
get anybody else to be in competition with it, how is that
anticompetitive?
Ms. Khan. Yeah, this proceeding is ongoing, so I am not
able to speak publicly on it, but I will say that the
Commission issued an opinion a few weeks ago that lays out in
full our reasoning, including on some of these innovation
topics.
Mr. Joyce. Your request includes an increase of 300 full-
time equivalents for fiscal year 2024. Part of the
justification for this increase is the need for additional
staff to further your regulatory agenda.
I believe it is critically important for every Federal
regulatory agency to develop regulations that are clear and
durable. It is harmful to our economy and the American people
when regulations are poorly developed and their impacts are not
accurately evaluated ahead of time.
The FTC is pursuing an extremely active regulatory agenda.
Do you believe the regulations that the Commission is
developing are thoughtful in design?
Ms. Khan. Yes.
Mr. Joyce. And durable?
Ms. Khan. Yes.
Mr. Joyce. If the Commission's goal is to create lasting--
one FTC regulation I have heard from many of my constituents is
the Motor Vehicle Dealers Trade Regulation Rule, also called
vehicle shopping law.
Concerns have been raised to me regarding the substance of
the regulation, but also process by which it was developed. If
the Commission's goal is to create lasting and impactful
regulation, why did the Commission deny the request to extend
the comment period for this rule, especially because there was
no opportunity to receive feedback from stakeholders through an
Advanced Notice of Proposed Rulemaking or Request for
Information process?
Ms. Khan. So we closely followed the process that is
required under the Administrative Procedure Act. That includes
putting out a proposed rule and leaving an open comment period
where people can give us input.
We have now received somewhere between 10,000 and 11,000
comments. So I have full confidence that this is a robust
process, and we are really getting all the input that we need
here.
Mr. Joyce. Have there been any instances under your tenure
the Commission has extended a comment period?
Ms. Khan. Yes.
Mr. Joyce. I have also heard from constituents that there
is a lack of clarity regarding the assumption that, as a result
of this regulation, customers will spend 3 fewer hours shopping
for their new vehicle.
Could you provide us with additional background and
analysis on how the Commission developed this 3-hour figure
used in this rule to help assess its cost and benefits?
Ms. Khan. Yeah. So the proposed rules lays out that
analysis by in-house economists who do fantastic work. Because
this is a proposal, we actually include in some of our
questions requests for feedback on some of the assumptions that
are made, including on that topic. So I am hopeful that some of
the comments we have received will give us more insight on
that.
Mr. Joyce. I appreciate the work that the FTC is doing to
strengthen the ``right to repair'' policies. Unfortunately,
reports have indicated the price of auto repairs have increased
more than 14 percent since January of 2023. What more can
Congress do to help strengthen these protections for consumers?
Ms. Khan. I am so glad you mentioned this because ``right
to repair'' is a big priority for us. Shortly after I joined,
the Commission unanimously issued a policy statement
recommitting our resources to fight unlawful restrictions on
repair. We brought a whole series of enforcement actions in
this area, and more work is underway.
Clearly, any time that Congress is legislating to provide
even clearer instruction and clearer direction about how these
repair restrictions may be unlawful, that will always boost our
ability to go after them.
We do existingly have authority that allows us to address
these practices, but any clarity from Congress would be useful.
Mr. Joyce. Thank you.
I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Womack. Mr. Amodei.
Mr. Amodei. Thanks, Mr. Chairman.
Hi, Madam Chair. Thank you for reaching out the other day.
I appreciate that.
You know, this kind of came up in a little bit of what Mr.
Moolenaar said, and we spoke the other day about follow-up on
some requests from committee members on, you know, that were
related to actions that your agency has taken.
And so, I kind of like, when I am listening to your
discussion with Mr. Moolenaar, and you talk about, Hey, we
would like to see what we can provide you in response to him,
public versus private.
When you say to a member of any committee exercising an
oversight function, we would like to see and get back to you,
can you put some more meat on those bones? What exactly does
that mean, or, for instance, what are you going to do in
response to Mr. Moolenaar to see what you can provide for the
information he asked you?
Like, I am going to talk to this person, we are going to
whatever, let me give you a time frame. Can we put some
specificity on that?
Ms. Khan. Yeah, happy to. So whenever that type of exchange
happens, our terrific staff then make contact with either
committee staff or the staff of the Member and engage in a
discussion.
Oftentimes we are able to, at minimum, offer a non-public
briefing to bring members up to speed about what we are doing
in House. If we are also then able to share some paper, we do
that as well, but, absolutely, there is always follow-up.
Mr. Amodei. Okay. And then the last part of that is,
generally speaking, what parameters do you put on that? Like,
is that next week, is that next month, is that 90 days?
I know it depends on the request, but since Mr. Moolenaar
is our guinea pig, when do you expect to get back to Mr.
Moolenaar?
Ms. Khan. We will endeavor to do it as quickly as we can.
Mr. Amodei. So----
Ms. Khan. At the very least, our staff will make sure they
reach out to you in the next couple of days and see what more
we can provide you.
Mr. Amodei. Thank you.
Now I would like to go back to our conversation where you
were asked by Mr. Duncan, I believe it is about a letter that
your organization sent to the U.S. Trade Commission about an
issue or whatever.
And so, I had checked back with him today and said, Hey,
have you heard anything? And he had indicated to me--we
happened to be in the same location yesterday about 4:30, you
know, voting on birthday card salutations and stuff like that--
and I said, Hey, have you heard back from those guys yet? And
he had indicated that he hadn't.
And so--and I took the liberty of getting the transcript of
that exchange or whatever, and your response was, Happy to
engage with your staff to see what we can share with you. Have
you engaged with his staff to see what you can share with him?
Ms. Khan. My understanding is that, yes, our staff has been
in touch with them about the request that they made and----
Mr. Amodei. And who would that be on your staff, when I
report back to Mr. Duncan, that he is unaware of what is going
on in his office--which doesn't make him unique--me included--
who should I tell him--it is, like, Well, according to our
hearing today, the chair said that John Smith has been in
contact with somebody who answers the phone in your
neighborhood?
Ms. Khan. Yeah. It is the Office of Congressional Relations
at the FTC which is headed up by Jeanne Bumpus.
Mr. Amodei. Okay. Great. And then one last thing is, I had
some independent insurance agents in my office recently. They
were talking about the anti-competition rule and so--or the----
Mrs. Hinson. Noncompete.
Mr. Amodei. Yeah, thanks for that help.
And can you get me some blogs on who is calling who, too,
so we can keep track of that?
And so my concern is this. There are instances when
noncompete agreements are appropriate. It starts to sound,
though, like, if we take a broad brush on that and just say
they are nasty things from top to bottom, in between,
everything else, that we are going to have some unintended
consequences.
And so I would like somebody from your Office of
Congressional Relations to get a hold of us to give a briefing
on, Hey, are we looking at where the problem areas are, instead
of one-size-fits-all?
I am concerned about, so it is real clear, I don't want to
get into one-size-fits-all if there is not a problem that needs
fixing, if there aren't victims in certain areas where actually
these may be a tool, and by the way, if they are not, then
there is also nothing wrong with, you know, your training and
other folks in this room. It is, like, Hey, sometimes you got
to go see somebody in that third branch, which is the judicial
branch to see what is appropriate.
We don't want to encourage that any more than we need to,
but I want to make sure that we don't start out on the premise
that they are all bad.
Who would be the person that we would like to hear from in
terms of the scope of what that is all about?
Ms. Khan. Yeah. We are happy to have our Office of
Congressional Relations follow up. I will say, our proposed
rule lays out a very comprehensive review of the available
empirical literature to understand what the effects of these
noncompetes have been, which are now affecting not just high-
wage workers, but also low-wage workers.
We have also seen that over the last couple of decades,
different States have gone into different directions with this,
and as a result, we now have effectively a natural experiment
on the national scale, which has allowed researchers to study
and isolate what are the effects of noncompetes.
What they have found is that even when these noncompetes
are applied in, say, States that have prohibited them or
limited them, they are still being applied at a very high
rate--companies are not abiding by that--and that there can
also be significant effects on innovation and new business
formation. So that is why we thought that at this stage it was
important for us to address those practices across the board.
Mr. Amodei. Well, then let me help you. My time is expired.
I want to hear specifically about problems in the insurance
industry where books of business and things like that, I want
to know about victims, and I want to know about why this area
needs some help in that area.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Womack. Mr. Ciscomani.
Mr. Ciscomani. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you also,
Chair Khan, for coming before the committee to testify.
From my fresh perspective here on the committee and in
Congress, it seems clear to me that the FTC has two distinct
but related missions; first, to protect consumers, and
secondly, to promote competition as well.
One of the most important constituencies in my district
that needs protection is that of our more than 200,000 seniors
that I have in my district. And many of my constituents have
complained of signing up for the Do Not Call Registry, but
still receiving phone calls.
I understand this is likely because scammers don't care who
is on this registry or not. So my question is going to be
around this area and actually following up to one of my
colleague's comments on this.
Can you speak to the efficiency of the registry,
specifically in stopping criminals and scammers?
Ms. Khan. Yeah, it is a great question. And one of the top
sources of consumer complaints that we get are about robocalls
and unwanted calls. As you noted, there is a Do Not Call
Registry, but what we have seen is that companies engage in
spoofing, that basically conceals where they are calling from,
and they are able to evade some of those processes that we have
in place.
Nonetheless, we have been bringing enforcement actions,
including, recently, enforcement actions against VoIP service
providers, which are the upstream providers that can, in some
instances, enable millions and millions of robocalls.
So what we have seen is that rather than just go after
these fly-by-night scammers and fraudsters that are doing the
calls, going after the providers that are enabling this
activity to continue is more effective, and so that is what we
have been doing.
Mr. Ciscomani. Can you speak to that, how effective it has
been? Have you seen data of this getting better or not? I keep
hearing about this issue from my constituents, so I would like
to see if this trending in the right direction, or are we
seeing any results from those actions yet?
Ms. Khan. Yeah. Based on the data that we have, we have
seen around a 19 percent reduction in the complaints that are
coming in. So that, to us, suggests that there is some impact
here, but, of course, it is possible that data isn't fully
reflecting what is happening, but that is what we are seeing in
the numbers.
Mr. Ciscomani. Okay. And how long did you start applying
that? How long of a process has that been in place, of that
action?
Ms. Khan. Of these enforcement actions?
Mr. Ciscomani. Uh-huh, those enforcement actions.
Ms. Khan. I mean, the FTC has been active in this space for
at least the last two decades. You know, the Do Not Call
Registry was put in place in the early 2000s.
Mr. Ciscomani. No, but I mean the registry is there, but
then we are finding problems with it. And what I am trying to
get to is, what more can we be doing if this 19 percent
decrease--how long has that action been happening, because,
again, I keep hearing about it from my constituents. So I am
not sure if it is really moving the needle in this sense.
And if that is all that is being done, has done for a year
or 10 years, I am trying to get a sense of when that
intervention has happened.
The registry itself, on its own, doesn't do the job
completely--I think we can agree on that--because scammers
don't care, they are just going to continue to call.
So what I was asking is, what else, on top of the registry,
or what other methods of enforcing the registry--and your
answer was what it was. So my question following up to that is,
how long have you been doing that part of it, to see the 19
percent decrease? Because I am just not seeing, anecdotally at
least, I am not getting that feedback.
Ms. Khan. Yeah, so the efforts to go after some of the VoIP
service providers have been in place for the last few years,
and I believe that is the same period over which we have seen
some of the decrease.
I will note this is also an area where we share
jurisdiction with the Federal Communications Commission that is
also able to reach some of these practices that are outside of
our jurisdiction.
Mr. Ciscomani. You know, it seems, in several areas but
this definitely being one of them, that we are kind of playing
catch-up with the criminals and the people committing fraud on
these, and they seem to have a leg up on us, and specifically
in the robocalls area.
Consumer protection should continue to be an important
priority and one that is not pushed aside while the FTC goes
after the ``big is bad'' antitrust work.
You know, the fiscal year 2023 funding for protecting
consumers was above promoting competition, but in your fiscal
year 2024 request, this is reversed. Is there a trend that we
should continue to expect on this?
Ms. Khan. So the main motivation here is to make sure that
our competition mandate is better resourced because the
competition enforcement actions require more people, and they
require more money because the experts are more expensive.
So that is really what is motivating some of that
unevenness, but currently, our Bureau of Consumer Protection is
already bigger than our Bureau of Competition, and even the
increases that we would be making would fully equip us to be
active in this area.
Mr. Ciscomani. Well, thank you. My time is up, but I want
to just strongly encourage you to please continue to keep the
protection side of it, specifically for seniors, as a top
priority and continue to look into ways to make the registry
more effective.
Thank you. I yield back, sir.
Mr. Womack. Thank you, Mr. Ciscomani.
We have--I want to be respectful of the chairwoman's time,
but we have time maybe for another question per member. I am
not going to put the timer on it, but just let everybody know
that we are going to go back around on round 2 and give
everybody an opportunity to ask another question, and I will
lead.
I mentioned earlier the concerns about the independent
bipartisan Commission operating under one party right now, and
you have already indicated that you are ready and willing and
able to welcome a couple of new members when nominated.
Can you help me understand, have there been any lessons
learned when you are operating specifically with one-party
rule? Are there lessons that can be taken that will help you,
help the Commission, help our country, when you do get new
participation to the Commission?
Ms. Khan. Well, I will say as a general matter, you know,
the Commission is governed by what is known as the Sunshine Act
which can limit, especially when you just have three members,
the ability for commissioners to talk directly to one another.
So that is just day-to-day a handicap that we are facing right
now.
More generally, I think we have seen, including from this
committee, strong bipartisan concern about some of the
monopolistic practices in our economy, some of the unfair
practices, especially as it relates to data privacy and
protection.
So I am hopeful that once we get new members, we will be
able to continue our strong work in both of these areas.
Mr. Womack. Mr. Pocan.
Mr. Pocan. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Just a follow-up from a question I believe I asked you last
year around defense contractors. We know in 1990, Department of
Defense could turn to 13 different contractors for tactical
missiles; eight to make fixed-wing aircraft, another eight to
build ships. Today, there is three missile and three aircraft
makers and only two surface shipbuilders.
Similarly, there were eight satellite manufacturers in
1990. Today there is four. I know that we have talked about
this issue in trying to bring sense to it. So I am just
wondering if you can just give us an update on this particular
area, and specifically has the DOD continued to supply all the
relevant information that the Commission has needed to work on
this?
Ms. Khan. Yeah, it is a great question, and I think we have
seen public statements from DOD indicating that the degree of
consolidation that we have seen, that you just mentioned, is
actually risking impairing and undermining our national
security.
We have seen also reporting more recently suggesting that
the consolidation is impairing the war effort in Ukraine.
Just this morning there was actually an article in The Wall
Street Journal also noting how the consolidation has meant that
in some cases, DOD is just dependent on a single factory, and
so if you have one outage, the effects can be devastating.
More generally, you know, we were able to sue to block
Lockheed's attempted acquisition of Aerojet last year. We were
pleased that the parties ended up walking away. DOD was a
terrific partner in that instance.
I know you have raised concern about some of the prior
consolidation more generally. I will just say as a general
matter, in order for us to be able to unwind some of those
acquisitions, we would end up being very dependent on any
representations from DOD since they are the main customer in
those cases.
Mr. Pocan. Great.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Womack. Mrs. Hinson.
Mrs. Hinson. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
I want to quick, Madam Chair, point to something in the
Inspector General's report that was brought up specifically
about the Commission's use of unpaid consultants and outside
experts.
According to the Inspector General's report, there are many
cases where this approaches the proximity of policy function
that is supposed to be reserved for Federal employees only.
So my concern is over scope. So what guidance is in place
at FTC to make sure that that scope of work done by
nongovernment consultants is there, and what guardrails are in
place to ensure that they are not conducting work that should
be done by government employees?
Ms. Khan. Yeah. So the IG report was helpful in
underscoring some of the process improvements that we could
have in place to be better guarding for that.
Since that IG report came out, we have taken steps to make
sure that, you know, when the experts are coming on board, the
paperwork that we are putting in place is clearly identifying
what they are able to work on, who they will be reporting to.
And so, all the recommendations that the IG made in that report
have been followed.
Mrs. Hinson. Right. If you would give us some examples of
how you have done that in practical application, I would
certainly appreciate that.
Ms. Khan. Sure. Happy to.
Mrs. Hinson. Thank you.
Mr. Womack. Mr. Carl.
Mr. Carl. Thank you. I was going to say----
Mr. Cloud. Go, go.
Mr. Womack. I was under the----
Mr. Cloud. Yeah, no, I know.
Mr. Womack. I was under the impression Mr. Cloud did not
have a second question.
Mr. Cloud. I do now.
Mr. Womack. You do. Well, Mr. Cloud, you are recognized.
Mr. Cloud. I wanted to touch on something that the
commissioner had--you talked about us wanting to protect
monopolistic practices in the economy. We are also concerned
about that in the FTC at the moment under one-party rule, and
especially if you are not able to work or talk with other
commissioners, then it really comes down to you on a lot of
these matters.
In 2020, there was a Federal employee viewpoint survey
where FTC employees are asked basically in the integrity, if
they support the integrity and operations, if they think that
their high-level officials are working with integrity. And it
was at 87 percent in 2020, and right now, it is at 49 percent.
Now, you mentioned some early mistakes coming in. I am not
on the inside to know what it is. I would certainly like to
know why you think that drop has happened, what lessons have
you learned from it, what changes you are making, and what we
can do to restore the trust in the FTC.
Ms. Khan. Yeah. As I said, you know, I am enormously proud
of our staff. Day in, day out, they are going up against some
of the most powerful companies in our economy. They are
significantly out-resourced by the other side.
After looking at those results and working closely to
understand from our staff, you know, what was driving it, we
have been able to put in place better processes to share
information more widely across the agency, streamline processes
for decision making, and identify some other ways in which we
can make it easier for the FTC staff to do their jobs.
Mr. Cloud. And they had an issue with integrity as well.
That sounded like a nice, well-worded answer, but it didn't
provide any details. Can you provide some details of lessons
learned and what you are doing to change the culture?
Ms. Khan. Yeah. As I mentioned, you know, one of the issues
that came up was just making sure that we were sharing
information more widely across the agency. We have been doing
that. We now have regular meetings with the senior staff, make
sure that information is being shared broadly.
There were also concerns about delays in decision making,
so we put in place more streamlined processes that are
expediting that.
Mr. Cloud. Thank you.
Mr. Womack. Mr. Carl.
Mr. Carl. Thank you, Chairman.
The FTC has clearly taken an interest in franchising and
this unique American business model. In Alabama alone, we have
12,000 franchisees, and it is very important to our local
economy.
I understand FTC is reviewing the franchise rules. That is
why last fall, we sent a letter, 67 of us and our colleagues,
sent a letter asking the Commission to do no harm to extend the
FTC franchise rules.
Recently, the Commission stated it has growing concern
around unfair and despicable practices in franchise industry.
Can you give me evidence of that?
Ms. Khan. So we recently launched a request for information
that was responding to the fact that at our open public
Commission meetings which I mentioned earlier, month after
month, we have been hearing from franchisees, this includes
owners of hotels, owners of fast-food franchises, and they have
raised a set of concerns that are quite troubling.
So we launched this effort to make sure that we were not
just hearing anecdotally but actually were able to systemically
study, are there issues in this industry that really should be
on our radar.
Mr. Carl. Can you provide me with those facts and that
information?
Ms. Khan. Sure. Some of what we have heard about, for
example, are instances----
Mr. Carl. In writing. In writing.
Ms. Khan. Sure. Happy to.
Mr. Carl. I understand you are trying to explain it, but I
would love to see those numbers in writing, because if it is 10
or 12, I mean, it is a big country. You know, if it is 12 into
1,500, we would really have a problem.
I just have a feeling that it is a very small issue that we
are trying to get involved in, and I promise you, I have
started 10-plus different companies, and the government has
never helped me start a company. I have always had to work
against the government.
So the Federal Government saying we are trying to help you,
not the truth. It is not the truth.
Thank you for your time.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Womack. Mr. Moolenaar.
Mr. Moolenaar. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to thank
also Chair Khan for your prompt response based on Mr. Amodei's
kind efforts.
So one area that I want to ask you for a prompt response,
the Select Committee on the Weaponization of the Federal
Government, and previous FTC Commissioner Wilson, and countless
other sources have said the FTC has abused its statutory and
enforcement authorities.
Chairman Jordan issued a subpoena to the FTC. My question
is, what is your timeline for complying with that subpoena, or
do you not intend to comply?
Ms. Khan. So we have been in touch with the House Judiciary
Committee about their various requests. In some cases, we have
already handed over significant documents to them. I believe we
also, in response to their subpoena, just sent over a letter
yesterday morning. So the back-and-forth between our staff and
the committee staff are ongoing.
Mr. Moolenaar. Is there a time that you feel you will be
fully compliant with their request?
Ms. Khan. Their request is quite extensive, so I wouldn't
want to prejudge that ahead of time, but, you know, I think
congressional oversight is important, and our staff is fully
committed to complying and engaging with the committee where we
can.
Mr. Moolenaar. So just in line, like Mr. Amodei said, do
you have, like, how soon are we talking here?
Ms. Khan. So I know that we have already repeatedly offered
the committee non-public briefings to get them up to speed. The
committee has not taken us up on that, so we are still waiting
for them to actually get back to us on that.
Mr. Moolenaar. And could you update us with that? When you
have complied, will you let us know?
Ms. Khan. Sure. Happy to. As I said, we have made certain
information available to the committee that they have not yet
taken us up on. So if and when they do, we are happy to let you
know about that as well.
Mr. Moolenaar. Okay. Thank you.
Ms. Khan. Great.
Mr. Womack. Mr. Ciscomani, bring us home.
Mr. Ciscomani. I will do that with just a quick simple
question here.
Can you walk the subcommittee through the coordination that
takes place between the FTC and the Department of Justice when
it comes to the antitrust actions, please?
Ms. Khan. Happy to. So we share, with the Justice
Department, oversight of certain antitrust laws. That includes
the Sherman Act and the Clayton Act. In those areas, we
basically divide and conquer.
So there are some industries where the FTC has historical
expertise, like the defense industries or hospitals. There are
some instances where DOJ has expertise, like airlines. And so
in those areas we really divide and conquer.
There are additional authorities that the FTC has that the
DOJ doesn't. So our statute prohibits unfair methods of
competition under section 5 of the FTC Act, so we enforce that,
DOJ doesn't.
DOJ, unlike the FTC, also has criminal antitrust
authorities, so they are able to use those in ways that we are
not.
Mr. Ciscomani. Thank you.
Yield back, sir.
Mr. Womack. Very good.
Mr. Pocan, any final thoughts?
Mr. Pocan. Just it was nice to fill in for Mr. Hoyer, so
thank you very much.
Mr. Womack. Give him our regards.
That is going to conclude our subcommittee hearing today.
Chair Khan, I speak on behalf of this entire subcommittee,
both the members on both sides of the aisle, in thanking you
and acknowledging the fact that you are very accessible and
responsive.
Now, there may be some questions about timelines on some of
the Requests for Information, but in terms of being able to
have interaction with the chairwoman on matters of importance
to the FTC, I want to thank you for your willingness to engage
each of the members that are up here today.
I think I would also be remiss if I didn't congratulate you
publicly on the birth of that bouncing baby boy. I take it he
is still bouncing around and getting a--giving you a good 8
hours of sleep every night, but that said, we won't press on
that particular issue.
It goes without saying that the appropriations process is
underway. There will be some fits and starts as we go. I think
everybody pretty well understands that, and we do look forward
to working with you and your team as we complete the process
for fiscal year 2024. And prayerfully, hopefully, we can get
this done on a timely basis, but thank you today for your time.
Ms. Khan. Thanks so much, and as always really keen to
engage with you all, so please don't hesitate to be in touch if
we can help in any way.
Mr. Womack. With that, this subcommittee hearing stands
adjourned.

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

W I T N E S S E S

----------
Page

Gensler, Hon. Gary, Chair, U.S. Securities and Exchange
Commission.....................................................
Prepared statement...........................................
Answers to submitted questions...............................

Khan, Hon. Lina, Chair, Federal Trade Commission.................
Prepared statement...........................................
Answers to submitted questions...............................

Yellen, Hon. Janet, Secretary, Department of the Treasury........
Prepared statement...........................................
Answers to submitted questions...............................

Young, Hon. Shalanda, Director, Office of Management and Budget..
Prepared statement...........................................
Answers to submitted questions...............................
