- DEPARTMENTS OF LABOR, HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES, EDUCATION, AND RELATED AGENCIES APPROPRIATIONS FOR 2025

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

DEPARTMENTS OF LABOR, HEALTH AND HUMAN
SERVICES, EDUCATION, AND RELATED AGENCIES
APPROPRIATIONS FOR 2025

_______________________________________________________________________

HEARINGS

BEFORE A

SUBCOMMITTEE OF THE

COMMITTEE ON APPROPRIATIONS

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

____________

SUBCOMMITTEE ON LABOR, HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES,
EDUCATION, AND RELATED AGENCIES

ROBERT B. ADERHOLT, Alabama, Chairman

MICHAEL K. SIMPSON, Idaho ROSA L. DeLAURO, Connecticut
ANDY HARRIS, Maryland STENY H. HOYER, Maryland
CHARLES J. ``CHUCK'' FLEISCHMANN, BARBARA LEE, California
Tennessee MARK POCAN, Wisconsin
JOHN R. MOOLENAAR, Michigan LOIS FRANKEL, Florida
JULIA LETLOW, Louisiana BONNIE WATSON COLEMAN, New Jersey
ANDREW S. CLYDE, Georgia JOSH HARDER, California
JAKE LaTURNER, Kansas
JUAN CISCOMANI, Arizona
CHUCK EDWARDS, North Carolina

NOTE: Under committee rules, Mr. Cole, as chairman of the full
committee, and Ms. DeLauro, as ranking minority member of the full
committee, are authorized to sit as members of all subcommittees.

Kathryn Salmon, Emily Goff, James Redstone,
Laura Stagno, Kirk Boyle, and Laura Hatten Rell
Subcommittee Staff

____________

PART 1

Page
Department of Health and Human
Services................................
1
Fiscal Year 2025 Request for the
Department of Education.................
161
Fiscal Year 2025 Request for the
Department of Labor.....................
265
Members' Day..........................
349

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

____________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Appropriations

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

56-664                    WASHINGTON : 2024

COMMITTEE ON APPROPRIATIONS

TOM COLE, Oklahoma, Chairman

HAROLD ROGERS, Kentucky,     ROSA L. DeLAURO, Connecticut
Chair Emeritus     STENY H. HOYER, Maryland
KAY GRANGER, Texas,     MARCY KAPTUR, Ohio
Chair Emeritus     SANFORD D. BISHOP, Jr., Georgia
ROBERT B. ADERHOLT, Alabama     BARBARA LEE, California
MICHAEL K. SIMPSON, Idaho     BETTY McCOLLUM, Minnesota
JOHN R. CARTER, Texas     C. A. DUTCH RUPPERSBERGER,
KEN CALVERT, California       Maryland
MARIO DIAZ-BALART, Florida     DEBBIE WASSERMAN SCHULTZ, Florida
STEVE WOMACK, Arkansas     HENRY CUELLAR, Texas
CHARLES J. ``CHUCK'' FLEISCHMANN,     CHELLIE PINGREE, Maine
Tennessee     MIKE QUIGLEY, Illinois
DAVID P. JOYCE, Ohio     DEREK KILMER, Washington
ANDY HARRIS, Maryland     MATT CARTWRIGHT, Pennsylvania
MARK E. AMODEI, Nevada     GRACE MENG, New York
DAVID G. VALADAO, California     MARK POCAN, Wisconsin
DAN NEWHOUSE, Washington     PETE AGUILAR, California
JOHN R. MOOLENAAR, Michigan     LOIS FRANKEL, Florida
JOHN H. RUTHERFORD, Florida     BONNIE WATSON COLEMAN, New Jersey
BEN CLINE, Virginia     NORMA J. TORRES, California
GUY RESCHENTHALER, Pennsylvania     ED CASE, Hawaii
MIKE GARCIA, California     ADRIANO ESPAILLAT, New York
ASHLEY HINSON, Iowa     JOSH HARDER, California
TONY GONZALES, Texas     JENNIFER WEXTON, Virginia
JULIA LETLOW, Louisiana     DAVID J. TRONE, Maryland
MICHAEL CLOUD, Texas     LAUREN UNDERWOOD, Illinois
MICHAEL GUEST, Mississippi     SUSIE LEE, Nevada
RYAN K. ZINKE, Montana     JOSEPH D. MORELLE, New York
ANDREW S. CLYDE, Georgia
JAKE LaTURNER, Kansas
JERRY L. CARL, Alabama
STEPHANIE I. BICE, Oklahoma
SCOTT FRANKLIN, Florida
JAKE ELLZEY, Texas
JUAN CISCOMANI, Arizona
CHUCK EDWARDS, North Carolina

Susan Ross, Clerk and Staff Director

(ii)

DEPARTMENTS OF LABOR, HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES, EDUCATION, AND RELATED
AGENCIES APPROPRIATIONS FOR 2025

----------

Wednesday, March 20, 2024.

DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES

WITNESS

HON. XAVIER BECERRA, SECRETARY, DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES
Mr. Aderholt. Well, good morning, and Mr. Secretary,
welcome to the Labor, Health, and Human Services Subcommittee
on Appropriations, and it is my honor to have you here for our
first budget hearing of the year, and we look forward to
hearing your testimony.
And I know the discussion this morning will focus a lot on
the facts, the figures that are related to the funding of
public health, biomedical research, and services for children
and families, and certainly those are all important issues.
But I also want to raise another important topic that I
think needs to be addressed, and that is the issue of human
trafficking. Tragically, human trafficking is not limited to a
few isolated border cities or towns. In my home state of
Alabama, and particularly north Alabama, parts of my district
have seen nearly a 200 percent increase in the number of
unaccompanied migrant children placed with sponsors over the
last few years. Unfortunately, I have learned that across the
country only a small percentage of these placements involved an
objective, professional home study in advance to determine
whether or not the placement is safe for the minor.
The shocking truth is that many of these unaccompanied
children are the victims of trafficking, whether through their
initial smuggling into the country or through placement with
corrupt sponsors after their arrival date, due to the lack of
proper due diligence from the Department of Health and Human
Services.
This subcommittee has been made aware of several instances
of these minors being placed illegally, in dangerous jobs such
as cleaning floors in meatpacking facilities and working in
unsanitary and dangerous conditions in factories and on farms.
Mr. Secretary, it is your department that has the
responsibility of making sure these children are not exploited,
that they are not enslaved and that they are placed in safe
care until they can be heard by a judge.
I understand from recent news reports that the Department
of Health and Human Services rushes through background checks
and other procedures that are designed to vet sponsors in order
to move children quickly out of shelters and off your
Department's rolls. It was reported that your agency has lost
contact with a third of all unaccompanied minors within a month
of placing them with the sponsors. And I will be asking some
questions about this this morning, and I will go into further
detail.
But we have an unprecedented national security crisis at
our border, as well. Americans deserve a secure border, and
these children deserve to be protected from exploitation and
from trafficking. And I fear the young people in already
vulnerable situations are being deceived into coming to our
country illegally with the promise of job security, only to
find themselves abused and enslaved within these borders. This
is indefensible, and your Department must do a better job.
It is disappointing to see that your budget proposal in the
next fiscal year continues out-of-control government spending,
which only adds to our already high inflation rates. Inflation
is a burden to every American, and it hurts those in margins of
our society even more. The creation of new mandatory programs
such as your proposal for Vaccines for Adults, seems to be an
example of more unnecessary spending that will only add to our
budget deficit.
This morning I also hope to discuss many of the management
challenges you face at the helm of the Department and from the
continuing problems with recouping improper payments in the
Provider Relief Fund to oversee public health agencies that has
almost totally lost the public's trust. There are many other
areas that the Department needs improvement. I hope to learn
more this morning about what you are doing to take positive
steps in these very areas.
Finally, there are also many external threats facing the
Department. There are threats to cybersecurity, such as we
recently saw with Choice Health data breach, threats from
antibody resistance, and the ongoing and growing health
concerns of chronic disease. And again, I look forward to
hearing your ideas on how we can combat those issues this
morning, as well.
Just as a reminder, the subcommittee and our witness will
abide by the 5-minute rule, so everyone has a chance to ask
their questions. But before we begin I do want to yield to the
ranking member, the ranking member of the committee, the
gentlelady from Connecticut, for her opening statement.
Ms. DeLauro. Thank you so much, Mr. Chairman, and thank you
for holding this hearing this morning on the 2025 budget for
the Department of Health and Human Services. I begin by
welcoming and thanking my dear friend, former colleague,
Secretary Becerra, for your public service to our country and
for testifying today. I want to thank you for your staff being
here today, and if you would just give me a second I just want
to say hello to Lisa Molyneux, who used to sit on the staff of
this committee. So good to see you. Good to see you all here
today.
When President Biden and Secretary Becerra took office a
little more than 3 years ago our nation was in the throes of
dueling public health and economic crises, making HHS a leader
in our government's response. Over the last 3 years, thanks to
the leadership of President Biden and Secretary Becerra, we
have made great progress in supporting working families,
promoting public health, and expanding access to health care.
While it is close to 6 months late, the House will be
voting later this week on the fiscal year 2024 Labor, Health,
and Human Services and Education Funding bill. It is not a
perfect bill but it is a good bill that expands opportunity,
supports families, grows the middle class, and I encourage my
colleagues to vote for it, as I will.
The bill is not public so I cannot discuss specific funding
levels, but I am especially proud of the investments in child
care and Head Start programs, which will support working class,
middle class families, will ensure more kids benefit from high
quality early education programs.
Let me be clear. Much more funding is necessary to address
the childcare crisis in this country and the staffing crisis at
Head Start, and I know we will talk about that today. But for
fiscal year 2024, we worked on a bipartisan basis, under tight
fiscal constraints, to make sure that children and families
were the number one priority.
The bill continues to support research at the National
Institutes of Health to develop cures or treatments for cancer,
Alzheimer's disease, ALS, mental health, and maternal
mortality, and it protects funding for so many other areas of
lifesaving research.
We are continuing critical investments in our nation's
public health infrastructure, workforce, data modernization at
the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, and state and
local health departments. The bill also makes investments to
address our nation's most urgent health crises, including
mental health, substance misuse, material health, gun violence,
and health disparities.
Critically, even with the restraints put on us by the debt
ceiling deal we put the American people first and rejected the
obscene funding cuts proposed last year by House Republicans.
And for the last year, I have been firm that Democrats would
not accept poison pill riders in the Labor, HHS, Education
bill, including riders proposed by the majority that would
block access to abortion and reproductive health services and
block funding for gun violence prevention research.
As I stated, I am proud where we ended up with this bill. I
look forward to supporting it on the House floor later this
week. But having said that, there is still unmet need for
services funded in this bill, which brings me to the
President's budget for 2025.
Mr. Secretary, I am pleased to see how you have prioritized
the vast needs within your Department's budget for 2025. The
request for $119,000,000,000 to fund the HHS agencies within
the Labor H subcommittee will help to lower that cost of
living, grow the middle class, support working families, and
protect women's access to reproductive care. The President's
budget includes an increase of more than $1,000,000,000 for the
Child Care and Development Block Grant and Head Start.
Continuing robust support for childcare and Head Start will
help us to reach the President's goal of every child achieving
literacy by the third grade.
As President Biden said to the Congress and to the nation
at the State of the Union, and I quote, ``To remain the
strongest economy in the world we need to have the best
education system in the world,'' end quote. And every educator
knows that building the foundation for a quality education
begins well before a child reaches kindergarten.
Families and providers are facing a childcare crisis.
Parents are faced with either taking on extra work just to
afford safe, reliable childcare or forego working altogether,
accepting lower household income and a lower standard of living
in order to stay home and take care of their children. We
cannot force parents to keep making this impossible choice.
Just this week the New York Times ran an article on the
skyrocketing labor participation rate among women in Japan,
thanks, in part, to an expansion of childcare availability. And
the article says, and I quote, ``These days about 77 percent of
prime-age women in the United States have a job or are looking
for one. That number is about 83 percent for Japanese women, up
from about 74 percent a decade ago, and about 65 percent in the
early 1990s,'' end quote. Japanese children on nursery center
waiting lists fell to below 3,000 this year, from 19,000 five
years ago. Putting childcare infrastructure in place will help
American parents join and stay in the labor force here, as
well.
We must support childcare and early education for our
nation's children, from all walks of life, so that they can
reach their potential and become the best learners that they
can be and so that families, parents and children together, can
thrive.
As we begin to see the consequences of the disastrous Dobbs
decision unfold across America the need to support reproductive
health and family planning services has never been higher. The
President's request prioritizes women's health, which includes
an increase of more than $100,000,000 for Title X family
planning as well as maternal and child health programs,
including an increase of $27,000,000 for Healthy Start, which
reduces maternal mortality, and doubling of funding for the
Alliance for Innovation on Maternal Health, to expand the use
of patient safety bundles which address the causes of maternal
mortality and morbidity, and to reduce the number of maternity
care deserts. These are fundamental pieces of our health care
safety net, and I will continue to fight to ensure these
programs have the resources to serve every woman and child in
need in this country.
This budget will transform women's health research by
doubling funding for the National Institutes of Health Office
of Research on Women's Health, which would fund research on
maternal mortality, morbidity, menopause, sex difference on
health outcomes, and a range of health issues that are specific
to women.
When I joined the Appropriations Committee in 1993, I was
proud to work with my dear friend and our former chairwoman,
Nita Lowey, in securing language in the NIH Revitalization Act
mandating that women and minorities be included in all NIH-
funded clinical trials, and in a manner sufficient to obtain
information about both sexes and diverse racial and ethnic
groups.
In fiscal year 2021, as chair, I was proud to include a
line item for the Office of Women's Health Research so that it
had a dedicated budget and grant-making authority to assure
there was specific funding for NIH-supported research that
addresses issues that affect women, promote the inclusion of
women in clinical research, and develop and expand
opportunities for women throughout the biomedical research
career pipeline. And this funding has grown thanks to
bipartisan support for this office.
Let me also recognize the President for his executive order
this week to further expand the White House Initiative on
Women's Health Research, which is building on our efforts over
the past few decades to elevate research on women's health to
equal standing. This initiative is led by First Lady Dr. Jill
Biden, and I might add by my dear friend, Dr. Carolyn Mazure,
the former head of the Women's Health Research Program at Yale
University in New Haven. She is a world-renowned leader in
women's health research.
I am pleased to see the Administration take further steps
to bolster the capacity for public health agencies, including a
$500,000,000 increase for the Center for Disease Control and
Prevention, including for the first time $20,000,000 in
dedicated funding for wastewater surveillance, which is a
critical method of detecting and tracking the spread of
communicable disease throughout our communities.
I am also encouraged to see the strong leap forward in
mental health support, increases for programs at the Substance
Abuse Mental Health Services Administration, which operates the
988 Suicide and Crisis Lifeline and the Mental Health Crisis
Research Response Partnerships, and the National Institute of
Mental Health at the NIH.
I am also delighted to see a robust and desperately needed
funding level for the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid
Services. CMS is tasked with doing extraordinary, critical work
in administering the Medicare, Medicaid, and CHIP for the
American people, with a strong, narrowly tight resourcing. I
will continue to fight to ensure that CMS is able to achieve
its mission with a level of service and quality care the
American people need and deserve.
There are many, many other programs at HHS funded by this
subcommittee that are critical to protecting the health and the
well-being of American families, through clinical support,
public health, social service programs, through groundbreaking
research that keeps American health systems at the forefront of
lifesaving technological and scientific breakthroughs, to
protect and expand access to affordable, high quality health
care, lower drug and other health care costs burdening American
families, and to promote early childhood care and education.
I look forward to securing this funding for HHS and helping
deliver on the Biden administration's public health goals for
the American people.
I thank you and I yield back.
Mr. Aderholt. Thank you, Ranking Member. And Mr. Secretary,
again, we are honored to have you here today and thank you for
all that you do at the Department. And we would love to hear
your comments, and of course, everything will be included in
the record. But we look forward to you addressing us this
morning and tell us a little bit about what is going on for the
next fiscal year at Department of Health and Human Services.
Secretary Becerra. Chairman Aderholt, Ranking Member
DeLauro, and members of the committee, thank you very much for
the invitation to talk about the President's 2025 fiscal year
budget.
When President Biden took office in January of 2021, if you
recall, COVID was ravaging our families, our economies, and
Americans were dying at the rate of two to three 9/11s every
day. Let me repeat that. Every day in America we were losing
the same number of Americans that we lost with two to three 9/
11s combined every day.
In January 2021, the number of Americans with health
insurance was, like our jobs and economy, down and on the
canvas. In January 2021, prescription drug prices were
skyrocketing, with patients and their pocketbooks at the mercy
of Big Pharma and its profits.
Today, 3 years later, nearly 700 million shots of COVID
vaccines have gone into the arms of Americans, and we can now
manage COVID like the flu. Today, more than 300 million
Americans, a record number, can go to the doctor or hospital
and not go bankrupt because they have their own health
insurance. More than 21 million of those Americans count on the
Affordable Care Act marketplace for their insurance, another
record.
Today, while Big Pharma, while it is still big, but the
President's new prescription drug law has brought down the
price of insulin to $35 per month for Americans on Medicare.
And as we speak, we are negotiating with drug companies to
lower the prices of even more prescription drugs, even as they
sue us to stop us.
The President's budget doubles down to the investments that
made the comeback of our jobs, our economy, and our health
possible. It lays out a vision for a nation that invests in its
most vulnerable, fosters innovation, and protects every
American's access to the care she needs. This budget doesn't
just strengthen Medicare, it strengthens it beyond our
lifetime.
This budget continues our shift from a health system that
treats illness to one that sustains wellness. All told, the
fiscal year 2025 budget proposes $130,700,000,000 in
discretionary, and $1,700,000,000 in mandatory funding to
advance our mission and advance in key priorities.
Let me share some of the highlights. The budget provides
Medicare-like coverage to low-income individuals in the outlier
states that have not expanded Medicaid under the Affordable
Care Act. When that happens another 1.5 million Americans will
have health care coverage and the peace of mind that comes with
it.
This budget builds on the largest investment in behavioral
health in a generation. It bolsters the 988 Suicide and Crisis
Lifeline. It gives young people support at home and at school.
That means boosting our behavioral health workforce with 12,000
new psychiatrists, psychologists, clinical social workers,
marriage and family therapists, counselors, and peer support
specialists.
Across HHS the budget tackles the maternal health crisis by
improving access to pre- and post-natal care, supporting
emergency care services, and expanding maternal care in rural
and underserved communities. We are making childcare more
affordable for working families and more available where
families actually live and work.
This budget would provide increases wages for early
childhood education workers, and it would fund more than
750,000 slots for children in Head Start, and it funds
universal preschool for our Nation's 4 million 4-year-old
children. And as we move forward, eventually that will include
our 3-year-olds, as well.
Our budget grows and strengthens our cybersecurity
initiatives to ensure patient safety and privacy and to keep
our hospitals and providers, especially smaller ones and those
in rural communities, running and secure.
Finally, this administration has made tremendous strides in
preparedness capabilities since the pandemic, and we keep
building. This budget invests in countermeasures to combat
antimicrobial-resistant drugs, expands our monitoring of supply
chains, and integrates 200 data sources across Federal, state,
and local governments to improve information sharing.
We can't reduce the health and well-being of Americans to
align on a budget spreadsheet, but we can transform the numbers
on the balance sheet into investments and services that sustain
health and promote wellness for all Americans.
President Biden has presented a forward-leaning budget, and
Mr. Chairman, I look forward to taking your questions.
[The information follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Aderholt. Thank you, Mr. Secretary, and as I mentioned
in my opening statements it is alarming to hear about the
reports of unaccompanied teenagers who enter our country
illegally through the southern border and end up in the hands
of human traffickers, and they are often forced to work long
hours in very dangerous jobs.
In your previous statements--and correct me if I am wrong--
you have compared your agency's work in releasing minors into
the U.S. as an assembly line, encouraged your staff to expedite
the release of children.
My question is how many unaccompanied minors have actually
entered the U.S. in the past 3 years?
Secretary Becerra. Mr. Chairman, thank you for the
question. And just to clarify, I didn't compare the work that
we do at HHS to an assembly line. I said that we had to make
sure that we had operations that would move quickly and
efficiently and safely to make sure that children were placed,
because by law we have custody of those unaccompanied children
only temporarily. We must find a sponsor for them, and if we
don't act expeditiously, with safety in mind, to find them a
sponsor then we start to have a backlog of kids at CBP, the
Customs and Border Protection agencies' headquarters, which do
not have places for children.
So what we have to do is make sure we are being efficient,
always with safety paramount in our minds. And that is what we
have been doing. We have placed more than, I believe it is more
than 250,000 kids in the last few years, in various sponsors'
homes, and will continue to do that process every day.
But first and foremost, our responsibility, as you are
aware, is to provide the care and custody of children
temporarily until we can find a vetted sponsor to place them
with.
Mr. Aderholt. So do you have the number of how many
unaccompanied minors have entered in the last 3 years?
Secretary Becerra. I can get you the precise number, but I
believe it is--I said 250,000 but it probably over 300,000 over
the last three years or so.
Mr. Aderholt. What is the average time that a minor, when
they are held in your custody, before they are released to a
sponsor?
Secretary Becerra. Mr. Chairman, it depends. We have
children in different categories, because some children, we
know, are likely to have a close relative somewhere nearby in
the U.S. And we are able to place a child who has a primary
relative a lot sooner and with more safety than we do with a
child who doesn't have a close relative in the U.S.
And so it depends. It could be somewhere between 2 to 3
weeks for a child where we have identified a parent in the U.S.
who is able to take custody. If there is no close family
relative it could take several weeks. In fact, we have kids who
have been with us for far longer than several weeks.
Mr. Aderholt. What steps have you taken to expedite the
release of minors from your custody to sponsors other than the
parents or first-degree relatives?
Secretary Becerra. We have done a number of things over the
last few years, now that we have the capacity to do so. For
example, we have integrated the process of discharge, the
vetting process for children and the sponsors, consolidated it
into one operation rather than have more than 300 different
programs that have kids do it individually. This allows us to
have much more efficiency and be able to have better sight into
people who are requesting to sponsor.
We also have more technology now that we can use, whether
it is fingerprinting or documentation of the different
identifiers, where people live, where they work. That
information is now easier for us to access, and therefore we
can begin to get a sense if there is a sponsor that will
qualify to take a child.
Mr. Aderholt. And what follow-up does the Department do
once the minors are placed with the sponsor that is actually
not their parents?
Secretary Becerra. I appreciate the question, Mr. Chairman.
If the sponsor is not their parents--and we talk of immediate
family members because they are not all parents, but more than
three-quarters of the kids that we place end up with an
immediate family member. That means a parent, an adult sibling,
it could be a grandparent.
But for those that don't have a close family relative we
will go through a process and in some cases we will do home
inspections to find out if the site will be a good place for
this child. So we go far further with non-relatives in doing
the vetting than we do with close family members.
Mr. Aderholt. But once they are in there do you do a
follow-up?
Secretary Becerra. Okay. So once we release them, as you
are aware, Congress, you all passed a law that gave us
jurisdiction over these kids only while they are temporarily in
our custody. We have used authority over the children. We have
no custody authority over the kids once we place them with a
vetted sponsor. And so that child and the sponsor have no
obligations to stay in touch with us once we have released them
into their care.
Mr. Aderholt. So no follow-up then.
Secretary Becerra. We do follow up voluntarily because we
think it is good family practice, child welfare practice, for
us to try to make sure that the handoff goes well. So we do
post-release services. We will try, for example, to reach the
child and the sponsor three different times after they have
been released. So we will try to make a phone call. If they are
close by we might do a visit. But we try to find out how they
are doing, to see how the transition is going.
But they are under no obligation to respond to us, to
communicate with us. So we don't have the authority to require
that.
Mr. Aderholt. So what do you do to ensure that the minors,
once they are released, that they are not put to work
illegally?
Secretary Becerra. Great question because we have no
jurisdiction. The Department of Labor has jurisdiction over
labor violations. We have had many discussions with Members of
Congress on this subject. If you so choose, if Congress so
chooses to give us more authorities we will implement the
authorities you give us, with the resources that you give us.
But at this stage, Mr. Chairman, our authority to go out and
try to make sure that child, now in the community setting, is
doing well, is not there, and we don't have the resources, as
well, to try to do the follow-up. But we do voluntarily. We do
because we think it is good child welfare practices to try to
monitor the kid as best we can.
Mr. Aderholt. This question, maybe you have already
answered it, but if you want to expand on it just a minute. But
let me just ask, do you have an idea of how many unaccompanied
minors that the Department has completely lost contact with
since you became Secretary?
Secretary Becerra. So let me make sure, if you dissect the
question, you are asking a question that the answer will be we
don't lose children because once we discharge them to a vetted
sponsor we don't have jurisdiction over them. So we can't track
them because there is no obligation on their part, or the
sponsor's part, to stay in touch with us.
With that handoff--and that is why it is so important for
us to do a good vetting process, because once we do the
handoff, Congress did not give us authority to try to monitor
them.
So we can't lose a child that we don't have the authority
to track, and that is why, while they are in our care, they are
not exploited by companies to work. While they are in our care
they get the health care that they need. While they are in our
care we look for the most responsible person we can find, after
vetting, to release them to as a sponsor.
Mr. Aderholt. Yeah. So once you all release them then there
is nothing.
Secretary Becerra. Congress did not give us authority to
follow up with them.
Mr. Aderholt. Okay. Thank you. Okay. Ms. DeLauro.
Ms. DeLauro. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you, Mr.
Secretary. Maybe Congress ought to take a look at providing you
with that authority and with the resources, as well.
I want to focus in on childcare for a moment, and then
women's health investments.
Childcare is essential and it is in crisis. We know what
happened during the pandemic where the childcare sector was
really at the verge of collapse, and quite frankly, we cannot
overlook this and we can't understate the role that childcare
providers play in our economy. When childcare centers are open,
parents go to work, and if people do not have a safe, trusted
childcare they are not going to go to work, and it is as simple
as that. And we have the providers who are critically important
to this economy.
This committee has prioritized childcare for the last 5
years. We increased the Childcare Development and Block Grant
funding by $2,700,000,000 while I was chair. In fiscal year
2024, that will be released in the next couple of days, I am
proud of the investment we make in childcare. But childcare
funding is only reaching a fraction of the children and the
families eligible, and the workforce is struggling.
Mr. Secretary, thank you for your request of $500,000,000
for childcare. How does your budget address the larger
childcare crisis, specifically the staffing shortages and the
underpaid workforce in the childcare sector?
Secretary Becerra. Congresswoman, thank you for the
question, but most importantly thank you for your dedication to
this issue for the years since I have known you, when we were
both members in the House, back in the '90s, you have never
stopped.
What we do in this budget, the President makes it very
clear we are going to try to make childcare affordable, so
parents can really feel confident that they are leaving their
child in a decent place. But one of the things that we believe
is necessary to make that happen is to pay people a decent wage
to be childcare givers. When you can leave a childcare center
job and go flip burgers and make more money, there is a
problem. And today childcare workers make less than a preschool
instructor who has the same type of credentialing, and
certainly, as I said, you can find fast-food jobs that
sometimes pay you more than you can get at a childcare center.
So part of the resources that we are investing would be to
increase wages, provide better benefits to people, because we
would like them to know we believe in them as professionals to
do the work.
Ms. DeLauro. And early childhood, I was just in a daycare
center in New Haven last Friday, and they take infants, 6
weeks. Now those providers need to have advanced degrees. We
are not just saying anybody goes in and takes care of an
infant. So they are people with advanced degrees and they are
not getting wages commensurate with either their experience or
with their knowledge. So thank you for doing that.
Women's health. A priority of mine since I came to the
Congress. Everybody here knows my own history as a survivor, 37
years now, of ovarian cancer, so this is very, very important
to me.
I was pleased that the budget includes investments in
women's health, that is Title X, NIH Office of Research on
Women's Health, maternal and child health programs at HRSA, and
more. ARPA-H's announcement of $100,000,000 for its Women's
Health Sprint, using funds from previous fiscal years. Also,
the President signed his executive order on advancing women's
health research and innovation this past Monday.
Can you share highlights of the executive order and discuss
the role HHS will play in implementation? What is the plan at
the NIH to support the executive order on women's health
research? How can we work together and ensure that all of the
relevant stakeholders understand the importance of the order?
Secretary Becerra. Congresswoman, we are all in on this new
initiative for women's health research, NIH, ARPA-H, as you
mentioned. The White House certainly has been driving this ship
from the very beginning. We believe it is going to make a
marked difference in how we see research coming out from all
the different institutions, whether it is NIH or academic
institutions, where the focus will finally be on some of the
diseases and conditions that have never gotten the attention
they deserve. Why is it that everyone, when we heart attack,
our first image is of a man, when, in fact, heart disease
happens to hit women harder than it does men. We want to change
that.
And so we are going to not only do the basic research that
the NIH does but ARPA-H, as you are aware--and thank you for
the funding for ARPA-H--is engaged in a sprint. They are going
to invest in $100,000,000, but it is a public-private
investment, because we are going to turn to those innovators in
the private sector who are having a hard time finding the
investment capital they need to not only plant their idea to
launch, and we are going to try to go forward with some of
these ideas that can actually hit the ground in the next few
years.
And so stay tuned because we are going to have some great
results to show.
Ms. DeLauro. Okay. Thank you very, very much. And thank you
for including, again, the Title X money, which I think is very
important.
Secretary Becerra. It is crucial, very important for the
4,000 providers.
Ms. DeLauro. Thank you. Thank you very, very much. And I
just have a few seconds left, but I will just tell you when I
first came and I said that with Nita Lowey, we were trying to
get women and minorities into the clinical trials. We have come
a distance, but now I think we have an opportunity to really
have women's health, in the broadest possible sense, on that
front burner. Thank you for putting it there. I appreciate it.
Secretary Becerra. Thank you.
Ms. DeLauro. I yield back.
Mr. Aderholt. Dr. Harris.
Mr. Harris. Thank you very much. Thank you, Mr. Secretary,
for being here, and I have got to apologize to the chair and
ranking member because I had to step out for a few minutes
during your statements, because a group of Jewish students at
universities, including actually UCLA and Stanford in your home
state, have experienced blatant antisemitism on campuses, and I
am sure you empathize with them.
But let me bring it closer to home to HHS. Last December,
the Chief Diversity Officer at a major grantee, like this
institution in my state gets over $800,000,000 from HHS through
the NIH, issued a screed where she called Christians a
privileged group. Now, that may not offend you but that offends
some people who got that, and it was university-wide. It spread
through the entire medical campus.
I am sure you are aware, under Title VII that you cannot
discriminate based on religion at an employment when you employ
more than 15 people. Do you think it is appropriate for the
Department of Health and Human Services to directly fund a
religious bigot through NIH grants, or an institution that
hires a religious bigot to one of its highest levels of the
administration?
Secretary Becerra. Dr. Harris, first let me begin by saying
I think I can agree with pretty much everything you have just
said with regard to the need for us to respect everyone, to not
discriminate against anyone, especially whether it is race,
religion, national origin. And so I stand with you in that
statement.
And I would say to you that when we look at a grantee, we
look at those applications and we do thorough research to make
sure that what we are doing is making an investment that
taxpayer would be proud of. If there is a particular case that
you think didn't meet that standard, please let us know,
because we can only look at the application to figure out what
that grantee----
Mr. Harris. So you are unaware of that case?
Secretary Becerra. I am not aware of a particular case
where because of our funding someone is being discriminated
again.
Mr. Harris. No. I am talking about giving hundreds of
millions of dollars to an institution that hires a religious
bigot onto their administrative staff. But anyway, let's move
on.
I am so glad that in January you hosted HHS's first-ever
Food is Medicine Summit, because I have been trying to make
this point for years. Now, if food is medicine, junk food is
bad medicine, right? You are the doctor.
Secretary Becerra. Right.
Mr. Harris. All right. So if the scientific consensus is
that, in fact, by restricting junk food and beverage we might
be able to help prevent diet-related disease in low-income
populations, do you believe that restricting, for instance,
SNAP benefits to use on those bad foods is a bad thing, and
should we pursue a science-based policy to restrict those
benefits?
Secretary Becerra. You know, I am listening to what you
just said, and you almost had me shaking my head in the
affirmative because I don't see anything you said that I would
disagree with. Obviously, we don't get to control oftentimes
what gets included in some of these programs, but I would say
to you that we are trying to move us towards the fresh foods
and the things that keep people healthy from the start. And so
I want to make sure, because Dr. Harris, sometimes we don't
agree, but I am with you in what you said.
Mr. Harris. I am on a roll with you. We just agreed on a
couple of things, I think, in principle.
Secretary Becerra. By the way, I would love to work with
you on food is medicine.
Mr. Harris. And I thank you because I had the NIH director
in the office. She is willing to do it. The NIH has institutes
with nutrition. This, I have got to tell you, Mr. Secretary,
this is a no-brainer. To me it is a no-brainer. But anyway----
Secretary Becerra. Can I just mention grocers?
Mr. Harris [continuing]. Let's move on.
Secretary Becerra. If we can approach the grocers to buy
into this.
Mr. Harris. Oh, so Big Pharma is bad but Big Grocers is
okay. Is that right?
Secretary Becerra. No. What I am saying is----
Mr. Harris. No, that is the problem, is that Big Grocers
oppose it. And you are the Secretary of Health, not the
Secretary of Groceries.
Let me go on, and I only have a minute left. The No
Surprises Act, you asked for another $500,000,000 over 10 years
to help implement it. Do you intend to use some of the
additional implementation funding to enforce timely payments to
providers? You know this is a problem. I know you believe you
need statutory authority. Will you help us on that?
Secretary Becerra. Absolutely. I think we are beginning to
find the sweet spot. We have narrowed down the number of
ineligible claims. We are trying to work closer with our
arbitrators so they don't feel overwhelmed. I think you are
going to see good progress.
Mr. Harris. Thank you. Last question. Look, women's health
is important. Does HHS intend to define ``women''? Because I am
going to ask the NIH Director the same question. When you
enroll, people who have a Y chromosome and a single X
chromosome in a study for women, you muddy data, for a wide
variety of reasons I can get into scientifically. Three
thousand genes existing that are unopposed on those two
chromosomes. Are you going to define ``women''?
Secretary Becerra. So Congressman, we are in the business
of trying to improve the health of Americans, and we are going
to put out program proposals that give Americans a chance to
improve their health. We are going to work with anyone who has
got a good idea to improve Americans' health.
Mr. Harris. Thank you very much.
Secretary Becerra. Thank you.
Mr. Harris. I yield back.
Mr. Aderholt. Mr. Hoyer.
Mr. Hoyer. Thank you very much. Mr. Secretary, thank you
for being with us. Thank you for the job that you are doing for
those of us who had an opportunity to work with you for well
over a decade, maybe two decades.
Secretary Becerra. Twenty-four years. Twenty-four years,
Congressman.
Mr. Hoyer. Thirty-four years?
Secretary Becerra. Twenty-four.
Mr. Hoyer. Twenty-four years. I knew you hadn't been here
quite as long as I have been, but you have been here a long
time. Thank you for your work that you did on the Ways and
Means Committee, and focused on issues that you are now dealing
with as Secretary, and thanks for the work you are doing.
You visited a Judy Center in our state, in Baltimore City,
with me, and it was a great visit, and you were obviously very
knowledgeable about the subject. I appreciate that.
Let me ask you a number of quick questions, if you will.
Primary care. Obviously in the ACA we focused on primary care.
Can you tell me about the investments that this budget makes in
trying to extend primary care to people, in particular
behavioral health issues as well. It is my understanding the
budget provides three primary care visits without any cost
sharing in this legislation that you are proposing.
Secretary Becerra. Congressman, thanks for the question and
for the work you have done on these issues. I will tell you
that not only do we try to beef up the services, the immediate
services that people get, especially in preventative care, but
we are going a little bit farther. Cancer screening--most folks
don't think of preventative care as being cancer screening,
especially if they are young. ``I am too young to get cancer.''
But screening is the way we are able to detect potential cancer
fastest and save lives. So we are going to really make a push
on that.
Vaccination, we have seen a drop-off in vaccination. You
have heard about the measles contraction that has occurred in
various parts of the country. We had eliminated measles in this
country, but not as many kids are getting vaccinated.
Vaccinations protect you against the measles. Measles can be
very dangerous.
So we are doing a number of those effort that will do basic
stuff that not only saves us money but keeps people healthy.
Mr. Hoyer. Okay. I am going quick because the time is
brief. The second question, Head Start. As you know I have been
very involved in Head Start for a very long period of time. I
am very interested in Head Start. First of all, you mentioned
755,000 slots. How many children in America are eligible for
Head Start? Do you know that off the top of your head?
Secretary Becerra. Oh, it is about three or four times that
number.
Mr. Hoyer. So we have slots for less than half of the
children that would be benefited by Head Start.
Secretary Becerra. That is correct.
Mr. Hoyer. That was a program, of course, George H. W. Bush
and succeeding, Republicans and Democrats have thought that was
a program that worked well.
Secretary Becerra. Yes.
Mr. Hoyer. On the other hand, how are we ensuring that it
is spread to more rural areas of the country?
Secretary Becerra. We are making an effort to try to find
out where communities are under-resourced when it comes to Head
Start programs, childcare programs, and we are trying to get
them to apply to get the programs in place. The difficulty is
oftentimes, as you know Congressman, is in a rural area, in
lower-income areas, the costs are very expensive, and for
states to try to sustain and support these centers it is tough,
especially during COVID, so many went out of business. It is
tough to maintain the personnel. We are going to try to work
with states to make sure that not only do we establish centers
but they can stay in place as a good business.
Mr. Hoyer. Thank you. I am going to ask another question
about Head Start, but I applaud you on your efforts to make
sure that early childhood salaries are such that we can attract
competent, capable people, particularly for children at the
early years of life, because that makes such a difference in
terms of their long-term prospects.
Let me ask you something. One of the things Donna Shalala
did, from 1965 to 1995, there was never a Head Start cancelled
for non-performance. And I don't know what the process has been
since Donna Shalala did that, but obviously we need to ensure
that these Head Start centers that work, if they are properly
operated, how are we making sure that the centers we are
funding work in a way that is effective for children?
Secretary Becerra. Perhaps the most important element of
the President's proposal is to increase wages, because what we
find is that centers that pay good wages have stable workforce.
You have a stable workforce, you have committed people, you
have committed children.
We find that in many rural communities you have a pretty
stable workforce because, again, it is small, there are not a
lot of other options, and people are very committed to that.
That is where you get some of the best results.
And by the way, these are small businesses, these childcare
programs. We need to make it so that they can survive and
thrive as a business. So as states look to open up more slots
and establish more centers we have to make sure that those
centers can staff up with qualified people.
Mr. Hoyer. Five minutes is such a superficial time to get
into this, but Lois Frankel, unfortunately, has the flu and
could not be here today. But she wanted to ask a question that
she has been asking the Administration about the availability
of contraception. You know, we wanted contraception to be
accessible but we now understand insurance companies are
limiting it to certain contraceptives which are not necessarily
the woman's choice. Can you speak to that?
Secretary Becerra. Under the Affordable Care Act, which I
had the pleasure to work with many of you on to pass,
individuals have the right to receive preventative care
services. Contraception services are included among the
prevention services that the ACA protects. Under Section 1557
of the ACA we have the enforcement authority to go to those
insurers who are not providing women with their contraceptive
coverage at no out-of-pocket cost. And so we have reached out
to many of these insurers, we have heard the complaints, and we
are trying to make sure they understand what their obligations
are under the law.
Mr. Hoyer. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Aderholt. Mr. Moolenaar.
Mr. Moolenaar. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Secretary,
thanks for being here with us today and for your service to our
country.
Last July there was a TB outbreak that spanned seven
states, including Michigan, and infected at least 36 patients.
There was a CDC public health notice on the outbreak.
Unfortunately, that TB infection has taken the life of a
constituent of mine as well as another constituent of a
Representative in California. What was alarming is that this
was an outbreak that was the second one in the past 3 years,
and it had to do with bone graft material from cadavers
infected with TB.
Shandra Eisenga was my constituent. When I attended her
funeral her family asked to make sure that this never happened
again to anyone else. I am working on bipartisan legislation
with Congresswoman Dingell. We are working to address this
situation. But I would just ask you, Mr. Secretary, for your
full support in helping to make sure this never happens again.
In this case she was a woman who had back surgery and wanted to
be able to spend more time with family, and as a result passed
away from TB infection.
Secretary Becerra. Congressman, those are the heartbreaking
stories because you and I know it didn't need to happen. We are
all in. However you think we could be supportive please let us
know, technical assistance in your legislation or letting you
know what we are doing to try to help tackle this. We would
love to be involved.
Mr. Moolenaar. Thank you. Thank you very much.
Just to switch topics, last week the Public Health
Emergency Medical Countermeasures Enterprise, which is the
Administration for Strategic Preparedness and Response chairs,
released a multiyear budget. It is estimated that
$2,389,000,000 is needed to supply and replenish the strategic
national stockpile in 2025, yet the President's current request
to Congress is only $965,000,000, which is less than last year.
Could you please explain why the request does not closely
match the need outlined by ASPR's own professional staff?
Secretary Becerra. Congressman, that is a great question
because you all just swept up about $4,000,000,000 that we had
in COVID funding, much of which would have gone to address some
of these particular issues. We have to submit a budget that
stays within the frameworks that you all have provided, which
means we have to downsize our request to meet our budget end
game. So that means that on something like preparedness we are
having to make the tough choices about what is the most
important thing to do.
But I would tell you, you said our ASPR Administrator for
Prepared and Response here today, she would let you know
exactly what we would need, and we could use every additional
resource you provide us.
Mr. Moolenaar. Is that going to be a priority to try and
replenish those supplies, because my understanding is there are
decades-old products there that it seems like we would want
updated stocks.
Secretary Becerra. Yeah, absolutely. Let me give you a
quick example. We have a lot of material in stock that is
warehoused that expires, and if we don't take care of it the
right way, refrigeration or the rest, we lose it even before
its expiration date. We need to make sure we get funding just
to be able to keep things frozen, keep things at the right
temperature, and the budgets that we have to do these things,
because COVID showed us we need to have real preparation in
place, we are sometimes making really hard decisions on how to
make this work.
Mr. Moolenaar. Okay, thank you. I wanted to talk with you a
little bit about regional health systems and local health plans
are under a lot of pressure dealing with challenges, rulemaking
activities, payment notices. They are also experiencing the
impact of the recent Change Healthcare cyberattack. One of the
things that has come to my attention is that often with respect
to CMS priorities it seems that there is sort of a one-size-
fits-all approach that has negative impacts on the community-
based health service.
I wonder if you could tell me what steps HHS is taking to
ensure that its policies account for the diverse needs and
circumstances of these critical health care providers.
Secretary Becerra. Congressman, we are working closely with
most of the health care sector today because we know these
cyberattacks are going to continue, and we are trying to help
them understand where their vulnerabilities lie. And so in
December we put out a concept paper for the sector to comment
on, that really gives them a roadmap of where to go. We are
going to continue to work with them because this Change
Healthcare attack that essentially disabled a third, if not
more of the sector when it came to getting payment and being
able to share medical records, we can't have that happen. So we
need everyone to be prepared, whether you are the largest
hospital or the one-person doctor's office.
Mr. Moolenaar. Thank you, Mr. Secretary.
Secretary Becerra. Thank you.
Mr. Moolenaar. Mr. Chairman, thank you.
Mr. Aderholt. Mr. Pocan.
Mr. Pocan. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you, Mr.
Secretary, for being here. I have said this before and I am
going to say it again. You are the most accessible Secretary in
this Administration, and I appreciate that. Whenever we have a
question you, yourself, are often answering it, and we
appreciate that so thank you for being available.
Two areas I would like to try to cover in the time. The
first one is Medicare and Medicare Advantage--I know you are
shocked I want to talk about Medicare Advantage--and then also
about Medicaid. On Medicare you have a strong budget proposal
you have put together for the Administration. You have got
plans to extend the life of Medicare, and thank you for having
that in the budget proposal.
Specifically on Medicare Advantage, though, one of the
areas I hear the most from constituents who have complaints is
around Medicare Advantage. Two questions on Medicare Advantage.
One, we know that the overbilling and overcharging by Medicare
Advantage companies is something like $140,000,000,000, enough
to pay for Medigap insurance for every single person on
Medicare.
Is there more you can do without congressional authority to
go after these companies to stop? And the second question on MA
is you also had some proposed rules that are very strong, I
think, to look at the industry and make sure. There is a
particular part I would like you to talk a little bit more
about, is prior authorization. We know that right now when
people have to get prior authorization the number of people
that are told no, it is in the millions. However, when they
appeal that, over 80 percent are allowed to proceed, which
means delayed time is often delayed care for people.
Can you just talk about those two aspects, the
$140,000,000,000, and anything else you can do on the
overcharging, and specifically on prior authorization?
Secretary Becerra. And so, Congressman, because I know some
folks don't know the difference, but under Medicare you can
have what is called traditional Medicare, fee-for-service,
where you can go to any doctor, any hospital you wish because
you are a Medicare beneficiary. And then there is Medicare
managed care, which is called Medicare Advantage, which says
you sign up to be part of a network that that insurance company
will provide you access to, but only there. You can't go
outside of network.
And the Medicare Advantage program, which you are referring
to, we are trying to extract more transparency in the process,
because as you said, it looks like we are ending up paying more
per person, Medicare recipient, who is in the Medicare
Advantage program than we are for those in equal settings in
the fee-for-service program.
So more transparency. We would like to understand better
how they make their decisions about prior authorization, so we
are now requiring them to provide us with the background on the
process they go through for prior authorization. And we are
trying to make sure that they are working closer with the
providers, so that the providers understand what is expected of
them, so that when they bill they will get paid.
Mr. Pocan. Do you know offhand what that percentage is? I
know it is over 80 percent, the number when they are appealed
the number that get turned back, so people actually get the
care.
Secretary Becerra. Yeah, I don't want to give you a wrong
number. I don't have it with me, but I could get you that.
Mr. Pocan. Okay. But it is over 80 percent if I remember.
Secretary Becerra. You talk to any beneficiary or any
Medicare recipient in Medicare Advantage and they will tell you
it is too high.
Mr. Pocan. Yeah. Thank you. Also Wisconsin, my state, is
unfortunately one of 10 states that didn't do Medicaid
expansion, and one of the things is when the redetermination
process began last year we had about 268,000 Wisconsinites lost
coverage, including probably 185,000 people for procedural
reasons, that meant they were still eligible but not because of
this redetermination process.
Is there anything specifically that you are doing to help
to make sure that those eligible in places like Wisconsin can
still be enrolled?
Secretary Becerra. Yeah, we are working as closely as we
can with the governors and with their Medicaid authorities in
the state, and Governor Evers has been very good about working
with us. Oftentimes what happens is that the state's Medicaid
program doesn't have enough resources and wasn't prepared to
deal with the big number of folks who had to go through the
redetermination process.
But we are working closely. Some states have employed what
we call the ex parte process, which allows, especially for
children, for them to be automatically reenrolled, and then
once the determination is made about eligibility they can make
decisions. But most of these kids will be eligible, so there is
no reason to knock them off of coverage when at the end of the
day they will end up getting Medicaid coverage.
Mr. Pocan. And is that related to part of the CHIP proposal
that you have in the budget?
Secretary Becerra. Our proposal actually would expand
access to Medicaid to individuals in states like yours that did
not expand Medicaid, so they will have access. Because we know
that the folks most impacted by the loss in coverage under
Medicaid redetermination are people who live in states that did
not expand Medicaid.
Mr. Pocan. Thank you. And I will actually yield back the 23
seconds.
Mr. Aderholt. Wow. Ms. Letlow.
Ms. Letlow. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and Ranking Member
DeLauro, and Secretary Becerra, thank you for your testimony
today and for being here. I represent a largely rural district
that covers 24 parishes, many of which are considered medical
deserts. I believe it is crucial that we support programs that
seek to address the severe health care crisis in rural America,
which is a passion of mine, and I look forward to partnering
with you on that endeavor.
My question. In the coming years, when we look back at
COVID-19, we will always think of the effects on health as a
result of delayed routine and preventative care, strained
health care systems, and the increased mental health care
crisis, which may be the worst of all for our children,
especially those from low-income families who suffered
significant harm during prolonged school closures, as well as
the economic harm that upended many small businesses and
communities.
Mr. Secretary, you oversee the CDC. Correct?
Secretary Becerra. Yes.
Ms. Letlow. Do you believe that the CDC has a public trust
crisis at hand?
Secretary Becerra. A public trust----
Ms. Letlow. A public trust crisis.
Secretary Becerra. No.
Ms. Letlow. Okay. Well, according to the Department's very
own survey in 2023, nearly 60 percent of Americans have serious
lack of faith in the CDC. Mr. Secretary, what is the
Department's plan to engage with the public to restore faith in
our public health institutions and the CDC?
Secretary Becerra. Gosh, what a great question because I
think you are right, although I think pretty much everybody
these days--Congress, everyone else--ranks pretty low in the
eyes of so many Americans, and we do have to regain the faith.
And what CDC is doing is they are trying to reach out more
directly with communities by working directly with folks on the
ground. We typically work with the state and the state health
care offices because we don't control health care in the
various states. So CDC partners. But what we are trying to,
especially as a result of COVID, is go directly into
communities, because we have a ton of data that can help
communities understand what is going on where they live, and we
would like them to be able to have better sight to that.
Ms. Letlow. That is encouraging to hear. I spoke with the
NIH Director. She said that she was committed to going into
rural communities like mine to try to rebuild and restore that
faith. As you know, this is personal to me. I think back on the
pandemic and lessons learned and what we would have done
different. And many of us, rightly so, look to the CDC for
guidance and advice. And it changed so often, and wherever I go
in my district, in my communities, they have completely lost
faith.
So here is my fear. What happens during the next pandemic,
and what is your plan, moving forward, to restore that faith
and prepare for the next pandemic? Because again, this is a
personal question to me, and I want to make sure it is
something that you all are looking at. What did you do wrong in
the past and how can we correct it, course correct it, moving
forward?
Secretary Becerra. Yeah. We would like to be able to
connect the dots better. For example, one of the things that we
did was we were trying to let communities know about
availability of vaccines is we used trusted voices. Rather than
have the CDC Director, the Secretary of HHS try to go out there
and convince people what was available we used folks that
people trusted, so whether it was the teacher, the barber, the
clergyman. Whoever had the faith and trust of community folks,
we tried to use them to have entree, to provide information.
We would love to do more. If you are interested I know that
the CDC Director would be more than willing to make a trip to
speak to folks in the various communities, especially, by the
way, rural communities, because it is not often that you get
the Director of CDC to go into a rural town or a small
community in rural America. We would like folks to know that we
are accessible, probably best through their congressperson or
perhaps through their county health authority. But we will try
to make sure that we connect the dots, so people have the
information, and hopefully that builds the trust that the
information that they are getting is solid.
Ms. Letlow. Looking back now, is there anything you would
have done differently?
Secretary Becerra. I think we would have worked closer with
the state health authority more directly, quickly. Because
again, the Federal Government doesn't do health care. We are
only able to do health care when we are invited by the state
health authorities to work with them, because states control
health care. And we were not as well connected as we could be.
That is a function of our Constitution, which gives states the
authorities to govern health. And when a crisis comes we have
national authorities to do much more. But it is tough to build
that connectivity overnight.
Ms. Letlow. Well, as someone who oversees the CDC I look
forward to seeing a comprehensive plan on how you are going to
address it, so we will be prepared for the next round.
Secretary Becerra. I will let Director Cohen know that you
asked quite a few questions about CDC.
Ms. Letlow. Thank you. Thank you for your time.
Secretary Becerra. Thank you.
Ms. Letlow. I yield back.
Mr. Aderholt. Mrs. Watson Coleman.
Mrs. Watson Coleman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and good to
see you, Secretary. I tell you, I am very encouraged by the
President's proposed budget here, particularly as it relates to
women's health care postpartum, pregnancy, disparities,
children, you know, just all kinds of chock full of really good
things. And things such as negotiating down the price of
prescriptions, which is vitally important to me.
So I am going to ask you three questions. I am going to put
them out there right now because I don't have a whole bunch of
time. One of them is about PBMs, one is about long COVID, and
one is about obesity.
With regard to PBMs, I want to know what can the Department
do to--first I want to know what PBMs do to actually create,
lowering the cost of medication that gets to the patient. I
really want to understand how they do this, what their role is.
I want to understand their value added, if there is any. I want
to understand what kind of oversight and guidance your agencies
have been able to provide and accountability, because that is a
very thorny issue with me.
With regard to obesity, we have finally found a way to lose
weight and not have to be hyped up on drugs and things of that
nature, and there are several evidence-based medications that
are available to deal with obesity. But in addition, we
recognize that nutrition, access to information is vitally
important. What are we doing to increase resources to that end,
both to helping people to understand how to live a healthier
life, and how to access those evidence-based medications
through your insurance coverage.
And then thirdly, I want to know about long COVID, because
I am continuously asked about it. I have no idea if I have got
it. I know something, you know. But I know there is
$130,000,000 or something like that, that the President is
proposing with regard to long COVID. What are we planning, and
do we think we have enough? What do we actually need to be
doing here?
Thank you. I appreciate. And I am sorry to hit you like
that but I only got 3 minutes.
Secretary Becerra. Let me try to address those,
Congresswoman. I appreciate. They are all excellent questions.
On pharmacy benefit managers, here is the tough part. They
are middlemen.
Mrs. Watson Coleman. I know that.
Secretary Becerra. They are between the manufacturers of
the drugs and the purchases of the drugs--hospitals, doctors.
PBMs essentially determine at what price and to whom they go,
and if you talk to the community pharmacists they will say PBMs
are the main reason why so many of them are going out of
business.
So we are trying to get to the bottom of this, working with
you all because I know there is bipartisan legislation to try
to really address reform on PBMs. Everyone is interested in
transparency. Most of us would like to see more consumer
protections, so that consumers don't end up paying higher
prices for their drugs than necessary. And we want to make sure
that we prohibit the kind of interference that gets in the way
of actually getting the drug to the person who needs it, as
quickly as possible.
So we are doing what we can to try to give technical
assistance to those who are coming up with the legislation. We
are somewhat constrained by law because we don't oversee PBMs.
They are a creation of the manufacturers and the insurance
companies. So what we are trying to do is have greater insight
into what they are doing.
On obesity, you know, I always talk about a great American
who said, ``It is easier to build strong children than to
repair broken men.'' That was Frederick Douglass. He said that
about 160 years ago. We spend billions of dollars trying to
repair broken men and women instead of building strong
children.
To your point about obesity, obesity is preventable for the
most part, and we should be doing far more to keep people from
becoming obese. Fortunately, we are finding new medicines that
help us treat obesity. The difficulty for some is they can't
afford them. And in the case of Medicaid, it is up to a state
whether or not it will provide payment for obesity drugs. In
the case of Medicare, as you know, Medicare has a statutory
prohibition from using Medicare funds to pay for weight loss
drugs. So we have to work with you to see what we can do. But
clearly the first thing we should do is make sure we are
preventing people from becoming obese, and secondly, help treat
people so that whether it is because of diabetes or other
reasons, we have to deal with these issues.
Mrs. Watson Coleman. So this is to providers of information
ought to be considered eligible for coverage, as well.
Secretary Becerra. Yeah, well, again, we have to work with
states on Medicaid. We have to work with you to change the law,
if you would like to, with regard to Medicare. But clearly
there are medicines out there, but there also programs out
there that don't rely on medicines, to help you keep from
gaining weight.
I didn't get to long COVID. I apologize.
Mrs. Watson Coleman. Long COVID is my last issue, sir.
Secretary Becerra. We have the premier research project
underway at the NIH to address long COVID--what it is, what it
does, how to treat it.
Mrs. Watson Coleman. Thank you. I wish that I could stay
for a second round because I have got so many questions. But
thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you, Mr. Secretary.
Mr. Aderholt. Mr. Clyde.
Mr. Clyde. Thank you, Chairman, for holding this hearing
today.
Secretary Becerra, I am deeply disturbed by reports that
your agency, the Department of Health and Human Services, and
the subagency, Office of Refugee Resettlement, has mishandled
the flood of unaccompanied alien minors entering our country
by, one, not properly vetting the minor, and two, by placing
them in the hands of unvetted sponsors. Your agency is
responsible for ensuring that the sponsors of these children
will care for and support these unaccompanied children through
the Unaccompanied Alien Children Program, and your agency is
responsible for ensuring that these children do not become
victims of trafficking or exploitation. Is that correct?
Secretary Becerra. Congressman, while they are in our
custody we have an obligation to protect them, and we do. There
is not a child that you can name that has been exploited or
used for labor while they are in our custody.
Mr. Clyde. Okay. But when you send them to a sponsor is it
not your responsibility also to ensure that the sponsors of
these children will care for and support these unaccompanied
children?
Secretary Becerra. Congressman, that is where I turn the
question back over to you because you, Congress, did not give
us authority to have jurisdiction over those children once we
have dispatched them to a vetted sponsor. So the answer no, we
don't have authority or jurisdiction over that child, and you
have not given us any authority so we cannot, as you know, by
law, under the Constitution, I can't use a single dollar that
you all give me to try to help monitor that child once they
leave our care because by Constitution, I cannot spend a dollar
for something you haven't authorized me to do.
Mr. Clyde. Okay. I think we have a little different
viewpoint on that right there.
Secretary Becerra. But Congressman, there is no dispute
here. We do not have statutory authority to go beyond care for
that child once they leave our custody, and we have mentioned
this on many occasions. It makes it difficult for us. We do a
few things voluntarily, if we have the monies to do them, to
try to see if we can monitor them once we release them. But
those children and their sponsors are under no obligation to
even respond back to us.
Mr. Clyde. All right. You told Chairman Aderholt that over
300,000 UACs have been processed since the beginning of the
Biden administration. Is that correct?
Secretary Becerra. Yeah, I could get you a precise number
later.
Mr. Clyde. I would like that precise number.
Secretary Becerra. We will get that to you.
Mr. Clyde. And you also said that you do voluntarily follow
up on them.
Secretary Becerra. We try to, yes.
Mr. Clyde. You try to. Okay. What percentage are you
actually able to connect with?
Secretary Becerra. We make a commitment--it is not a
statutory obligation--but we make a commitment to try to follow
up with every child that we place with at least three phone
calls to the child and three phone calls to the sponsor. We say
three because we know that oftentimes we won't get to anybody
in the first call or the second call, and so we try at least
three times with child and sponsor.
We also then provide them with information on what they can
do once they are in the care of a sponsor if they need follow-
up services. And certainly for anyone where there is any
suspicion of abuse or neglect, we try to make sure that they
are aware that they could call a hotline number where we will
try to make sure they get assistance.
Mr. Clyde. Okay. Mr. Chairman, I would like to request
unanimous consent to enter into the record this article from
The New York Times, February 25, 2023, says, ``Alone and
exploited, migrant children work brutal jobs across the United
States.'' Have you seen that article.
Secretary Becerra. Congressman, my dad left the sixth grade
to start working because that was what he had to do to feed the
family, so I am very aware of the fact that a lot of young
children, especially migrant children, end up working to help
support a family.
Mr. Aderholt. Without objection, that will be entered into
the record.
[The information follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Clyde. Thank you. In this article it quotes you from
2021, saying, ``We don't want to continue to see a child
languish in our care if there is a responsible sponsor.'' Well,
let's talk about that responsible sponsor.
According to reporting from the New York Times, HHS has,
quote, ``pared back protections that have been in place for
years, including some background checks and reviews of
children's files. According to the HHS Office of the Inspector
General, these policies have resulted in the failure of HHS to
conduct required safety checks, including even sex offender
address and name checks.''
Secretary Becerra, has HHS rolled back any vetting
requirements of sponsors for UACs?
Secretary Becerra. Congressman, we have not rolled back
protections that would keep a child safe. We have constantly
evolved our processes to meet the needs of the kids as we have
them, but we have not rolled back safety protections which
would harm any child.
Mr. Clyde. Okay. Does HHS check to ensure that every
sponsor of an unaccompanied minor child is not a registered sex
offender?
Secretary Becerra. Well, we go through the public
registries for sex offenders.
Mr. Clyde. What about the people that live with the
sponsor?
Secretary Becerra. So as I mentioned before in answer to a
previous question, depending on who the sponsor is--if it is
the parent, for example, we go through the process to verify
that this is an individual who really is a parent or a close
family relative. If it is a close family relative then we don't
do the more extensive background checks. They are still
extensive, but for someone who is not a family member we will
go in and make sure people who are in the household, we check
them as well, because we can't trust that if you are not the
parent you are going to be as caring for that child. So we do
far more than what we do with regard to the vetting for a
primary family member.
Mr. Clyde. Well, I am happy to hear that. If there is one
thing I want to make sure is that Health and Human Services is
not the last link in the chain of child trafficking.
Secretary Becerra. I appreciate that. And Congressman, we
would be more than willing to give you a briefing on the
process that we undertake, because we have the different
categories of kids, those who have an immediate family member,
those who have a family member but not so immediate, those who
we have identified to have someone who is a close friend of the
family or a trusted name. Sometimes we get them from the family
back in the home country. And then there are kids that we find
no one who is close. So those various categories undergo a
different type of vetting, the sponsors do, because we trust
that a parent is going to care for that child far more than
someone who says they are a friend.
Mr. Clyde. Thank you, and I yield back.
Mr. Aderholt. Mr. Ciscomani.
Mr. Ciscomani. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you,
Secretary Becerra, for being with us today, for coming to
testify.
As you know, the U.S. has large disparities in health
outcomes among U.S. women--we talked a bit about that right
now--and minority populations, as well, when compared to men.
And as the father of three girls I never want to see my
daughters face undue challenges because of their gender or
their race, and that goes for health care research to job
opportunities, as well.
So my question is, despite making more than half of the
population, women have been historically understudied and
underrepresented in health research as well as being
chronically underfunded. And I am concerned many of the
diseases we are focused on today, such as Alzheimer's and
cardiovascular disease, impact women to a far greater extent.
In light of this, how does HHS plan to advance women's
health research across the agency to prevent, diagnose, and
also treat health conditions in women?
Secretary Becerra. Congressman Ciscomani, as a father of
three daughters as well I feel for you because you have to
sometimes go without the kisses and hugs that you get from
those three daughters probably every you are around.
Mr. Ciscomani. True all the way.
Secretary Becerra. Yes, and I don't know how old yours are
but mine are now in their 20s, and they are gems. In fact, one
of them was in this room for a while. You are a lucky man.
And what I will tell you is that the President has given us
an opportunity to really focus in on women's health and women's
health research. This week the President announced, through an
executive order, that we are going to double down on doing
health research.
Quick thing I learned. Women athletes, for the most part,
the athletic apparel they wear, whether it is their shoes or
their jerseys, are simply downsized versions of the men's shoes
and jerseys. Women's feet are very different from men, their
arches are different, but yet they have to wear, professional
athletic activity, shoes that were designed for me. Jerseys, I
found out that the Spirit, I think is the name of the team, the
women's soccer team here in Washington, D.C., their jerseys are
just smaller men's jerseys. It goes to that extent that not
only have we not done the research on heart disease, which
attacks women more than me, but we don't even make sure that
our athletes, our greatest athletes, are getting the kind of
equipment they need.
We have to do more. If you are interested in that we would
love to chat with your team about what we are doing and how we
could use your support.
Mr. Ciscomani. Yeah, that was the full nature of the
question. To begin to tackle this health disparity we need to
begin with how agencies collect data, I think, as well. I don't
know if you are aware that only about 5 percent of clinical
trials even report the number of participants by sex.
So how much of your budget is going to focus on women's
health research, specifically?
Secretary Becerra. Well, the President's budget actually
increased it by several hundred million, the focus on women's
research. And we have a particular project, and I hope you are
familiar with ARPA-H, the new program that's similar to DARPA
at the Department of Defense. They have what they call a Sprint
on Women's Health. And what we are doing is we are going to
reach out to private sector companies, usually small businesses
that are having difficulty finding capital to move their
project forward, and we are going to see which one of them--
it's sort of like a Shark Tank--and we are going to invest in
some of these private sector innovators to see what we can move
forward. And it is going to be on women's health research.
Mr. Ciscomani. Well, I do want to take you up on a specific
briefing on that.
One more question, while on the topic of women's health
here. I specifically want to ask about the Department's focus
on maternal health. A critical component is having safe
medications and therapeutics that can be used during pregnancy.
But despite 90 percent of the pregnant women taking
medications, less than 5 percent of the medications have any
data on how it impacts women during pregnancy or her baby.
Like I mentioned and you and I talked about, I am the dad
of three girls. I am also a dad of three boys, so I have been
with my wife through six different pregnancies. And to think
that mothers are likely taking medications that have never been
studied on pregnant woman, that is concerning.
So what is the agency doing to begin studying common
medications and therapeutics taken by pregnant women?
Secretary Becerra. And the focus of the Women's Health
Research Initiative is to absolutely make sure that not only
are women included in general research projects but that there
are those that are specifically geared towards their health and
their conditions, so we understand them better. Why is it that
women seem to get Alzheimer's at a greater rate than men? Those
are the kinds of questions that these initiatives will actually
help us answer, and we would love to have you on board, and
congratulations on the three boys, as well.
Mr. Ciscomani. Well, I definitely am on board. I want to
make sure that the disparities here between the percentage of
the research that we are actually conducting and the percentage
of women getting these diseases is quite astounding. The
numbers have been there for a while. This is not any new
information to any of us. So we need to tackle that issue
immediately. That would be my suggestion.
Secretary Becerra. We will reach out to you.
Mr. Ciscomani. Thank you, sir.
Secretary Becerra. Thank you.
Mr. Ciscomani. I yield back.
Mr. Aderholt. Mr. LaTurner.
Mr. LaTurner. Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Secretary, welcome
today.
Secretary Becerra. Thank you.
Mr. LaTurner. We have seen a surge in recent years of youth
mental health issues, and we are seeing, in particular, that
children's use of social media is impacting their mental
health. Many companies are more interested in making money off
kids than protecting them, sadly. The data is alarming. For
example, the rate of eating disorders has doubled amongst
adolescent girls, and children's hospitals are seeing a surge
of children showing up with serious mental health issues,
including a 67 percent increase in referrals at Children's
Mercy in my own state.
The NIH has begun working on a study to better understand
the impacts of social media on mental health. Are there any
current findings that you can share with us today?
Secretary Becerra. I would like to tell you that we have
had some definitive research done and we can give the findings,
but I am not aware of it. I can make sure we check with NIH,
and if you would like us to follow up with we can. And not just
NIH but there are a number of agencies, a number of private
sector and academic research institutions are trying to look
into this, as well.
Mr. LaTurner. Well, that is what I wanted to talk about.
What is HHS doing to prevent research and intervene early when
a child is struggling with their mental health, especially in
the case of serious mental illness like eating disorders?
Secretary Becerra. I can try to make sure we respond back
with the different projects that are underway, research
projects underway at NIH, and we can certainly make sure that
our agency, our SAMHSA agency, the Substance Abuse and Mental
Health Services Administration, also follows up with you
because they are the ones that are doing the more direct
services to communities today. So for example, when you all
passed a bipartisan bill on gun violence and provided monies
for mental health services, SAMHSA was the agency that was
charged with trying to dispense those dollars best.
Mr. LaTurner. I would love some of those follow-up answers.
That would be helpful.
The crisis of antimicrobial resistance, or AMR, threatens
modern medicine, and is currently a leading cause of death
worldwide. I am encouraged that the Administration recognizes
AMR as a serious and urgent threat to patients and public
health by including a proposal that aligns with the bipartisan,
bicameral PASTEUR Act, which I am proud to co-lead in the
House, to encourage the development of innovative antimicrobial
drugs and ensure we are armed with an adequate supply of
properly stewarded antimicrobial products against highly
dangerous, drug resistant microbes.
Can you describe your budget proposal on antimicrobial
subscriptions in more detail, including an expected timeline
for implementation?
Secretary Becerra. Yeah. Congressman, we don't know each
other well but I would love to give you a hug because there
just aren't enough Members of Congress who want to touch this
issue of antimicrobial resistance. And in so many ways, as you
know, people are dying at rates that sometimes surpass COVID.
And we have an obligation to make sure people are safe, and we
don't lose quality medicines because they are not used properly
or they are overused, and we don't prepare for the next
bacteria that may come at us really hard.
So what we are trying to do is, very similar to what you
are proposing in the PASTEUR Act, is figure out a way to make
it worthwhile for manufacturers of these medicine to stay in
the game. Because many of these medicines, as you know, don't
have a lot of profit behind them, and so it is tough for a
business to stay afloat trying to sell drugs that you can't
sell for very much money and often aren't needed until there is
a crisis.
So the subscription model, which says everyone will buy in
and start to try to do the manufacturing, give us an industry
that could be available, they can do that because we will have
a subscription model where everyone pays in early so there is
money to be had so you don't have to wait until there is a
crisis to know that you will get paid for your good work in
manufacturing a particular medicine.
Mr. LaTurner. I appreciate that. Of the over 100 million
Medicaid enrollees, approximately 40 million are able-bodied
adults. Over the past several years your administration has
revoked multiple waivers, allowing states to test work
requirements for these able-bodied adults on Medicaid. At the
same time, we have seen data from state Medicaid agencies
indicating that many of these same able-bodied adults are not
working at all. We have had work requirements as a core
principle for participants in the TANF program for decades now.
What is your opposition to allowing states to experiment
with policies to move these adults from welfare to work?
Secretary Becerra. Congressman, let me make sure I am
clear, because you mentioned both TANF, the welfare program,
and Medicaid, which is a health care program. So tell me where
you want me to focus.
Mr. LaTurner. Well, focus specifically on your revoking
multiple waivers, allowing the states to test work
requirements.
Secretary Becerra. So this is in regard to Medicaid, which
offers waivers to states----
Mr. LaTurner. The 1,115 waivers.
Secretary Becerra. 1,115 waivers are part of the Medicaid
program within the CMS agency. The waivers are provided to
states--and to make sure it is clear--Medicaid has certain laws
that Congress has passed on how we implement Medicaid, how we
get resources to states to implement the program. That is
principally for lower-income Americans to have access to
doctors and hospitals. Medicaid is a matching program----
Mr. LaTurner. I am running out of time. Get to the core of
my question, which is my observation that there seems to be an
opposition to allowing states to test things like work
requirements.
Secretary Becerra. Sure. The Medicaid program's focus is on
health care, making sure health care is improved. If you look
throughout the Medicaid statute you won't find a single word
that says ``work requirements.'' And what we do is we make sure
that any proposal by a state, whether it is direct Medicaid
servicing or through a waiver of those servicing requirements,
that the health of that individual who will be impacted by the
waiver improves.
And so that is what we look at. We don't look at any other
thing. A state may want to try to do other things, which is
fine, but our purpose is to make sure, if you are going to ask
for Medicaid dollars, that when it is applied to that
individual in your state it improves the health of that
individual. And so that is what we look at, and if certain
waivers are retracted it is because we are not seeing results,
and taxpayers have a right to demand results when states spend
taxpayer dollars.
Mr. LaTurner. I will tell you what is good for people's
health also is understanding the dignity and pride that comes
with work, and not allowing states to pursue this, and to have
the opportunity to observe what works in one state and what may
not work so that we can have best practices is not a good
thing.
Secretary Becerra. Congressman----
Mr. LaTurner. And I hope that you will rethink your
position on this.
Secretary Becerra. I just want to make sure that we are
clear. We don't stop any state from----
Mr. LaTurner. My question was very clear. Your answer
wasn't so much.
Mr. Aderholt. The gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. LaTurner. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Aderholt. Mr. Edwards.
Mr. Edwards. Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you, Mr.
Secretary. I appreciate you being with us this afternoon.
Secretary Becerra. Congratulations on your assignment to
the committee.
Mr. Edwards. Well, thank you. I am honored to be among this
group of Who's Who Congress men and women up here.
In this year's State of the Union address, President Biden
said that he would be directing his Cabinet to review the
Federal classification of marijuana. Have you had any
conversation with the President to this date on the
classification of marijuana?
Secretary Becerra. The only communication that I have had
with the President directly on this is when he issued his
directive to us to evaluate cannabis and report back to the
Drug Enforcement Agency on this.
Mr. Edwards. And so the news reports that I have been able
to look at indicate that you have already taken a position that
marijuana should be, I am going to say decriminalized.
Secretary Becerra. Descheduled.
Mr. Edwards. Yeah, descheduled from a Class I to a Class
III.
Secretary Becerra. It can still be a criminal violation,
depending on its use.
Mr. Edwards. But wouldn't you agree that between that
declassification and President Biden's statement--because I
believe that he did go on to say, in his State of the Union
address, that it shouldn't be--and I am not quoting him
exactly--it shouldn't be such a crime to possess marijuana. But
between those two things wouldn't you think that that would
make marijuana more available to the citizens of our country,
particularly youth?
Secretary Becerra. Congressman, I don't know about your
state but in my state of California, and probably more than
half of the states of the nation, marijuana is already somewhat
available, whether for medical purposes or even for
recreational purposes. What we are talking about here is the
Federal treatment of marijuana, of cannabis, because Federal
law treats cannabis differently than most states. And what the
President asked us to do is examine where we are with cannabis
today at the Federal level. And as you are aware, right now
cannabis is listed, it is scheduled as a--I am going to get it
wrong, V or I----
Mr. Harris. One.
Secretary Becerra. Yes. Thank you, Dr. Harris--a Schedule
I, which means the most potent and dangerous type of narcotic.
Mr. Edwards. So I don't mean to cut you off but I am going
to run out of time here in just a minute. I have got a couple
more questions that I would like to get to. And the whole issue
of the states implementing a law contrary to Federal law is a
whole other discussion maybe we can have at another time.
Secretary Becerra. Okay.
Mr. Edwards. I find it very conflicting to look in your
report that you provided to this Committee, and I will read a
sentence or so. ``The budget also addresses the sobering impact
of the behavioral health crisis on our nation's youth. National
surveys of youth have shown significant increases in certain
mental health symptoms, including depressive symptoms and
suicidal ideation.''
And yet much of the research that I see indicates that the
use of marijuana creates these tendencies. Are you aware that
according to the CDC, people who use marijuana are more likely
to develop temporary psychosis, hallucinations, and paranoia,
and long-lasting metal disorders, including schizophrenia, and
the association between marijuana and schizophrenia is stronger
in people who start using marijuana at an earlier age and use
marijuana more frequently.
Are you aware of that report, or a report similar to that?
Secretary Becerra. I am aware of a number of reports and
studies. When I was the Attorney General in California we dealt
with the issue of marijuana. And as the Secretary I have worked
closely with the Food and Drug Administration, which is the
agency charged with making a determination about the
scheduling, well, recommending scheduling of marijuana.
Mr. Edwards. And are you aware of a 2021 NIH study that
suggests a link between cannabis use and higher levels of
suicidal ideation, plans, and attempts?
Secretary Becerra. The various studies you are probably
referring to are the types of studies and reports that the Food
and Drug Administration would have taken into consideration, as
it did in its assessment of cannabis.
Mr. Edwards. Thank you. So you are aware of those reports
out there. I have a real concern that in light of the mental
health issues that we have today, that our Federal Government,
the Department of Health and Human Services, and President
Biden are considering, descheduling a substance that is far
more potent today than it was when any of you all ever used the
drug, that will contribute more to depression, suicidal
tendencies, schizophrenia, and those types of things.
And so I would urge you, and I will say that I will
continue to resist any effort to make these types of substances
more available to our youth today, where in your report you go
on to say we need more money to treat. That seems very
contradictive to me.
So with that, thank you.
Secretary Becerra. I appreciate your comments.
Mr. Aderholt. Mr. Secretary, we would like to do a second
round if you are available.
Secretary Becerra. At your bidding, sir.
Mr. Aderholt. All right. I appreciate that very much, and I
am going to yield my time to Dr. Harris, and then we will go to
Ms. DeLauro.
Mr. Harris. Thank you very much, and I will be brief. It is
approaching the noon hour. Let me follow up on what Mr. Edwards
said, because I think he is absolutely right. You know, in
front of this subcommittee Dr. Volkow, who kind of works for
you, has come and said it is just a bad idea. I mean,
recreational marijuana is just a bad idea, and brings up the
fact about brain development in youth and things that Mr.
Edwards brought up. So I have a concern when the HHS, kind of
with both arms, hugs this idea of reducing the scheduling.
I also have the concern about the international treaties,
the 1961 U.N. Single Convention, of course, the 1988 Convention
Against Illicit Trafficking of Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic
Substances, which some people, I know there is disagreement.
Some people think we would be violating our international
treaty agreement.
Now, given that this Administration is all in for a treaty
agreement with the World Health Organization on pandemic things
that would give up our rights as states in a free nation, I am
a little surprised that they want to have this beef with the
World Health Organization on the Single Conventions. But I will
leave it at that.
I have a disagreement with the Department's proposed rule
change governing the Temporary Assistance for Needy Families,
the TANF program, that eliminates pregnancy resource centers,
and it specifically says that they don't fulfill the three
purposes. That can only be written by someone who hasn't been
in a pregnancy resource center. They fulfill all three purposes
that we require for funding. Eighty percent of Americans agree
with the idea that you should have a resource for women who
feel they might be in need, and the excuse that it only, quote,
``help women only after they become pregnant,'' again is just
not true with regard to anyone who has visited a pregnancy
resource center. And I will follow up with some QFRs on that.
Finally, and to end, I am so glad that you agree--we are
going to agree on something else--women athletes are actually
different than men athletes. You actually said that their foot
structure is different between a woman and a man. Well, that is
interesting because my daughter was a six-time all-American
track and field person, and I am convinced that if she had to
compete against someone, a man who thinks they are a woman now,
whose foot structure is different, that puts her at a
competitive disadvantage. I don't care what kind of shoes she
wears. I am, she is at a structural, competitive disadvantage
because women athletes are different than men athletes. Period,
full stop.
So are you investigating that, as well, in addition to what
shoes an athlete might wear, like whether or not it is actually
fair to let men compete with women in women's sports, to undo
all the things we've done to get women competitive, to get the
ability to compete in college sports, to get athletic
scholarships. Are you going to help us not throw that all under
the bus, or is it just going to be about sneakers?
It is a rhetorical question. You don't have to answer. I
yield back.
Mr. Aderholt. The gentleman yields back. Ms. DeLauro.
Ms. DeLauro. Thank you. Mr. Secretary, a couple of
questions. One on public health. And public health, as you
know, is just not about infectious diseases. You have got food-
borne outbreaks, cancer prevention, safe drinking water.
The committee in the past has made significant investments
in that public health infrastructure, public health data
modernization, public health workforce. And sometimes it is not
understood that 80 percent of the CDC's budget goes to our
public health partners. That is the state and local health
departments, and these departments rely on the funding for
their activities and that impact all of our communities,
because they need to be response ready when something happens.
So we need to not backslide on our public health
investments. We need to understand what is going on in our
communities, and it is the public health departments that are
on the front line.
As you travel the country, what do you hear from state and
local departments? How do you see the Federal investments
impacting the role that they play at the local level?
Secretary Becerra. Congresswoman, one of the things I hear
all the time is that the coordination that we saw when we were
crisis mode with COVID really brought states and the Federal
Government together to try to address the needs of our people.
But that absent that type of crisis or emergency, we don't work
as well together as we should, and the coordination is
something that CDC is trying to maintain. So whether it is data
sharing--and I don't know if folks understand this but except
for the public health emergency, when it came to having data on
COVID, who was getting sick, who was dying, we didn't have the
authority to have that information. Usually we have to request
it, but because of the public health emergency we had emergency
authority to say, ``You must provide us with this data.''
We would love to be able to coordinate better with our
state and local health care partners, and the more we do, the
better off Americans will be.
Ms. DeLauro. Yeah. Thank you. And this committee, like I
said, has made significant investments in the public health
infrastructure, which is what you are talking about. We know
during the pandemic, public health infrastructure almost
collapsed on us. And that is why I am very concerned that we do
not backslide on that public health investment. So I appreciate
the efforts and look forward to working with you on that, and
to make it more known, particularly to members, the role that
their state and local health departments have with the CDC.
Eighty percent of the budget goes there. So thank you.
Last question is on behavioral health, and I am so pleased
to see your focus in that area. I have seen the positive impact
of substance use in our--we have peer review counselors now,
crisis response teams around the country, one in my own
hometown of New Haven, Connecticut.
The other area is I am a long-time supporter of the
National Child Traumatic Stress Initiative, that looks at
mental health care for kids. I was able to visit one of the
programs in my district and impressed by their positive impact.
This subcommittee has made behavioral health, I might add,
a major priority, including the doubling for SAMHSA over the
last 8 years from $3,800,000,000 to roughly $7,600,000,000.
And my question, Mr. Secretary, behavioral health is
complex. It requires serving people over the course of their
lifetimes. How does the budget request proposed address the
variety of behavioral health needs of our country?
Secretary Becerra. Excellent question, Congresswoman, and I
would tell you that one of the things we are doing is trying to
go outside the box. So we are trying to make sure that primary
care physicians, family care doctors actually get training in
behavioral health so that while they may not become specialists
in behavioral health--psychiatrists, psychologists--they have
some training so they can identify issues faster.
Because right now what we see is you go in to see your
family care doc, and your doc says, ``Oh, I can see that Johnny
has got some issues, but I am going to refer you to the
specialist,'' and then you have to wait 2 more months before
you see the specialist, as opposed to having a doctor who says,
``I recognize this. I am not a specialist but I recognize it.
So here is what we are going to do.'' And we want folks to be
trained as primary care, family docs, to be able to quickly
address behavioral health, so we don't treat it like a
stepchild to physical health.
We are also trying to make sure that we have more graduate
medical education slots, the residency programs, that are in
behavioral health, so we drive more doctors and nurses into the
behavioral health sciences. So this way we beef up the
workforce because we are so desperate need of more people,
especially in rural and underserved communities.
Ms. DeLauro. Thank you very much. I think the Department of
Education, we had mental health counselors in schools. That is
first line, as well, to look at that and put resources there.
Thank you so much.
Secretary Becerra. Thank you.
Ms. DeLauro. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Aderholt. Ms. Letlow.
Ms. Letlow. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Secretary, I
know you have addressed some of these concerns but I want to
circle back to it.
According to your own Department's Office of Inspector
General's OIG report from last month--I have a copy here--in
February, the Office of Refugee Resettlement often transferred
unaccompanied children to adult sponsors in the U.S. without
thorough screening. Additionally, the report alleged that HHS
neglected to conduct timely safety assessments after the
children were released. The findings revealed that 16 percent
of child case files lacked documentation of sponsor background
checks by ORR.
This is extremely disappointing. As a mom, myself, it is my
deep concern that many of these children fall victim to child
labor and sex trafficking.
Mr. Secretary, I am a mom. You are a father, correct?
Secretary Becerra. Yes.
Ms. Letlow. Do you share my concerns in this?
Secretary Becerra. Congresswoman, not just for my kids but
any child. We owe them a great deal more attention, and the
services that we would expect for our own children. So I
absolutely agree that we have to do as much as possible.
Ms. Letlow. Okay. You mentioned to my colleague,
Congressman Clyde, that they do background checks on all adults
and sponsor households before releasing the children. I believe
the truth is that you all only started doing that after this
OIG report came out this year, exposing them for not properly
screening kids. Is that correct?
Secretary Becerra. No. No, that is not correct.
Ms. Letlow. Okay.
Secretary Becerra. We have done background checks from the
very beginning. Now what I will tell you, and because you
referenced an OIG report, that was from 2021, and it covered
about a 2-month period, which was when we were seeing the
height of the influx of children. And because, as I mentioned
before, our obligation is to place them in the care of a
sponsor because it is always better to be in a family setting
than in a congregate care setting for any child, especially
very young children, we have an obligation, by law, to try to
place them. So we were going through the process of trying to
make sure we did it efficiently but safely.
So what we are now experiencing is a very different
situation, and what we have learned over the course of these
last few years is how to make sure we do it as good as
possible. So that is why we now have different categories of
kids and how we treat them in trying to vet their sponsors.
So we continue to learn. We appreciate the work that the
OIG did to give us recommendations. In almost every case we
have either completed or are on the way to completing many of
the recommendations, because at that point we were flying the
plane while it was still in repair. And what are now doing is
making the best use of everything we have learned, to make sure
best practices are being applied for these children.
Ms. Letlow. Okay. Well, that is a nice segue to my next
question, because it is my understanding that we have shattered
the record for migrants crossing the border illegally, with
over 2 million just last year. So would it be accurate to say
that HHS and ORR are overwhelmed with processing and vetting
placements for these children?
Secretary Becerra. No. Today, no.
Ms. Letlow. Okay. I beg to differ. It has been reported
that ORR has lost contact with over 85,000 children. That seems
that ORR is overwhelmed, or that they are not doing their job.
I have a simple solution to solve this crisis, and that is
for the Administration to secure the border and enforce our
immigration laws.
With that I yield back.
Mr. Aderholt. Mr. Hoyer.
Mr. Hoyer. The problem with simple solutions is they are
usually not correct, although I share the view that we need to
slow, very, very substantially, those who come in, and we need
to fix the immigration system, and it is very sad that a
bipartisan proposal that was put forward was tanked by the
person who wants to be President of the United States, not the
incumbent. It is a sad thing.
The other observation, Mr. Edwards, I would make to you, I
don't do this for applause or detraction. I have never smoked,
I have never had marijuana, I have never had any other drug
other than prescription drugs, and I don't drink alcohol. I
represent the tobacco-growing area of Maryland, however,
southern Maryland, which does not grow tobacco any longer. Took
the buyout.
But I think that cigarette smoking is far more lethal and
costly to the country and to human beings than is marijuana.
Our state has legalized marijuana by a vote of the people. I
don't know how many states, but you referred to half the
states, somewhere in that neighborhood.
So I think it is somewhat ironic that we are focused on a
less lethal drug, according to the medical community,
marijuana, which I have never used, don't intend to use, and
urge my daughters not to use, and cigarettes, which I also urge
them not to use. Unfortunately, two of them do. I make that
observation because I think that it is clear, for whatever
reasons, the American people, in every state in which it has
been voted, including Mississippi but not North Carolina--have
voted pretty handily to authorize that substance.
And as a result, where we find ourselves is in a
contradictory situation between the states' legalization and
the Federal Government. Particularly, there is a bill that has
been pending, and I have been strongly for it, not because I am
for selling marijuana per se--I am not necessarily for making
it illegal because people are going to use it, do use it, and
then get incarcerated for what is being used generally by the
public, and apparently approved generally by the public that
has voted on it.
But we have a banking system that does not accept at the
Federal level dollars that are being legally earned in states
that have legalized the sale, but they don't have any place to
deposit. I think that is a dangerous situation that is leading
a lot of cash hanging around people's businesses that is
subject to being stolen and their places broken into. I say
that as an aside, just because I think it is somewhat
contradictory and confusing for the public, and harmful for the
public, as well.
Let me go back to Head Start. I am very interested in Head
Start. You went to the Judy Center. Judy, my wife, headed up
Head Start. About 20 percent of the Head Starts in America
operate through their local Department of Education, 80 percent
of them operate through their local Social Service Agency. I
think they all ought to be in Education--that is my own view--
because kids are ready to learn at 3 years old. They were ready
to learn at 2. They were ready to learn at 1. But we had a
concept in 1965, when Head Start was established, that children
being exposed to education before the age of 5 or 6 would have
too much pressure on them. Hillary Clinton and scientists and
educators have all said that is not true.
But I am also concerned, in looking at this I think the
figure is either $19,000,000,000 increase for the Childcare
Development Block Grant and $12,000,000,000, increased to just
over $12,000,000,000 in the Head Start program.
Mr. Secretary, this is not a question so much as an
observation and an encouragement. That is a lot of money we are
spending. I think we are spending it in the right place, but I
think there are some places where it is not being used very
efficiently and effectively, to the end that those children--
you quoted Frederick Douglass, ``Easier to build strong
children than it is to repair broken men.'' That is absolutely
right. And we have to make sure that $19,000,000,000, that is
$20,000,000,000 is being spent to the benefit of those
children.
And I will say, and it is going to be controversial, and I
know some people are going to get on my back about it, but
there are some programs that are not being carried out to the
benefit of children as they should be, and we need to look at
that because that is a lot of cash we are putting on the table.
It is necessary to do, and it is critically important for those
children that they are getting the best that we can give them,
and getting the best results for them as well as for the
taxpayers' expenditure of that money.
That is not a question, but it is--as I say, I was amazed
when Donna Shalala told me, she was sitting where you are
sitting now, in 1986, that we had been from '65 to '95 without
ever cancelling a program for non-performance. I can tell you,
because of Judy's experience nationally, there were some
programs that didn't work for children, and we need to make
sure they do.
Thank you.
Mr. Aderholt. Mr. Clyde.
Mr. Clyde. Thank you. In follow-up to my previous questions
I want to talk about the issue of properly vetting the minor
now. Because not only do we need to protect the unaccompanied
alien minor from exploitation but we also need to protect
American citizens from any potentially dangerous individuals
who are entering the United States through the Unaccompanied
Alien Children Program.
Mr. Secretary, are you aware that HHS has processed minors
with criminal records into our country?
Secretary Becerra. Congressman, we are obligated by law to
make sure that when the Department of Homeland Security has a
child who is unaccompanied who has crossed the border that they
are transferred to our care. And if there is a child who may
present security issues we take measures to provide for that.
But we are obligated, under law, to take a minor who is
unaccompanied from the Department of Homeland Security.
Mr. Clyde. I get that, but do you do a background check or
criminal background check?
Secretary Becerra. We work with the Department of Homeland
Security both vet that particular individual, the minor, and
when it comes to the process of trying to place the minor we
also go through a vetting process for the potential sponsor.
Mr. Clyde. Okay. In July 2022, Kayla Hamilton, an American,
was sexually assaulted and murdered in Maryland by a 16-year-
old alien, MS-13 gang member from El Salvador, who was allowed
to enter the U.S. through the Unaccompanied Alien Program. This
16-year-old illegal alien was apprehended by Border Patrol in
Texas on March 23, 2022, and then referred to the Office of
Refugee Resettlement. According to the alien, members of his
family paid $4,000 to a guide who smuggled him to the southwest
border. On May 3, 2022, ORR place the alien with a sponsor, his
alleged first cousin in Maryland.
As revealed in his case file, the alien had been arrested
by police in El Salvador on January 21, 2020, for illicit
association with the MS-13 gang. The illegal alien's case file
also includes information from law enforcement officials dated
August of 2022, noting that the alien had tattoos affiliated
with gang activity. There was no indication in the case file
that either DHS or HHS provided that noted gang-affiliated
tattoos on his body at the time of his apprehension, or
placement into the United States.
So Secretary Becerra, that is really concerning to me. Here
you have illegal alien minors with gang tattoos being brought
into our country.
The Judiciary Committee sent you a letter a year ago,
February 27, 2023--I am sure you have read it--and in this
letter it asks for a detailed description of, and related
documents regarding how HHS established and verified, if at
all, the familial relationship between the women he identified
as his aunt and the case materials referring or relating to the
vetting of the sponsor, the woman he identified as his aunt.
You have not responded to this letter with those questions.
Can I get your commitment right now to respond to this letter,
to the Judiciary Committee, concerning this perpetrator, this
monster that killed this young lady, that brutally raped and
murdered her?
Secretary Becerra. Congressman, I was not aware of that
particular letter not having been responded to. Let me get back
to you. I commit to you to work with you to make sure that we
can try to respond to your question.
Mr. Clyde. Well, thank you. As someone from whose community
another illegal alien murdered a very young lady, a nursing
student, Laken Riley, this is greatly concerning to me. And I
think it is paramount that HHS vet not only the sponsor but vet
the child or vet the UAC coming into our country, especially
when the person has, on their body, visual evidence that this
is a gang member and a violent person. We cannot allow American
citizens to become victims of illegal aliens.
Secretary Becerra. And Congressman, once again, we can go
through the process with you if you would like a briefing on
the vetting that we do of the children along with the vetting
that the Department of Homeland Security does.
Mr. Clyde. Thank you, and I yield back.
Mr. Aderholt. Mr. Ciscomani.
Mr. Ciscomani. On that note real quick I am also interested
in a briefing there on the vetting, both the minor and for the
sponsor, as well, if you can add me to that.
Secretary Becerra. Okay.
Mr. Ciscomani. Secretary Becerra, I appreciate you
highlighting in your testimony the need to advance technology
and continue to digitally integrate providers into the rest of
the health care system. But I have got to question your
Department's seriousness when the administration, your
administration, took weeks to inform the public about a
cyberattack on February 21st, that saw millions of dollars in
lost and delayed revenue for providers in my district. This was
a big, big deal for specifically one provider in my district.
This delay is obviously unacceptable.
Can you just briefly walk me through the timeline of this
event and share why the delay occurred, and also why, after my
staff reached out about this weeks ago, weeks have passed, and
we still haven't had a response from your office on this
incident, the cyberattack.
Secretary Becerra. Okay, Congressman. I absolutely will
follow through with you. But I want to make sure I understand
because the day that the cyberattack occurred, on February
21st, we already had stood up our ASPR operations, our
preparedness and response operations, to start working on this,
and within 24 hours we were in the mode of trying to respond,
and within less than a week we were already in deep
communication with providers. We started communicating with
United Health, the owner of Change Healthcare within 24 hours,
I believe, of the cyberattack.
So I am not sure where you got the information, but from
the get-go we have been working it. That is why we responded so
quickly, and to date we have already put out close to, I
believe, $2,500,000,000 to $3,000,000,000 in advance payments
to the Medicare program to providers who aren't getting paid
otherwise, and we made flexibilities available to those
providers so they could get their payment now instead of
waiting for the processing to occur.
Mr. Ciscomani. Well, I do want to see that information
because--that is one of the questions that we asked that we
haven't gotten a response to. So to add some clarity here, some
transparency on what happened, because a provider in my
district, literally, they were the only ones, but they saw a
bit hit on their delayed revenue here. So this was an impact
for my district. That is what I am hearing from my own
constituents on this, and that is why I brought it up. I
haven't gotten a response besides what you just mentioned. So I
am looking forward to getting a more detailed response and
walk-through of what happened and how to prevent this from
happening again. Because I want to know, when we look at
funding this, the billions of dollars, and we don't have a full
measure of accountability and transparency, we can't allow
that.
So I want to know what guarantees you can provide that will
open the process and be transparent with us, with the Members
of Congress, for the future in these kinds of incidents. So I
will wait to hear a response from you, hopefully in writing
soon here, since we wrote to your Department weeks ago.
Secretary Becerra. We will follow up. I would say this. I
can tell you one thing that we will need. It will be the
flexibilities under existing law within Medicare and Medicaid
because we cannot--for example, we can only forward, through
advance payments, so much money, by law. So we are restricted.
So if the Change Healthcare organization doesn't get its
systems back up in place quickly, we will be constrained by
statute on how much flexibility we can provide.
Mr. Ciscomani. Well, I do want to talk to you more about
that, so I look forward to getting that response.
I want to fit in one more question on Head Start. On the
notice of proposed rulemaking published by the Office of Head
Start, titled ``Supporting the Head Start Workforce and
Consistent Quality Programming,'' which several leaders in the
Head Start community have expressed concern about that to me.
While increasing the pay of overall lifestyle of educators is a
worthwhile goal that I also share, the rulemaking states that
implementing the various provisions of the rule would cost
around $1,600,000,000--that is the estimated--each year until
2033.
Now your budget request only includes about $543,000,000
increase for the Office of Head Start. Does that mean that the
Biden administration is either moving away from the proposed
rulemaking, or is this an unfunded mandate?
Secretary Becerra. Neither. We are providing funding for
the slots that can be used. You are probably aware that we,
right now, authorized close to three quarters of a million Head
Start slots in America, but I think close to 100,000 of them
are not filled. We have about 560,000 slots that are used by
children in Head Start, but states are authorized to provide up
to--I don't know the precise number--650,000 or so.
What is happening is it is very difficult for some of these
centers to fill those slots because of costs and finding
professionals to offer the care. And so what we are simply
saying is let's recognize what we can fund, but let's do it the
right way. Let's not try to have people working for less money
than they can earn flipping burgers at the fast-food joint. And
so what we are doing is being realistic. Let's have quality
Head Start slots for these kids, and let's make sure that we
are providing quality workforce for these families.
Mr. Ciscomani. Well, I am in agreement on the pay here, and
I recently introduced two different bills that support and deal
with Head Start and making sure that we have what we need
there, specifically on the workforce area. I just want to
caution your Department on the one-size-fits-all here solution
for all and having unrealistic and detrimental for small rural
Head Start programs that are more likely to have less financial
flexibility and community resources to draw from. That is a
concern of mine. That is the largest part of my district in
terms of geography. Head Start is important in every aspect of
my district, both the urban and the rural areas, so this is an
important issue for me. And I want to make sure we don't have
these unfunded mandates or that we are holding true to making
sure that Head Start
is----
Secretary Becerra. I hear you. And by the way, some of the
best Head Start centers are in rural communities.
Mr. Ciscomani. Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Aderholt. Mr. Edwards.
Mr. Edwards. Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Hoyer, I appreciate
your comment, and I mean that respectfully. And I don't want to
get into the debate about marijuana and cigarettes right now,
although I believe we need to be having some more conversation
up here on this Hill about the harmful effects of marijuana and
the states' rights to circumvent Federal law. But this is
probably not the time for that. So since I saw the word
``appropriations'' over the door out here I am going to try to
turn back, Mr. Secretary, the conversation to appropriations.
As this committee puts together a funding bill for the
upcoming fiscal year, we are going to have to set priorities
about how to spend the taxpayers' dollars, and importantly, we
have to stick to the limit set for our subcommittee. With that
in mind, I want to ask you about some of the ways HHS's budget
proposes paying for its priorities, because some of those
appear to exceed the principles agreed to in the Fiscal
Responsibility Act.
The HHS budget also has mandatory funding proposals for
things traditionally paid for with discretionary
appropriations. A few examples include $1,400,000,000 for
Cancer Moonshot activities at the National Institutes of
Health, $150,000,000 for a Community Violence Intervention
Initiative at the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention,
and another CDC proposal for $1,000,000,000 for Vaccines for
Adults.
Why, Mr. Secretary, did the Administration propose these
expansions to the mandatory side of the budget, especially
given the warnings that we hear from the CBO about the
projected growth in mandatory spending and what it means to our
growing debt?
Secretary Becerra. Congressman, thank you for the question,
and it is clear that you have hit the ground running in your
new committee assignments, so congratulations to you.
Let me just use one of the examples, Vaccines for Adults.
We have a program for children, the Vaccines for Children
program, which is very successful, and the reason so many
children have been vaccinated and kept safe from things like
measles or other types of very contagious diseases. That
program, Vaccines for Children, is on the mandatory side, and
it is because it is widespread, the utility and value is well
known, and rather than have to go through the constant
discretionary budgeting process of allocating money for
something we know is indispensable, we considered a mandatory
program.
Vaccines for Adults is no different. We know from COVID
that if you didn't get vaccinated chances are you were the one
in the hospital or perhaps dying. We want to move that to the
mandatory side because, again, it is indispensable, it is
universal, and it is something that will not only benefit the
individual but American society.
And so the purpose of moving some of these programs on the
mandatory side is because there is a clear value in not having
to go through the yearly exercise of saying you will allocate
dollars for a very worthwhile purpose.
Mr. Edwards. So to follow up, exactly what would that value
be? Do you not think that the taxpayers deserve to have this
dialogue and to have the expenditures questioned, year after
year? Why should we just take for granted that, carte blanche,
for perpetuity, that we will spend these mandatory dollars?
Secretary Becerra. Yeah. Congressman, having served where
you are for 24 years, you have that opportunity to have that
discussion. In fact, you have the right, not just the
opportunity, to actually change that, so that it won't be a
mandatory program, or it will become a mandatory program. That
is the purpose of these hearings and your debates. You all
decide if it is a mandatory or a discretionary program. We live
by your direction, and we will try to make sure that we provide
the type of services that you expect.
But honestly, the reason the adult vaccination program is
not mandatory is because Congress has not yet decided to do so.
President Biden has said we believe it is now time to make it a
mandatory program. It is worthwhile to do.
Mr. Edwards. All right. Thank you. I would just like to
make a comment to the chair and to the rest of the committee
that I would resist adding any more mandatory spending to our
budget. I think every dollar should be challenged with every
budget.
Thank you. With that I yield back.
Mr. Aderholt. With a final statement I want to recognize
Ranking Member DeLauro.
Ms. DeLauro. Thank you so much, Mr. Chairman. I really
appreciate the opportunity.
Just one or two observations. I think we have got a task
cut out for us on this committee, one that was raised by Chair
Aderholt, and that is with the follow-up services, if you will,
to unaccompanied children, and what HHS's responsibility, you
have that responsibility as unaccompanied if they come from,
that we have to, by law, accept unaccompanied children. But
then when the sponsors are vetted, et cetera, and the child
goes, then after that HHS does not have authority to check into
what is happening.
And I think that we ought to examine the kinds of authority
that HHS should have, and quite frankly, that should not be an
unfunded mandate. That should be one in which we deal with the
resources that are necessary to be able to accomplish that. And
I think that would answer some of the questions of safeguarding
children in this country.
And I might add, with regard to that, because the issue
that came out in the conversation about that was what is
happening with youngsters, and they wind up in child labor
situations. And you made a reference, Mr. Secretary, to the
Department of Labor. I have been working with the Department of
Labor on this issue, and we have been trying to get increases
through the Wage and Hour Division, so that, in fact, we could
investigate what is happening in some of these enterprises
which are dealing with child labor, in some of our very big
corporations in this nation.
And I might also add that the Administration did ask for
increased dollars last year for this very purpose. But I also
will add that we could not come to an agreement to increase the
funding to look into this effort. So we can outline the
problem, but we need to then be willing to look at the solution
and to provide the resources for the solution, as well.
So those two issues, and I welcome you, Mr. Edwards, to the
committee. I should have done that early on. It is a great,
great committee, and I think people will tell you that I speak
my mind on this committee. Is that true, Mr. Moolenaar?
But I would just say I heard Mr. Clyde's comment, and I
will see him on the floor and mention this to him, troubled by
some of the issues that he did. Life is precious. No one's life
should be taken, under any set of circumstances.
But I would also say some of us get very, very troubled--
and I hope it is widespread--that are troubled by the mass
murders that are committed, something like Sandy Hook and
Uvalde. Those were committed with an AR-15 weapon, and that we
don't seem to want to deal with any kind of a solution to that
problem. We can't be troubled by only one source of victimizing
or killing of people, but we must look at it more broadly, and
we have the power in this institution to do something about
that.
I want to say a thank-you to you, Mr. Secretary, for being
here. But thank you so much for the years of public service. It
was Shirley Chisholm who said, ``Public service is the rent we
pay for space on this Earth,'' and you have paid that rent over
and over and over again.
I am pleased with the priorities in the President's
budget--childcare and Head Start, women's health, reproductive
health, public health, behavioral health, biomedical research,
Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services, CMS. We need to
continue to build on the investments of the last 2 years in
that critical Health and Human Services program.
I look forward to working with you to finalizing 2024, and
I am hoping it is a matter of the next couple of days on Labor
H, which will provide important investments and stability at
HHS for the rest of this year, and how we can work together in
2025.
Thank you so much for being here and for your work. Mr.
Chairman, thank you very much for the time.
Mr. Aderholt. Thank you, and Secretary Becerra, thank you
for your time today. I know you have got a busy day today. We
appreciate your answers and being available for this committee
hearing, so thank you very much.
And with that, seeing no further business, we are
adjourned.
[Questions and answers submitted for the record follow:]

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Wednesday, April 10, 2024.

FISCAL YEAR 2025 REQUEST FOR THE DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION

WITNESSES

HON. MIGUEL CARDONA, SECRETARY, UNITED STATES DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION
LARRY KEAN, BUDGET DIRECTOR, UNITED STATES DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION
Mr. Aderholt. Well, good morning. We will get started. Good
morning, Mr. Secretary.
Secretary Cardona. Good morning.
Mr. Aderholt. Good to see you today. I had a chance to
speak with you yesterday and chat with you on the phone, and
welcome you to the subcommittee once again. And we all look
forward to your testimony here this morning and hear from your
Agency and some of the requests that you have got and how we
can be helpful. So again, we welcome you here this morning and
glad to have you.
When you came before the subcommittee, I guess, just about
a year ago exactly, myself and a lot of my other colleagues had
expressed some concern about the proposed Title IX rule that
would force schools to allow biological teen males into girls'
locker rooms and promote unfair competition on the playing
field. The original intent, as you know, of Title IX was to
protect women, so I hope your Department's delay in finalizing
this misguided rule signals that the administration agrees with
most of America that this proposal would harm women and girls
in sports and set them back decades. And I will want to follow
up with that with some more questions a little bit later, but
for now, I want to turn to your budget proposal.
I am concerned about the new programs, the increases and
the cuts that are proposed by your fiscal year 2025 budget and
what they say about the Department's priorities: $25,000 for a
new preschool demonstration program, $10,000,000 for an
unnecessary initiative for fostering diverse schools, and a
large increase to administrative accounts to carry out student
loan debt transfers that are funded by the new budget gimmicks
are just a few of the issues that are concerning to many of us
on the committee. Rather than create more new programs along
with additional bureaucracy that would require our educational
budget, needs to focus back on just barely the basics.
Four years after schools were shut down across this
country, 26 percent of all students are still chronically
absent from schools. For the poorest students, that number
rises to a staggering 32 percent. Obviously if children are not
in school, they are not learning. How would the new proposals
in your budget get those kids back into the classroom? How
would they address the significant declines in math and reading
scores, which are felt the hardest in minority communities? How
would they help regain the trust of parents? These are tough
questions that the budget needs to address.
I also have questions regarding your Department's proposal
to cut grants to charter schools by $40,000,000. This program
has been flat funded for 5 years, but, according to my
understanding, charter schools are outperforming traditional
public schools in student achievement. At a time when our
Nation faces skyrocketing debt and inflation, we should be
targeting investments in education in what works, not
duplicative, ideological programs that merely sound great but
no difference in the learning process. Your budget also
proposes $600,000,000 to increase the office that oversees the
Federal Student Aid Program, including the Department's student
loan cancellation schemes. Even though the Supreme Court struck
down the President's signature, one-time student loan program,
your Department has doubled down on canceling loans through
other avenues. In fact, on March 21st, your Department boasted
that it had canceled a total of $144,000,000,000 in loans thus
far. This doesn't even account for the new loan repayment
program that the Department unilateral created last year, which
makes loan repayment even more generous, including by cutting
borrowers' payments in half and accelerating loan forgiveness
for some borrowers. Last September, the CBO estimated this
repayment program would cost approximately $260,000,000,000
over a 10-year window. It is clear that the Department's
student loan forgiveness policies are unfair to Americans who
did not go to college or that paid back their loans, and it
sends a dangerous message to students, and that is to borrow
more and just send the taxpayer the bill.
I also continue to hear about how free speech is under
attack on college campuses across our Nation. Our colleges and
universities should be places that support free academic
inquiry and where different ideas can be expressed and can be
exchanged. So it is alarming to hear about speakers being
disinvited or angrily shouted down at events, or about faculty
being canceled for expressing views that do not conform to the
popular thinking of others on campus. This cancel culture is,
ironically, increasing at a time when universities are failing
to adequately condemn the rise of antisemitism and support of
terrorist organizations at our universities, creating a hostile
environment for Jewish students, faculty, staff, and all this
is simply unacceptable.
According to the Foundation for Individual Rights and
Expressions, more than half--56 percent--of students surveyed
for their 2024 college free speech rankings report said they
worried about the reputation or harm because someone
misunderstood something they said or something they did.
Twenty-eight percent of students today engage in self-
censorship fairly often or very often during class discussion.
One in 5 students said it is not clear that their campus
administration protects free speech, and 43 percent says it is
only somewhat clear that free speech is protected. I think you
would agree that these statistics are concerning to any of us.
We can do better, and we must do better, both to foster free
speech at our college campuses while also pushing back against
terrorist rhetoric that has no place in our schools.
Mr. Secretary, as you can see, there are a lot of important
topics to talk about today, but that being said, I do
appreciate your attendance here today and having a chance to
interact with you and ask some questions and the subcommittee
members. And at this point, I would like to recognize my
colleague and friend, and, of course, the ranking member from
Connecticut, Ms. DeLauro for her opening statements, and I
yield to Ms. DeLauro.
Ms. DeLauro. Thank you so much, Chairman Aderholt, for
holding this critically important hearing this morning on the
Department of Education's budget. If I could just start, just
take a moment of personal privilege, with the Secretary being
from Connecticut as well. I think there are some Connecticut
folks in the audience. I just say, ``Go Huskies. Yes, hear-
hear. Well done. Well done.
Anyway, I want to say a thank you to our witness this
morning. Secretary Cardona, thank-you for appearing here, but
thank you for your lifetime's work and your public service. It
was Shirley Chisholm, the first African-American woman who
served in the House of Representatives, and she said, ``Public
service is the rent you pay for space on this earth,'' and, Mr.
Secretary, you pay that rent over and over and over again, and
we are grateful for that. And we thank you for dedicating to
investing in and improving the outcomes of our Nation's youth.
When Secretary Cardona and President Biden took office over
3 years ago, students and families were facing unprecedented
disruptions to their education, and indeed learning loss and
chronic absenteeism are still critical challenges we must work
diligently to resolve. But thanks to the leadership of
Secretary Cardona and President Biden and investments made by
the House Appropriations Committee, schools now have essential
resources to support student academic recovery, address mental
health needs, and tackle nationwide teacher shortages.
We increased financial aid to help students pay for
college, and we invested in colleges and universities so
students from diverse backgrounds all have a fair shot at a
high-quality post-secondary education. And I am taking a look
at the array of tee shirts that I see here this morning,
``Literacy and Justice for All.'' Amen. And thanks to the
administration's historic success in canceling student loan
debt, 4,000,000 Americans living paycheck to paycheck under the
weight of burdensome and oftentimes overwhelming debt are
feeling major relief to their household's bottom line and
helping families with the high cost of living.
Students and families do not just need help to pay tuition.
Housing, food, and transportation expenses are staggering.
Nearly 1 in 3 college students experiences food insecurity.
That means hunger. Let me translate food insecurity: they are
hungry. And so any assistance that we can provide will continue
to make education even more affordable and more accessible to
hardworking Americans. And lest you think I made up the
statistics, this is an article that appeared in ``The Hartford
Courant'' in Connecticut: 1 in 3 college students can't afford
food, which is a fact of life for our youngsters today.
The strength of our great country and the resilience of our
democracy depends on how well we prepare our next generation
with the knowledge and the skills necessary to face future
challenges, which is why support for high-quality, affordable
education is one of our subcommittee's most solemn
responsibilities. I was proud to work with Democrats and
Republicans in the House and Senate to complete the work on the
fiscal year 2024 Labor, Health, Human Services, and Education
funding bill. I am proud that we protected the historic
investments this subcommittee made in education programs during
the first 2 years of the Biden administration.
Last year, House Republicans proposed a destructive 80-
percent cut to Title I, the cornerstone of our Federal
investment in public education, which would have removed
224,000 teachers from classrooms serving low-income students
nationwide. We spent months communicating the devastation this
would bring to urban, suburban, and rural communities across
our country, which is why I am so proud that we not only beat
back these cuts, but we passed a bill that increased Title I by
$20,000,000.
Despite the tight fiscal constraints that were placed on
us, I was also pleased to secure a $20,000,000 increase for
IDEA grants to States to equip special educators with the tools
they need to support students with disabilities. And finally, I
was particularly proud to secure at least $74,000,000 in new
awards for a total funding level of over $170,000,000 for
school-based mental health grant programs that were created by
this subcommittee to advance our goal of making sure every
child can count on the support of a qualified mental health
professional at their school. We also removed each of the
dozens of poison policy riders proposed last year by the
majority, including new riders that would have blocked access
to student loan relief, new income-driven repayment options,
and rules that would protect students who are victims of sexual
assault.
I am proud of where we ended up with the 2024
appropriations bill, but there is still unmet need in
education, which brings me to the President's budget for 2025.
The request for $82,000,000 for programs funded at the
Department of Education will help support working middle-class
families and help secure future opportunities for America's
children regardless of their socioeconomic status. Increases of
$180,000,000 each to Title I and IDEA grants to States will
build on the progress we made in supporting students with the
highest needs, and I am thrilled to see a $50,000,000 increase
to full service community schools, a program I was proud to
double in size to $150,000,000 in fiscal year 2023, which we
also were able to protect in 2024. And I was pleased to see the
administration's proposal to shore up the Pell Grant and avoid
a devastating shortfall, with a plan to provide an additional
$2,100,000,000 for Pell in fiscal year 2025 to support an
increase to the maximum award.
Horace Mann called education ``a great equalizer of
conditions of men.'' Indeed, a quality education which provides
the knowledge and skills needed to solve complex challenges is
a prerequisite to finding success in life. It is, therefore,
our duty to invest in every American child so that they may
have the opportunity to reach their potential, achieve their
dreams, and become the leaders of the next generation. I look
forward to securing this funding for students and families, and
helping to deliver on the Biden administration's education
goals for the American people. Thank you, and I yield back.
Thank you, Ranking Member DeLauro, and, Mr. Secretary, you
have the mike. We look forward to hearing your testimony.
Secretary Cardona. Thank you. Chairman Aderholt, Ranking
Member DeLauro, distinguished members of the committee, thank
you for the opportunity to testify today on President Biden's
fiscal year 2025 budget request for the United States
Department of Education. I speak to you today in my capacity as
Secretary of Education, but I also look at this budget as a
lifelong educator, and especially as a father of a son in
college now and a daughter in her final year of high school. In
that spirit, I come here today to discuss a budget that is not
only about our priorities at the Department of Education, but
about what we are hearing directly from parents and others all
over this country, in red and blue States alike, about where we
have common ground when it comes to our hopes for our children.
I am also here today because education opened doors for me
as it did for many of us. At its best, public education is the
great equalizer, putting opportunity within reach for all
Americans. So where some seek to defund public education, I am
here to defend it unapologetically as the foundation of the
American Dream.
This budget is about making responsible choices together to
invest in that foundation for American opportunity and raise
the bar for our Nation's future. It is about the responsible
choice to continue to sustain our Nation's academic recovery
from the impacts of the pandemic through $82,000,000,000 in
calculated investments to accelerate learning and success
instead of minimizing support at a very crucial time for our
students to regain lost ground. It is about the responsible
choice to invest in a stronger future for all Americans by
boosting funding to close achievement gaps in low-income
communities through Title I, to support students with
disabilities through IDEA, to support multilingual learners
through Title III, recruit, retain, and develop great teachers.
It is about the responsible choice to invest in safer schools
and the mental health of our students by making more funding
available for more school counselors and mental health
professionals and more full-service community schools.
It is about the responsible choice to give more young
people access to the American Dream by building more pathways
to higher education for all students by improving college
affordability, retention, and completion, including through
free community college and increased student supports. And it
is about the responsible choice to make these investments in
our Nation's future while fully honoring the caps under the
bipartisan agreement to reduce the deficit.
It is also about working together again, as we did in a
bipartisan fashion last year, to reject the sort of extreme
policies and the extreme cuts proposed by some at the time.
These could have resulted in the loss of more than 200,000
teacher jobs at a time when those teachers are critical to
recovering their students' learning in reading and math. Yes,
there are some in our Nation who benefit from stoking division
in our schools and inflaming culture wars, but let me be clear.
My purpose here today is to propose a budget that helps protect
and support all of our Nation's students instead of creating a
spectacle for the benefit of the media or provoking divisions
that aim to bring attention to some but do nothing to help our
young people succeed.
At a time when there is, in fact, so much common ground
about what matters most for our Nation's students, such as
getting all students to read by 3rd grade, providing mental
health supports in the midst of a youth mental health crisis,
opening up career and college pathways so students have more
options for rewarding lives and careers, and making higher
education more affordable and accessible for those who choose
that path, I know we can and we will prioritize results over
rhetoric. We can raise the bar for our Nation together. I look
forward to working with you to do so. Thank you.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Aderholt. Thank you, Mr. Secretary, and again, we
appreciate your testimony, and I appreciate your words about,
you know, coming here and talking about the budget. There are a
few issues I think we need to talk about because of your
Department that I do want to bring up. And as I had mentioned
in my opening statement, I am concerned, and I know many people
are about the proposed Title IX regulation, which, in my
opinion, would do grave harm to the safety and the success of
young girls and women across this country. Particularly, I am
worried about how this could impact girls in elementary school
for whom these school years are crucial for physical and mental
development and building confidence.
Under these proposal rules, as you have laid out, the
elementary age students would generally be able to participate
in school sports teams consistent with their gender identity,
and that would mean that a 6th grade boy who simply identifies
as a girl could play on the same basketball team as young
girls. My question: when can we expect the Department to
finalize the Title IX rule?
Secretary Cardona. Thank you, Chair Aderholt, for the
question. We know this is a very important issue and an
important question that many have opined on. We have received
over 150,000 comments, and we are working vigorously to move
forward on that rule. We know it is important, and we are
working hard on that.
Mr. Aderholt. Is there things that the Department is doing
to ensure that a final rule would protect vulnerable young
biological girls?
Secretary Cardona. As I said before, you know, the safety
of all students is critically important to all of us, and it is
important that we work quickly on these rules, and we are
working as quickly as we can. I would ask, sir, that you
consider the $22,000,000 budget increase that we have for the
Office for Civil Rights to help us facilitate the work of not
only writing regulation but also investigating.
Mr. Aderholt. Also, I mentioned in my opening statement
that many of us are concerned about the pervasive cancel
culture at our institutions of higher education and the
chilling effect that it has had on campus free speech.
According to the Foundation of Individual Rights and Expression
study that I had mentioned, students are self-censoring in the
classroom and in conversations with other students. Speakers
have been disinvited or angrily shouted down at events, and
professors have lost their positions or suffered reputational
harm for expressing their views. It is also apparent that
students are not getting a consistently clear message from
campus administrators regarding free speech protections. Do you
think the status quo is acceptable given how critical free
speech and free inquiry is concerning higher education?
Secretary Cardona. Thank you. I agree with you that higher
education institutions should be places where free speech is
allowed. I also agree that we have to make sure we are making
our campuses as safe as possible for students and that we take
concerns about safety very seriously. I recently had
conversations with students at Towson University and Bowie
State talking about safety on campus, talking about making sure
that they are heard, so I do take that very seriously.
At the Department of Education, we have worked really hard
to ensure that there is more guidance on this, and we have
worked closely with university leaders to help them with
resources and tools to ensure free speech and an environment
where people can communicate their thoughts while also
maintaining safety, which is of utmost importance. I have
spoken to parents who also felt, you know, uneasy about their
children being on campus, given some of the challenges we have
been hearing about on campus. But we are committed to working
with you and others to make sure campuses are places of free
speech, but also that they have the tools needed to protect
students.
Mr. Aderholt. Can you talk about any particular things that
the Department is doing to ensure this protection of free
speech as it relates to colleges and universities----
Secretary Cardona. Sure.
Mr. Aderholt [continuing]. That, of course, Federal
funding? I know you mentioned you are trying, and I understand
that, but are there some specific steps that you all are
looking at or that you have taken?
Secretary Cardona. Thank you. Thank you. Yes. If you go to
Ed.gov, you will see a link right there to some of the
materials, the guidance that we put forward, and in those
materials, you will see very specific strategies that we have
shared with colleges. We have had numerous webinars with
college leaders, folks on campus to make sure that they are
understanding how to balance promoting free speech and allowing
for free speech, but also keeping safe environments. So happy
to follow up more on that. We are working with, you know,
leaders from different sectors on this as well, so this is
something that I am really proud of the work we are doing, and
I welcome an opportunity to share more with you.
Mr. Aderholt. Well, just please know that this cancel
culture mentality is a real issue out there, and I think it is
something that needs to be addressed, especially when
universities are receiving Federal dollars. And we hope that
you can be helpful in trying to make sure that students don't
have to self-censor in the classroom and also in conversation
with other students, and also make sure that speakers are not
disinvited----
Secretary Cardona. Right.
Mr. Aderholt [continuing]. Or angrily shouted down when
they come and express their views. With that, let me turn to
Ms. DeLauro.
Ms. DeLauro. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Mr.
Secretary, we are on the same page that chronic absenteeism
from school is a profound crisis for our kids. Our rates have
increased from 15 percent pre-pandemic to 26 percent in 2023,
and our Nation's highest poverty school rates have increased
from 19 percent to an alarming 32 percent in 2023. Something
has shifted in our schools with causes and explanations that
are complex and sociological. And I am not trying to plumb all
those reasons----
Secretary Cardona. Right.
Ms. DeLauro [continuing]. But at all levels of government,
we have a responsibility to reverse this unacceptable trend.
Presently, two-thirds of States use chronic absenteeism as an
official indicator for statewide improvement plans under the
Elementary and Secondary Education Act. On the Federal level,
your Department is responsible for monitoring States' evidence-
based responses to the indicators in their plans. How satisfied
are you with how States are implementing their chronic
absentees and plans? What would you like to start seeing from
States in your Department's next round of monitoring?
Secretary Cardona. Thank you for that question. As a
lifelong educator, I share that concern. Chronic absenteeism--
you know, you are not learning if you are not in the classroom
with your peers, so that is an issue that was exacerbated after
the pandemic for various reasons, and in our budget we have
proposals that will help address that. We have been very
focused on ensuring that States are also--what we call, raising
the bar--really doubling down efforts on that, and we are
seeing some good progress.
But to answer your question, we have a technical assistance
center that we are focusing on chronic absenteeism. So
technical assistance, what is working? You know, what are the
best strategies across the country? The technical centers are
helping with that. I have written to every State education
chief and asked them to take additional steps to address
chronic absenteeism. We are monitoring the data more at the
Department of Education regularly. We are working specifically
with States not making as much progress as other States, and we
are going to continue to do that. We are working closely with
the White House as well to bring in educators and leaders who
are having success with this so that we can highlight best
practices.
In our budget, we believe, you know, the increase for full-
service community schools will make a big difference. I was
recently in Pennsylvania speaking to parents in a parent
center, and they were learning about how they could be equipped
with tools to help other parents reduce chronic absenteeism.
So, you know, this is an area, as you said earlier, we have to
focus on, and we all have a role to play. At the Department of
Education, increasing accountability, targeting, support, and
making sure we are listening to the best practices and sharing,
those are some of the strategies we are taking.
Ms. DeLauro. Thank you, and if there is any way in which
you can share some of that information that is coming through
with what the programs and plans are, that would be helpful to
the committee I think. Thank you. Thank you.
Let me move to another issue. Last year, your Department
took action against Grand Canyon University, a predatory for-
profit college, over the school's failure to accurately
disclose its cost to students, driving up the true cost for
those students, requiring them to pay for continuation courses
before they would graduate. Scam courses added about $10,000 or
more to the cost of education for these kids. The students
settled a class action lawsuit against Walden University,
another scam for-profit, targeted women and black students with
false advertising, misrepresenting how long it would take to
complete their degrees. This is far from being a few rotten
apples in the bunch. Predatory for-profit colleges have engaged
in a range of deceptions designed to increase enrollment and
student costs to drive more revenue for owners and
shareholders. Beyond these individual actions, how are you and
your Agency committing to increased oversight of these
institutions, and are there any ways in which we can shut these
folks down?
Secretary Cardona. Thank you for that. If I could
contextualize this for a second, in 2021, when I was named
Secretary, the President made it very clear to me that we have
a broken higher education system, and we have to fix it, that
the system that we had separated the haves and the have-nots,
and there were a lot of practices there that prevented students
from accessing higher education or finishing higher education.
So with that frame that there is a broken system, you know, we
did multiple strategies: borrower defense, which I will get to
in a second, debt discharge, increasing Pell, holding colleges
more accountable, holding higher education solutions more
accountable.
And with borrower defense, going after those predatory
schools that are preying on first-generation students, you
know, you have a shiny brochure and a great commercial, but the
product is not worth the paper it is written on. We have
students graduating $60,000, $70,000 in debt, only eligible for
jobs making under $30,000. That to me is unacceptable.
We have provided $22,000,000,000 in debt discharge for more
than 1.3 million borrowers. We increased enforcement of our
FSAs through our Office of FSA to go after these folks and
really cracked down on these behaviors. We have levied the
largest fine in Ed history against a school that lied to
students about the cost and what it cost to get a degree, and
we have terminated a school from the Title IV program as well.
So we are cracking down on them, not only to shut them down,
but to send a message across the country that you cannot prey
on our students and expect to be successful.
Ms. DeLauro. Mm-hmm. Thank you very much, and I want to
thank the chair for the indulgence with time. Thank you.
Mr. Aderholt. Yeah. Dr. Harris?
Mr. Harris. Thank you very much. Mr. Secretary, thanks for
being here.
Secretary Cardona. Thank you.
Mr. Harris. Let me follow up a little bit on this Title IX
discussion. Would you agree that Title IX was necessary to help
establish women's sports because women can't fairly be expected
to compete on biological male teams?
Secretary Cardona. Yeah. Especially after last week, I am
really proud of what I saw in women's sports, and----
Mr. Harris. Please no filibuster.
Secretary Cardona. Yeah.
Mr. Harris. Do you agree that that is why we have Title IX?
Secretary Cardona. Yes, and I am----
Mr. Harris. Okay. For input on the rule, are you seeking
input from HHS?
Secretary Cardona. Say that again, please?
Mr. Harris. Are you seeking input from HHS on this rule?
Secretary Cardona. We work closely with all departments
when we are making----
Mr. Harris. You are? So are you aware of what Secretary
Becerra testified in front of this committee 3 weeks ago when
he was talking about women's health and women's health
research, said, ``Women's feet are different from men, their
arches are different, but yet they have to wear for
professional athletic activity shoes that were designed for
men.'' Would you agree that women are physically different than
men?
Secretary Cardona. I see where you are going with this, and
I am not going to talk about----
Mr. Harris. No, no. Would you agree with Secretary Becerra
that there is evidence that women are physically different from
men?
Secretary Cardona. So, Dr. Harris, I know where you are
going with this. I would love to talk about how we can work
together to support----
Mr. Harris. Mr. Secretary, do you agree that biological
women are different from biological men physically?
Secretary Cardona. I think----
Mr. Harris. This is a simple question for an educator. You
are not going to answer. Okay. Let's go on to the next topic. I
believe that your proposed Title IX rule could obviously roll
back the protections of Title IX, and it is an affront to women
in this country. It is an absolute affront that you are even
considering a change to that rule given the Secretary of HHS'
testimony in front of this committee 3 weeks ago. Now let's
move on.
Charter school grants, and your reason for decreasing it,
one of the reasons is so that you would prohibit program funds
going to schools operated by for-profit entities. So if a for-
profit entity demonstrates that it can educate a child better
than the failing Baltimore City Public School System, for
instance, where 5 percent of students are actually proficient
at something when they are done, you don't think the Federal
Government should support a for-profit entity that has evidence
that they can deliver a better product?
Secretary Cardona. I recently visited a charter school that
provided outstanding education, and throughout the course of my
career, even before Secretary of Education, I have supported
high-performing charter schools.
Mr. Harris. So if they are high performing and they are
for-profit, what your budget request suggests is that you are
unwilling to have the Department support them, a for-profit,
highly-performing charter school.
Secretary Cardona. I am----
Mr. Harris. Am I reading this wrong because it says
``prohibit program funds to charter school operated by for-
profit entities.'' Am I reading that right? I mean, unlike
Baltimore City School children, I actually have reading
proficiency. Is this correct? Is this what your Department
wrote?
Secretary Cardona. Sir, I think, you know, to respond to
that comment, if you support our budget, we can provide enough
Title I to districts to help all students read, which is why I
am here today.
Mr. Harris. It says you want to prohibit them, for-profit
entities, even if they are highly performing. Is that correct?
Secretary Cardona. I am a big believer in public charter
schools, and, no, sir, I do not believe public dollars should
go to private institutions.
Secretary Cardona. Even highly performing. See, the problem
in my district is I may not have a public school entity that
actually can set up a highly-performing charter school, but a
for-profit entity might be able to move in there. So the
districts that really don't have the infrastructure to set
these up, they are the ones you are going to punish.
Interesting. Okay.
Last thing I want to talk about is student nutrition, and
you are an educator. You are aware, and I am going to ask to
enter this into a record, a study entitled, ``A Four-Day
Western Style Dietary Intervention Causes Reduction in
Hippocampal-Dependent Learning and Memory and Interoceptive
Sensitivity.' A carefully-done study out of Australia suggests
that a diet high in added sugar and saturated fat actually
interferes with learning and memory.''
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Harris. Now, given the science behind this, and we will
share this with your office to review, don't you think it is
about time that we actually limit the government paying for
sugary beverages under the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance
Program so that we can actually help students learn better
given the science behind it?
Secretary Cardona. Thank you. Thank you for that, and I
look forward to receiving that. Dr. Harris, I look forward to
working with you on the things that we have common ground,
including helping those schools in your districts that you say
are not helping students. And nutrition, I agree with you. We
have to make sure our students are healthy, so I look forward
to working with you in the future. Thank you.
Mr. Harris. Thank you very much, Mr. Secretary. I yield
back.
Mr. Aderholt. Mr. Pocan.
Mr. Pocan. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Sorry about that.
Making a mess here. Thank you, Mr. Secretary, for being here.
Congress established the Pell Grant as the main investment
in college affordability for low- and middle-income students,
but today, the Pell Grant has the lowest purchasing power in
more than its 50-year history. We have seen rising pressure on
Pell funding in recent years due to increases in the maximum
award, more people returning to college, and more students
becoming eligible. Recent analysis from the Committee for a
Responsible Federal Budget found that without significantly
increased funding, smaller awards, tighter eligibility, or some
combination of the above, the Pell Reserves could be exhausted
by 2026, possibly sooner. Can you just discuss the resources
that will be required to double the maximum Pell Grant by 2029
and maintain the Pell Grant solvency without cutting award
size, rolling back recent expansions like the year-round Pell,
or narrowing grant eligibility.
Secretary Cardona. Thank you. Pell really is a lifeline for
so many in our country. There are students whose reliance on
Pell will determine whether or not they have access to chasing
their dream and filling out their potential, and I believe,
Congressman Pocan, that we are not meeting our country's
potential because we have a system that is broken, as I said
before. Increasing Pell, supporting Pell is a big part of that.
It really is. When we talk about leveling the playing field and
making sure that education is the great equalizer, the Pell
Grant is a huge lever for them. In 1979, it covered 80 percent
of the cost of attending a 4-year college. Let that sink in.
Eighty percent was covered by Pell. Today, that number is about
31 percent.
So number one, it is not keeping up, but the President's
increase would bring it up to $8,145, which is an increase of
$750 per student per year. To me, increases are going to be
needed in order to ensure solvency, so that is an ask that we
have. I can tell you every year, it is more and more important,
and while we are going to work on accountability and improving
the return on investment in higher education because that is
part of the broken system, we recognize that without supporting
Pell, the increase in Pell, we are basically just exacerbating
gaps in our country that exists now.
Mr. Pocan. Well, thank you, and as a Pell recipient myself,
you know, I wouldn't probably have been able to go to a public
even university, much less some other universities without that
help. So I am glad that we are doing the effort to double Pell
Grants, so thank you for that. And also, just because of time,
thanks for the new initiatives that you all are proposing, the
President announced in my district on Monday, again, to help
people who are repaying loans. I think having people
automatically fall into some of the programs rather than having
to apply is extremely efficient in going after those predatory
colleges that took advantage of people.
Your fiscal year 2025 budget requests a $22,000,000
increase for the Office of Civil Rights to better respond to
rising discrimination complaints. In your testimony, you
highlighted antisemitism and anti-Arab discrimination as key
areas of concern, and I agree. I also want to make sure we are
paying close attention to the rising threats to the LGBTQI+
students in prioritizing their rights and protections as well.
A recent Washington Post analysis found that in States with
anti-LGBTQ laws, the number of hate crimes targeting those
students in K to 12 schools has more than quadrupled, while
advocates report that calls to the LGBTQ youth crisis hotlines
have exploded.
Will you commit to ensuring that your efforts to address
discrimination in schools will also prioritize rising threats
to LGBTQI+ students, and do you believe the additional funds
you have requested for OCR will be sufficient to meet this
growing need?
Secretary Cardona. Thank you for that question, and I
wholeheartedly agree with you that there has been an increase
in threats and exclusionary behaviors for students who are
LGBTQ. And I need those students to hear directly from me that
they should come as they are, and they should feel as welcome
as the next student in their school. They should feel a sense
of belonging, a sense of being a part of something bigger than
them in order for them to reach their potential. Again, ``all''
means all. We need to stand up for the students who are being
marginalized.
Look, we are asking for a $22,000,000 increase. Ninety
percent of this will go directly towards investigations. And
let me tell you, since 2009, our complaints to the Office for
civil rights have tripled while we have lost 58 people due to
budgets. So that tells you the issue that we are dealing with
here. All students deserve dignity and respect, and the office
for Civil Rights is ready. The budget proposal that we have
here will really help us move forward, not only with our
students who are LGBTQ, but also the rise in antisemitism and
the rise in anti-Arab and anti-Muslim sentiment that we are
seeing as well.
Mr. Pocan. And thank you for that, and, you know, just as
rising rhetoric even in the halls of Congress on this issue, I
think the reality I just want people to remember is, kids are
getting not just beat up and threatened, but suicides are
rising among youth. And it is just really important we all keep
that in mind when we talk about these issues. Thank you. I
yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Aderholt. Ms. Letlow.
Ms. Letlow. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you, Mr.
Secretary, for being here with us today. Would you agree that
FAFSA is one of the most important documents that a student
fills out when trying to determine their college path?
Secretary Cardona. Absolutely. As a parent, I can tell you
I have experienced the old system and the new system, and I do
believe FAFSA is a very important document that students fill
out.
Ms. Letlow. Right, and that leads me to my second question.
As a parent----
Secretary Cardona. Yeah.
Ms. Letlow [continuing]. You mentioned your son and
daughter. As you are planning for your child, you are very
curious about what financial aid will be available for your
child. So you would think it would be important for parents as
well?
Secretary Cardona. Absolutely.
Ms. Letlow. Okay. As a former higher education
administrator myself, I know how important it is that we
receive that FAFSA data in a timely manner. So you would also
agree that for higher education administrators, as they are
planning how many sections they are going to have, how many
professors are needed for each section, that that also would be
very important for them as well.
Secretary Cardona. Absolutely. I talk to financial aid
administrators daily. I spoke to one in person yesterday, and I
understand the situation that they are in, and we are working
with them to make sure we can support them.
Ms. Letlow. Sure. So you know where I am going with this.
It is no secret that the rollout of the new FAFSA has been an
absolute disaster: multiple delays, technical issues, long
processing times, and now incorrect data supplied to
universities, so my question begins with this. At what point
did you realize there were going to be some real problems
getting the FAFSA rolled out on time, and when did you know the
Department was not going to meet the traditional FAFSA
deadlines?
Secretary Cardona. Thank you. Look, I understand the
challenges our students, our families, our universities,
financial aid administrators are facing. There is nothing more
important right now at the Department of Education. We are
working on this around the clock because we want to make sure
our students have information that they need to make informed
decisions. And let me tell you, Congresswoman, 30 years ago
when I was 17 and I was going to fill out the FAFSA, I knew the
burden that it would put on my parents.
Ms. Letlow. Right.
Secretary Cardona. And it was too much.
Ms. Letlow. Yeah.
Secretary Cardona. I never filled it out.
Ms. Letlow. Yeah.
Secretary Cardona. We need to move forward to a better
system----
Ms. Letlow. Right.
Secretary Cardona [continuing]. But we need to do it in a
way that gives the students the information in a timely way.
Ms. Letlow. Sure. Sure. So it is my understanding that the
FSA has around 1,400 career staff known as FTEs. I read on your
website that the office oversee or handles the Federal student
loan programs, including the FAFSA, student loan repayment, and
student loan forgiveness. Is that correct, 1,400?
Secretary Cardona. I can verify that with you, but that
sounds about right.
Ms. Letlow. Great. Of those 1,400 employees, how many focus
on FAFSA implementation, and how many of those FTEs have been
focusing on the $144,000,000,000 of student loan forgiveness,
which your Department has rolled out over several tranches?
Secretary Cardona. Mm-hmm. So I can get more specific
information to you because you are asking very specific, the
number of employees. But I can tell you the FSA office is
responsible for also bringing 28,000,000 people back into
repayment. We changed contracts to make the process better for
students, so we are moving contracts for us to oversee those
programs in addition to FAFSA. I don't want you to think that
they are not doing FAFSA because they are working on something
else. FAFSA has been a priority since day one when we got into
these positions, and it will continue to be a priority until we
deliver for these students.
Ms. Letlow. It is my understanding that it has been an
absolute nightmare. I hear from university administrators all
the time. This isn't a partisan issue.
Secretary Cardona. Right.
Ms. Letlow. This is something that is affecting higher
education as a whole. It is affecting parents, students, and at
a time when I hear from my constituents, industry leaders, that
we are facing one of the worst workforce shortages in history,
that we shouldn't be creating a deterrent for our students to
go into higher education so that we can answer that workforce
shortage that we have. And so I am concerned that you didn't
pull employees away from working on loan repayment for people
who have already gone to college. At what point did you start
prioritizing those people who have already finished their
college degree from making sure that we can get a steady
workforce prioritizing students to go into college?
[Clerk's note.--Later corrected to ``loan forgiveness'']
Secretary Cardona. As I said earlier, you know, it is not
either/or. We have been working on FAFSA since we have got here
to the Department, and I agree with you. This system is over 40
years old, and it needs overhaul. We expect over 650,000 more
students to be eligible for Federal aid, which is great for our
workforce, great for our country. We expect 1,700,000 more
students to get top aid, okay?
Ms. Letlow. Mm-hmm.
Secretary Cardona. A total of $7,100,000 students getting
aid with this new system, and because it is 20 minutes, we
expect the completion rates in this country to go up. We have
been satisfied or we have normalized 60-percent completion
rates, 70 percent. We have to do better for our students, and
this better FAFSA will get us there, but I do empathize with
the challenges and the frustrations that folks are feeling. We
need to do better, and we are going to get better. And I
encourage students who are listening to go to StudentAid.gov
and fill it out. You fill it out today, by Friday, this
information will be in the schools.
Ms. Letlow. I am happy to hear that. I hope this debacle
never happens again. I hope that you will have a plan in place.
The American people want to see you focused on getting students
into the classroom, not repaying loans for people who have
already been there.
[Clerk's note.--Later corrected to ``forgiving loans'']
Secretary Cardona. Thank you.
Ms. Letlow. Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Aderholt. Ms. Frankel.
Ms. Frankel. Thank you. First of all, I want to just
welcome those who are advocating for literacy and justice.
Thank you very much for being here.
So I heard just a quick response to a remark by one of my
esteemed colleagues about what is an affront to the women of
this country. Respectfully, I do not believe it is the size of
the feet of boys and girls. I didn't quite understand that, but
I will tell you what is an affront. An affront is the
Republican banning and restricting abortion all over this
country. That is what the affront is. And a forced pregnancy on
a 12-year-old or a 15-year-old, I respectfully suggest will
greatly interfere with their education and their future, but I
will move on, Mr. Secretary.
I want to talk some good news first. Did everybody watch
the women's NCAA basketball finals? Hooray to the women
athletes, had over 18,000,000 viewers watching, 4,000,000 more
than the men. Sorry. Sorry about that. [Laughter.]
Ms. Frankel. The most viewers for any basketball ever on
ESPN, including the NBA, and it is predicted that this year,
women's sports revenues will pass $1,000,000,000, so that is
really the good news. But there is some not so good news, which
is that the NCAA continue to offer more athletic opportunities
to men than to women in a very, very large way. So I am
wondering what, if anything, your Department is doing to make
sure female athletes, including athletes of color, which also
seem to be on getting the short end of the stick, receive the
same investment as the male athletes.
Secretary Cardona. Thank you for that, and I did reflect on
the NCAA tournament and the amazing work of, you know, so many
of those teams as a byproduct of the Title IX fight that has
been happening in this country for many, many years, but as you
pointed out, there is still so much to go. We still shouldn't
be satisfied. The contracts for viewership that the women got
was much less than the men, yet the results, as you pointed
out----
Ms. Frankel. Yeah.
Secretary Cardona [continuing]. Were far greater, and I
think that is a sign of where we are going, but we have a lot
of work to do. We are working really hard in the Office for
Civil Rights to move forward with the Title IX regulations. As
you know, this is an important topic to so many people across
the country. We received over 240,000 comments that we review
carefully in order to make the decision, and we are committed
to ensuring that the Title IX regulations are fair, responsive,
and effective. And while I can't speak specifically to the
content of that because it is still not final, I will tell you
that we recognize that while we have made some progress in this
country, we still have a ways to go.
Ms. Frankel. Thank you for that. You know, I would
appreciate maybe if you have a plan of action on this specific
issue, I would love to see it.
Secretary Cardona. Okay.
Ms. Frankel. I think a lot of people would be interested in
that. And my colleague here, Mr. Pocan, raised the issue of
antisemitism on the college campuses as well as other
discrimination, and we know there is something like 75 percent
increase in antisemitism on the college campus. This is very
alarming, very unacceptable. Students can't learn if they don't
feel safe.
Secretary Cardona. Mm-hmm.
Ms. Frankel. And I know that you are taking some actions,
and I would like to know how your budget request affects your
work, and what is the shortfall in terms of enforcement? Is it
the dollars?
Secretary Cardona. Right? Well, yes. I mean, as I said
before, we are down 58 people, despite having 3 times as many
cases since 2009, and we are talking investigators, right? So
the budget proposal will bring on 86 new staff members, 90
percent of whom would work on investigations, but let me just
contextualize. Since October 7th, we have 134 open cases, and
that was updated this morning. It was 128 last week. One
hundred thirty-four open cases----
Ms. Frankel. Excuse me. Open cases where? Are these on
college campuses?
Secretary Cardona. Under shared ancestry.
Ms. Frankel. Oh, shared ancestry.
Secretary Cardona. Yeah. Right. So that goes to show the
volume. We have opened many more from the last administration.
I think they opened 27. So it goes to show the demand that
there is for investigations. Last year, we were not able to
increase funding for OCR, and we are concerned that if we don't
have funding this year, getting to those investigations, and
they are thorough investigations. Oftentimes we will
investigate one thing, and something else will come up during
that investigation. So it is critical that we have funding for
the Office for Civil Rights to make sure that our
investigations are thorough and quick.
Ms. Frankel. Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Aderholt. Mr. Moolenaar.
Mr. Moolenaar. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and, Mr. Secretary,
thank you for being here today.
Secretary Cardona. Thank you.
Mr. Moolenaar. I want to follow up on Representative
Letlow's questions with the concern that this problem with
FAFSA. I am wondering if resources were diverted from the
Department, people who could have been implementing FAFSA
working on, you know, the cancellation of $144,000,000,000 in
Federal student loans. Can you tell me how many people were
working on the canceling student loans and what resources were
used in that process?
Secretary Cardona. Sure. So the way it works at the
Department of Education, we have the Office of the
Undersecretary that is working on helping develop policies to
provide debt relief to millions of Americans who are really at
risk of default or having issues. So that is the process where
we develop, whether it is through rulemaking or through
different proposals. The implementation of those when it comes
to the student accounts goes through the Federal student aid
offices. So it is not that we are taking employees from the
Federal Student Aid Office to sit at OUS to work on policies.
That is not how it works. There are, let's say, 28,000,000
people that have to go back into repayment. They have to go
into repayment either way. If they have debt discharge, there
are changes to their accounts----
Mr. Moolenaar. Mm-hmm.
Secretary Cardona [continuing]. That lead to the debt
discharge. So there is no strategy where we are taking folks
from one building and saying, go to this building to work on
this strategy that we have to fix the problem.
Mr. Moolenaar. But I would assume implementing, you know,
$144,000,000,000, you know, canceling that debt would require
resources and focus that would take people maybe who could have
been working on FAFSA and improving that situation. Do you not
see that or?
Secretary Cardona. Well, I think, you know,
operationalizing our policies falls under FSA regardless of
what the policies are.
Mr. Moolenaar. Mm-hmm.
Secretary Cardona. So I think I would rather communicate it
that way, that we are working really hard on fixing a broken
system, which means providing a lifeline to millions of
Americans who right now are underwater and need help.
Mr. Moolenaar. Okay. Could I----
Secretary Cardona. So FSA is the body that is implementing
the decisions that were being made in other places.
Mr. Moolenaar. Okay. In my district, I hear from parents
who paid for their children's education and feel that it is
unjust to say, okay, some people are having their loans
forgiven, but they had to pay everything, people who went into
the skilled trades who didn't take out student debt and made
that decision, and they are saying, now I have to subsidize
people who chose to take on student debt going to college. I
hear from students who, you know, work part time or took time,
you know, in their career and then went back to school, they
aren't getting their student loans. Do you see the fundamental
injustice in how this administration has, you know, picked
winners and losers in this process?
Secretary Cardona. Thank you for that question,
Congressman, and I have met with people across the country who
have shared different perspectives and listened to them
thoroughly. I think my response to that is that messaging makes
sense if we are protecting the status quo. We have a very
broken higher education system, and as a former school
principal who has spoken to students who said, I can't go to
college, that is too expensive for me. At 11 years old? This
kid who is one of the smartest kids in my school, in front of
his father, normalizing, I am not going to college.
Mr. Moolenaar. Well----
Secretary Cardona. We have to fix the system, sir.
Mr. Moolenaar. What you are doing is subsidizing a broken
system, right?
Secretary Cardona. So you could make the same case----
Mr. Moolenaar. And you are creating incentives for people
not to do what the families that saved, what the people who
made decisions----
Secretary Cardona. Right.
Mr. Moolenaar [continuing]. Going into the skilled trades.
You are incentivizing people to not pay back student loans and,
at the same time, penalizing and forcing people who did to
subsidize those who didn't.
Secretary Cardona. Sir, thank you for sharing that
perspective. I don't see it that way. I feel that the people
that received PPP loans were given support when they needed it
most to get back on their feet. We have over a million people
defaulting on loans, so we have a responsibility to fix it. And
I agree with you wholeheartedly on the career and technical
education tracks. We are doing more in this administration to
create pathways to trades to make sure that all the great work
of the Invest in America provisions, that we meet the moment,
so I agree with you on that, and I don't see it as unfair. I
see it as we are fixing something that is broken. We have
better repayment plans now, so we don't have to be in the
business of forgiving loans in the future. But we have an
inequity that we are leveling now to get to a future that has
greater accountability, higher Pell dollars, and making sure
that people can pay off their loans.
Mr. Moolenaar. Well, I just want you to know, I am hearing
from parents, I am hearing from students, I am hearing from
people who went on different tracks, that they feel like it is
fundamentally unfair, and I just want you to have that message.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Aderholt. Thank you, Mr. Moolenaar. Mrs. Watson-
Coleman.
Mrs. Watson-Coleman. Thank you very much. Thank you, Mr.
Secretary. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Secretary, I have been doing a lot of work around
mental health issues, from the very young all the way up to me.
[Laughter.]
Mrs. Watson-Coleman. And I stand firmly with the President
on doubling that number----
Voice. That took hours. [Laughter.]
Mrs. Watson-Coleman [continuing]. Number of mental health
professionals in our schools. Can you please explain to this
committee how the $216,000,000 for school safety national
activities and the new $25,000,000 investment in the fund for
the improvement of post-secondary education helps us reach that
goal?
Secretary Cardona. Mm-hmm. Well, prior to the pandemic, as
an educator, I would categorize our mental health supports in
schools as an emergency room model. We waited for the trauma to
happen, we waited for the student to have an outburst, and then
we approached it, and unfortunately, in many places in our
country, it became discipline. It is insufficient. We are
seeking to transform how we view accessing mental health in our
pre-K THROUGH 12 schools and our higher education institutions.
Those dollars are intended to develop proactive programming to
meet the needs of learners so they can be successful in a way
that is supportive.
You know, students are 6 times more likely to receive
mental health supports if it is offered in a school, compared
to if it wasn't offered in the school and they had to get it in
the community. So in addition to those dollars that you are
talking about, we are also proposing full service community
schools that connect with community partners and bring them
into the schools. Look, we have to fundamentally change how we
approach mental health supports in our schools. I believe this
is one of the most purple issues that we have, and it is an
opportunity for us not to go back to what it was before the
pandemic.
Those dollars that you made reference to will do that in
higher education because what I am seeing, Congresswoman, is
that the higher education institutions that focused on mental
health when reopening schools did a better job reopening
quickly and more safely, and kept their students greater.
Higher education institutions recognize that importance, and
they are moving forward in that, so those dollars are intended
to support their efforts.
Mrs. Watson-Coleman. I am glad to hear that. What kind of
guidance are you all actually giving to make sure that these
funds reach the underserved communities?
Secretary Cardona. Yeah. So, you know, in 2021, the
Department issued guidance on mental health in schools. And it
was shocking to me to learn that that was the first time mental
health guidance was provided from the Department of Education,
knowing that, you know, today we are in a youth mental health
crisis. So since then, there have been numerous other guidance
documents, technical assistance webinars, working specifically
with higher education institutions, talking about how to
support. For many institutions, they are developing smaller
programs to provide mental health supports.
So we are working with them, sharing best practices on our
website. We have resources. We have a Department whose focus is
to make sure that universities have that support, and we are
going to continue to do that. We recognize that this is an
opportunity that we have to really shift the narrative around
accessing mental health supports as we reduce the stigma that
has been so prevalent in the mental health space. We have a
responsibility to do better for our students, and we are taking
every advantage to work with them at the ground level.
Mrs. Watson-Coleman. Particularly in the underserved
communities.
Secretary Cardona. Absolutely.
Mrs. Watson-Coleman. I just want to add a comment. I want
to thank you, I want to thank the President for working around
as much as you can to provide as much student debt relief as he
can. I don't think anybody desires to take a loan out----
Secretary Cardona. Right.
Mrs. Watson-Coleman [continuing]. If he or she has the
financial capacity to pay for what it is that is before him or
her. And so I know that this has been a very hard road to hoe,
I should say, given what our colleagues on the other side of
the aisle and what our unfortunate wrongheaded courts have been
doing, and so I just want to say that you got a fan in me on
this issue. I think this is vitally important to our
communities that represent the need.
Secretary Cardona. Thank you.
Mrs. Watson-Coleman. And there is so much more to do. Thank
you. I yield back.
Mr. Aderholt. Mr. Ciscomani.
Mr. Ciscomani. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you,
Secretary Cardona, for coming before us today to talk about the
budget. You know, I have got several questions, but I want to
start off with the Charter School Program, and on that, in my
district alone, almost 17,000 students attend charter schools,
and over half of those students are minority students, and the
majority of those minority students are Hispanic.
Now, I understand you talked about increase in Title I
funding, but this program is still very much needed in my
community. My own kids attended charter schools for the first 5
years of their schooling, the older three. I have six, so I
have a lot of experience here. But given the popularity of the
program, why does your budget propose a $40,000,000 cut to the
CSP?
Secretary Cardona. Thank you, Congressman. You know, I have
seen examples of charter schools that do exceptional work,
public charter schools, and I visited E.L. Haynes recently, a
fantastic school. To be very frank with you, the demand hasn't
kept up, and I just want to remind folks, the charter school,
even with the proposed $40,000,000 cut there, the charter
school competitive grant is still the largest pre-K 12 grant
that we have at the Department of Education. The demand has
really diminished, so in keeping with the Fiscal Responsibility
Act, that is a concern that we have.
Mr. Ciscomani. Well, let me jump in here because, you know,
when you talk about the size of the budget, less than 1 percent
of the K through 12 Federal spending is on charter schools.
Secretary Cardona. Mm-hmm.
Mr. Ciscomani. So that is a very low number based on the
demand that I see in my district. Now, you talk about, you
know, the demand, so let me say this respectfully. You know,
from the meetings that I have with educators, with parents of
kids that my kids went to school with, it is evident to me that
the slow spending is not due to the lack of interest in
applying, but rather the burdensome regulations your Department
has put on this program. I have heard that from many people.
Like I said, educators, teachers, those that are trying to
start charter schools.
Secretary Cardona. Right.
Mr. Ciscomani. The regulations and just the burdensome toll
of people trying to start these schools is incredible. So
charter school leaders have told me that the wait times and the
red tape that exists when applying for the programs make many
give up on the application process entirely, and I have seen
that happen with people that I personally know. So rather than
suggesting a cut in the program, I would suggest you meet with
charter school leaders about their current difficulties they
are facing when applying to this program.
You mentioned you visited a school recently. From what I
saw in the reports, I think you have visited a couple of them,
but there are a lot of great examples out there, and my State
included. I would personally invite you to come to Arizona, and
I can show you some of the best charter schools that you will
see in the country that do this work, that are high performing,
that are working for our students, and let me tell you
something. In mostly all of them, there is a waiting list.
Secretary Cardona. Yeah.
Mr. Ciscomani. So I respectfully disagree with the fact
that there isn't a demand. There is actually more demand than
they are being able to be met with. And in the majority of the
charter schools, at least in my district, are in the K-8
section. There are very few high schools. So students, after
they go through a charter school life experience, then they are
left with very little options in high school. That is at least
the story in my district, so I want to push back on that a
little bit and say the demand is there. The demand is there,
but when you make it as hard as the Department has made it for
the charter schools to actually be erected and work and
function for our kids, again, let me say, in my district, the
vast majority of these kids being minority students and the
majority of that group are Hispanics, like my kids example,
that is a problem.
Secretary Cardona. I appreciate your passion. I could----
Mr. Ciscomani. I am very passionate.
Secretary Cardona. No, and I welcome an opportunity to
visit with you in Arizona. I think anytime we can show
bipartisan effort on supporting students, I welcome that. I
will tell you with this grant that I am speaking to
specifically, and I am going to ask my team to follow up with
you on sharing the demand, with regard to the notion of making
it difficult, look, we have increased accountability across the
board, all schools. We should not be satisfied in this country
with where our students are. We have to raise the bar, and that
means across the board we are increasing accountability because
that is what our students deserve.
Mr. Ciscomani. Well, let me, just because I am out of time
here, we need to increase accountability, of course. We need to
make sure that parents have the choice for their kids'
education, and that is what I am very passionate about. It is
choice, choice and education that parents should have. My
family moved to this country when I was 11 years old. We
immigrated here. The top reason why we came here was a better
job for my parents and a better education for the kids. That
was us. That is what we need to be protecting. That is what we
need to be fighting for. I admire your story and your
background and where you came from and where you are today. We
got to work together, like you said, on a bipartisan basis to
make sure that all students, regardless of their background,
can have a real shot at the American Dream, and that comes
through education. So I reiterate my invitation to Arizona. I
look forward to working with you and welcoming you there.
Secretary Cardona. Thank you.
Mr. Ciscomani. I yield back, sir. Thank you.
Mr. Aderholt. Ms. Lee.
Ms. Lee. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, thank you,
Ranking Member, and thank you, Mr. Secretary. Mr. Secretary, I
have been working very closely with HHS Secretary Beccera and
USDA Secretary Vilsack to address food and nutrition
insecurity. The President's budget provides over
$15,000,000,000 to allow more States and schools to leverage
participation in the Community Eligibility Program and provide
healthy and free school meals to additional 9,000,000 children.
Thank you very much. Can you provide me with just a bit more in
terms of the details of the coordination efforts between the
Department of Education, the Department of Health and Human
Services, and the U.S. Department of Agriculture regarding food
and nutrition insecurity in schools? I am really pleased that
the coordination is there----
Secretary Cardona. Yeah.
Ms. Lee [continuing]. But want to see how seamless this
coordination will be.
Secretary Cardona. Sure. Thank you, and let me just drill
it down a little bit, if I could. I come from a district that
has that benefit, right, the community benefit. And I remember
prior to this happening, we had so many different issues where,
you know, students were getting different meals because they
didn't pay for their lunch or the paperwork wasn't filled, you
know, in a district that has 75, 80 percent of the students
eligible for free or reduced lunch. So what it did to remove
the stigma--sometimes we don't talk about that here--what it
did to remove the stigma, make sure students had a healthy meal
and were able to function like every other student, what a
significant difference that made when that happened. And I
happened to be a school principal when that happened, so thank
you for that support and for the work on that.
Look, we recognize we cannot work in silos at the
Department of Education. When we talk about Medicaid
reimbursement to get mental health dollars, HHS and Department
of Education have to work together. School meals. Tom Vilsack
and I have had conversations. Our Departments have to work
together. When we are talking about career opportunities in the
trades and technical education, DOL, Energy, Commerce,
Transportation, we are connected at the hip. We meet regularly
as part of our structure at the Department of Education to make
sure that, you know, Larry is spending time with his
counterpart at the other agency if we are working on grants
together.
And we are thinking about it from the perspective of the
consumer, right? They don't need a Department of Education over
here with rules, Transportation over here with rules. So we
work really closely to make sure we are thinking about the user
experience, and the user in that case might be a school
district. It might be a State office. So it is just kind of how
we are designed to work together.
Ms. Lee. Good.
Secretary Cardona. And the President expects it.
Ms. Lee. Good. Good, good, good. You know, we talk about
intersectionality quite a bit.
Secretary Cardona. Yeah.
Ms. Lee. And I think that this is a good example of what
other agencies can do for our young people and adults in
general. Also, I want to thank you for working to address and
to eliminate the teacher shortage. Especially encouraged to see
the President's budget that includes more than $650,000,000 to
support a diverse and well-prepared pipeline of educators and
an increase in $15,000,000 for the Hawkins Centers of
Excellence Program. Although teachers shortages remain
disproportionately impacting students in underserved
communities, it is important to retain quality educators,
especially those that represent the community, and, you know,
this continues to be really challenging for many communities.
And so what are the plans to ensure that teacher diversity
is institutionalized and that teacher diversity is
representative of communities that they serve, well,
especially, you know, in underserved communities, but we have
to be intentional about that.
Secretary Cardona. Right. We have to be, and we can't keep
doing what we have done, or we are not going to ever catch up,
so thank you for that. You know, I always say our profession
should be as beautifully diverse as our country, and right now
it is not, and if we are not intentional, then we are not going
to make improvements there. So we are taking a lot of steps.
The Augustus Hawkins grant, you mentioned it. I was at Bowie
State recently, and I saw a program. They had 50 men of color
going into the teaching profession, being mentored by former
superintendents that are being there, giving their time to help
these young men become teachers. And so that was a recipient of
the Augustus Hawkins grant. We are asking----
Ms. Lee. Mr. Secretary, let me just mention, I was a
staffer----
Secretary Cardona. Were you?
Ms. Lee [continuing]. And an intern for Congressman Ron
Dellums and had a chance to get to know Congressman Gus Hawkins
very well. He would be very happy about this.
Secretary Cardona. It is just one of those things that just
felt fantastic because I know that community is going to be
better. So there are specific grants to that. We are really
shifting how we are thinking about this. We are at the doorstep
of another crisis if we don't think about educator shortages,
and I am proud to see that California is one of those States
that has an apprenticeship for teaching. The days of free
student teaching should be in our rearview mirror. No other
profession does that. And while teachers get paid, on average,
24 percent less than people with other similar degrees, we need
to make sure that we are creating a pipeline for teachers to
get into the program.
And then this is why, you know, when some people talk about
student debt relief as something negative, we are fixing a
bipartisan bill in 2007, the Public Service Loan Forgiveness
Program, to provide debt relief to educators because they chose
teaching, not to become rich, but to help their community, and
we are proud of the work that we are doing. I spoke to a
teacher of color Monday in New York City who took out a loan
for $30,000, and we know educators of color typically have to
take out loans for their whole amount. A $30,000 loan about 10
or 12 years ago, the interest is brought up to $60,000. So this
teacher benefited from debt relief and is benefiting from the
plans that the President has announced.
So for me, this is how we also help maintain teachers of
color in our profession. We have to make sure that we are
increasing salary, creating good working conditions, being
intentional about recruiting, and creating pathways and
apprenticeships. I believe we have good strategies. We just
have to fund them and support them across the country. Thank
you.
Ms. Lee. Thank you very much. Thank you, Mr. Secretary.
Mr. Aderholt. Mr. Fleischmann.
Mr. Fleischmann. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Good morning,
Secretary Cardona. Thank you for being before us today.
Mr. Secretary, it has been brought to my attention that the
Department is attempting to significantly alter a program that
allows college students to receive their educational materials
at below market rates and before the first day of class.
Additionally, since 2016, data from College Board has
demonstrated prices for educational materials for college
students has decreased by over 40 percent, which indicates to
me that these affordable access programs are working. My
understanding is that the Department will force these programs
to operate in an opt-in manner, which will likely decrease the
effectiveness of the programs. So my question, sir, has the
Department conducted any studies to determine if these programs
are sustainable under a proposed opt-in method and if the
current benefits to students would be preserved in an opt-in
system? If not, would you commit to doing so before
promulgating these regulations? I thank you.
Secretary Cardona. Thank you, Congressman, for raising that
and for sharing your perspective on that. We have spoken to
many college leaders and heard different perspectives on that.
We have heard from families as well, and I know we are in that
rulemaking process, which prevents me to go any deeper in that.
But I will go back to my team and see if there are any studies,
as you mentioned, that we have referenced, and I will have my
team follow up with you on that important issue. Thank you.
Mr. Fleischmann. Thank you, Mr. Secretary. Mr. Chairman, I
will yield back.
Mr. Aderholt. Mr. Hoyer.
Mr. Hoyer. I don't know that anybody wants to hear me, but
I will turn on the mike. Let me say, Mr. Secretary, I apologize
for being late. I had a speech to give that just conflicted
with this, and I was the one that had to give the speech, so I
wasn't here.
First of all, let me say that very much appreciate your
taking this responsibility. At the Federal level, it is
somewhat controversial, but, in my view, and I tell people
every place that I go, the most important people in any society
are its teachers. If we don't educate the young, we won't have
the kind of society that we want, so I think this is a primary
investment for all levels of government, Federal, State, and
local. While the primary is local, the State has a significant
impact in terms of funding, and the Federal a less direct, but
a significant role.
I was very pleased to see that you have put money in for
full-service community schools and, particularly, early
childhood schools. Oh, and by the way, congratulations for
visiting Bowie State University, which is in my district, as
you probably know.
Secretary Cardona. Right.
Mr. Hoyer. And it is a wonderful institution, badly
underfunded. Prior to the middle 60s and when we had
redistricting and the State Senate became more representative
is when we started to invest in Bowie State University, and now
it is an outstanding institution.
But back to the full-service schools. I think that early
childhood education is absolutely critical in terms of this
education continuum. We have some people wearing ``Literacy and
Justice for All'' shirts here. My wife, Judy Hoyer, was a
reading expert, but she was also a first grade teacher, and
then she was the administrator of early childhood education in
Prince's George County, one of the larger school systems in the
country, and she started an early childhood school.
I am going to take you to a Judy Center. I don't think you
have been to a Judy Center, but it will fall within the
category of this new program. I didn't talk to anybody about
this program. I didn't know about this program until I read my
book today, and I am glad to see that is done because it is
tough to get people who are not just passionate about being an
educator. My wife wanted to be an educator, and she told her
mother that at age 7, and she went to Towson State, which was
then a teacher's college. This is all to say that we need
investment in this area, and as we need investment, we need
accountability.
I mentioned this when Secretary Becerra was here because it
is in Health and Human Services. I think Head Start ought to be
in Department of Education. The expertise in 1965 when Head
Start was started was that it was not an educational program
because if kids were confronted with education, that might be
too much pressure on them at that young age. Well, we know that
was incorrect. In fact, out of the womb, children are sponges
and ready to learn. So I want to congratulate you on pursuing
this program and urge you to, as we pursue this program, pursue
accountability to make sure that it is working for kids. I
mentioned that with respect to Head Start to Secretary of HHS,
Mr. Beccera.
I have just asked the staff to give me, I want the
statistics, and this goes to one of the questions that was
asked on Pell Grants. I am a big supporter of Pell Grants. I
have been on this committee since 1983, but I also have a
concern about every time we increase Pell Grants, college
expenses go up 1-and-a-half times as much. I don't know how we
can deal with that, but I think we do need to deal with it, and
so I would urge you to do that. That is not a question.
Ms. Frankel, I understand, asked the question about
antisemitism. Antisemitism is a cancer on the international
global community now, increasing at a faster rate than any time
since World War II, and we need to be very vigilant,
particularly on college campuses. Young people need to be
educated, Mr. Secretary, on the background of the millennia of
discrimination and hate directed at the Jewish community.
Millenia. I got 2 seconds left, so I haven't asked you a
question, but I do want to raise those two issues, three
issues, in particular, that I would ask to direct you and your
staff to focus on, and I will follow up on all three.
Secretary Cardona. Thank you.
Mr. Hoyer. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Aderholt. Thank you, Ms. Hoyer. Mr. Clyde.
Mr. Clyde. Thank you, Chairman Aderholt, for holding this
hearing today.
In recent years, we have seen a drastic increase in radical
gender ideology being promoted and pushed by government
bureaucrats and educators through school curriculums. Pseudo
scientists are attempting to redefine gender to include in
individual's feelings rather than focus on their biological sex
at birth, and our Nation's top executive branch officials
cannot clearly define what a woman is. So, Mr. Secretary, I am
sure you remember that in our last hearing last year, I gave
you an opportunity to answer that question, and I will give you
a second chance. Can you define what a woman is?
Secretary Cardona. I will respond, Congressman Clyde, the
way I did last year. I am here to talk about the budget and how
to support the students in your district.
Mr. Clyde. Well, I think it is very important that you
determine that you know how to define a woman. As Ms. Frankel
mentioned over there, she wanted to be sure that women had
their fair share of funding. If you can't define what a woman
is, how in the world can you determine that they get their fair
share of funding? If you cannot understand and clearly define
what a woman is, how can you make rules that protect women's
rights? You can't. So I would ask you to please respect this
committee and the U.S. Congress by answering my question.
Secretary Cardona. I respect your role, I respect this
committee, and I said, I am here to talk about the budget, and
if you have a question about the budget, I would be happy to
respond.
Mr. Clyde. I am asking you a question, and you are refusing
to answer.
Secretary Cardona. Be happy to respond to questions about
the budget, which is why I am here.
Mr. Clyde. You are here to answer whatever questions I want
to ask of you, and this question directly correlates to the
budget.
Secretary Cardona. We are asking for a $22,000,000 increase
for the office for Civil Right so that we can----
Mr. Clyde. That is not my question. My question is, can you
define a woman?
Secretary Cardona. As I said earlier, I am not interested
in getting----
Mr. Clyde. All right. Okay. So you are not interested in
respecting the question of a member of Congress.
Secretary Cardona [continuing]. Personal content.
Mr. Clyde. All right. Your answer is cagey, evasive, and
reveals to me that you have an inability to serve and protect
the interest of young women, especially women athletes in this
country. Female athletes are having their safety and rights
violated by biological males competing in women's sports, and,
as a result, our Nation's women and young girls are suffering
the consequences. Yet despite the grave need for protections to
cover female athletes, the Department of Education is moving to
eradicate these protections by redefining gender in clear
contradiction to biology through its proposed Title IX
rulemaking.
Mr. Secretary, I hope you realize this proposed rule
unilaterally forces schools to allow biological males to
participate in women's athletics by threatening to withhold
Federal assistance from schools across the Nation, assistance
that is currently used to benefit all students, I might add. So
do you think a woman's safety is in jeopardy by allowing
biological males who claim to be women to compete in women's
sports?
Secretary Cardona. All students should feel welcome and
connected to our schools, and the protection of students is
something we take very seriously. We are, as you know, in a
rulemaking process for Title IX. I can't get into specifics on
what our proposal will be. I can tell you that we have had
hundreds of thousands of comments that we take very seriously,
comments that have different perspectives, which is why it is
really important that we listen and we read all those comments
before we respond with a rule.
Mr. Clyde. Okay. But you haven't answered my question. Do
you think women's safety is in jeopardy by allowing biological
males who claim to be women to compete in women's sports?
Secretary Cardona. I believe all students should be safe in
school and should be protected, and all students should be
welcome in our schools. Again, I see what you want----
Mr. Clyde. Okay. So you are not going to answer my
question.
Secretary Cardona. Could I finish my response, sir?
Mr. Clyde. No. I will tell you something. I am very
thankful----
Secretary Cardona. Could I finish my response?
Mr. Clyde. You are not answering my question. You are
filibustering. I am very thankful that the NAIA, the National
Association of Intercollegiate Athletics, has decided to only
allow biological female student athletes to participate in
female sports. The NAIA understands. They understand the safety
issue here. They understand that it protects women's
achievements. They understand the hard work of women needs to
be honored. The NAIA understands that they need to prevent the
stealing of future honor and accomplishments from women by
allowing biological men to take those honors and hard work that
women have worked years and years and years to accomplish, and
yet it is not happening. So do you think that biological males
who claim to be women should be allowed to use women's locker
rooms?
Secretary Cardona. We are in the Title IX regulations
process, and you know, sir, that I cannot speak premature to
the rules being put out.
Mr. Clyde. I am asking your opinion. I am not asking----
Secretary Cardona. I can tell you, as an educator and as a
father, I want to make sure all students in schools feel
welcome, seen, and protected. I can answer that. As a lifelong
educator, that is something that I fought for, and that is what
I am fighting for as Secretary of Education.
Mr. Clyde. I yield back.
Mr. Aderholt. Mr. Edwards.
Mr. Edwards. Thank you, Mr. Chair. Dr. Cardona, thanks for
being with us this afternoon.
Let's begin with this. How many public schools, let's say,
K through 12, have you visited in the last 12 months, just
roughly?
Secretary Cardona. In the last 12 months?
Mr. Edwards. Public K through 12 schools.
Secretary Cardona. I couldn't give you an exact number, but
dozens.
Mr. Edwards. Ballpark.
Secretary Cardona. I would say dozens. I would say dozens
at least, yeah.
Mr. Edwards. What about charter schools that serve K
through 12 students? How many have you----
Secretary Cardona. I can tell you I recently visited one.
Some of the other schools that I visited might have been
charters. I couldn't tell you off the top of my head.
Mr. Edwards. Thank you for that honest answer. I would like
to continue the conversation my friend, Mr. Ciscomani, began a
while ago on charter schools because your response really
piqued my interest in a number of ways. What are your views,
what are your opinions of charter schools and the role that
they play in preparing for young people for life and working
careers today?
Secretary Cardona. Sure. Thank you for the opportunity to
respond to that. You know, not only in this role, but in
previous roles as an educational leader, I have always valued
parents' ability to choose where they want their children to
attend, whether it is a local public school, a technical
school, a charter school, or even a private school. I myself
chose to go to a technical high school. I didn't go to my
neighborhood school, so I am a believer in choice, student
choice and in parent choice. I am a believer in public charter
schools being an option for families who choose to not attend a
local school or send their children to a school that might have
a specific focus, whether that is, you know, STEM or a
different area that is of interest to students similar to
magnet schools, so I have always been fine with that.
What I am not in favor of is public education dollars being
used to fund private tuitions for schools that are often non-
inclusive as much as the community needs it. So that is what I
am really concerned about, and that is what I am not in favor
of.
Mr. Edwards. You had said while we recognize there has been
a proposed $40,000,000 cut----
Secretary Cardona. Mm-hmm.
Mr. Edwards [continuing]. To the charter school program,
and during a Department of Education briefing on the
President's budget, your staff stated that the cut was due to a
lack of interest.
Secretary Cardona. That is right.
Mr. Edwards. Can you help me better understand the basis in
that statement?
Secretary Cardona. Sure.
Mr. Edwards. Are there any surveys, any data that you are
pointing to that says there is a lack of interest? And the
reason I ask that is because I am not sensing that from my
district. In fact, folks in my district seem to be more
interested in more choices for educating their children.
Secretary Cardona. Sure. Sure. Thank you, and I would be
happy to have my staff follow up with yours to give you the
specifics, but I will tell you that the demand has been
decreasing for this competitive grant. I can't say that in some
pockets of our country, there is not a greater demand for
charter schools. That is not what I am saying here. What I am
saying is for this grant, $400,000,000 grant, there is less
demand for it. We anticipate that we are going to still be able
to make the same number of awards as previous years, and what I
have learned from my staff who looked into this is that
oftentimes we are frontloading dollars.
Mr. Edwards. And so you have answered my question.
Secretary Cardona. Okay.
Mr. Edwards. I am sorry.
Secretary Cardona. Sure.
Mr. Edwards. I am going to run out of time, and there is
more I would like to do here. So there has not been as many
requests is what I hear. Have you gone as deep to find out why
there have not been as many requests?
Secretary Cardona. Again, I can have more information sent
to you from staff who do work with grantees and who get
feedback from grantees because that is a critical part of what
we do when we are putting out grants.
Mr. Edwards. So let me just take my last minute to share a
couple thoughts. I see, I hear there is a greater demand for
charter schools for a number of reasons.
Secretary Cardona. Mm-hmm.
Mr. Edwards. And I would suggest, and I am anxious to see
the data that you are going to provide to this committee, there
may be a lot of other reasons--
Secretary Cardona. Mm-hmm.
Mr. Edwards [continuing]. That there is not a request for
as many grants. One is 107-page application, which I think
speaks to Mr. Ciscomani's point about regulation and the
difficulty. I would also suggest that maybe there are income
requirements that are preventing people for applying for
grants. In some cases, I know they have been too low, and in
some cases I know that they have been too high, one of the
reasons that I know that folks do not apply for charter schools
or that they cannot receive grants of substantial form to send
their children to a charter school. Maybe a particular grant
that they can receive in a State would offer a small amount,
that they can't afford the greater amount.
And I will just summarize by saying the folks in my
district very strongly believe in charter schools and the niche
that they provide, and that they had rather have choices for
their education for a sundry of reasons. So thank you, Mr.
Chair. I yield.
Secretary Cardona. Thank you.
Mr. Edwards. Thank you, Mr. Edwards. Mr. Secretary, you are
very popular, so we are going to go ahead and ask a few more
questions. What we will do, we will do a second round, but we
will do it limited to 3 minutes. Because I know some members
have a few follow-up questions, I want to go forward, and so I
will kick off the first question.
Last summer, of course, you remember the Supreme Court
struck down the President's one-time student loan cancellation
program, and after more than a 3-year pause, borrowers started
loan repayment back last fall.
Secretary Cardona. Mm-hmm.
Mr. Edwards. Can you tell us what is the share of borrowers
now repaying their student loans?
Secretary Cardona. I do recall having that information
reported to me soon after we got back, and I think the number,
I want to say the 60 percent compared to what it was before. It
was maybe 10 or 15 points below, but I don't want to misspeak,
so what I will do, Chairman, is have that information sent to
you today.
Mr. Aderholt. So how does that compare to before the pause?
Secretary Cardona. Well, we were dealing with over a
million defaults before, and we saw progress ramping up. We did
implement many programs, sir, to help borrowers who are
struggling to make repayment, the Fresh Start Program. So there
were a lot of new things that we put in place to help borrowers
who are struggling get back on, so I will have my team reach
out to and follow up.
Mr. Aderholt. Okay.
Mr. Aderholt. And as I mentioned, the Department has touted
that the Biden administration has found ways to cancel
$144,000,000,000 in student loans. The Department is also
pursuing debt cancellation through a negotiated rulemaking
process that has created a 1-year ``transition period'' during
which borrowers won't face consequences, like native credit
reporting, if they don't make repayments. It seems like a lot
of mixed messages that are being sent. What exactly is the
Department communicating to borrowers about paying back their
loans?
Secretary Cardona. Yeah, thank you for that, and, you know,
that 1-year where we weren't sending information to crediting
agencies, we heard from many, many borrowers who were
struggling to make that first payment and get back on after
having about 3 years of pause. So we wanted to make sure that
we get them back on their feet so they are successful so we
limit the number of defaults because that is never good for
them or the local economy.
So I think in terms of mixed messaging, we wanted to make
sure that they come on smoothly. For many of these folks, this
was the first time they were ever going to make a payment
because it was paused after they graduated. So, you know, we
feel that the steps that we took to ease them back on,
communicate more effectively, communicate more regularly, find
those folks who we didn't hear from. FSA did a lot of work to
try to make that process as smooth as possible so we could
reduce the number of defaults that our borrowers were facing.
Mr. Aderholt. Well, wouldn't you think that the
Department's repeated promises of debt cancellation affect a
borrower's interest in repaying their loans as well as decision
of current students about how much to borrow?
Secretary Cardona. No, that is a fair question, and to be
very frank, part of our communication was you have to restart
payments, and these are some things that we are doing to fix a
broken system. You may be a part of that, you may not, but it
doesn't negate the need to go back to repayment. We were very
careful with our messaging to prevent what you are referring
to.
Mr. Aderholt. Thank you.
Secretary Cardona. Thank you.
Mr. Aderholt. Ms. DeLauro.
Ms. DeLauro. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Let me just see if I
can get in two questions, one on learning loss. The committee,
the Democrats worked with the President and with you,
$130,000,000,000 to K through 12 schools in the American Rescue
Plan, 20 percent to deal with learning loss. Recovering from
the pandemic, there has been a struggle. Recovery is underway.
Between Spring of 2022-2023 students nationwide recovered one-
third of their learning loss in math, one-quarter of their
losses in reading. We need to continue on, but the strategy is
ensuring States and districts focus like a laser on evidence-
based responses to learning loss. One question. Can you
describe how your Department is driving this important work
across the country dealing with learning loss?
In terms of the Public Service Loan Forgiveness Program, we
know that prior to the Biden administration, the program was
broken. Seven thousand borrowers have never received
forgiveness. This deals with teacher shortage. The question is
there have been improvements made. Sixty-two-and-a-half-billion
in student debt has been canceled for 871,000 borrowers. The
improvements to the PSLF have been essential in helping us to
retain a top-notch public servants. How is your Department
streamlining the experience for borrowers participating in
PSLF?
Secretary Cardona. Thank you. So look, we should be just as
concerned about our literacy rates, our math rates as we were,
you know, when the pandemic hit.
Ms. DeLauro. Right. Right.
Secretary Cardona. We are seeing recovery with the American
Rescue Plan. We have recovered a third of the pandemic-era
learning loss in math, a quarter in reading. Math, twice as
much growth last year; reading, 5 times as much growth. I am
not proud of where we are, but I just want to paint the picture
that the American Rescue Plan dollars focused money on
achievement gaps is critical. The gains for black students from
2022 to 2023 were greater than any year since 2009, okay? We
need to continue to invest in the strategies that work, and we
are going to continue pushing Title I. That is why we are
pushing that.
Moving to PSLF. Look, the President announced Monday, we
are talking about teachers, nurses, veterans, police officers,
firefighters, who are choosing to go into public service, and
talk about barriers? We need to remove barriers. My mentality
is we should be going to them telling them, you worked for 10
years, you have paid your loans for 10 years, you are done.
These are public servants that choose to make the community
better. So we are trying to streamline the process that way.
But as you noted, $62,000,000,000 in debt relief. It went
from 7,000 people in the 4 years in the last administration to
over 840,000 in 3 years with us. We are committed to fixing a
broken system. PSLF is a good example of that.
Ms. DeLauro. Look forward to working with you offline on
what the progress is on learning loss because I think that is
information----
Secretary Cardona. Absolutely.
Ms. DeLauro [continuing]. That needs to get out and how
successful the PSLF Program has been.
Secretary Cardona. Absolutely.
Ms. DeLauro. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Aderholt. Dr. Harris.
Mr. Harris. Thank you very much. Just two quick things.
First of all, just to follow up on the Title IX, you know, the
NAIA just announced this policy that is not going to allow
males to participate in female sports, biological males
participate in female sports. I mean, I think there are over
200 NAIA colleges. Your Title IX rule doesn't in any way
threaten their ability to cooperate with Federal funding, would
it?
Secretary Cardona. So thank you for that question.
Congressman Clyde mentioned that earlier as well. You know, as
I said before, I am not sure if I said it when you were asking
questions, but we are in the regulation process, which we have
just for athletics alone, over 150,000 comments that we are
going to review carefully before we come up with a proposed
rule. So for me to be speaking about on what impact it would
have on the recent rule you made reference to would be
premature.
Mr. Harris. Yeah. But you are telling me the Department, I
mean, that is within the range of consideration to basically
educationally defund the Federal-level institutions that
wouldn't cooperate with your mandate to allow men to
participate in women's sports? I mean, that is within the range
of something you are considering, or that is off the table?
Secretary Cardona. Is your question whether the
announcement that you made reference to this week----
Mr. Harris. Yes.
Secretary Cardona [continuing]. Would impact how our Title
IX regulations would roll out?
Mr. Harris. No, could that potentially threaten their
ability to participate in Federal education funding----
Secretary Cardona. Oh.
Mr. Harris [continuing]. Such as student loans, Pell
Grants, things like that?
Secretary Cardona. I see what you are saying. So again, as
I said earlier, you know, we are committed to moving quickly on
our Title IX regulation. For me to talk about it before it is
out would be premature, and I wouldn't want to do a disservice
to the thorough work that we have to do to read through the
comments and consider them before making a decision.
Mr. Harris. Sure. I would just hope that the administration
doesn't defund hundreds of colleges because they think that
biological men shouldn't participate in sports with biological
women. I mean, I just hope that, but I am only one of 150,000
comments, I guess. Serious subject. Many universities,
including University of Maryland, is considering a BDS sanction
policy. Is the Department willing to stand up for our allies in
Israel and limit educational funding to those universities that
implement BDS sanctions?
Secretary Cardona. You know, we take antisemitism, anti-
Arab, anti-Muslim comments very seriously. We take what is
happening on our college campuses very seriously, which is why
since October 7th, we have done more than any other
administration, not only to provide open investigations of
these issues or investigations from the Office of Civil Rights,
but we have done a lot to make resources available to college
leaders, to families, ensuring that freedom of speech and
safety can coexist on college campuses.
Mr. Harris. Do you consider BDS policies to be antisemitic?
Secretary Cardona. Without looking at a BDS policy in front
of me, I don't want to make a comment on something that I
haven't reviewed.
Mr. Harris. Thank you very much. I yield back.
Mr. Aderholt. Ms. Frankel.
Ms. Frankel. Thank you. Well, with all due respect to my
colleagues' concern about the men and the women's sports, which
I think is probably not a really big issue in this country, but
here's something that you should be concerned about: the rights
of women and girls to have reproductive freedom. I am going to
say it again. Since the overturning of Roe v. Wade, one-third
of women in this country of reproductive age have lost access
to legal abortion. That is about 25,000,000 women. So I would
respectfully suggest if you really care about girls and women,
care about their access to be fully in charge of their
healthcare and their future.
Now, with that said, I do have a question, Mr. Secretary,
and this is about book banning. According to the American
Library Association, in 2023, a record 4,200 different books
were targeted for bans in schools and libraries nationwide,
with Florida and Texas leading the Nation. I live in Florida.
This dangerous censorship is overwhelmingly targeting LGBTQ+
content and books about black history. In Florida, believe it
or not, we have banned books about Harriet Tubman, Rosa Parks,
and even a book about two male penguins raising a chick
together. How is your Department handling this? Are you sending
out guidance? What actions are you taking to make sure that
diverse material remains available to students?
Secretary Cardona. Thank you, Congresswoman Frankel. You
know, the topic of book banning, we have seen an increase in
that tremendously. The number of titles targeted for censorship
in public libraries increased by 92 percent over the last year.
Ninety-two percent. School libraries did increase 11 percent,
and 47 percent of those titles are books about LGBTQI or BIPOC
individuals, so that shares kind of the perspective of which
books are being, you know, targeted.
We recognize how important this is and how, while we don't
at the Department of Education dictate curriculum, we do feel
that we needed to make sure that we have materials and supports
available. So the Office for Civil Rights will continue to
support the public but also our school communities in
understanding their rights. We hold trainings for schools, for
libraries, and for educational stakeholders on, you know, laws
and how to address situations when they are needing help when
it comes to book banning.
Ms. Frankel. Thank you very much. I yield back.
Mr. Aderholt. Ms. Letlow.
Ms. Letlow. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Secretary, in the
2 years prior to my time in office, Congress provided almost
$200,000,000,000 through the CARES Act, the Coronavirus
Response and Relief Supplement Appropriations Act, and the
American Rescue Plan for K through 12. Those dollars were to be
used to improve online learning capability to sanitize schools
with special equipment, to purchase PPE, and to address
learning loss caused by school closures. Do you believe that
this funding provided for K through 12 schools was
appropriately spent?
Secretary Cardona. Yes, I do.
Ms. Letlow. Okay. While some of that funding may have been
appropriately spent, we saw misuse of funds, too: providing new
synthetic turf for football stadiums, baseball field, drainage
improvements, and brand new weight rooms. Secretary, it has
been between 3 to 4 years since these three bills passed, and
the funds are set to expire in September. Have the schools
spent all of their funding to date?
Secretary Cardona. Thank you, Congresswoman. I was a
commissioner of education in Connecticut during those years,
and I recall the important efforts that were taken to provide
PPEs----
Ms. Letlow. Mm-hmm.
Secretary Cardona [continuing]. And to ensure maintenance
of air handling systems that, to be very frank with you, for
decades have been, you know, had deferred maintenance, so I do
know those dollars were used to safely reopen our schools
quickly. I know in Connecticut, for example, we focused on
that, and we relied on those dollars. We know that 99.6 percent
of CARES ESSER has been used; CRRSA ESSER, 99 percent. Sixty-
eight percent of the current $130,000,000,000 of the American
Rescue Plan dollars have been used with the drawdown date
coming up soon. And then while you didn't ask that, I would
want to share also, we have homeless children and youth
dollars----
Ms. Letlow. Mm-hmm.
Secretary Cardona [continuing]. Provided by Congress, and
44 percent of those dollars have been drawn down, and we are
working closely with States to continue to draw them down.
Ms. Letlow. I want to get to my point. I looked on your
website this morning. Louisiana still has only spent 70 percent
of the total that they were awarded during the pandemic. That
is concerning to me because in your budget, you proposed a new
$8,000,000,000 mandatory program labeled the Academic
Acceleration and Achievement Grants. The justification for this
specifically labels this new program as a way for the Nation's
schools to recover from the COVID-19 pandemic and specifically
addresses learning loss due to COVID. Why should we appropriate
more money for this program, this mandatory program, when we
haven't already spent the money that was given during the
Pandemic for learning loss specifically?
Secretary Cardona. Thank you, and I say this respectfully,
but there are many students in Louisiana and other States that
are reading well below the level. So those dollars are
critically important to sustain efforts of tutoring, summer
school programming, and 70 percent in Louisiana is about
average. I said the country's average is 68 percent ESSER
drawdown, but if you talk to any school principal,
administrator, superintendent, board member, they will tell
you, because I have been speaking to them, those dollars are
being used, and they expect them to be drawn down. They are for
social workers, reading teachers, additional afterschool
programs, so they are obligated dollars. They just haven't been
drawn down because the work hasn't been performed.
But they are also telling me in Louisiana and other places
that they are concerned when this ARP dollar sunsets, the needs
of the students are still great. So I encourage you to support
the budget and the $8,000,000,000 for tutoring, for additional
reading support, and summer programming.
Ms. Letlow. Thank you. I have gone over my time, but I
would just expect us to be a good steward of taxpayer dollars.
I don't believe in appropriating more funds when we haven't
already spent the funds that we already sent. Thank you. I
yield back.
Mr. Aderholt. Ms. Lee.
Ms. Lee. Thank you very much. Mr. Secretary, I am really
delighted to see that the President's budget request includes
the $21,300,000 in funding for strengthening HBCUs' Master
Program, which supports STEM and tech education among black
graduate students. The Department's focus on supporting
emerging STEM and tech black graduate students is extremely
important, and we know that there is still a lot of work to be
done. I am excited that I am introducing once again the
Computer Science for All Act with Representatives Fleischmann
and DelBene. This has been a bipartisan bill since President
Obama actually announced Computer Science for All, and we have
been working together to invest in preparing our young people
for the STEM jobs of the future by providing the training and
learning opportunities, especially in low-income and in
underserved communities.
So I wanted to just find out in terms of your
administration, what are you doing, short of our legislation
passing, to enhance access to STEM and tech education and
workforce outreach efforts to underserved communities,
especially K through 12 students who are low income and
students of color?
Secretary Cardona. Thank you. Thank you for that question
and for your work on this because it is critical. It is
critical not only to level the playing field and make sure all
students have access to good STEM programming, but, quite
frankly, if we are going to meet the moment with CHIPS and
Science Act, with the, you know, energy provisions under the
Inflation Reduction Act, and even some of the infrastructure
work that is happening, STEM has to be a bigger part of our K-
12 programming and our higher ed program. So, you know, going
specifically to HBCUs, you know, we are asking for an increase
of $35,000,000 to bring it up to $431,000,000 for HBCUs. What I
heard from HBCU leaders is, look, we are ready to go for these
contracts. We are ready to give our students the same
opportunities that students in other universities have.
However, due to decades of underinvestment in HBCUs, we don't
have the infrastructure.
So we have to make sure that we have the STEM labs, we
have, you know, the same facilities that will give our students
access to those programs. So we are putting dollars in minority
science and TEACH engineering improvement programs. There is
$60,000,000 there, FIPSE, again, a lot of it targeting towards
minority-serving institutions, to level them up, make sure that
they have the same opportunity. In K-12, we are trying to, what
I call evolving our high schools, evolving in the sense that
our K-12 institutions need to be better aligned to the
opportunities that our students are going to have after
graduation. You don't need to have a 4-year degree. You could
have a 2-year degree. You could have a credential. I am
visiting schools where students are graduating with an
associate's degree in high school before their high school
degree.
So we need to push that through our innovation dollars,
through our STEM dollars, but make sure that these STEM career
pathways or these STEM classes are connected to the
opportunities that exist for these students.
Ms. Lee. Thank you very much, and this is one of our
bipartisan bills, incidentally----
Secretary Cardona. Yes. Good.
Ms. Lee [continuing]. That we have been working on for
years. Thank you.
Mr. Aderholt. Mr. Moolenaar.
Mr. Moolenaar. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Secretary, just
to follow up on some of the STEM-related questions at
universities. The National Security Presidential Memorandum 33
outlines research security requirements for U.S. government-
supported R&D programs at universities across the country. If a
university fails to comply with this guidance, the Secretary of
Education can suspend or deny Federal financial aid to the
university. Are you familiar with this guidance and the
authority you have been given?
Secretary Cardona. Are you referring to Section 117?
Mr. Moolenaar. Yeah. Well, that is part of the Higher
Education Act. This is actually the President's National
Security Presidential Memorandum 33.
Secretary Cardona. Okay. Yeah. So I am sure my team is on
that. I can get more information on it.
Mr. Moolenaar. Okay.
Secretary Cardona. I don't have specifics on it now, but I
would be happy to follow up with you on it.
Mr. Moolenaar. Have you used this authority?
Secretary Cardona. Happy to have my team follow up with
you. We take those issues very seriously, and we know that
accountability of the expectations are part of the work that we
do at the Department of Education.
Mr. Moolenaar. Can you tell me what steps you are taking to
ensure that universities are complying with this guidance?
Secretary Cardona. Happy to follow up with you with more
specifics.
Mr. Moolenaar. Do you plan to suspend Federal financial aid
when universities fail to comply?
Secretary Cardona. We will follow the law as written by
Congress to make sure that we are upholding the expectations of
compliance.
Mr. Moolenaar. Are you sharing PRC-related information
obtained through Section 117? As you mentioned, with the FBI
and other agencies, the Department of Education recently found
that numerous large and well-resourced institutions have
aggressively pursued and accepted significant amounts of money
from the People's Republic of China, while failing to comply
with the transparency requirements of Section 117 of the Higher
Education Act. Are you sharing that information?
Secretary Cardona. Yes.
Mr. Moolenaar. Okay. The public version of the Department's
Section 117 report, dated October 2020, is redacted. Will you
commit to providing the members of this subcommittee with a
classified briefing to discuss this and other classified
information connected with the Section 117 investigations?
Secretary Cardona. Are you referring to a report that was
redacted in the last administration?
Mr. Moolenaar. Yes.
Secretary Cardona. Okay. I can have my team reach back out
to yours about that.
Mr. Moolenaar. Do you have someone in particular on your
team who is reviewing the information obtained through the
Department Section 117 investigations?
Secretary Cardona. I certainly do, and I can have that
information shared with you.
Secretary Cardona. Let me tell you, Congressman, that we
have reported 38,900 foreign gifts worth $21,400,000,000. We
take this very seriously, and I think it is really important
that the American people know which gifts are coming to which
universities. We have been more transparent than any other
administration, and we work closely with FBI's National
Counterintelligence Task Force, sharing information regularly
to ensure not only transparency, but that, where investigations
need to happen, the correct authorities are involved.
Mr. Moolenaar. Will you commit to providing the members of
this subcommittee with the classified briefing on this?
Secretary Cardona. I will have my team get back to you on
whether or not that is going to be possible, but for me,
transparency is really important, and sharing with you is very
important.
Mr. Moolenaar. I have to say, Mr. Secretary, I appreciate
the spirit in which you say these things, but I am disappointed
in the response you have given because it doesn't appear to me
that you do take this as seriously or you don't take the
subcommittee as seriously to offer information to us today. So
I am disappointed with that.
Secretary Cardona. Sorry you feel that way. Thank you.
Mr. Aderholt. Mr. Edwards.
Mr. Edwards. Thank you again, Mr. Chair. Mr. Secretary, one
of the things that I continually hear from folks in my district
and from all around America is that Washington seems to have
forgotten so much of the working class. And I see no better
example of that than the Student Debt Relief Program that is
being suggested right now, where folks with dirt and grease
under their fingernails are being asked to pay for folks'
college education that wear a crest on their sport coat. I am
going to give you a chance right now in the time that I have
left to explain to that working class why this proposed
program, this debt relief program is fair and not turning its
back, our back, on those folks that have calluses on their
hands and really have built this country.
Secretary Cardona. Thank you for sharing your sentiment. I
will say this. If you look at the 4,000,000 people we have
helped and the 30,000,000 that the President proposed, those
are the working class. Those are exactly the folks that you are
talking about. When we are talking about increasing Pell
Grants, it is those we are talking about, unlike
multimillionaires that have tax breaks. We are fighting for
working class people. We are pushing for dollars----
Mr. Edwards. Mr. Secretary, I am talking about the folks
that are plunging toilets every day, and cutting pipes, and
laying bricks that didn't have an opportunity to go to college,
and now we are asking them to pay for the education of the
folks that you are trying to describe there. Those are
different classes. So tell the brick layers and pipe fitters
out there right now--you have the floor for a minute and 3
seconds--why they should feel good about paying for these
student debt relief programs.
Secretary Cardona. We are not only increasing opportunities
for those pipe pipefitters to have opportunities to get more
credentials, to get more pay, and some of the legislation that
was passed, some of it in bipartisan fashion, are going to
increase the opportunities for those folks that you are talking
about. But those folks also have children that are going to
school, and many of those folks have children who are saying, I
can't go to college because I can't afford it because it has
gotten out of control. We are fixing a broken system.
This debt relief work that we are doing shouldn't happen
forever because now we have the SAVE Program. So the children
of those brick layers, those who are building our country,
those people that deserve an opportunity to be thought about as
well, their children are going to have access that they
wouldn't have had before the Biden administration----
Mr. Edwards. Mr. Secretary, however, the parents of those
children that are laying bricks and fitting pipes----
Secretary Cardona. Mm-hmm.
Mr. Edwards [continuing]. Have already made their decision.
They are into their career, and they are being asked to pay for
a different class of folks' education. I find that just
tremendously unfair, and I will be anxious to go back and
employ your comments over to the folks back at home and see if
you have convinced them of that.
Secretary Cardona. Happy to work----
Mr. Edwards. Thank you.
Secretary Cardona. To support those folks.
Mr. Aderholt. Ms. DeLauro, I think you have got some
closing comment. Okay.
Ms. DeLauro. Secretary Cardona, I took very seriously
something that you said in your opening statement, and I will
quote, and tell me if this is accurate. We must defend public
education, not defund public education. I believe that this is
our charge as Federal public servants to protect and to
strengthen the Federal programs that serve as the cornerstone
of public education. And quite frankly, I have watched with
dismay, both in the last budget deliberations and just
listening today, and I am sure that this will continue, where
some of my Republican colleagues view that there is a need for
us to defund public education and look to protecting private
institutions.
Now, what is the charge of public education? Who does
public education serve? As I understand it, nearly 50,000,000
students in public schools, over 3.6 public school teachers,
and yet in the last budget, there was an attempt to cut 80
percent of teachers, almost 224,000 teachers, to jettison them.
Public school teachers. The charge over public education is for
the 25,000,000 students who are supported by Title I services
for high-need populations.
So we have an enormous responsibility to deliver for the
students in a system that should be our country's great
equalizer, to help those brick layers, to help their kids, to
help the pipe fitters, to help the first generation of kids
like you and myself to be able to get to school. We need to
lift up and we need to be supporting public education, combat
chronic absenteeism, address learning loss as you are doing,
dealing with students who have mental health needs, help them
to recover. And we must support the basic needs of students in
college to deliver on the vital goals of Claiborne Pell, a man
to the manor born, as affluent as anyone in our history, who
viewed public education for the sons and daughters of working
families as something that the Federal Government should be
deeply involved in so that we have an educated citizenry.
And it is a real concern of mine of what is happening, and
I won't point to the many ways in which in the last budget
discussion we were eroding public education. That is not what
you are doing. That is not what President Biden is doing. You
take this responsibility very seriously, and I will just say
for one that I stand ready to support your work, to support the
continued investment in public education as a necessity for the
strength, the future strength. Whether it is our national
security, our domestic security, wherever else we are going, if
we do not have a strong public education system, we are doomed
as a Nation.
I thank you for your service, I thank the President, and I
thank you both for both of your commitments to making sure that
the vast majority of these people in this country have the
opportunity not just to succeed, but to thrive through
education. Many thanks, Mr. Secretary, for being here this
morning.
Mr. Aderholt. Thank you, Ms. DeLauro. Thank you, Mr.
Secretary, and, Mr. Kean, thank you for being here as well. You
got off easy today, but it is good to have both of you here,
and we look forward to working with you. Thank you for taking a
lot of these comments and questions that our members brought to
you seriously, and I think they reflect what they hear back in
their districts. It is not, I don't think, something that they
just, or any of our questions are something we just came up
with out of the blue. It is things that we hear back home, and
I hope that you can take that message back to the Department
with you. And we look forward to your follow-up on some of
these issues as we move forward.
So with that, again, thank you both, and we look forward to
working with you as we continue on through the budget process.
Secretary Cardona. Thank you.
Mr. Aderholt. Dismissed.
Thank you. Thank you.
[Questions and answers submitted for the record follow:]

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Wednesday, April 17, 2024.

FISCAL YEAR 2025 REQUEST FOR THE DEPARTMENT OF LABOR

WITNESS

HON. JULIE SU, ACTING SECRETARY, U.S. DEPARTMENT OF LABOR

Chair Opening Statement

Mr. Aderholt. Good morning. The subcommittee will come to
order, and I just want to welcome Acting Secretary Su to the
Labor, Health and Human Services, and Education Subcommittee.
Pleased to have you here to hear about the budget for the
coming year and look forward to your testimony. Of course, as
we know, the role of the Department of Labor is to foster,
promote, and develop the welfare of wage earners in the United
States, to also improve their working conditions, and to
advance their opportunities for profitable employment.
The purpose of this hearing this morning is to review the
fiscal year 2025 budget request. While there are many open jobs
in the economy, persistent and painful high inflation, driven
by the Democrats' out-of-control spending and regulatory
overreach, has burdened the American workforce and their
families for more than 2 years. Last week, the Department that
you are in charge of reported that consumer prices were up 3.5
percent this week from a year ago. Everyday essentials like
groceries, rent are more expensive, and as I have said before
in these hearings, inflation is a tax on every American.
Continued high inflation in our country is unacceptable and
should be a number one concern for all of us.
I am concerned that the budget request attempts to go
around discretionary limits that are established in the Fiscal
Responsibility Act by calling for the creation of a new $8
billion mandatory training program. Out-of-control mandatory
spending got us into this fiscal mess, and it is certainly not
the tool that will get us out of it. On a more positive note, I
do appreciate that this budget request no longer includes the
partisan Civilian Climate Corps proposal that was included in
last year's proposal, but I am disappointed that you continue
to call for the creation of a new sector partnership grant
program that has been repeatedly rejected by Congress. The
presumption that local employers, educators, training
providers, or State and local government officials need a
Federal grant to collaborate is indicative of a top-down
command-and-control approach to economic development that
simply does not work.
I am concerned that the budget request demonstrates a lack
of support for employers. Nationwide, unemployment remains low
at 3.8 percent. In my home State of Alabama, unemployment is
significantly below the national average at only 3 percent.
Businesses are struggling to find workers. The workforce
shortage inflames the pressure of inflation and risk a
recession that would threaten the livelihoods of literally
millions of Americans, yet I do not see policy and spending
proposals from the administration that reflect the very
realities that we face. The budget proposal fails to
demonstrate industry-based partnerships that can address what
employers say they need but can't find.
Beyond the spending concerns, the regulatory agenda the
Department is pursuing is increasingly worrisome. A recently-
finalized rule regarding independent contractors threatens to
disrupt millions of freelance and independent workers around
the country, as well as businesses who rely on these workers. I
would hope that the Department will be supporting innovation,
entrepreneurship, and those who choose to work in the growing
freelance economy because of the flexibility it affords, rather
than restricting opportunities for personal economic
advancement.
I am also deeply concerned the Department's proposal to
rewrite overtime regulations would further worsen the
challenges faced by small businesses. It would destabilize the
economy and reduce opportunities for career advancement. The
Fair Labor Standards Act is the benchmark of the U.S. Wage and
Hour law. Within this national framework, States may elect to
implement overtime law and regulations that respond to their
economic situation and the needs of their workers and their
employers. The Department's proposed regulation fails to
recognize that the American economy is made up of many
different local and regional economies. I find the
administration's advancement of a one-size-fits-all regulatory
agenda deeply concerning, given the potential to harm workers
and small businesses, especially in the district I represent.
The more than 417,000 small businesses in Alabama employ over
47 percent of private sector workers in our State. The Small
Business Administration's Office of Advocacy expressed concern
that the Department's regulatory analysis was insufficient and
that it underestimated the economic impact of the rule on small
businesses and nonprofit organizations, with potential negative
consequences for employers, such as loss of benefits and
reduced worker flexibility.

REGISTERED APPRENTICESHIP PROGRAM

Madam Secretary, while the Department of Labor regulatory
matters are frequently contentious, we have often been able to
find bipartisan and common ground on skilled training. Last
year, I would have expressed my appreciation and support for
the Department's continued commitment to Registered
Apprenticeship Program. Unfortunately, earlier this year, the
Department that you are in charge of issued a proposal to
reinvent the Registered Apprenticeship in a manner that would
imperil the Alabama Office of Apprenticeship, an office that
was created in 2019 and is the first new State apprenticeship
agency in over 2 decades with the specific goal of improving
labor market participation through apprenticeship.
Apprenticeship produces positive outcomes for workers and job
seekers because it puts what should be the end goal of all
workforce development programs, a job first. These programs
only exist where businesses choose to adopt this intensive
approach to human capital management. We have seen support for
these programs flourish under multiple administrations.
The Alabama Office of Apprenticeship was in part created to
respond to employer frustration with the Department of Labor's
management of the Registered Apprenticeship Program. These
frustrations include a bureaucratic and outdated one-size-fits-
all approach to skills training and overly-prospective
requirements. Employers across the country know that every
industry and every employer cannot expect impartiality from the
Department of Labor in reviewing apprenticeship program
applications. The Department's proposal would turn a 2-page law
into a 776-page rule that would, in the name of equity and
inclusion, reduce opportunities for American workers for all
races and both sexes.
I am concerned the Department is more interested in
catering to beltway-based liberal social policy concerns rather
than responding to the very real needs that real Americans deal
with, whether they be workers, job seekers, or employers. What
else could explain the Department's publishing a regulation
that would eliminate the highly successful competency-based
approach to apprenticeships, that would reduce the ability of
States to recognize these programs, or impose national testing
requirements similar to the No Child Left behind law that was
repealed and replaced by Congress. Rather than replicating the
failures of the Department of Education, we should be ensuring
that American workers and job seekers have access to career
pathways that work for them. Apprenticeships represent an
opportunity and pathway to high-paying jobs. Unfortunately, the
barriers to growth of this career training model will not be
solved through funding alone. Improved program administration
and more effective leadership at and by the Department can
better support the adoption of registered apprenticeships for
workers for our Nation's workforce.
These are just some of the policy differences I am sure we
will discuss today, and I am sure they will come up in the
questioning. I am hopeful that as we work through this
shortened budget year, that we will be able to, once again, at
the end of the day find some common ground. In closing, I do
want to thank you, Acting Secretary, for appearing before us
today and look forward to your testimony and your continued
work on our shared priorities, which I do believe that we can
find quite a few of those. At this time, I would like to
recognize the ranking member of the committee, Ms. DeLauro, for
her comments.

Ranking Member Opening Statement

Ms. DeLauro. Thank you very much, Chairman Aderholt, for
holding this hearing on the 2025 budget for the Department of
Labor. Just before I make my comments, I do want to make a very
quick comment about the issue of the high cost of groceries
these days. And I think while we are making comments about
inflation and the causes of inflation and the causes of high
price of groceries, we need to take a very hard look and
investigate the price gouging that is being done by
corporations, by the consolidation of the industry which
increases food prices. And understandably, there is no shortage
of food in the United States. That means that we do not have to
raise food prices, but we need to take a hard look at the
corporations who are raising the prices because they can. I
think that should be a focus of our attention, probably in this
committee and in other committees as well, with the Federal
Trade Commission and others.
So I want to say a thank you to our witness, Acting
Secretary Su, for appearing today, for your many, many years of
public service, for your dedication to protecting the rights of
American workers, though I must say I am perplexed by the
acting prefects in your title. I will not pretend to understand
why the Senate does what it does, but it is my hope you will be
confirmed in the very near future. I have said this in other
hearings with our secretaries in the last couple of weeks, but
Shirley Chisholm, the first African-American woman elected to
the House of Representatives, once said, ``Public service is
the rent you pay for space on this earth,'' and, Secretary Su,
you have paid that rent many times over. You set an example for
the rest of us by continuing to do so.
I also want to say thank you to you for visiting my
district, the 3rd District of Connecticut, earlier this year to
celebrate a grant awarded in the 2023 bill that will boost
Connecticut State colleges and university system. You, like me,
believe that our workforce is our infrastructure, and, thus,
our current and future workforce is one of the best places for
us to invest.
When we think of the benefits that many of us might take
for granted today, say, for working conditions, paid leave
weekends, an 8-hour workday, and a 40-hour work week, we have
the hard-fought victories of unions and the labor movement to
thank for all of that. In recent years, workers have been
organizing at a pace this country has not seen since the Great
Depression. This is unequivocally a good thing. We all know
that labor unions are the driving force for progress. The
middle class is built on a union label.

WORKERS' RIGHTS

The fight for workers' rights has always had a special
place in my heart. I am the daughter of a garment worker. My
mother toiled in the old sweatshops in the City of New Haven,
sewing shirt collars, piecework, and obtaining pennies on the
dollar for that hard work. So every day now, I work to ensure
that her early struggles were not in vain. When President Biden
took office over 3 years ago, the economy was in crisis.
Workers were struggling. Unemployment was over 6 percent.
Millions of Americans were out of work. The economy has begun
to make progress in giving workers a fighting chance, and that
is thanks to President Biden and to you, Secretary Su, to your
leadership and the investments made by Democrats on the House
Appropriations Committee.
But the economy, as we all know, is still difficult for
working people today, and we admit that. Too many families are
weighed down by the high cost of living. They do live paycheck
to paycheck. They struggle to make ends meet. And while
unemployment is down, families are barely able to scrape by,
and wages haven't gone up for these folks. But we have the
largest corporations, the biggest corporations who have reaped
record profits, and I might add, 55 of these corporations pay
no tax at all in the United States, which is why your fiscal
year 2025 budget request and your Department's regulatory
actions are so vital.
I specifically commend your Department's work to fight wage
theft when employers fail to compensate workers for the wages
they have earned. And through your independent contractor and
overtime rules, you are putting desperately-needed dollars back
into the pockets of these workers. That addresses cost of
living today. Unfortunately, many of my colleagues on the other
side of the aisle want to roll back these essential
protections, but we cannot go backwards. The rollbacks they
want would take earned wages away from American workers and
their families, hurting their ability to pay their monthly
bills and making the cost-of-living crisis even worse. And
while it was a challenging process, I was proud to work with
Democrats and Republicans in the House and Senate to complete
our work on the 2024 Labor, Health/Human Services, and
Education funding bill. I am proud that we protected the
investments this subcommittee made in job training, worker
protection programs during the first 2 years of the Biden
administration.
Last year, House Republicans proposed a destructive cut of
$4.7 billion to the Department of Labor. They proposed the
elimination of Workforce Innovation and Opportunity Act, WIOA
job training programs, which would have denied opportunities
and services for 420,000 youth and adults who face barriers to
finding good-paying jobs. They would have eliminated Job Corps,
which would have taken away vital training experiences for
50,000 young people. And they would have eliminated the Senior
Community Employment Service Program and would have cut 40,000
community service positions for low-wage seniors. We spent
months communicating the devastation this would bring to
working people across the country, which is why I am so proud
that we protected these programs and avoided the cuts to worker
protection agencies, like Wage and Hour and OSHA. We rejected
dozens of poison pill policy riders proposed last year by the
majority, including a new rider that would put workers at risk
of being unlawfully misclassified as independent contractors.
I am proud of where we ended up with the 2024
appropriations bills, but there are still unmet needs for
workers, which brings me to the President's budget for 2025.
The request for $14.2 billion for programs funded at the
Department of Labor will help grow middle class, support
working families, ensure America remains the land of
opportunity for all her children. And while it is nice to see a
modest increase to strengthening community college training
grants, a program I created in my first year as chair of the
Labor, HHS Subcommittee, I believe there is much more we should
do to boost this program. Community colleges are uniquely
positioned to support local workforce development and industry
needs. They are more accessible to more families, and they
should be a focal point for our investment. And I am happy to
see an increase of $50 million for registered apprenticeship
programs.

COMBATING CHILD LABOR

In addition, I am pleased to see a strong $35 million
increase to the Wage and Hour Division to fight wage theft and
to combat child labor. And I am glad that the President's
budget once again calls for the establishment of a
comprehensive paid family and medical leave program so that
Americans can take up to 12 weeks of paid leave and do not have
to make the impossible choice between providing for their
families or taking care of the health of themselves or a loved
one. I am also pleased that the President's budget calls on
Congress to require employers to provide 7 paid sick days each
year. I have fought tirelessly for paid leave and paid sick
days in the Congress, and I look forward to working with the
administration to make this a reality for American workers. It
is a reality for members of Congress. They can take all the
sick time that they need, all the paid leave that they can
take, and what is good enough for members of Congress is good
enough for the American people.
In our recent hearing with HHS Secretary Javier Becerra,
several members raised concern about the scourge of child labor
and child trafficking. I noted that the Department of Labor has
requested additional funding to investigate employers who prey
on child labor, including in some of our most dangerous
industries. Again, I strongly urge my colleagues to support the
Department of Labor in its efforts to combat child labor and
child trafficking, and to penalize employers who profit by
exploiting vulnerable children. Finally, I am thrilled to see a
$46 million increase to the Bureau of International Labor
Affairs, ILAB, so it can continue to effectively monitor and
enforce the labor provisions of the United States-Mexico-Canada
Agreement, the USMCA.
Acting Secretary Su, thank you for your commitment to
workers for ensuring that there is a pathway to good jobs and
to the middle class, and for protecting the wages and benefits
that workers have earned with their hard work. We have made
great progress over the past 3 years, but there is still much
to do, and I believe we have the opportunity before us to forge
an even brighter future for the American labor movement and for
hardworking Americans across this country. Thank you for being
here this morning. I look forward to our discussion. I thank
you, and I yield back.
Mr. Aderholt. Thank you. Madam Secretary, we look forward
to your testimony, and, of course, your comments will be
included fully in the record, so look forward to hearing your
comments this morning. You have the mike.

Opening Statement

Ms. Su. Thank you so much, Chairman Aderholt. Chairman
Aderholt, Ranking Member DeLauro, and members of the
subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to testify in
support of President Biden's fiscal year 2025 budget request
for the Department of Labor.
As the acting Secretary of Labor, I get to travel the
country to meet with workers, workers like Mariah, a single mom
who was living paycheck to paycheck, worried every day about
how she would have enough to get by. She went to her local
social services office to apply for SNAP benefits and Medicaid.
That is where she noticed a flyer for a job training program in
the pipe trades. Today, Mariah is in a good union job, and she
has quadrupled her income. What struck me about Mariah was not
just how much a good income meant to her. It was the pride she
felt in putting in a hard day's work and getting rewarded for
it, and the pride she saw in her children's eyes. It is
undeniable. Good jobs change lives. This $13.9 billion request
will help more people like Mariah get good jobs that can
support families, lift up communities, and bring the dignity
and pride that are core to the American Dream.

PATHWAYS TO GOOD JOBS

I want to frame our request under two priority areas.
First, pathways to good jobs for all of America's workers. I
have met with thousands of workers like Mariah who are in
programs that work, programs that exist because we have
invested in them. That is why we are requesting investments to
develop and expand proven models to connect workers to the good
jobs they want and need, and employers to the workers that they
want and need. For example, we are requesting $8 billion for
the Career Training Fund. That investment would help as many as
750,000 people who do not see 4-year college as their path
enroll in evidence-based, high-quality training programs for
actual jobs in their communities.
Workers who complete high-quality programs don't end up
with a job search. They end up with a job. On that, we agree,
Chairman. We also seek $335 million for apprenticeship
programs. Registered apprenticeships provide training for the
actual skills that employers need, they allow workers to earn
while they learn, and they increase job pathways for
underrepresented groups, including women, people of color,
veterans, and individuals with disabilities. When I talk to
business owners, many tell me that their top concern is
recruiting and retaining workers. Well, the investments in our
budget request are how Congress and the Department of Labor can
tap into the talents and skills of all of America's workers and
make sure that the supply of skilled workers meets the demand
right now and well into the future.

WORKER PROTECTION

The second priority I would like to highlight is the
Department of Labor's mission to protect workers, including and
especially those most vulnerable to exploitation. Too often,
employers who hire 13-year-olds to work in hazardous conditions
fail to pay workers overtime for a 60-hour work week, or who
put workers at risk of losing their limbs or even their lives
on the job do it because they think they can get away with it,
that no one will stop them, that they can operate in blatant
disregard of the laws Congress has enacted. Not on our watch.
That is why we are requesting modest, but important, increases
for the Department's worker protection agencies because we
can't do this vital work without dedicated public servants--the
Wage and Hour investigators who combat child labor; the team
that ensures workplaces are free from safety hazards; the
benefits advisors who answer the phone when panicked patients
have been denied coverage for mental health services by their
health insurance company.
We are asking for $7.5 million for additional staff to
combat wage theft and child labor; an additional $23 million to
investigate high-hazard workplaces, protect whistleblowers, and
give employers compliance assistance; and an additional $10.7
million for my solicitor's office, which has been essentially
flat funded for more than a decade. The President's request
would also help us advance worker rights and promote a level
playing field internationally for U.S. workers and businesses,
and it would better support implementation of Congress' Secure
2.0 Act, the Mental Health Parity and Addiction Equity act, and
the No Surprises Act because when you pass laws, we should make
them real.
In all, the budget request will help make sure that workers
can come home safe and healthy at the end of the workday and
get high-quality jobs with the power to truly change lives.
Again, I thank the subcommittee, and I look forward to taking
your questions.
[The prepared statement of Acting Secretary Su follows:]

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Aderholt. Thank you for your comments and overview. And
we will start our questioning time, obviously, as we normally
do, 5 minutes per person, and we look forward to your responses
to our questions.

RELIGIOUS EXEMPTION RULES

Let me begin. Last year, the Office of Federal Contract
Compliance Programs rescinded a rule that provided clarity and
certainty around religious exemptions. Those were for
organizations that contract with the Federal Government. The
rule allowed religious organizations to operate according to
the religious beliefs while participating as Federal
contractors. Now that the rule is rescinded, what steps has the
Department taken to ensure that religious organizations will
receive fair treatment and protection in the Federal
contracting process?
Ms. Su. So, Chairman Aderholt, the religious exemption does
remain in place. We believe that nobody should have to choose
between their religion and their ability to operate a business,
and that they should still be in compliance with laws that
protect against discrimination, so the religious exemption
order is still in place. Our final rule on that that you
mentioned actually reestablished OFCCP's long-established
policy that was in place under both Republican and Democratic
administrations, that analyzes a contractor's exemption claims
on a case-by-case basis, and it is consistent with the views of
both DOJ and the EEOC, as well as the courts. I might also
mention that while the previous administration's rule was in
place, only one business received an exemption, and since the
rule was rescinded, no contractors have requested such an
exemption.

CIVIL RIGHTS CENTER ACTIVITIES

Mr. Aderholt. Okay. Your fiscal year 2025 budget request
included a 22-percent increase for the Department of Civil
Rights Center. Can you talk a little bit about the activities
by this center thus far in fiscal year 2024 that is related to
religious rights of DOL employees and program participants?
Ms. Su. Thank you very much for that question, Chairman. So
in general, what that center does is it makes sure that both we
are in compliance and they conduct investigations. One of the
things that I believe is also in our budget request is making
sure that we are providing services to all workers, and part of
that is ensuring language access for individuals who need
translated services. That is one of the areas of focus, and we
have a Language Access Center as part of that area of work. But
the other thing is that we do investigate if there are
complaints that are made internally. That that is part of the
work, also, of our internal Office of Civil Rights.

REGULATORY FLEXIBILITY ACT

Mr. Aderholt. And let me switch gears to the Regulatory
Flexibility Act, which requires Federal agencies, as to
consider the effects of regulations on small businesses and
other small entities by performing initial regulatory
flexibility analysis. As I mentioned in my opening statements,
small businesses provide essential job opportunities to the
constituents I represent, and regulatory action taken by the
Department, without consideration of their effects on these
entities, unfairly harms, in my opinion, rural Americans,
especially. When considering the potential regulatory actions,
what steps does this Department take, number one, to meet the
requirements of the Regulatory Flexibility Act, and number two,
ensure that proposals developed in Washington take into
consideration their effect on small businesses, especially in
rural America?
Ms. Su. So Chairman, you might be referring to, there is a
provision that requires, when OSHA adopts laws, to go through a
small business review, and that is very important because what
you are saying is true. We do take and must take great care to
make sure that the rules that we put in place have the impact
that is intended and don't have negative unintended impacts.
And that is why many people complain that our rulemaking
process takes too long. Part of that is because we do go
through a very careful review that includes small businesses.
And so for some of the rules that are pending, we have
completed that small business review. For others that are
upcoming, we will obviously comply with that.
The other is that even outside of the OSHA space, we engage
with, we listen to beyond just the regular public comment
period, which is also a time in which we hear the kinds of
comments that you were talking about, but we do reach out to
small businesses. We do listening sessions. We invite input. We
take all of those things very seriously because, as you have
mentioned, small businesses are really the engines of our
economy. I know that because my parents had small businesses.
We have to make sure that we understand the impact of any of
our rulemaking on all affected stakeholders.
Mr. Aderholt. Thank you. Ms. DeLauro.

RESOURCES FOR WAGE AND HOUR AND SOLICITOR'S OFFICE

Ms. DeLauro. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Secretary Su, in your
testimony you clearly state, ``The Department is committed to
combating illegal child labor because we cannot build our
economy on the backs of children.'' First of all, thank you for
your moral clarity and unwavering focus to keep kids safe from
harm and dangerous workplaces. 2023, your Department
investigated 955 cases of child labor violations. It involved
almost 5,800 children nationwide. Just last month, you cracked
down on a parts supplier for John Deere that relied on children
as young as 14 to conduct dangerous work. The Department's work
is outstanding. We need much more of it, which is why I believe
the Wage and Hour Division and the solicitor need far more
resources to continue going after companies that exploit
vulnerable children.
How would additional resources for Wage and Hour and the
solicitor expand the Department's efforts to combat child
labor? Can you explain why securing penalties and judgments
against offending employers is so resource intensive?
Ms. Su. Thank you so much, Ranking Member, for your moral
clarity as well. We are seeing really unconscionable cases of
child labor. We are seeing 13-year-olds working the night shift
on the kill floor of meatpacking plants, working with toxic
chemicals doing cleaning. We see young people working as
sawmill operators, doing roofing, work that is, understandably,
by law, illegal for children to work in. We are not talking
about a child who is working at the corner store, learning how
to show up on time and provide good customer service, and the
importance of responsibility and a paycheck. We are really
seeing really terrible cases in which children are being put in
harm's way.
One of our most important jobs is to put a stop to such
child labor, to investigate, and our budget request includes
$7.5 million specifically for child labor, to increase the
number of boots on the ground, to increase the number of
investigators in the field who can investigate. These cases
often usually involve employers who don't want to be
discovered. They don't want people to know what is happening.
And so it requires us to be innovative, it requires us to be
smart, it requires us to ask the right questions, and
oftentimes this happens because the location where the work is
being done is not the direct hirer of the children. They often
hire through a contractor, which creates other vulnerabilities.
And so our investigations involve understanding who is
responsible, what the right penalty should be, and include
using tools that Congress has given us, like the ``hot goods''
provision.
Ms. DeLauro. Okay. I just will say about that, we need to
give you the resources to crack down on companies that exploit
children. Let's not mince words on my part. We need to shut
companies down that exploit child labor, and we need to send
those responsible to prison.

LOW SALARY THRESHOLDS FOR OVERTIME ELIGIBILITY

Let me just ask you about low salary thresholds. Because of
these low salary thresholds for overtime eligibility, under
outdated regulations, employers have been strategically
misclassifying their employees as ``managers'' in order to
avoid paying overtime. This is wage theft, plain and simple. A
recently-published study found that giving workers these
inflated job titles results in 13-percent less pay or a loss of
$4 billion in overtime payments each year. By raising the
overtime threshold, how would a revised regulation help to
prevent this kind of grand-scale wage theft from low-wage
workers that is happening across the country in a wide range of
industries?
Ms. Su. Yes. Thank you so much, Ranking Member. Our Wage
and Hour investigations find that overtime violations are some
of the most common that we see. And as you noted, overtime
violations deny workers a just day's pay. It is one of the
fundamental promises in the Fair Labor Standards Act, that when
you work longer hours, you will be paid for it. And that form
of misclassification, giving someone a title but their work is
still very much the work of a frontline employee in order to
avoid paying, is a real problem. That is one of the reasons why
we have engaged in a rulemaking process because titles
shouldn't be used to obscure what workers are really doing, and
the salary test is one part of helping to ensure that workers
who are entitled to overtime get overtime. And so it is just an
important very important piece of ensuring that workers who go
to work each day get the wages that they have earned in their
pockets.
Ms. DeLauro. Mm-hmm.
Mr. Aderholt. Thank you.
Ms. DeLauro. What is interesting is just a news article
that talked about--actually, it was on CBS--would you rather be
a front desk clerk or a ``director of first impressions?'' I
think that really is carrying this to a different level, so we
know how they are trying to circumvent the overtime rules, and
it is wage theft. Thank you, and thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Aderholt. Dr. Harris.

H-2B VISA PROGRAM

Mr. Harris. Thank you very much, and thank you very much,
Madam Secretary, for being here today and speaking with me
yesterday. I brought up a couple of the issues yesterday, and
we talked a little bit about the H-2B Visa Program. I
appreciate that things are being expedited. I still think there
is room for over about 4,000 additional visas this year, as we
spoke about yesterday, and maybe you can follow up with that
and just see if there is any way we can get a few more visas
released.
With regard to H-2B visas, the lottery system is a real
problem because you pick winners and losers. If somebody comes
up as a loser 2 years in a row or 3 years in a row and they
depend on these H-2B workers, they will go out of business.
They have in my district. So I will ask you, and, again, we
will follow up later about whether or not you could, in fact,
eliminate the lottery system, go to a proportional or where a
certain proportion of eligible applications get filled for an
employer instead of all or none because I think that would
help. Especially, as you pointed out yesterday in our
conversation, with the increase in applications, this becomes
even more important that we perhaps go to some proportional
system. You will have to get back to me whether or not that can
be statutorily done.

NO SURPRISES ACT IMPLEMENTATION

Mr. Harris. With regards to the No Surprises Act
implementation on ERISA plans, there is still an issue with
insurance companies not having timely payments to providers.
They are supposed to pay within 30 days. Less than a third pay
on time, and, again, you will have to get back to me as to
whether or not the Department, if they just need more resources
to enforce this with the insurers. We kind of solved the
problem for the patients, but we kind of put it on the backs of
the providers now instead of the insurance companies where part
of that burden should reside.
Mr. Harris. But let me talk about a couple of other issues.
Look, I am sorry that there is bipartisan opposition to your
confirmation in the Senate, but it is bipartisan, and, again,
we don't deal with Senate politics. But I am glad we have a
functioning acting secretary because the Labor Department does
important things.
You know, there was criticism from the other side over
attempts to rein in government spending. Look, you are aware we
have over $2 trillion deficit this year, a $34 trillion Federal
debt, and I am still waiting to hear, other than tax increases,
what is a possible way out. Madam Secretary, you know as well
as I do that the President's budget, despite almost $6 trillion
in tax increases, still keeps that deficit going. So if the
other side wants to recommend how we deal with it, I am all
ears, but just criticizing our attempts at fiscal
responsibility I don't think is responsible, to be honest with
you.
But what I want to concentrate on in the last couple
minutes is what is the Department of Labor doing because I
think you will agree with me that wage growth has not kept pace
with inflation. That is just a fact, and we have a lot of data
points to show that, and I believe that part of it is, is that
we have 9 million working-age people who crossed the border
illegally in the past few years. I have got to believe they
have entered the job market, sometimes legally, sometimes not,
and that that is suppressing wages. What is the Department
doing to help the American worker from that border invasion
that has resulted in almost 10 million workers entering this
country who, you and I both know, probably get paid a little
less than an American union worker and depress wages overall.

H-ZB VISA PROGRAM

Ms. Su. Thank you, Dr. Harris. I did very much enjoy our
conversation yesterday, and there are many issues that I feel
like we could work on together. I want to just acknowledge the
H-2B issue. I know it is important, and businesses should not
be going out of business because they can't get the workers
that they need. That is why we have taken a hard look at what
our Office of Foreign Labor Certification is doing to try to
speed up while maintaining integrity of that system.
As you acknowledge, the number of applications that we have
received has really skyrocketed. In the first 3 days of
January, we got more applications, 4 times more than the cap,
and so just acknowledging that I look forward to working with
you and on sharing whatever we have done to try to make it
better. But also you mentioned the potential for statutory
improvements. I hear this from many of the members of your
body, and I would love to make sure that we are doing what we
need to do there so that employers can meet their workforce
needs. Also appreciate I know you have probably a particular
expertise in the No Surprises Act and why it is so important,
and we do do enforcement in that space, but also look forward
to a conversation about what we might need to do to ensure that
those who should be paying are actually paying at the same time
that we protect patients.

FY 2025 BUDGET PROPOSAL

Just one thing on the budget itself. So our proposal is a
4-percent increase over the fiscal year 2024 enacted. It also
stays within the Fiscal Responsibility Act cap. And so I
appreciate your point about we are in a place of making
difficult choices, and I believe that the Department, we have
done that. Some of what you are hoping for would require us to
have more resources, which was why we have asked for them,
including in the H-2B space.
The last thing is, I would say the data about where we are
in the economy is that wage growth has actually outpaced the
rate of inflation. This is especially true for low- and middle-
income workers. I am not saying that everything is great. I am
not saying that everyone is doing great. There are still too
many people, as the ranking member said, who live paycheck to
paycheck, who struggle. That is the work of all of us to do
everything we can with the powers that we have to try to
alleviate some of that suffering. But real wages are up, and
that means more wages in workers' pockets. That means more
breathing room, as the President likes to say, for working
families.
And I think one of the solutions to what you raise is that
if we create a pie that is big enough for everybody, then we
can see good job opportunities for all, and that is what we
have seen since President Biden came into office. We have had
15.2 million jobs created. We have historically low
unemployment. The chairman mentioned in his State, it has been
under 4 percent for 26 months straight. That has not been true
since the 1970s. And labor force participation is high, so it
is not that the unemployment rate is low because people aren't
working. People are coming into labor market, they are looking
for jobs, and they are finding jobs. And so when you have
strong GDP growth, steady jobs growth, and you invest in
policies that help working families, we create a bigger pie in
this country, and that is the President's vision. I share that
vision, and I know that there are areas that we can work on
together to pursue that vision.
Mr. Aderholt. Thank you. You yield back. Ms. Lee.
Ms. Lee. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Good morning,
Madam Secretary.
Ms. Su. Good morning.
Ms. Lee. Let me first say thank you very much for your
tremendous leadership, Acting Secretary, Madam Secretary. Thank
you.
I wanted to ask you a couple of things about what you are
doing to promote job quality and pathways to good jobs for all
workers, especially historically-underrepresented workers that
tend to be from communities of color. I am happy that in the
Department request, you include $5 million for the Women in
Apprenticeship and Non-Traditional Occupations Grant Program.
Now, in June of 2023, black women over the age of 20 had an
unemployment rate of 5.4 percent, which is higher than white
women at 2.6 percent, AAPI women at 3.2 percent, and Latinas at
4.1 percent. Of course, this is very concerning to hear. We
know that black women have also been disproportionately
impacted by the lingering impacts of COVID-19 and the pandemic,
and so wanted to find out what actions are you taking in the
Department of Labor to really address job access disparities
impacting women of color in general and African-American women
in specific, or Black women in specific.

JOB ACCESS DISPARITIES IMPACTING BLACK WOMEN

Ms. Su. Thank you, Congresswoman. This is an issue that is
very near and dear to my heart. This is something that we have
to get right. When the President says that we are going to
build an economy from the middle out and the bottom up that
leaves no one behind, he knows and I know that we have to be
clear-eyed about who has been left behind for too long in the
past. Our budget includes investments in workforce training
programs that are creating opportunity in communities across
the country.
I mentioned the historic job growth, and these are
opportunities for people who want to work, who have talent and
potential, and the desire to be in a training program, and want
nothing more than their shot at their piece of the American
Dream. And so we need to do everything we can to break down
systemic barriers that have existed for too long. Some of those
are because of bias and discrimination. Some of those exist
because of occupational segregation. We have seen that, too
often, black workers are relegated to jobs that have lower job
quality and lower pay, and then, because of our lack of valuing
their work, that becomes justified in that industry. We have to
do better than that. The care industry is a good example of
that.
So what are we doing about it? Our programs include, as you
mentioned, WANTO (Women in Apprenticeships and Nontraditional
Occupations) grant. We are seeking an increase in order to use
proven models. We see across the country that there are women,
like I mentioned Mariah, but there are thousands others who are
in programs that will allow them to do work that maybe they
didn't know existed before, or maybe they didn't even imagine
for themselves, but oftentimes, as we know, when someone is in
there, others can see that they can do it, too, and so we are
investing in programs. There are programs also that are led by
black women, black tradeswomen in particular. So we have an
investment in a group called Chicago Women in Trades that is
demonstrating how when you give black women a chance, they can
do any trade, any job, but a trades job that has a square path
to the middle class. We also invested in scaling their model
toward others.
The last thing I will mention is, I know we talked about
this, Congresswoman, but we have something called Mega Project
at the Department of Labor. That is an effort to take
construction projects of $35 million or more and provide
assistance from the beginning. Now, the chairman said not
everything is a Federal solution, and we agree with that. So
the question is, how can the Federal Government help to advance
our goals of a strong economy, good jobs for all, and equity?
What we are doing in this space is assisting project owners,
contractors, and subcontractors before a single shovel even
hits the ground to make sure that they are getting the
workforce that they need and tapping into every community for
that. So it is about recruitment policies, it is about outreach
to make sure people know that there are jobs, and we are doing
that in a way that is very intentional about leaving no one
behind.
Ms. Lee. Thank you very much, Madam Secretary, because this
whole issue of equity, it has many, many layers, and I am glad
to see that you all have looked at this and advancing through
executive orders, also, equity in contracting, which is
extremely important for minority- and women-owned businesses.
Also, very quickly, in terms of professions and workers who are
working outdoors, given the fire dangers now, especially in
California, I am trying to figure out how OSHA helps protect
workers outside from these harmful effects of climate change,
and we talked a little bit about the bill that I have, the
SMOKE Act. Mr. Chairman, do I have another 30 seconds on this?
Mr. Aderholt. Go ahead. Go ahead.

THE SMOKE ACT TO PROTECT OUTDOOR WORKERS

Ms. Lee. I just want to raise the increased funds used to
protect outside workers, like construction workers and
longshoremen, people who are impacted by the effects of
climate. What are we doing to protect them, and if you can look
at this more closely.
Ms. Su. Absolutely, Congresswoman. Very much eager to work
with you on this to see what we can do. There is not a Federal
standard on smoke, but as you know, the general duties clause
applies to all employers who are covered by the OSH Act, and we
have to do everything we can to keep workers safe, including
from outdoor hazards. We are currently working on, as I think
you all know, the first Federal standard ever to combat the
hazards of heat. That is both an outdoor and an indoor
potential hazard, but very much aware of the need to protect
workers against outdoor issues and happy to work with you on
what we can do.
Ms. Lee. Thank you.
Mr. Aderholt. Mr. Moolenaar.
Ms. Lee. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

SMALL FARMERS AND THE H-2A PROGRAM

Mr. Moolenaar. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Good morning, Madam
Secretary. Food production, production agriculture is vital for
our country. It is vital for Michigan and for my constituents.
You talked earlier about the economic engine, small businesses.
In rural America, agriculture is the economic engine, and these
family farmers are vital. Many of the farmers, the small farm
operators in my district, use the H-2A program. Are you
familiar with that program? Okay.
Ms. Su. Yes, sir.
Mr. Moolenaar. Unfortunately, the Department of Labor
continues to hurt the work they do to feed Michigan and our
country. For 10 straight years, the Department has mandated
adverse effect wage rate increases that outpace inflation. I am
hearing from fifth- and sixth-generation farmers that they may
only have 1 or 2 years left before they are forced to leave the
business. Even H-2A workers are concerned about the increases
because they know their job will be lost if the farm goes out
of business. That is why I introduced the Supporting Farm
Operations Act to pause the AEWR increases and help these farms
stay open. While this wage freeze would give farmers some sense
of stability, there is also the problem with the flawed
methodology used to calculate AEWR.
Madam Secretary, I noticed in your remarks you didn't
mention meeting with small farm operators. Have you met with
farmers about this issue?
Ms. Su. Thank you, Congressman. I want to acknowledge the
importance of the program. I have certainly heard from many
about why the H-2A Program is so important for them to meet
their workforce needs. Part of the H-2A Program is to make sure
that H-2A workers do not undercut the ability for workers in
the United States already to do the jobs and to be paid a
wage----
Mr. Moolenaar. No, I am familiar with the program, and I
think there are good safeguards to ensure that we aren't in any
way forcing Americans out of jobs. But this is a matter of the
Biden administration raising the costs on these family farmers
to the point where these mandated Department of Labor increases
are at risk of putting them out of business. And so I am
wondering if you have heard about that concern.
Ms. Su. Yes. Yes. So as you know, the Department has
completed a rule on that, and so as with all of our rules, we
invite, seek out, and take input. So, yes, it is a space in
which, as you say, we both need to help employers meet their
workforce needs, and we need to ensure that the safeguards are
in place.
Mr. Moolenaar. Thank you, Madam Secretary, but I guess my
question is, there are negative consequences to that rule
forcing family farms out of business. And my question is, are
these intended consequences or unintended consequences with
this policy because what I am hearing you say is you have heard
the message and, you are not concerned about it.
Ms. Su. Well, Congressman, I have also met with some of
your colleagues about this, and I want to make the same offer
to you, which is, I am happy to have my team come and talk to
farmers who are affected by this to understand the impact of
the rule. The rule that we did, it was a very narrow part of
how AEWR is used. Most----
Mr. Moolenaar. Well, let me just say----
Ms. Su. Yeah.
Mr. Moolenaar [continuing]. In my district, it is having a
huge effect----
Ms. Su. Yeah.
Mr. Moolenaar [continuing]. When it comes to people growing
cherries, apples, asparagus, carrots. I mean, across the board,
people growing fruit and vegetables are affected by this, and
they need desperate relief. I guess the question is, could you
actually, on your own, pause this increase to give them some
time to get back on their feet?
Ms. Su. Let me say this, Congressman. I am happy to have
our staff work together on what they need. In addition to what
I responded to earlier with the chairman's question about how
we engage with small businesses, including small farms and any
rules that affect them at the front end----
Mr. Moolenaar. I will take you up on that.
Ms. Su [continuing]. We also do compliance assistance----
Mr. Moolenaar. Okay.
Ms. Su [continuing]. Across all of our agencies, and this
might be an area where that could be.
Mr. Moolenaar. Well, I will take you up on that. I guess
one last question. Secretary Vilsack claimed that the Farm
Labor Survey is an accurate and appropriate vehicle to set the
AEWR. Your own Bureau of Labor Statistics data show that in
Michigan, the general farm worker wage is $2 less than the Farm
Labor Survey rate. How do you explain setting the AEWR based on
the Farm Labor Survey, when your own data show that it is $2
less?
Ms. Su. Well, so, Congressman, I have tremendous respect,
obviously, from my colleague, Secretary Vilsack, and it is true
that our AEWR is based on their survey. My understanding of how
the H-2A guardrails is that we have to ensure that an H-2A wage
is not less than not AEWR, but the prevailing wage, a
collective bargained wage, the Federal minimum wage. So it is
the highest of those things.
Mr. Moolenaar. Mr. Chairman, just one last question?
Mr. Aderholt. Yeah, real quick.
Mr. Moolenaar. All right. Well, just so you are aware, in
Michigan, it is $18.50 an hour, which is vastly above any of
the rates you were talking about. Often, housing is provided,
and transportation is provided. So in my view, that far exceeds
anything that you are comparing it to.
Ms. Su. I am very happy to follow up with you on this,
Congressman.
Mr. Moolenaar. Thank you.
Mr. Aderholt. Mr. Pocan.
Mr. Pocan. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, appreciate it, and
thank you, Madam Secretary.
I want to acknowledge the remarks that Rosa made as well
about you are Secretary Su, period, and you have been doing
outstanding work in working with business and workers and
doing, I think, a really great balance with your Department,
and I just want to thank you for all that work.
As you know, we are kind of in an interesting point where
the amount of unionization is at an all-time, I think high. At
least the public opinion on unions is highest in 50 years. We
are seeing people organizing in areas that we have never seen
organize before. In your budget, there is a slight increase to
your Office of Labor Management Standards, which helps protect
union members and their right to organize.

PROTECT WORKERS FROM UNFAIR LABOR PRACTICES

I have two questions. First, given the significant rise in
unionization over the last year, is this funding sufficient to
meet the needs of workers nationwide? And then, also, I know it
is independent agency, but the National Labor Relations Board,
many of us have advocated for a much stronger increase, and
they are still kind of chronically underfunded, leading to
significant drops in staffing nationwide. How can we continue
to protect workers from unfair labor practices with all this
new unionization and support the NLRB, a vital independent
agency that safeguards employees' rights, to seek better
working conditions?
Ms. Su. Thank you very much, Congressman Pocan. Yes, we
have seen historic levels of organizing in this country, and we
have seen really historic gains at the bargaining table for
workers represented by unions. We are also seeing, as has long
been the case, that when that happens, there are benefits not
just for the members of that union, but for wages in that
industry, and that is very much a key tenet of President
Biden's vision of a strong economy.
To your point, there were about 400,000 workers who joined
unions in 2023, and to Congresswoman Lee's question earlier, 65
percent of them were black. And so we also know that unions
have been a pathway to the middle class for all workers, but
has been very important as a way to combat racial inequity in
wages. Our OLMS, as you mentioned, Congressman, has a role to
play. Part of what we do is investigate to make sure that union
elections are held according to the law. That is something that
we take very seriously. And another is that on a form called
the LM-10, employers who engage in certain practices that would
be seen as dissuading their workers from joining unions have to
report this activity to us. So we have done some work to try to
make that easier. We have updated the form, and we also take
that work very, very seriously. As you acknowledge, the NLRB is
a separate body, so I won't speak to that work except to say
that we do believe that the right of a worker to choose whether
or not to join a union belongs entirely to that worker, full
stop.

CHILD LABOR PROTECTIONS

Mr. Pocan. Great. Thank you. And then I just want to talk a
little more about child labor protections. You know, we have
seen a number of States introduce legislation and pass
legislation that has kind of rolled back protections, waiving
work permit requirements, including in my own State. Things
have been proposed to allow 14- and 15-year-olds to be able to
work, and, in many cases, as you said, hazardous or
exploitative sort of circumstances. With the budget that you
have proposed, do you think that you can adequately address
what is happening in the States, given there are so many laws
passing that are, I would say, weakening standards on child
safety?
Ms. Su. There is no one who would like to see truly
sufficient resources to combat the scourge of child labor in
this country than me. Our request--it is $10.5 million for
child labor to our Wage and Hour Division--is very much
intended to make real progress in building those resources and
to be respectful of the Fiscal Responsibility Act and the caps
that were in place.
It is true that while some States are increasing
protections, they see what is going on, they don't want to see
children working in hazardous conditions, getting injured on
the job, falling off of rooftops and dying, working with
hazardous chemicals, working with dangerous equipment, and they
are increasing their own penalties, there are also some States,
as you know, that are doing the opposite. One important message
is that Federal law does apply regardless, right? The Federal
law is a floor, and we make sure that the Department of Labor
enforces that floor so that children, regardless of the State
protections, understand that there is a floor beneath which
nobody should have to live and work, and that is the Federal
standard.
But we also have tried to improve our working in
partnership with State and local enforcement agencies. So in
States where there are higher protections, we really defer to
the work that they do in order to allow our resources to be
really utilized where the Department of Labor is truly the
first and last line of defense for vulnerable individuals.
Mr. Pocan. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, appreciate it.
Mr. Aderholt. Mr. Clyde.

DOL'S RULEMAKING AND INDEPENDENT CONTRACTORS

Mr. Clyde. Thank you. Thank you, Chairman Aderholt. Acting
Secretary Su, in the last 3 years, Americans have experienced
sky high inflation. Our national debt has continued to climb as
a result of the Biden administration's failed policies.
Moreover, our Nation is facing a serious labor shortage across
the board, from the healthcare sector to childcare services to
various skilled positions. So I think it is more important than
ever that we eliminate unnecessary barriers and red tape for
our labor force to ensure that employers, especially small
businesses, are able to find the employees that they need. Yet
despite this labor shortage, the Department of Labor continues
to push dangerous rules that will destroy businesses across our
country. Hardworking Americans have become increasingly wary of
the Department of Labor's authoritarian legislating through
rulemaking.
The National Labor Relations Board rule, Standards for
Determining Joint Employer Status, published on October 27 last
year, and the Wage and Hour Division's rule, Employee or
Independent Contractor Classification under the Fair Labor
Standards Act, published on January 10 of this year, are two
such rules. While I am relieved that both the House and the
Senate have passed a Congressional Review Act resolution
disapproving of the joint employer rule, threats from the White
House to veto the CRA are extremely concerning. Furthermore,
knowing that a U.S. district judge in Texas has already vacated
the rule on March 8 of this year, I urge your Department not to
pursue further action on this matter.
This rule, if allowed to go into effect, will devastate
small business franchises and entrepreneurs by placing
unnecessary and burdensome requirements on mom-and-pop shops.
These businesses should have the autonomy to determine their
own hiring practices, wages, and benefits in compliance with
current Federal law. They often lack the financial and
administrative means to satisfy labor union demands, yet your
Department would place legal liability on these small
businesses to do just that. If that were not enough of a blow
to our economy, your Department is also pursuing the
independent contractor rule, which would upend the concept of
independent contractor work, exposing businesses to additional
legal liability and limiting opportunities for individuals to
work as independent contractors.
Whether it is a full-time profession, a second job, or
part-time work, roughly 45 percent of the American workforce
are pursuing employment as independent contractors to keep food
on their tables and provide for their families. These workers
choose an independent contractor status because of the
flexibility and the autonomy it provides, allowing them to
determine when and with whom they do business. Those contracts
between businesses and independent contractors are agreed to by
both parties, and it is far beyond the Department of Labor's
reach or authority to intervene in these private business
dealings. By making it harder for individuals to qualify as
independent contractors, the Department of Labor is placing
additional liability on business, resulting in fewer contract
opportunities for independent workers and a slower, more
tedious hiring process.
Acting Secretary Su, independent contractor work is a
cornerstone of the American economy. Would you agree?
Ms. Su. Yes, sir.
Mr. Clyde. It is composed of more than 72 million
Americans. In light of the devastating effects your rule will
have on these workers, what is the Department of Labor doing to
ensure that Americans can continue to work as independent
contractors?
Ms. Su. Thank you very much, Congressman. I appreciated you
taking a moment for us to chat yesterday before this hearing.
So let me answer the various issues that you raised.
The first is, I know you know, but to be clear, the NLRB is
an entirely separate entity, and while I have tremendous
respect for them, the joint employer rule was not put out by
the Department of Labor, and we did not play any role in the
joint employer rule.
Mr. Clyde. Okay.
Ms. Su. To the point of the independent contractor rule,
which was ours, I do agree that independent contractors play an
extremely important role in our economy, and our rule does not
affect that. Bonafide, true independent contracting, it is a
way that people make a living. It is the way that they put
their expertise into developing their own independent business
operation, and then they get hired to do that. That remains in
place.
Mr. Clyde. Okay. Well, then, let me ask you this.
Ms. Su. Okay.
Mr. Clyde. Did your Department conduct any studies in order
to determine the economic impact if millions of workers can no
longer qualify as independent contractors?
Ms. Su. So what our independent contractor rule did was
bring the test back to be aligned with decades of Federal case
law on this. We didn't make up the test. The test comes from
cases that have interpreted how to decide whether somebody is
an employee or an independent contractor under the Fair Labor
Standards Act that have been decided, again, for a very, very
long time, and we did engage with, as we do with all of our
rulemaking. I think we had something over 30,000 comments on
that rule, and we, of course, review them all. We respond to
them all. Our goal really, Congressman, was to make sure that
somebody who should be an employee and, therefore, should enjoy
all the protections of a century's worth of labor law
protection, like minimum wage, like the right to overtime, like
unemployment insurance.
Mr. Clyde. I get that, I get that, but what I see is that
what you are doing is you are putting a Federal foot on the
ability of people to be an independent contractor, and I don't
see that. I know I am over my time. I have one more quick
question, if I may?
Mr. Aderholt. Real quick.
Mr. Clyde. Okay. All right. You are asking for $8 billion
here on a new Federal program. We are $34 trillion in debt. How
can you do that? How is this a Federal authority? Where is it
in the Constitution that you are going to spend another $8
billion?
Ms. Su. Well, it is a request, and I am here to make a case
for our request. This is really very much a part of, and we
have heard some of this theme already, employers want and need
workers with the right skills for the jobs that they are
creating. And working people, job seekers want good jobs in
their communities, and part of the Department of Labor's role
is to try to create the connections----
Mr. Clyde. I agree, but I think that is a State
responsibility, not a Federal responsibility, and I yield back.
Mr. Aderholt. Ms. Frankel.

WOMEN IN THE WORKFORCE

Ms. Frankel. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chair. Well,
welcome. Thank you, Madam Secretary, and I applaud the good
work of your Department and your team. And I have heard some
concern from my friends over on the other side of the aisle
about inflation, about regulation, so I am just going to give
you my little point of view here.
What I am concerned about, what I think a lot of people
concerned about, a trend for women being driven out of the
workforce. Why? What is happening? First of all--first of all--
I use my triple, ``my, my, my.'' There are 25 million women in
this country. I know this is not your Department issue, but
there are 25 million women in this country of reproductive age
who now live in States where abortion is banned or severely
restricted. You know what that means? That means they are going
to be potentially thousands and thousands of women who have
forced pregnancies, which means many of those women are going
to be forced out of the labor market. And you want to talk
about inflation? We are going to talk about the costs rising
for those families.
Number two, the cost of childcare and long-term care are
rising. Centers are closing all over the country. I have two
little toddler grandchildren. I just spent my week off trying
to find childcare for them this summer. It is very, very
difficult all over this country. And also, not having paid
leave, medical leave policies, also driving women out of the
country--out of the country--may drive them out of the
country--out of the workforce. When you compare us to like
countries, I saw a report from the Labor Department that this
is costing our economy billions of dollars. I think it was up
something like $700 billion.
So my first question to you, and let me just add something
else. What is that called, adding insult to injury? Adding
insult to injury, last year, the Republican majority proposed
an appropriation bill that completely eliminated the Women's
Bureau. First question: why is it important to have a dedicated
Women's Bureau at the Labor Department?

IMPORTANCE OF WOMEN'S BUREAU

Ms. Su. Thank you very much, Congresswoman. I think in much
of what you said, you provided the answer. We have seen women
come back into the workforce after COVID in record numbers, and
we certainly saw how women, in particular, but obviously
everybody was devastated by the economic impacts of the
pandemic. Just to your point about childcare, we know that when
we make the right investments, it works. So under the American
Rescue Plan Act, the investments in childcare allowed some
225,000 childcare centers to stay open. At the same time, it
allowed increase in childcare workers' wages, right? The
President believes, as do I, I know you do as well, that we
should not have to choose between reliable, accessible,
affordable childcare and the well-being of childcare givers,
that those two things, we can uplift them at the same time.
Our Women's Bureau has done a study. Two I will mention.
One is the national database of childcare prices. It shows just
how much childcare costs at a very granular level. I think it
is down to by county or district, but it is really indicating
just how untenable it is to not have a childcare infrastructure
that can support all individuals, but because those
responsibilities still primarily fall to women, women workers.
The other is the study that you mentioned, which is that if we
invested in childcare in this country and other family-
supporting policies the way comparable industrial countries do,
like Germany and Canada, we would allow some 5 million more
women to join the workforce, and that would result in $775
million of economic activity a year. So I know the conversation
is often about how can we afford to do this. I think the real
question is how can we afford not to do it.

AFFORDABLE CHILDCARE

Ms. Frankel. Thank you. You talked about apprentice
programs or uplifting jobs. There are a lot of jobs that women
have that we need, especially in the care industry. What, if
anything, you are doing to try to make sure that those workers
are getting the salaries they need to take care of their own
families?
Ms. Su. Yeah, that is right. So this is a whole-of-
government issue, and many agencies are hard at work on this.
The President issued an executive order on increasing access to
care and supporting caregivers. The Department of Labor has
some work in that space, including samples that we created so
that workers who work in people's homes, whether as nannies or
caregivers or housekeepers, can actually have an agreement with
their employer to set out rights, responsibilities,
expectations, and the like.
The other thing that I will mention is this kind of relates
to, Chairman, your point about the sector grants, is there are
industries in which employers say they really, really need
workers. Childcare is one of them. Healthcare is another.
Education is a third. And so when we talk about apprenticeship
programs and training programs, we often focus on the trades.
That makes sense because the trades are the gold standard when
it comes to apprenticeship programs, but these training
programs, tried and true, also work in other industries. So we
have invested in other sectors. Childcare is one of them.
Teaching is another. We now have apprenticeships in industries
that didn't exist before.
Ms. Frankel. Thank you. I yield back, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Aderholt. Mr. LaTurner.

REGISTERED APPRENTICESHIPS

Mr. LaTurner. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Always pleased to
follow my colleague from Florida as well. I am sure all of my
colleagues here can testify to the fact that our Nation is
experiencing a workforce crisis that our current system is not
adequately addressing. I hardly take a meeting with Kansas
employers where they don't share about struggles to close the
skills gap and find workers to meet the needs of their
business. Given the current status of our labor force, I have
serious reservations about the proposed rule that your
Department has put forward under the National Apprenticeship
Act. I would specifically like to discuss a provision that
would strip State apprenticeship agencies of the ability to
recognize suitable occupations for apprenticeships and
centralize this authority with DOL's Office of Apprenticeship,
completely undermining State autonomy and almost certainly
leading to a disconnect between local labor markets and the
needs for apprenticeship opportunities.
While I understand you cannot answer proposed questions on
the regulation, employers have significant concerns that under
the current system, the Department of Labor is already not a
neutral arbiter when it comes to reviewing and approving
apprenticeship applications. Can you please share the number of
requests for a new apprenticeable industry and the average time
it took the Department to approve the request?
Ms. Su. Thank you, Congressman. I have heard this now a
couple times about neutral arbiter, so I do want to say that
our approach to workforce development overall, but definitely
apprenticeships, is that they have to be demand driven. They
have to be tied to the needs of employers. It just doesn't make
sense to train for skills or skills that are not needed or jobs
that don't exist. That is one reason why registered
apprenticeships are so invaluable, is that they engage
employers on their needs. There is clarity about what the
skills are needed, how they are going to be acquired, and then
individuals can earn while they learn. I talk to lots of people
who would love to go into a training program to get a better
skill and to get a better job and to be able to afford more of
the basics of life, but they can't do that because they have
bills to pay. They have a job they are currently in.
Mr. LaTurner. For the applications the Department did not
grant, can you please share some examples of why the Department
reached that decision?
Ms. Su. So I don't know about a specific situation, but I
will say that one reason why registered apprenticeships are so
valued is that they do have real standards built into them, and
it is standards not only for the training, but also standards
for the job. There is a job quality component to it: wages,
wage progression, the opportunity to move up. There is also----
Mr. LaTurner. I have very limited time.
Ms. Su. Okay.
Mr. LaTurner. I have to move on, but I would love to talk
offline about that.
Ms. Su. Yes.

H-2A PROGRAM CHANGES

Mr. LaTurner. In much of my district, agriculture and ag-
adjacent industries comprise a large portion of the workforce
in the State's economy. Across Kansas, farmers experience
challenges in securing a consistent workforce, and many utilize
the H-2A Program. I already hear from farmers across my
district of the complexity of the applications. Especially when
employers utilize the program, they must interact separately
with multiple different government agencies who are slow to
process applications and delay decisions on whether an employer
may proceed with the hiring process.
The Department of Labor's changes to the program wage
methodology through drastic increases in the adverse effect
wage rate and changes to occupational classification codes have
created more uncertainty for producers in my district who are
forced to absorb the cost of the rulemaking. In many cases, due
to either the cost of the program or delays in processing,
those jobs have remained unfilled. When you responded to
Congressman Moolenaar's question about the impacts of the H-2A
changes on a small and mid-sized farms, you mentioned that the
Department helps with rule compliance. How does the compliance
with new wage requirements help producers for whom the program
has become unaffordable?
Ms. Su. Thank you, Congressman. As I discussed with
Congressman Moolenaar, the H-2A Program is a balance of meeting
the needs of employers and ensuring protections not just for
the H-2A worker, but for U.S.-based workers, right? There are
requirements around recruitment, and part of that is the wage
protection. I mean, this is by Congress, so you don't want, but
I also don't want a workforce that is more vulnerable and that
brings down the wages in an industry. It could be a job that
somebody in the U.S. wants to do. For example, we had a
complaint involving H-2A farmers, farmers who were using the H-
2A Program to bring in workers and purposely not hiring black
farm workers in Mississippi. We don't want a program that will
undercut the ability of U.S. workers to have a good job.
Mr. LaTurner. We also don't want the compliance to be such
that folks can no longer afford it. Forgive me for going over.
I yield back, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Aderholt. Mrs. Watson-Coleman.

FEDERALLY-CONTRACTED PROJECTS

Mrs. Watson-Coleman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you,
Madam Secretary. Thank you for your testimony regarding all the
good work that I believe this administration and your
Department have been dedicated to. All good intentions don't
lead to all good outcomes, and so I want to kind of talk to you
about that a little bit.
The projects that are funded through the Bipartisan
Infrastructure Plan were devised to provide good jobs, repairs
that needed to be made, increased diversity, increased
training, and all those kinds of things, be it contractors or
employees. I have a question about does the Department have the
resources to ensure that those priorities are actually taking
place. What accountability is there to certify that workforce
diversity goals are being met for federally-contracted
projects? Who keeps that information? Is it in any way
available for us to evaluate because at the end of the day, I
want to make sure that the diversity proposals and promises
actually came through for underserved communities, particularly
minorities and women.
Ms. Su. Thank you, Congresswoman. As I said, this is
something that is very important to me and to the Department as
well. We can't build an economy that leaves no one behind if we
are not honest about who is being left behind. As you note, the
historic investments being made right now in our country is
about repairing roads and making sure there are safe bridges.
It is about making sure that every family who turns on the
faucet gets clean drinking water. It is about ensuring that
every community has access to high-speed, reliable, affordable
internet. And all of those are opportunities to create good
jobs in the communities that need them the most. And so as we
put shovels in the ground, as we replace lead pipes, we also
have to be sure that those jobs are available to every single
community.
One way of doing that, one policy mechanism is to have
local hire provisions when it comes to contractors who receive
Federal funds. My sister agencies, who are putting out the
money, do have mechanisms for reporting on how those projects
are going. We similarly, I mentioned earlier in response to
Congresswoman Lee's question, we have a Mega Project effort
which is designed to help employers make sure that they know
where ready talent is. Everybody has correctly noted the
challenge of employers in finding workers. Well, there is a lot
of untapped talent in this country. There is a tremendous
amount of potential, and this is our moment to make sure that
they enjoy all of the same opportunities that we are creating
in communities across America, and that is how we build more
pathways to the middle class. That is----
Mrs. Watson-Coleman. Can I respectfully interrupt you----
Ms. Su. Of course. Please.

WOMEN AND MINORITIES BEING CONTRACTED FOR JOBS

Mrs. Watson-Coleman [continuing]. Because I agree with
everything that you are saying about what we intend to do, what
we want to do. What I can't get clarified for me is, is it
happening. So I know that you have an Office of Civil Rights.
Every Department has an office of civil rights. No one is
taking responsibility for collecting the data that tells us
whether or not women and minorities are being either hired or
contracted in these jobs. There are a gazillion dollars being
spent. I don't want there to be an ``oops'' at the end of this
process. We had every intention of getting to minorities and
women, helping them to build their companies, helping them to
build their skills, get their jobs, but we didn't meet the
mark. So tell me, where do I need to go?
Ms. Su. It is a very, very important question. I will give
an example of a program within the Department of Labor. So we
have talked about apprenticeship several times, right. Our
budget request includes $335 million for registered
apprenticeships. That is an increase of $50 million. In the
last 3 years, we have expanded apprenticeships to different
industries. I don't think I said earlier there were no teacher
apprenticeships for teachers when this administration came in.
There are now----
Mrs. Watson-Coleman. I know what you are doing. I just want
you to tell me where are you logging in your successes or the
gaps that you are missing, and then what would be the course
corrections. I know what you want to do.
Ms. Su. Yeah.
Mrs. Watson-Coleman. I know what you are telling people to
do. What I don't know is whether or not it is happening and if
the appropriate course corrections are being taken place.
Ms. Su. Yeah. Yeah.
Ms. Watson-Coleman. Excuse me for interrupting you.
Ms. Su. No, no. It is an issue that you are passionate
about, and so am I. So within the apprenticeship programs,
though, we are seeing greater diversity. So it is just we know
that when we make the right investments, when we are
intentional about inclusion, we can move the needle, but there
is much more work to do on that, and I would be very happy to
continue to have conversations with you about how we do it
right.
Mrs. Watson-Coleman. Thank you, and, Mr. Chairman, to you.
I do want to have specific conversations regarding this because
at the end of the day, I want to see the numbers. Thank you
very much, and I yield back.
Mr. Aderholt. Ms. Letlow.

ACCESS TO PAID FAMILY AND MEDICAL LEAVE

Ms. Letlow. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you, Acting
Secretary Su, for being here with us today.
As we discussed yesterday, you know that this past year I
have been working with a bipartisan group of my colleagues to
explore ways to improve access to paid family and medical
leave. In January, our Paid Family Leave Working Group
identified several areas of consensus among the members of the
group and released a legislative framework with four pillars.
One of these pillars included a proposal to create an
interstate paid leave action network, known as the I-Plan, to
drive coordination and harmonization across the growing numbers
of States with paid leave programs. While these States share a
common purpose in providing workers with access to these
critical benefits, they were not built and designed to function
in tandem with the program of another State, let alone the
structural variations of programs implemented in now 13 States
and D.C.
This siloed approach has presented many challenges for
workers, States, and employers, and is one of the top issues we
hear about from our large employers with multiple locations
around the U.S. The I-Plan would incentivize States with paid
leave programs to create, adopt, and improve on interstate
agreements to simplify the process for workers accessing these
benefits, providing employers a way to offer a consistent paid
leave benefit to their employees, and improve the affordability
of benefits across States for an increasingly mobile workforce.

I-PLAN

My question is this, Secretary Su. How would improving
timeliness, accuracy, and portability, all purposes of the I-
Plan, help boost workers' access to State paid leave benefits?
Ms. Su. Congresswoman, thank you so much, and I very much
enjoyed our conversation about at least two issues that we both
care deeply about----
Ms. Letlow. Yes.
Ms. Su [continuing]. This and creating real opportunities
in rural communities. We are--the President says this often--
the only sort of industrialized Nation that does not have a
national paid leave policy, and this is costly. It is costly in
the ways that I mentioned earlier, our study that demonstrates
that if we had one and invested in other kinds of supports in
infrastructure that can support mostly working women but
working individuals, we could improve our economy to the tune
of $775 million a year. This is significant.
We also through our Women's Bureau do work to track and
make sure that we know and States know what other State leave
policies there are, so in the absence of a national policy,
States can learn from one another. States can share stories
about what is working and what is not, what some of the
challenges of implementation are. So those are also some of the
ways that we approach this space.

UNEMPLOYMENT INSURANCE

Ms. Letlow. Sure. Great. And right now, there is no shared
technological systems across States with paid leave programs,
which differs from other social insurance programs, like
unemployment and insurance. How does the absence of a shared
technological system make it difficult for State paid leave
programs to combat fraud and ensure program integrity?
Ms. Su. That is a very interesting question. I will
approach it from an angle that I know because it is something
that we have been working on for the last few years, which is
in the unemployment insurance space, we have seen that the lack
of national efforts to combat fraud can be very damaging. It is
very difficult for States to do a State-by-State effort, and it
makes sense to have systems in which there can be information
sharing but also flagging of different practices. So I am very
happy to talk to you more about what that could look like in
the area that you are talking about.

45S AWARENESS CAMPAIGN AND 45S TAX CREDIT

Ms. Letlow. Wonderful. In the final fiscal year 2024
appropriations package, report language was included to
encourage the Women's Bureau to coordinate a campaign designed
to increase awareness of the tax credits for paid family and
medical leave authorized under Section 45S of the Internal
Revenue Code. How do you envision this 45S awareness campaign
will be implemented, and will the Women's Bureau be working
with other Federal agencies and outside stakeholders to
increase awareness of the 45S tax credit?
Ms. Su. Yes, and this is another space I would be very
happy to follow up with you and have our staff work together so
that we tap into your expertise and the ways that we can
improve that outreach. I think, again, what you are saying is
true. It can be confusing, especially for employers who operate
in multiple States. That is why a national policy is so
important, but in the absence of that, very happy to work with
you on this issue.
Ms. Letlow. Wonderful. Thank you so much for your time. Mr.
Chairman, I yield back.
Ms. Su. Thank you.
Mr. Aderholt. Mr. Hoyer.

APPRENTICESHIP PROGRAM AND CAREER TRAINING FUND

Mr. Hoyer. Thank you very much. You have an extraordinarily
impressive background (inaudible) making probably 6, 7, 8 times
what you are making as Secretary, so we appreciate the time and
effort you are giving. I want to ask at least two questions,
and I will be brief on the questions about my Make It In
America agenda.
The last Congress was the most Make It In America Congress
in which I have served. We are going to get lots of new jobs,
and we need to train people for the jobs, as we pointed out. I
want you to speak to the apprenticeship programs and the Career
Training Fund, both which are looking for the same thing.
Making sure that as we create a surge in new industries with
new jobs available, we have tripled or quadrupled the private
sector investment in manufacturing over the last year. So speak
to me of how we are going to implement that and reference the
problems we have had in the Congress in getting to an
apprenticeship program that can be agreed upon.
Ms. Su. Thank you very much, Congressman, and thank you for
your kind words coming from you. They really do mean a lot.
So yes, we are in a moment of tremendous job growth and the
need to connect job seekers to those jobs. I often say it this
way. We are investing in infrastructure like never before. The
idea that jobs should be in America, that we can make things in
America, is very fundamental to the President's vision for this
country and I know to yours as well. Physical roads and bridges
are one form of infrastructure. Our workforce system is also
infrastructure as well, as the ranking member said, and they
are the roads and bridges that connect people to the good jobs
they want and need, and employers to the people that they want
and need. And we need that infrastructure to be just as strong
as our physical infrastructure.
So registered apprenticeships are really like superhighways
in that infrastructure because of the way that they connect.
They are demand driven, they have a good job at the end of it,
and it is an opportunity to recruit from communities that might
not otherwise be able to do a training program. I get to see
them from Oregon to New York, from Chicago to Las Vegas. These
are programs----
Mr. Hoyer. From California to the New York Island.
[Laughter.]
Ms. Su. That is right. And so our budget really seeks to
double down on something that we know works, that is needed in
this time. Part of our sectors include advanced manufacturing.
There is no reason, as President Biden says all the time, we
can't make the things that we invented here in America with
American workers, American talent in good jobs that will
provide a pathway to the middle class. So we have already
expanded apprenticeship programs significantly. We have 6,500
new apprenticeship programs since President Biden came into
office with over 11,000 employers, and we know that we still
have more work to do on that. So that is part of building an
infrastructure that will help meet the workforce needs of
America's employers and create really good pathways.
The other thing about registered apprenticeships that I
think is important is because they have standards that can
often be nationwide. I really hear this idea that one size does
not fit all. I know that to be true, but when you have national
standards, you also give workers more power to be mobile,
right? Now workers are not just tied to a single employer. They
have skills that they can use if they have to or want to move.
Mr. Hoyer. Madam Secretary, to what extent, as I referenced
in my question, have our inability to come to an agreement on
Federal law impeded our success here?
Ms. Su. It certainly is helpful to the field when there is
clarity about standards and expectations. You also asked about
the other career training fund that we have in place. The idea
there is to provide about $10,000 for about 750,000 individuals
for training purposes. Again, we know that not only do people
sometimes not get to train for a job because they didn't know
that it existed, but sometimes they simply can't afford to
leave a job to do it. Sometimes they need supportive services.
We say that all the time, that the inability of someone to get
to a job is a massive barrier to them doing the job. It is not
because Americans don't want to work. We are the most
hardworking people in the world. The President says all the
time, right? You could never bet against America's workers, but
sometimes the infrastructure doesn't exist for things like
childcare, for transportation, and so we are looking to put a
fund in place that would help to support those needs.
Mr. Hoyer. Thank you very much. Just one observation,
brief, Mr. Chairman. It is interesting that we have a lot of
people saying employers are having a tough time finding people,
thus there are job openings. It is ironic that some contend
that the economy is doing poorly, but employers can't hire
enough people. That didn't require an answer.
Mr. Aderholt. Mr. Ciscomani.

SILICA EXPOSURE

Mr. Ciscomani. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you,
also, Acting Secretary Su, for being here with us today. Nice
to meet you.
Representing Arizona's 6th Congressional District, which
continues to expand with new industry and career opportunities,
I have a strong interest in ensuring that we are equipping our
workforce with the skills and be able to compete not only
today, but for future generations to come as well. So I have
got several questions where I could go, but I want to focus in
on two main industries. One is mining.
As you know, Arizona is a national leader in the mining
industry, but I have heard concerns from my constituents
regarding Department of Labor and also the Mine Safety and
Health Administration, MSHA, proposed rule regarding silica
exposure. Now, specifically, there are concerns that the
incurred costs necessary to abide by these regulations, these
new regulations, are incredibly stark. They are concerned that
they are not properly considered on their feedback, their
concerns weren't. So can you explain how your Agency reviewed
and incorporated industry and stakeholder comments in that
process?
Ms. Su. Thank you so much for raising that, Congressman. So
actually, that is a rule that we just rolled out yesterday. We
just announced it yesterday. I was in Uniontown, Pennsylvania,
along with many miners who talked about just what the impact of
exposure to silica dust has been. As I said there, the trends
are going in the wrong direction. You know, 1 in 5 miners get
sick because of silica dust. They develop irreversible damage
to their lungs, and their lifespan is cut short by an average
of about 12 years. It is just an unconscionable situation. And
our rule, as is true with all of our rules, was developed with
input from the industry in mind.
I think it might be important to note, based on what you
said, Congressman, that one of the pieces of feedback that we
took and incorporated into the rule is that while the rule
limits the permissible exposure level for silica as well as
other airborne hazards, it has a ramp-up time for mine
operators. So for coal mines, they will have to come into
compliance by April of 2025, and for metal/nonmetal mines, they
have until April of 2026, so they have 2 years. That is an
example, I think, of what you were talking about, which is we
can protect workers and make sure that nobody finds their job
to be a death sentence, but we can also do it in a way that
takes into account what the responsibilities of the employees
are.
Mr. Ciscomani. And that is what I am getting at, so I am
glad to see that the timeframe for compliance, it was correctly
extended. MSHA and OSHA appear to be operating off of maybe
different silica standards, though, on this, and some companies
are looking at hundreds of millions of dollars in compliance
cost. What is MSHA going to offer in the way of compliance
assistance, especially when it comes to the feasibility of the
medical surveillance requirement for mental and non-mental
miners--I am sorry--metal and non-metal miners.
Ms. Su. That is right. So as I have said, we provide
compliance assistance as a matter of course, and we would be
very happy to do that also in your district with the mines that
you were mentioning. I could just share with you, Congressman,
that in terms of the comments that we got to the rule, we had
157 written comments during the public comment period. That did
include comments from industry. We also held three public
hearings with virtual and in-person participation, and over 500
attendees participated in those three hearings. So in terms of
your----

H-2B PROGRAM

Mr. Ciscomani. Well, thanks for that feedback, and I do
want to take you up on the opportunity here to work with you,
specifically in my district with the mines. I have a heavy
mining district. With the few seconds that I have left, I want
to switch over to the visa conversation we were having earlier.
I hear consistently from my constituents about issues with the
need for more workers. This ranges from high-skilled to low-
skilled jobs. In fact, there are many workers who want to come
to work here and return home as well, guest workers from
international, but as you know well, there are issues with
numerical caps. How can we ensure that businesses are able to
address their labor needs and non-immigrants are able to more
easily travel back and forth from their home countries to work
here in the United States?
Ms. Su. So I think you are referring to the H-2B Program,
which we talked about earlier.
Mr. Ciscomani. Yes, uh-huh.
Ms. Su. Yeah. It is an important part of the overall puzzle
of how employers have the workforce that they need and how we
continue to protect workers and make sure that every job is a
good job, and working people go home healthy and safe at the
end of the workday. We have put in place efforts to improve the
speed at which we approve H-2B visas.
Mr. Ciscomani. The numerical caps, if I may, because I am
out of time, so that specifically.
Ms. Su. I will have my staff follow up to talk about those
caps. Those are not entirely within the Department of Labor's
discretion but happy to work with you to understand what the
challenges and the needs are.
Mr. Ciscomani. Yeah. Thank you. I yield back, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Aderholt. Mister Edwards.
Mr. Edwards. Thank you, Mr. Chair. Madam Acting Secretary,
thanks for being with us this afternoon. Thanks for the offer
to have a conversation with you yesterday. I apologize that I
wasn't able to carry through with that scheduled phone call,
but I appreciate you reaching out and giving me the
opportunity.

DOL'S PROPOSED NEW DEFINITION OF FIDUCIARY

My first question is this. On November 3, 2023, the
Department of Labor proposed a new definition of ``fiduciary''
with a 60-day comment period. I would like to highlight that
the comment period fell over two major Federal holidays, which
would result in a comment period that was less than 45 actual
days. Many industry stakeholders and members of Congress sent
letters to the Department of Labor highlighting the shortened
comment period and asking for an extension for impacted
industries to provide feedback, and despite that pushback, the
Department declined. It seems that perhaps the Department of
Labor wasn't interested in hearing the constituency, and maybe
that was because of pushback that the Department had received
in the past. And instead of extending that comment period, the
Department of Labor effectively shortened it even more by
holding a hearing on the proposal in the middle of the comment
period on December 12, 2023, requiring industry stakeholders to
understand and articulate their concerns to the Department of
Labor even sooner.
I am just curious. Can you tell this committee why the
Department is not adequately considering feedback from industry
stakeholders and rushing a rule that will significantly impact
choice for low- to middle-income Americans and result in
millions of Americans losing access to investment advice?
Ms. Su. Congressman, I am glad that we have a chance to
meet today, although we did not connect before this hearing.
Thank you for that question. We absolutely want to hear input.
I just want to answer that question straight up. There is
absolutely no desire, no benefit on the part of the Department
not to allow full input, feedback, and letting us understand
the impact of what we do. This rule is a long time in the
making, right? This is a rule that there has been informal
conversations and there were prior rules for probably 8 years
at least now, but this proposal did include a 60-day comment
period. That is that standard, not just for the Department of
Labor's rules, but for rules generally. We did receive over 400
individual comments and just under 20,000 petition submissions.
I am a little bit confused by what you said about. We did
have hearings also, which were meant to invite more comment and
give another forum in which to give comment. They certainly
weren't meant to say, you have to do it now, and, therefore,
you can't give comments at the end of the 60-day period. They
were really more efforts to be open and accessible when it
comes to hearing from comments. And in fact, the rule that we
have proposed now is different from the rule that was proposed
back in 2016.
Mr. Edwards. I am going to run out of time, so I am going
to cut you off there, respectfully, but I have to comment that
your words seem different than your actions because you
received a very specific letter asking for more time with what
I think is a valid reason, and that is there was two major
holidays in between. So I hear your comment, but it looks
insincere.

IMPROPER PAYMENTS FOR PANDEMIC UNEMPLOYMENT BENEFITS

Let me ask this question real quick. The Department of
Labor reported an improper payment rate of 22 percent covering
the period 2020 to 2022, in which Federal taxpayers paid out
nearly $900 billion in pandemic unemployment benefits, of which
GAO has reported an estimated a hundred to $135 billion was
lost to fraud. What effect, real quick, can you tell us, would
the Department's 2023 guidance on the application of State
finality laws have on how the Department calculates improper
payments?
Ms. Su. Thank you for raising that, Congressman. I know we
haven't talked about that at this hearing yet. So the UI
system, as you know, is a safety net that helps workers get
through hard times, temporary periods of unemployment through
no fault of their own. I think you said almost $900 billion. I
think it was like $880 billion worth of benefits, the vast
majority to eligible claimants who needed it to get through
those extremely difficult and uncertain months. And at the same
time, the pandemic revealed gross inadequacies in the system,
mostly borne out of two things. One is decades of
underinvestment in the system. So most States, if not all,
most, the vast majority were operating under computer programs
that that were created before the internet was invented. And
because the safety net itself doesn't reach everyone, Congress
passed a specific program called Pandemic Unemployment
Assistance that has been found where the vast majority of the
fraud occurred because it was built in not to have the same
safeguards.
Mr. Edwards. Thank you. In respect of the Chairman's
timekeeping, I will just thank you for your response there and
say that I think that it is all of our responsibility as
appropriators and as secretaries and stewards of the taxpayer
dollar, that we do everything that we can----
Ms. Su. Yes.
Mr. Edwards [continuing]. To limit the horrendous improper
payments----
Ms. Su. Yes. Yes.
Mr. Edwards [continuing]. And suggest to the chair we make
that a top priority in this session. Thank you.
Ms. Su. Thank you, Congressman. I am happy to follow up and
talk to you about that, too, because we have been making
enormous steps to make sure that the system can function well
in the next crisis. Thank you.
Mr. Edwards. As we approach the noon hour, I want to
recognize the ranking member. She may have some comments. I
will have some closing comments, and then we will adjourn. So
Ranking Member DeLauro.

CHILD LABOR LAWS

Ms. DeLauro. Thank you so much, Mr. Chairman. I am going to
try to make two points. I want to say thank you to you,
Secretary, for your commitment and focus on the issue of child
labor. And quite frankly, not you--you are dealing with much
more stringent enforcement, et cetera--but as a Nation, we are
going backward in this area. We have watched many industry
groups are encouraging States to roll back child labor
protections, laws making it easier for kids from 14 to 17 years
old to work longer and later and in occupations that were
previously off limits for minors. Ten States in the past 2
years have introduced or passed laws rolling back child labor
protection. I won't go through the details, but it is Arkansas,
Iowa, New Hampshire, New Jersey, Minnesota, Missouri, Nebraska,
Ohio, South Dakota, Wisconsin.
Iowa has passed one of the most radical laws, children as
young as 14 to work in meat coolers and industrial laundries.
Teens 15 and older can work on assembly lines around dangerous
machinery. Teens as young as 16 can now serve alcohol in Iowa
restaurants as long as two adults are present. I will say we
are going backward in this area. This is going back to a
previous time in our history when we came forward with child
labor laws to protect children in this nation.

FIGHTING INFLATION

My second point is that my colleagues across the aisle
repeatedly share their interest in fighting inflation, but as
is the case for working families, each night at their kitchen
tables, I believe actions speak so much louder than words. So I
will ask, what plans do they have to help families afford
groceries by taking on food companies that reap record profits
due to price gouging? One, Tyson Foods, the largest meat
company in America, more than doubled its profits between
quarter one of 2021 and 2022, and raising the price of their
product. What plans do they have to help working families keep
dollars in their pockets?
Well, we have heard folks today, loud and clear. Let's roll
back your Department's regulatory efforts to fight wage theft,
misclassified workers as independent contracts so that they
lose Federal wage protections, deny new overtime protection for
millions of workers. This vision would take away earned wages
from workers and their families, hurting their ability to pay
their bills and to get by. We need to reject this vision, and I
believe you reject this vision, which is why I will work
tirelessly with you and the President to support the Department
of Labor's budget requests, your regulatory efforts to make
sure that working people are getting a fair shot in this
economy, and that we use this government and its power to
provide economic security for people and put money back in
their pockets, helping them with today's cost of living. Thank
you for being here, Madam Secretary.

CONGRESSIONAL INQUIRIES

Mr. Aderholt. Thank you, Ranking Member DeLauro. In
conclusion, I think we have had a very good hearing today, and
a lot of members got to ask a lot of questions. Just before we
adjourn, because I know a lot of folks have other hearings to
go to and other meetings, but I do want to call to your
attention about the congressional inquiries. It has been called
to my attention that since you have become Acting Secretary of
Labor, the Committee on Education and Workforce has sent more
than 25 letters, including a duly-served subpoena, and the
Department of Labor has failed to provide responses in full and
forthright answers in these oversight inquiries. Also, the
Department's response to questions for the record following
hearings such as even this one, were often late and provided
few insights on the matter that are important to so many
members of Congress.
I guess my question in closing, can we expect to more fully
and timely get responses from your Department as we continue on
the remainder of the 118th Congress?
Ms. Su. Chairman, it is my understanding and my expectation
that we always cooperate, that obviously, we respect the role
of this body in oversight and all other matters, and if you are
not getting what you need, then I will certainly talk to my
team about that. But I trust that that is what they are doing
also and working closely with yours.
Mr. Aderholt. Well, like I said, it has been called our
attention that that has been an issue, and so if you could
check into it, I would appreciate it.
And with that, we stand adjourned.
[Questions and answers submitted for the record follow:]

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Tuesday, April 30, 2024.

MEMBERS' DAY

Mr. Aderholt. Well, good morning. Thanks for being here,
and of course it is a pleasure to welcome you to the Labor,
Health and Human Services, and Education Subcommittee on
Appropriations, and look forward to taking testimony from
members this morning. It is an opportunity, of course, for us
to hear directly from members as we want to hear what is
important to them and the congressional districts they
represent. And I appreciate Mr. McGovern being here. I have
been before his committee before, so it is actually good to be
on the other side of the mike. So but you are welcome here, and
we look forward to hearing from you. And before I begin, I will
turn over to Mr. Pocan, who is sitting in for the ranking
member, for any remarks that he would like to make.
Mr. Pocan. Thank you, Chairman Aderholt, for holding the
Member Day hearing. As this is the largest non-defense
appropriations bill, the subcommittee allocates approximately
$225,000,000,000 in annual funding. The programs in this bill
fund lifesaving biomedical research, they equip our Nation to
deal with public health emergencies, they level the playing
field for low-income children looking to get a good education,
and they help Americans get the skills they need to find a job.
I could go on, and I am not going to. These programs directly
impact the lives of Americans across the country, especially
children, families, and seniors. So as the subcommittee begins
to draft a new bill for fiscal year 2025, it is important we
hear from our colleagues and their top priorities. Thank you
for doing this, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Aderholt. Thank you, Mr. Pocan. I would like now to
recognize our first witness, Mr. McGovern.
----------

Tuesday, April 30, 2024.

WITNESS

HON. JAMES P. McGOVERN, A REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF
MASSACHUSETTS
Mr. McGovern. Well, thank you, Chairman Aderholt, and my
friend, Mr. Pocan, thank you so much, and members of this
committee, thank you for the opportunity, that gives me the
opportunity to testify today on some of my priorities for the
fiscal year 2024 Labor, Health and Human Services, Education
and Related Agencies Appropriation Act. And let me thank the
members of this committee for the time and the effort you put
into these bills and to the staff in particular. I mean, this
is a lot of work and just know that some of us are grateful for
all of your efforts.
Look, we hold in our power the ability to lower diet-
related disease, improve health outcomes, and lower healthcare
spending. Food is medicine, and we can do all of these things
by better incorporating nutrition in our healthcare. A
bipartisan group of members, including my dear friend, Barbara
Lee, who serves on this subcommittee, have authored a request
for funding and report language directing the Department of
Health and Human Services to advance this work, as outlined in
the 2022 National Strategy on Hunger, Nutrition, and Health.
The letter calls upon this subcommittee to increase funding for
the Office of Nutrition Research and NIH, including support for
the Food is Medicine Centers of Excellence. We are also asking
for $5,000,000 to continue the incredible work at HHS to
implement the National Strategy and to establish a knowledge
hub that will collaborate with other Federal departments to
craft best practices, tools, and guidance to advance Food is
Medicine initiatives nationwide.
Additionally, we are requesting report language to improve
medical nutrition education for doctors, better incorporate
medically-tailored meals and produce prescriptions into our
current healthcare programs, and provide technical assistance
to States seeking to expand their Food is Medicine work under
the Medicaid 1115 waiver. Taken together, these advancements
would dramatically scale up Food is Medicine work happening
within the U.S. Government and across the country, helping to
save lives, improve nutrition, and lower healthcare costs.
I want to thank you for the committee's longstanding
support for the innovative approaches to the Literacy Grant
Program which is authorized in the Every Student Succeeds Act
and administered by the Department of Education. The innovative
approaches to the Literacy Grant Program has awarded over 200
grants to nonprofits and school districts around the country
since its creation in fiscal year 2012. IAL grants provide
access to community-based literacy programs for students in
low-income and underserved communities. Given the emerging
evidence of pandemic-related learning loss, bolstering programs
to support children's literacy is more important now than ever,
and I ask the committee to maintain its historic commitment to
this program and prioritize funding for the IAL Grant Program.
In addition to my general support for IAL grants, I want to
express my specific support for those grants that go to
programs that support pediatric literacy programs that are
provided during well child visits by medical providers, trained
in research-based methods of early language and literacy. Reach
Out and Read, the only national pediatric literacy model,
endorsed by the American Academy of Pediatrics, reaches
4,400,000 children across every State, and in Massachusetts'
2nd Congressional District, which I represent, Reach Out and
Read has 42 sites and 361 participating providers. And I ask
the committee to support language that encourages the
Department of Education to use a portion of the funds
appropriated for IAL grants to support pediatric literacy
programs.
I would also like to highlight the importance of supporting
additional health-related requests. I ask that the committee to
support language and increases funding for mitochondrial
disease research and prioritizes the development of lifesaving
therapeutics. I ask the committee to support language directing
the NIH to allocate funding for research and awareness grants
relating to childhood post-infectious neuroimmune disorders,
such as pediatric acute onset neuropsychiatric syndrome and
pediatric autoimmune neuropsychiatric disorders associated with
streptococcus. I also ask the committee to support language
that encourages ARPA-H to provide continued funding for the
Investor Catalyst Hub and Spoke Network and Language, and
encourages the National Institute of Biomedical Imaging and
Bioengineering to continue to expand the innovation funnel
model beyond COVID-19 testing to address other critical unmet
needs in diagnostic testing. I provide further details of the
importance of these four requests in written testimony that I
am submitting today.
And lastly, I am grateful for the committee's previous
support of neurofibromatosis research. As you craft the next
appropriations bill, I ask that the committee continue to
consider the Americans suffering from this disease and include
report language in the Office of the Director account,
encouraging various institutes at NIH to continue to expand
their NF research portfolios I would just say finally, this is
particularly personal to me. I have a daughter who is 22, who
suffers from neurofibromatosis, which has developed into a
cancer which she is being treated for right now in a clinical
trial. But she is making progress in large part due to the
investments that we have made at NIH that have produced some
breakthroughs, and my hope is that it will ultimately lead to
her cure. So I appreciate your patience, and I will end there.
Mr.  Aderholt. Thank you. Thanks for your information about
those particular projects and those particular programs, and
especially for mentioning your daughter with the NIH funding. I
know that you all have been through a process with that, and we
certainly will keep her in our thoughts and prayers as we move
forward, but certainly, we are glad that that has been
beneficial, too, at NIH.
So with that, do you have any questions or anything from
the ranking member?
Mr. Pocan. No.
Mr. Aderholt. Okay.
Mr. McGovern. Thank you, and I will----
Mr. Aderholt. Those two pages are not----
Mr. McGovern. Thank you, and I will remember this courtesy
when you come to Rules.
Mr. Aderholt. Yes.
Mr. McGovern. All right.
Mr. Aderholt. Thank you. Good to have you here. Thanks.
Thanks so much.
Okay. Our next witness will be Representative Ruiz from the
great State of California, 25th District, and we look forward
to hearing your testimony this morning about some projects or
programs that are of special interest to you.
----------

Wednesday, April 30, 2024.

WITNESS

HON. RAUL RUIZ, A REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF
CALIFORNIA
Mr. Ruiz. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. As an
emergency physician, I work hand in hand with infectious
disease physicians on the H1N1 response, and I appreciate from
firsthand experience the critical role that ID physicians
played in our responses to COVID-19 and Mpox.
As we have heard time and time again in the Select
Subcommittee on the Coronavirus Pandemic where I serve as
ranking member, outbreaks and pandemics will be more frequent
in our increasingly interconnected world. And it is critical
that we ensure all of our communities have the ID workforce
they need to prepare and respond. ID physicians are critical to
care for patients with serious infections, to develop and lead
infection prevention protocols that keep our healthcare
facility safe, to collaborate with public health officials on
investigations and surveillance, and to conduct research,
including clinical trials for medical countermeasures.
Patients with serious infections who are cared for by ID
physicians have better outcomes, shorter hospital stays, and
lower healthcare costs, but nearly 80 percent of counties in
our country do not have a single ID physician. And last year,
only 50.8 percent of ID physician training programs in the U.S.
filled, down from 56 percent in 2022. Hospitals across my State
of California aimed to recruit 35 new ID physician trainees
last year but were only able to recruit 24.
ID faces a unique recruitment barrier because our
healthcare system does not adequately value ID physicians'
expertise. According to Medscape, ID has the third lowest
reimbursement of all specialties. High medical student debt
understandably drives many new physicians to higher renumerated
specialties, leaving our communities without the ID experts we
need to be resilient in the face of the next outbreak or
pandemic. That is why I am asking the subcommittee to provide
funding for the Bio-Preparedness Workforce Pilot Program at
HRSA, which was authorized at the end of 2022 and has not yet
been funded. The pilot will incentivize health professionals to
pursue careers in ID in bio preparedness and to work in
communities where they are most needed. No Federal programs
offered loan repayment for providing ID care or conducting
emergency preparedness activities in healthcare facilities
prior to the establishment of the pilot program. This program
fills a discrete, but critical need without duplication of
Federal resources.
So with respect to healthcare workforce shortages generally
and other barriers to accessing care, rural communities, like
the congressional district I represent, are disproportionately
affected and need additional resources to ensure access to
care. According to the Health and Human Services
Administration, over half of designated health professional
shortage areas were rural. Additionally, many rural hospitals
are under-resourced and are at risk of closure, putting vital
health care services for the community in jeopardy. That is why
I am urging the subcommittee to support funding for rural
healthcare programs in this year's funding bill, including the
CDC Office of Rural Health, the Small Hospital Improvement
Program, or SHIP, the Rural Residency Planning and Development
Program, the Rural Maternity and Obstetric Management
Strategies Program, and the Rural Communities Opioid Response
Program. These programs are instrumental to bolstering the
healthcare infrastructure in rural communities. Thank you, and
I yield back.
Mr. Aderholt. Thank you, Mr. Ruiz, for your testimony here,
and I will defer to the ranking member if he has anything.
Mr. Pocan. Nothing. Thank you.
Mr. Aderholt. Well, again, thank you for calling this to
attention. My cousin's husband was an infectious disease
physician over at Johns Hopkins, and so I understand the
importance of infectious disease, and especially after the
pandemic last year, understand the importance of making sure
that infectious disease is something that we pay close
attention to. So thanks for calling my attention to this
subcommittee, and we look forward to working with you on this.
Mr. Ruiz. Thank you.
Mr. Aderholt. Thank you. If there are no other comments,
then we stand adjourned.
[Statements submitted for the record follow:]

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
