- STATE OF THE AMERICAN WORKFORCE

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

STATE OF THE
AMERICAN WORKFORCE

=======================================================================

HEARING

before the

COMMITTEE ON EDUCATION
AND THE WORKFORCE
U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

HEARING HELD IN WASHINGTON, DC, JANUARY 26, 2011

__________

Serial No. 112-1

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Education and the Workforce

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web:
http://www.gpoaccess.gov/congress/house/education/index.html
or
Committee address: http://edworkforce.house.gov

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
64-120 PDF              WASHINGTON : 2011
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800; DC
area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104  Mail: Stop IDCC, Washington, DC
20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON EDUCATION AND THE WORKFORCE

JOHN KLINE, Minnesota, Chairman

Thomas E. Petri, Wisconsin           George Miller, California,
Howard P. ``Buck'' McKeon,             Senior Democratic Member
California                       Dale E. Kildee, Michigan
Judy Biggert, Illinois               Donald M. Payne, New Jersey
Todd Russell Platts, Pennsylvania    Robert E. Andrews, New Jersey
Joe Wilson, South Carolina           Robert C. ``Bobby'' Scott,
Virginia Foxx, North Carolina            Virginia
Duncan Hunter, California            Lynn C. Woolsey, California
David P. Roe, Tennessee              Ruben Hinojosa, Texas
Glenn Thompson, Pennsylvania         Carolyn McCarthy, New York
Tim Walberg, Michigan                John F. Tierney, Massachusetts
Scott DesJarlais, Tennessee          Dennis J. Kucinich, Ohio
Richard L. Hanna, New York           David Wu, Oregon
Todd Rokita, Indiana                 Rush D. Holt, New Jersey
Larry Bucshon, Indiana               Susan A. Davis, California
Trey Gowdy, South Carolina           Raul M. Grijalva, Arizona
Lou Barletta, Pennsylvania           Timothy H. Bishop, New York
Kristi L. Noem, South Dakota         David Loebsack, Iowa
Martha Roby, Alabama                 Mazie K. Hirono, Hawaii
Joseph J. Heck, Nevada
Dennis A. Ross, Florida
Mike Kelly, Pennsylvania
[Vacant]

Barrett Karr, Staff Director
Mark Zuckerman, Minority Staff Director

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page

Hearing held on January 26, 2011.................................     1

Statement of Members:
Andrews, Hon. Robert E., a Representative in Congress from
the State of New Jersey, letter, dated January 26, 2011,
from 250 economists in support of the Patient Protection
and Affordable Care Act of 2010............................    66
Kline, Hon. John, Chairman, Committee on Education and the
Workforce..................................................     1
Prepared statement of....................................     3
Kucinich, Hon. Dennis J., a Representative in Congress from
the State of Ohio, prepared statement and questions
submitted..................................................    58
Miller, Hon. George, senior Democratic member, Committee on
Education and the Workforce................................     4
Prepared statement of....................................     6
Roby, Hon. Martha, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Alabama, prepared statement of....................     7

Statement of Witnesses:
Boushey, Heather, senior economist, Center for American
Progress Action Fund.......................................    17
Prepared statement of....................................    18
Responses to questions submitted by Mr. Kucinich.........    84
Holtz-Eakin, Douglas, president, American Action Forum.......    29
Prepared statement of....................................    32
McDonnell, Hon. Bob, Governor, Commonwealth of Virginia......     9
Prepared statement of....................................    11
Messinger, Dyke, president and CEO, Power Curbers, Inc., on
behalf of the National Association of Manufacturers........    12
Prepared statement of....................................    14
Additional submission: ``Manufacturing Strategy for Jobs
and a Competitive America,'' dated January 2011........    74

STATE OF THE AMERICAN WORKFORCE

----------

Wednesday, January 26, 2011

U.S. House of Representatives

Committee on Education and the Workforce

Washington, DC

----------

The committee met, pursuant to call, at 2:10 p.m., in room
2175, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. John Kline [chairman
of the committee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Kline, Petri, Biggert, Platts,
Wilson, Foxx, Hunter, Roe, Thompson, Walberg, DesJarlais,
Hanna, Rokita, Bucshon, Gowdy, Barletta, Noem, Roby, Heck,
Kelly, Miller, Payne, Andrews, Scott, Woolsey, McCarthy,
Kucinich, Davis, and Hirono.
Staff Present: James Bergeron, Director of Education and
Human Services Policy; Kirk Boyle, General Counsel; Casey
Buboltz, Coalitions and Member Services Coordinator; Ed Gilroy,
Director of Workforce Policy, Marvin Kaplan, Professional Staff
Member; Barrett Karr, Staff Director; Ryan Kearney, Legislative
Assistant; Brian Melnyk, Staff Assistant; Brian Newell, Press
Secretary; Molly McLaughlin Salmi, Deputy Director of Workforce
Policy; Mandy Schaumburg, Education Policy Counsel; Ken
Serafin, Workforce Policy Counsel; Linda Stevens, Chief Clerk/
Assistant to the General Counsel; Joseph Wheeler, Professional
Staff Member; Aaron Albright, Minority Press Secretary; Tylease
Alli, Minority Hearing Clerk; Jody Calemine, Minority General
Counsel; Jose Garza, Minority Deputy General Counsel; Brian
Levin, Minority New Media Press Assistant; Jerrica Mathis,
Minority Legislative Fellow, Labor; Celine McNicholas, Minority
Associate Labor Counsel; Richard Miller, Minority Senior Labor
Policy Advisor; Megan O'Reilly, Minority Labor Counsel; Julie
Peller, Minority Deputy Director of Policy and Planning;
Meredith Regine, Minority Policy Associate, Labor; Melissa
Salmanowitz, Minority Press Secretary; Michele Varnhagen,
Minority Labor Policy Director; and Mark Zuckerman, Minority
Staff Director.
Chairman Kline. A quorum being present, the committee will
come to order. I want to make a couple of administrative
announcements to our guests and to our panel and to my
colleagues here on the committee. The weather, as all here
know, has turned a little tough out there. Planes are being
canceled, flights are being canceled and rescheduled and moved,
and the roads are slippery, and I am advised that the Office of
Personnel Management is encouraging Federal employees to leave
at 4:00. While that doesn't directly apply to us, the
conditions that will create out there does. So I am going to
announce to all that we will have a hard stop at 4:00 out of
respect to all.
I think, I want to, I am going to make an opening statement
briefly and turn to Mr. Miller in a minute. But I want to thank
members for coming and I know that Members of Congress will be
leaving as the flight schedules direct. So when you need to go,
when the plane is ready to roll, we understand you will be
departing. All right.
Well, good afternoon and welcome to our first hearing of
the 112th Congress. I appreciate the time our witnesses have
spared to be with us today. Whether you are a Governor, a small
manufacturer, an economist, your time is valuable and we are
grateful for your participation today, all of us.
It is no secret the American workforce faces significant
challenges. Over 20 consecutive months' unemployment has
remained at 9 percent or higher. During that same period of
time, more than 14 million Americans have been unemployed and
searching for work. Roughly 1.3 million unemployed workers have
become so discouraged by searching and coming up empty that
they have given up hope and abandoned the labor force entirely.
Despite some unprecedented attempts, perhaps best reflected
in the failed $814 billion stimulus bill passed in the early
hours of the last Congress, the Federal Government cannot
legislate or regulate its way to job creation in our country.
It can, however, provide some sense of certainty that will give
the young entrepreneur and small business owner the confidence
he or she needs to go forward and invest in their new idea or
company.
Unfortunately, over the last 2 years we have seen the
Federal Government move in a disturbingly different direction,
one that creates economic uncertainty felt by businesses both
large and small. A number of policies and proposals have caused
many business owners to think twice before expanding their
operations or hiring additional workers.
At the center of this uncertainty is the recent health care
law. We have all heard the story of a small business owner
already struggling to make payroll, who now faces a penalty for
failing to provide government-approved health care. Despite
promises health care reform would lower costs, the chief
actuary at the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services
reports national health care spending will increase by some
$311 billion over the next 10 years. This health care law has
forced business owners to choose between higher health care
costs or government penalties. To suggest this doesn't
discourage job creation in this country is to ignore, I
believe, reality.
The President has suggested a willingness to fix what is
broken in the law. I would suggest the employer mandate is the
place to start. While one arm of the Federal bureaucracy
transforms our health care economy, another is considering
sweeping changes to the law governing the relationship between
employers and labor unions.
The National Labor Relations Board is supposed to safeguard
the rights of workers against the illegal actions of both
employers and unions. Today there are conversations taking
place at the NLRB that will have profound consequences for
America's workers. Many of the discussions going on behind
closed doors should be debated here in this committee, on the
floor of this Congress and in the public, in full view of the
American people. No Federal agency or board should rewrite the
rules of the game to favor any special interest over the
interest of all Americans.
Despite these challenges, I am happy to see the
administration reconsider various proposals that would have
made it more difficult for businesses to plan and invest in the
future. Recently the administration withdrew its proposal to
re-interpret the noise feasibility standards, a proposal that
would have imposed significant costs on businesses without any
real justification. And yesterday the administration announced
it is reconsidering proposed changes to employer injury and
illness laws that would have created a significant paperwork
burden for employers. While I welcome these actions by the
President, more needs to be done.
Well, that is why we are here today. We want to learn about
the policies that may be standing in the way of job creation
and find better solutions to protect the rights, safety and
prosperity of the country's workers.
And I am now pleased to yield to our senior Democratic
member, the ranking member, Mr. Miller, for an opening
statement.
[The statement of Chairman Kline follows:]

Prepared Statement of Hon. John Kline, Chairman,
Committee on Education and the Workforce

Good afternoon and welcome to our first hearing of the 112th
Congress. I appreciate the time our witnesses have spared to be with us
today. Whether you are a governor, a small manufacturer, or an
economist, your time is valuable and we are grateful for your
participation today.
It is no secret the American workforce faces significant
challenges. For 20 consecutive months unemployment has remained at 9
percent or higher. During that same period of time, more than 14
million Americans have been unemployed and searching for work. Roughly
1.3 million unemployed workers have become so discouraged by searching
and coming up empty that they have given up hope and abandoned the
labor force entirely.
Despite some unprecedented attempts, perhaps best reflected in a
failed $814 billion stimulus bill passed in the early hours of the last
Congress, the federal government cannot legislate or regulate its way
to job creation in our country. It can, however, provide some sense of
certainty that will give the young entrepreneur or small business owner
the confidence he or she needs to go forward and invest in their new
idea or company.
Unfortunately, over the last two years, we have seen the federal
government move in a disturbingly different direction--one that creates
economic uncertainty felt by businesses both large and small. A number
of policies and proposals have caused many business owners to think
twice before expanding their operations or hiring additional workers.
At the center of this uncertainty is the recent health care law. We
have all heard the story of a small business owner already struggling
to make payroll who now faces a penalty for failing to provide
government-approved health care. Despite promises health care reform
would lower costs, the chief actuary at the Centers for Medicare and
Medicaid Services reports national health care spending will increase
by $311 billion over the next 10 years. ObamaCare has forced business
owners to choose between higher health care costs or government
penalties. To suggest this doesn't discourage job creation in this
country is to ignore reality.
The president has suggested a willingness to fix what's broken in
the law. I would suggest the employer mandate is the place to start.
While one arm of the federal bureaucracy transforms our health care
economy, another is considering sweeping changes to the law governing
the relationship between employers and labor unions. The NLRB is
supposed to safeguard the rights of workers against the illegal actions
of both employers and unions. Today there are conversations taking
place at the NLRB that will have profound consequences for America's
workers. Many of the discussions going on behind closed doors should be
debated here in this committee, on the floor of this Congress, and in
the public--in full view of the American people. No federal agency or
board should rewrite the rules of the game to favor special interests
over the interest of all Americans.
Despite these challenges, I am happy to see the administration
reconsider various proposals that would have made it more difficult for
businesses to plan and invest in the future. Recently, the
administration withdrew its proposal to reinterpret the noise
feasibility standards, a proposal that would have imposed significant
costs on businesses without any real justification. And yesterday, the
administration announced it is reconsidering proposed changes to
employer injury and illness logs that would have created a significant
paperwork burden for employers. While I welcome these actions by the
President, more needs to be done.
As we look to these recent decisions by the administration, we will
be guided by President Reagan's aged wisdom--trust but verify. We will
trust the president when he says he wants to review the regulatory
structure's affect on jobs, but we will verify that promise against the
actions his administration takes over the next two years.
That is why we are here today. We want to learn about the policies
that may be standing in the way of job creation, and find better
solutions to protect the rights, safety, and prosperity of the
country's workers.
I am pleased to yield now to our senior Democratic member,
Mr. Miller, for an opening statement.
______

Mr. Miller. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. And I want
to also thank our witnesses for joining us this afternoon.
Today's hearing on where our Nation's workers stand is a
timely and an important topic to explore. For most of the 20th
century, America's working families and middle class made our
democracy strong. The promise was that if you worked hard,
played by the rules, you could save something for your kids'
education, have enough left over to save for a comfortable
retirement.
Unfortunately this promise is being broken for working
families. For 30 years workers have been hit by stagnant pay,
skyrocketing health costs, rising tuition and a loss of
retirement security. In lieu of fair pay increases, Americans
turned to credit to maintain their middle-class standards. With
certain Federal policies making income inequality worse, wealth
chased after the next bubble, leading to the Wall Street
scandals. The economy became over-leveraged, and debt exploded
to levels not seen since just before the Great Depression.
The bill came due in the fall of 2007. Since then more than
8 million Americans lost their jobs, further fueling the
foreclosure and the debt crisis. Swift and decisive action was
needed to avoid the total economic catastrophe. Congress and
the Obama administration came together and made immediate
investments to save the economy. The Recovery Act was the first
step, and we see the result today: Over 4.7 million jobs have
been created or saved, according to the CBO, as a direct result
of the Recovery Act.
The broad range of experts disagree, including private
economists across the political spectrum and the nonprofit
Congressional Budget Office. In official government statistics,
our actions saved the economy from slipping into deeper crisis.
While there is much more work to be done to dig our country
out of this mess, the private sector job growth has increased
by 1.34 million jobs last year. That means that the Obama
policies created more jobs in less than 2 years, than the
entire 8 years under the Bush administration.
Even the manufacturing sector is seeing growth for the
first time since 1997. Private economists are predicting a gain
this year of 330,000 manufacturing jobs, a dramatic change from
every year in recent memory. Ford announced its plan to add
7,000 jobs over the next 2 years. Whirlpool, Dow Chemical and
Caterpillar have all cannoned that they are going to keep jobs
in America and even expand operations.
Also, corporate profits are back to their highest point
since before the recession began, and the stock market is also
up.
The non-farm, non-financial business sector is holding more
than $1.9 trillion in cash, the highest level since 1959.
Policies to stimulate the economy are not, by themselves,
enough. We must also begin to rebuild the foundations of a
strong middle class. By doing, so we ensure that the recovery
is fair and that it is sustainable.
On that front, Democrats in Congress, working with the
Obama administration, took critical action to grow and
strengthen our Nation's middle class. Today, all Americans will
have access to quality, affordable health coverage, no matter
if their employer provides it or if they change jobs or they
lose their job.
Today, college students have access to critical financial
assistance they need to go to college and to stay in college
and to earn the critical skills to keep America competitive.
Today, businesses have powerful new tax incentives for
businesses to hire the unemployed Americans and expand their
businesses. Today, workers have the Department of Labor that
puts worker safety first, all of which has helped reduce
workplace injuries and makes businesses more efficient. Today,
workers have a fair minimum wage, a rate that was increased by
Democrats after Republicans blocked an increase for a decade,
shamefully allowing the value of the rate to drop to a 50-year
low. Today, small businesses have more access to credit
necessary to start and continue or expand their businesses. And
today, we have a revitalized supervision of our Nation's
financial institutions to avoid another meltdown in our
financial system.
There is more to be done to heal our economy. We need to
move forward on key investments to help unleash our Nation's
competitiveness and innovation. One area that this committee
can work on is the rewrite of the Elementary Secondary
Education Act so that our Nation's school children can be
successful in the classroom and beyond.
Every initiative that goes through this committee must be
judged by whether or not it will grow and strengthen the middle
class. We cannot double down on go-go bubble economics and
trickle-down tax policy. All across the Nation, communities are
confronting the lack of high-skilled workers, even as
unemployment is high. In my own communities, business, labor,
and community colleges have come together with a new urgency to
tackle this problem.
We must support these local efforts to create jobs, to stay
competitive, to act decisively, nationally, to build and to
maintain a higher skilled workforce. Falling behind is not in
America's DNA. It never has been and it never will be. We have
the hardest-working people in the world, and as the President
pointed out last night, the most productive workers in the
world, and I hope that we can look forward to solutions that
help grow and strengthen America's middle class.
And I thank you very much for having this most timely
hearing. And I just want to apologize to the witnesses. I am
one of those who is trying to catch the last flight tonight out
of Dulles. So I love your testimony. I am not flying with you.
[The statement of Mr. Miller follows:]

Prepared Statement of Hon. George Miller, Senior Democratic Member,
Committee on Education and the Workforce

Good afternoon, Mr. Chairman.
Today's hearing on where our nation's workers stand is a timely and
important t topic to explore.
For most of the 20th century, America's working families and middle
class made e our democracy strong. The promise was that if y you work
hard, play by the rules, you could save e something for your kids'
education and have enough left over to save for a comfortable
retirement.
Unfortunately, this promise is being broken for working families.
For thirty years, workers have been hit by stagnant pay, skyrocketing
health costs, rising tuition and loss of retirement security. In lieu
of fair pay increases, Americans turned to credit to maintain their
middle class standard of living.
With certain federal policies making income inequality worse,
wealth chased after the next bubble, leading to the Wall Street
scandals. The economy became over-leverage ed. Debt exploded to levels
not seen since e just before the Great Depression.
The bill came due in the fall of 2 2007. Since then, more than 8
million Americans s lost their jobs, further fueling the foreclosure
and debt crisis. Swift and decisive action was needed to avoid total
economic catastrophe.
Congress and the Obama administration came together and made
immediate investments to save the economy. The Recovery Act t was the
first step and we see the results today.
Over 4.7 million jobs have been created and saved according to the
CBO as the direct result of the Recovery Act.
A broad range of experts agree--including private economists across
the political spectrum, the nonpartisan Congressional Budget Office,
and official government statistics--our actions saved the economy from
slipping into a deeper crisis.
While there is much more work to be done to dig our country out of
this mess, private sector job growth has increased by 1.3 million jobs
last year. That means that the Obama policies created more jobs in less
than two years then the entire eight years of the Bush administration.
Even the manufacturing sector has seen growth for the first time
since 1997. Private economists are predicting a gain this year of
330,000 manufacturing jobs--a dramatic change from every year in recent
memory.
Ford announced that it planned to add 7,000 jobs over the next two
years. Whirlpool, Dow Chemicals and Caterpillar all have announced that
they are going to keep jobs in America and even expand operations.
Also, corporate profits are back to their highest point since
before the recession began, and the stock market is up. The nonfarm,
nonfinancial business sector is holding more than $1.9 trillion in
cash, the highest level since 1959.
Policies to stimulate the economy are not, by themselves, enough.
We must also begin to rebuild the foundations of a strong middle class.
By doing so, we ensure that the recovery is fair and sustainable.
On that front, Democrats in Congress working with the Obama
Administration took critical actions to grow and strengthen our
nation's middle class.

Today, all Americans will have access to quality,
affordable health coverage no matter if their employer provides it, or
if they change jobs

Today, college students have access to critical financial
assistance they need to go to college, and stay in college--and earn
the critical skills to keep America competitive.

Today, businesses have powerful new tax incentives for
businesses to hire unemployed Americans and expand their businesses

Today, workers have a Department of Labor that puts worker
safety first--all which helps reduce workplace injuries and makes
business more efficient.

Today, workers have a fairer minimum wage rate--a rate
that was increased by Democrats after Republicans blocked an increase
for a decade--shamefully allowing the value of the rate to drop to a 50
year low.

Today, small businesses have more access to credit
necessary to start, continue, or expand their business.

And today, we have a revitalized supervision of our
nation's financial institutions to avoid another meltdown of our
financial system.
There is more to be done to heal our economy. We need to move
forward on key investments to help unleash our nation's competitiveness
and innovation.
One area this committee can work on is to rewrite the Elementary
and Secondary Education Act so that nation's schoolchildren can be
successful in the classroom and beyond.
Every initiative that goes through this committee must be judged on
whether it will help to grow and strengthen the middle class. We cannot
double-down on go-go bubble economics and trickle down tax policy.
All across the nation, communities are confronting a lack of highly
skilled workers, even as unemployment is high. In my own communities,
business, labor, and community colleges have come together with a new
urgency to tackle this problem.
We must support these local efforts to create jobs, stay
competitive, and act decisively nationally to build and maintain a
highly skilled workforce. Falling behind is not in America's DNA--it
never has, and never will be.
We have the hardest working people in the world and I hope we can
look forward to solutions to help grow and strengthen America's middle
class.
I yield back.
______

Chairman Kline. I thank the gentleman. And we all
understand. There will be a Le Mans start for the airport here
pretty quick, I am sure. I thank the gentleman for his
statement and for the cooperation that he has shown over the
years when he was the chair of this committee.
Pursuant to committee rule 7(c), all members will be
permitted to submit written statements to be included in the
permanent hearing record.
[The statement of Mrs. Roby follows:]

Prepared Statement of Hon. Martha Roby, a Representative in Congress
From the State of Alabama

Thank you Mr. Chairman. This being my first hearing of the
Education and Workforce, I want to take a moment to express know how
much I look forward to working with you over the next two years. I look
forward to an open debate on reforming health care, ensuring our
children have the resources to reach their full potential, and
innovative ways for job creation. The hearing today is the first step
toward this in regards to the state of our workforce. I want to thank
the witnesses for appearing today at our first full committee hearing.
The Administration administered an $814 billion ``stimulus''
package in 2009 that has done nothing to stimulate the economy--
instead--resulting in a loss of 2.1 million jobs. During the Great
Depression of the 1930s, the New Deal was designed to address the ``3
Rs''--relief, recovery and reform. Out of the New Deal, this country
became stronger with improved infrastructures like the Hoover Dam,
improved national transportation system and a more secured financial
system. Unfortunately, the Obama's Stimulus Package did not provide
similar results. This nation is still left with an aging
infrastructure, high unemployment, high levels of uncertainty in
business, and an out-of-control federal debt.
During my travels around the district, I hear from so many
constituents on about the negative impact that the recent efforts by
the federal government are having on their businesses and jobs. I
specifically hear about the opposition to the Patient Protection and
Affordable Care Act signed into law last year. Last week, the House
voted to repeal the law that created significant uncertainty for
businesses-particularly for small business where job growth is so
critical in turning around this recession. I recently spoke with one of
my constituents from Headland, Alabama, who owns a Pizza Hut. He told
me that he will most likely have to shut down his business due to the
added cost from Obama Health Care. I heard from another constituent,
who owns several pharmacies in the southeast, that he had the ability
to create four new jobs bust has not due to the uncertainty of what the
federal government will place on him next.
I look forward to the testimony today from our witnesses on their
observations of these and other factors that have been roadblocks to
America's recovery. Only last month it was reported that December was
the 20th month that unemployment was still above 9 percent nationally.
In my home state of Alabama, unemployment rose slightly to 9.1 percent,
which represents 195,000 unemployed workers in the state. This
Committee must move forward in legislation that will take away the
obstacles to growth for small businesses to help turn around this
recession. The answer to economic growth is not a national answer, but
one on every Main Street and farm of this nation-for small business to
operate and build upon innovation. Once again thank you Mr. Chairman
for holding this hearing.
______

Chairman Kline. It is now my pleasure to introduce our
distinguished panel of witnesses. Governor Bob McDonnell is the
71st Governor of Virginia. Prior to assuming office, the
Governor served as the 44th Attorney General of Virginia from
2005 to 2009, and was a member of the Virginia House of
Delegates from 1992 to 2006. Governor McDonnell also served in
the U.S. Army, both Active Duty and Reserve, retiring as a
lieutenant colonel in 1997. In addition to his long and
distinguished public and military service, the Governor also
has experience in the private sector, having worked for
American Hospital Supply Corporation, a Fortune 500 company,
for a number of years. He holds master's degrees in business
administration and public policy, as well as a law degree.
Welcome, Governor.
Our next witness, Mr. Dyke Messinger, is the President and
CEO of Power Curbers, Incorporated in Salisbury, North
Carolina. Power Curbers is a 55-year old family-owned company
in Salisbury, North Carolina, that manufacturers paving
equipment to form concrete curbs and gutters, highway safety
barriers and other special applications. In 2007 Mr. Messinger
was awarded the Manufacturing Champion Award by the Charlotte
Chamber of Commerce, as well as the Sam Walton Business Leader
Award by the Salisbury, Rowan County Chamber of Commerce. In
addition to his service with Power Curbers, Mr. Messinger
serves on the Board of Directors of the National Association of
Manufacturers.
Dr. Heather Boushey is a senior economist at the Center for
American Progress. Her research focuses on employment, social
policy, and family economic well-being. Prior to her work at
the Center for American Progress. Dr. Boushey was an economist
with the Joint Economic Committee of the U.S. Congress, the
Center for Economic and Policy Research, and the Economic
Policy Institute. Welcome.
And Dr. Douglas Holtz-Eakin is currently the President of
the American Action Forum. Since 2001 he has served in a
variety of policy positions which include his service as the
chief economist of the President's Council of Economic Advisors
and as the Director of the Congressional Budget Office from
2003 to 2005.
Welcome to you all. There are little boxes in fronts of
you. Those lights will illuminate. The system here is you get a
green light at the start of your remarks and some 4 minutes or
so into it, you get a little yellow light, and at the end of 5
minutes you get a red light. We would ask you somewhere in
there to try to wrap up. I am not prepared at this, my first
hearing, to gavel anybody down when the light turns red. But
please try to wrap up your comments. And we would like to hear
from all of you. And then as time allows, we would move into
questions. So, at this time, we will start here and go that
way, Governor.

STATEMENT OF HON. ROBERT F. McDONNELL, GOVERNOR, COMMONWEALTH
OF VIRGINIA

Governor McDonnell. Mr. Chairman. Thank you very much for
your kind invitation to come and talk to you about this
critically important topic of job creation and economic
development. I am delighted to come from across the Potomac to
your south to be with you. It is good to be with my friend,
Congressman Scott, as well. I don't think there is any more
important issue facing the American public than that issue, as
well as spending control, and so it is very timely that you
make this your first topic.
I was particularly gratified with the President's speech
last night and his focus on job creation and workforce
development and access to the American dream. I think that is
something that crosses all party lines, and the question is how
do we best get there; what actually works at the state and
Federal level to promote that?
I will share just a couple of thoughts with you in three or
four categories about some experiences I have from Virginia
that are working and then some things we would like to ask you
to consider up here.
I would say that over the last year we have taken a very
strong set of steps in Virginia to cut spending and focus on
economic development. As a result of that, we have turned a
deficit into a $400 million surplus and we have been ranked
this year either number one or number two as far as the most
business-friendly State in the country. We are ranked fourth in
total job creation, ninth lowest unemployment rate. So we have
learned a little bit about some of the things that work that I
wanted to share with you.
First is what is the overall climate; what can you do in
the States? It starts to keeping our environment where taxes
and regulation and litigation are all kept to a minimum. Strong
right to work laws. We are 1 of 22 states that have that. That
is a magnet for business, great higher education system.
And then thirdly, some of the intangibles: tone, saying you
are open for business and welcoming business, not attacking
business, which I think is critically important and I was
delighted to see some of that last night as well in the
President's remarks.
We have also set some big aspirational goals, I think, that
are helpful, making Virginia the best State in America for
small business, making it the energy capital of the east coast.
Businesses have now come and are gravitating around those
goals.
The second topic that I would say is there are some things
in the short run that both Congress and the States can do to
really attract business. Some of the things we have done in
Virginia would be creating new economic development incentives
for businesses to come here. I look at me not competing just
against Carolina, but against China, India, Singapore, Taiwan,
and other countries and a global economy.
So we have been much more aggressive in funding things like
a Governors Opportunity Fund to provide incentives to business
to relocate; investments in mega sites, opening up trade
offices in India, and China; focusing on some of the core
competencies that our State has in things like aerospace and
agriculture, tourism, film, wine, things we are good at; and
then putting more incentives to attract new businesses as well.
And then major tax credits and things that would create jobs
and produce manufacturing jobs to return back to our
Commonwealth.
The third thing I would say is the long-term approach. The
President touched on this a little bit last night, and that is
the importance of higher education. We have a major new
initiative that I proposed to our general assembly just a
couple of weeks ago to create 100,000 new degrees in Virginia
over the next 15 years. I am very concerned, as you are, about
the future of American competitiveness if we continue to lag
behind in science, technology, engineering, math and health
care, and the number of degrees that we are producing there
compared to some of the Pacific Rim countries.
So we have got to invest and create more opportunities for
our young people to be able to go to institutions of higher
education. But we have got to run colleges, I think, a little
bit more like a business so that we can keep the college
tuitions low. They have doubled in the last 10 years in
Virginia, and you price a lot of middle-class kids out if we
don't find ways collectively to increase access, reduce cost,
and focus on these areas of STEM.
The final area, Mr. Chairman, I would like to discuss with
you are some of the things that you all here in the Federal
Government can do to help us or to hurt us. And I want to tell
you about a couple of those that I think can be impediments.
And again, most Governors would say we really believe, not only
under the tenth amendment, but the fact that we are closer to
the people and therefore govern a little better, as Mr.
Jefferson said, that we ought to have a little more latitude to
be able to do these free-market things that we believe will
work.
Let me tell you a couple that I think don't help. Major new
regulations. I think Heritage has estimated there were 43 major
new rules promulgated in 2010, the largest number in 30 years,
at a cost of $26 billion to business nationally.
The President talked last night about introducing an
executive order to say we are going to cut down on regulations,
find things that don't work, inhibit entrepreneurship and small
business development and free enterprise. I applaud that. I
urge you to hold his feet to the fire and make sure you really
do that to cut down on regulation.
Secondly is bills like card check and cap-and-trade that
you have proposed and considered in the past that, for me as a
coal-producing State, that dramatically hike up energy costs,
undermine our Right to Work laws. That is not good for me as
the chief executive officer of a State.
There are some rules that EPA has promulgated that are
noble; for instance, in cleaning up the Chesapeake Bay. But the
TMDLs will cost Virginia about $700 million in unfunded
mandates in our State and our businesses over the next 15
years.
Mr. Chairman, you mentioned health care. We estimate about
$2 billion in unfunded mandates on the businesses and the State
of Virginia over the next 2 years as a result of the health
care bill.
So what I would say to you is that the things that we can
do in the short and the long term involve more opportunity,
more education--not more guarantees, keeping a lid on
regulations, on taxes, inhibiting States like mine that have a
Right to Work law with things like card check that get in the
way. We would ask you to restrain from doing those things so
that we can continue to be the laboratories of innovation that
I think our Constitution contemplates.
So thank you, Mr. Chairman, I look forward to your
questions.
Chairman Kline. Thank you, Governor.
[The statement of Governor McDonnell follows:]

Prepared Statement of Hon. Bob McDonnell, Governor,
Commonwealth of Virginia

Good afternoon, Mr. Chairman. Thank you for the kind invitation to
join you all this morning to talk about the state of the American
Workforce.
Over 400 years ago, the Commonwealth of Virginia began as an
international business venture--and we have a strong and proven track
record of success. While over the past few years the economy
unfortunately slowed down in Virginia, as it did nationally, the fervor
and passion of the entrepreneurial spirit continues to remain strong in
the people across the Commonwealth from Chincoteague on the Eastern
Shore to the Cumberland Gap in the far southwest.
When I took office just over a year ago, we set out to create a
Commonwealth of Opportunity.
We are the northernmost ``Right to Work'' state, we have a pro-
business environment that fosters economic growth with low taxes and
reduce regulations. We have a strong, diverse workforce prepared to
meet the needs of businesses today. We have been recognized nationally
as one of the best states in which to do business. While still
unacceptably high with an unemployment rate of 6.7 percent, and over
280,000 Virginians out of work, we do have the 9th lowest unemployment
rate in the nation.
We have put forth bold initiatives to get our economy moving again.
I firmly believe it is the entrepreneur who makes businesses grow and
prosper--not the government. Because of our trust in the men and women
to determine the course of their business destiny--we have announced
128 new projects, over $2.2 billion in new investment and over 11,673
new jobs.
Since last February 55,400 net new jobs have been created in the
Commonwealth, the fourth highest number in the nation--trailing only
Texas, Pennsylvania and California.
Our accomplishments include the announcement that Northrop Grumman
will move their headquarters from California to Virginia and
Microsoft's announcement that they would make the largest investment in
Southern Virginia history, opening a $500 million state of the art data
center in Mecklenburg County.
We are committed to simultaneously attracting new employers while
also strengthening our workforce--and I have recently announced my
``Top Jobs for the 21st Century'' initiative that will enable our
higher education institutions to issue an additional 100,000 degrees
over the next 15 years, making Virginia one of the most highly educated
states in the nation. Our initiative also places a greater emphasis on
the high demand science, technology, engineering and math subjects
through the formation of a public-private partnership that will engage
the business and professional community in leveraging best practices
for K-12 and higher education.
We are encouraged by the growth we have seen--slow and steady as it
may be--and the steps we are taking to ramp up that growth are working,
but there still remains a lot of work to do.
However, no matter what pro-free market and job-creation steps we
take in Virginia, we cannot avoid the fact that what happens here in
Washington can cancel much of it out and make our work that much more
difficult.
As you know, our small businesses are the backbone of our economy.
Our small businesses continue to struggle--and when they are able to
rebound we will all be on a more prosperous path. According to a study
just released by the by the National Federation of Independent
Businesses, the largest problem currently confronting small businesses
nationwide is weak sales, followed by taxes and government regulations.
A recent Heritage Foundation analysis reported federal agencies
issued 43 new major rules increasing regulatory burdens in Fiscal Year
2010. The total costs of these rules--as estimated by the regulators--
exceeded $26.5 billion. That's the highest single-year cost recorded
since 1981, the first year for which records are available. These
increased burdens will stunt operations--especially for small
businesses.
We can see the negative impact of excessive federal regulations
throughout our Commonwealth.
For example, the total cost of implementation of the Environmental
Protection Agency's mandated Chesapeake Bay Total Maximum Daily Load
and the associated Watershed Implementation Plan for Virginia
agriculture will be up to $2.5 billion. The Health Care Reform passed
last year will increase the number of Medicaid enrollees in Virginia
from 270,000 to 425,000, at a cost of $2 billion by the year 2022. Our
business owners are concerned about how they are going to comply with
the increased costs to provide insurance to their employees.
I am concerned--especially as the Governor of a Right to Work
state--about the December announcement of the National Labor Relations
Board announcing its intention to publish in the Federal Register a
proposed rule requiring almost all private sector employers to post in
the workplace a notice to employees outlining their rights under the
National Labor Relations Act. The poster entitled, ``Employee Rights''
lists seven bullet points that state employees have the right to
organize, form or join a labor union and repetitively state they have
the right to negotiate their wages, benefits and working conditions
with their employer. This is counterproductive and detrimental to the
message we are trying to send in Virginia.
Just last week President Obama announced what he called ``A 21st
Century regulatory system,'' in which his Executive Branch agencies
would seek ``affordable, less intrusive means to achieve the same ends-
giving careful consideration to benefits and costs.'' He issued an
executive order ``Improving Regulation and Regulatory Review''--
instructing agencies to begin a retrospective analysis of their
existing regulations--and we hope to see burdensome regulations
actually repealed as a result.
Mr. Chairman, members of the Committee, I applaud you for bringing
this panel together today to talk about this paramount issue: ``The
State of the American Workforce.'' In Virginia we are working to keep
taxes low, and regulation and litigation to a minimum in order to free
our entrepreneurs and job creators to grow their businesses and create
the private sector jobs our citizens need. We hope this Committee and
this Congress will move aggressively and quickly to remove the
obstacles that hinder job growth in our great Commonwealth and nation.
Thank you and I look forward to your questions.
______

Chairman Kline. Mr. Messinger.

STATEMENT OF DYKE MESSINGER, PRESIDENT, POWER CURBERS, INC., ON
BEHALF OF THE NATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF MANUFACTURERS

Mr. Messinger. Good morning, Chairman Kline and
distinguished members of the committee. I am Dyke Messinger,
President and CEO of Power Curbers, Incorporated, headquartered
in Salisbury, North Carolina. We employ 105 people in the
United States. We were established in 1953, and manufactured
the first automatic curb-building machine in the world. And I
have been leading a manufacturing company for 35 years.
On behalf of manufacturers in the United States, I
appreciate the opportunity to discuss impediments to job
creation because, as we all know, manufacturing does mean jobs.
Manufacturing supports an estimated 18.6 million jobs in the
United States, about one in six private sector jobs. To put
this in context, this is about the equivalent of the entire
populations of the five largest cities in the United States:
New York, Los Angeles, Chicago, Houston and Phoenix combined.
Manufacturing also means opportunity, innovation, security
and economic growth. In my prepared testimony, I lay out a
lengthy and, frankly, troubling list of these impediments in
such areas as taxation, labor policy, trade, regulation, and
innovation. Fundamentally, this should be understood not just
as a list of impediments to job creation, but also to U.S.
competitiveness.
We live in and operate in a global economy. Every time the
Federal Government enacts a new law, tax, or regulation that
makes it harder for a U.S. manufacturer to compete with foreign
companies, that is also an impediment to us hiring people.
Change, inconsistency, uncertainty are also impediments.
Employers who have no sense of what tax or regulatory policy
will look like next year or 5 years from now are going to be
cautious about hiring new workers.
The NAM last year developed our manufacturing strategy for
jobs, and to make a competitive America, proposing policies
that would lift these impediments. I would respectfully ask
that this document be included in my submission to the
committee.
The strategy sets three broad goals that, if completed,
would mean that we achieve the kind of pro-manufacturing
policies that encourage the hiring that is so important. We
start with the goal that the U.S. will be the best country in
the world to headquarter a company. It is critical that our
national tax climate does not place manufacturers in the United
States at a competitive disadvantage in the global marketplace.
A pro-manufacturing tax policy must first acknowledge that when
Congress raises taxes, it makes manufacturers in the U.S. less
competitive. It is essential that Congress lower the corporate
tax rate to 25 percent or lower, without imposing offsetting
tax increases, as well as instituting permanent lower taxes for
the over 70 percent of manufacturers that are S corporations
and file as individuals.
We must also recognize that one of America's great
competitive advantages is our dynamic labor market. Employers
face growing uncertainty with NLRB efforts to enact the goals
of the dangerous card-check legislation through executive
action.
Additionally, manufacturers face further regulations from
OSHA.
Health care is a pressing concern for all, of course. Above
all, health care solutions must contain costs by building upon
the existing employer-sponsored health care system without
jeopardizing or mandating plan design.
Our second goal is one that President Obama recognized last
night in his State of the Union address; that the United States
should be the best country in the world to innovate, performing
the bulk of a company's global research and development. The
R&D tax credit is important to achieve this goal. It has passed
and expired more than a dozen times.
This point reinforces my earlier comments about certainty.
Business, investors, employers, we all crave predictability and
permanence. A little more permanence in all tax policy would be
a good thing.
And finally, our last goal is that the United States be a
great place to manufacture, both to meet the needs of the
American market, and serve as an export platform for the world.
Manufacturers rely on overseas markets because the bulk of all
U.S. goods and services are manufactured goods. Exports of
manufactured goods have driven the 2009 and 2010 economic
recovery. I know this well, as my company exports 75 percent of
what we manufacture.
Rising energy costs continue to be an impediment to growth
and job creation. We need a comprehensive, all-of-the-above
energy policy that allows access to affordable sources of
energy and promotes reliable generation of baseload power that
meets the demands of a growing economy.
Mr. Chairman, members of the committee, I appreciate the
opportunity to testify today to provide an overview of some of
the many challenges currently facing manufacturers. Thank you
very much.
Chairman Kline. Thank you, sir.
[The statement of Mr. Messinger follows:]

Prepared Statement of Dyke Messinger, President and CEO, Power Curbers,
Inc., on Behalf of the National Association of Manufacturers

Good morning Chairman Kline, Ranking Member Miller and
distinguished members of the Committee. I appreciate the opportunity to
speak with you today about the state of the American workforce,
impediments to job creation and manufacturing strategies for jobs and a
competitive America.
I am Dyke Messinger, president and CEO of Power Curbers, Inc. Power
Curbers is based in Salisbury, North Carolina and employs 105 people in
the United States. Power Curbers was established in 1953 and
manufactured the first automatic curb machine in the world. I have been
leading a manufacturing company for 35 years.
On behalf of manufacturers in the United States, I appreciate the
opportunity to discuss impediments to job creation because
manufacturing means jobs. Manufacturing also means opportunity,
innovation, security and economic growth. Our nation's manufacturing
employees are ready to preserve and build upon the greatness built by
generations past and by those in manufacturing today.
The United States is the world's largest manufacturing economy,
producing 21 percent of global manufactured products. U.S.
manufacturing alone makes up 11.2 percent of our nation's GDP. More
importantly, manufacturing supports an estimated 18.6 million jobs in
the U.S.--about one in six private-sector jobs. To put this in context,
this is about the equivalent of the entire populations of the five
largest cities in the U.S.: New York City, Los Angeles, Chicago,
Houston and Phoenix combined. Nearly 12 million Americans (or 9 percent
of the workforce) are employed directly in manufacturing. Manufacturing
jobs are high paying jobs, too. In 2009, the average U.S. manufacturing
worker earned $74,447 annually, including pay and benefits--22 percent
more than the rest of the workforce.
But today's manufacturers face many challenges to our global
competitiveness and job creation efforts. Proposals that increase taxes
and impose new regulations will make business in the United States less
competitive. These proposals will stifle the already weak recovery and
destroy manufacturers' ability to create jobs.
Manufacturers need policymakers in Washington to embrace policies
and solutions that will ensure that the United States is the greatest
place in the world to be a manufacturer and to be a manufacturing
employee, because manufacturing means jobs. We must focus on
manufacturing strategies that have three key goals:

to be the best country in the world to headquarter a
company;

to be the best country in the world to do the bulk of a
company's research and development; and

to be a great place to manufacture goods and export
products.
The U.S. Must Be the Best Country in the World to Headquarter a Company
Manufacturing today is global and mobile. Companies often enjoy an
array of attractive choices when deciding where to locate their
headquarters, do their research or build new facilities. While the use
of government incentives is commonplace today, a country's or state's
business climate itself ultimately determines where a company will be
located.
As a springboard for future economic growth, investment and jobs,
manufacturers believe the United States must seek to be the best
country in the world in which to locate a manufacturing company's
headquarters.
To do this, we need a national tax climate that does not place
manufacturers in the United States at a competitive disadvantage in the
global marketplace. A pro-manufacturing tax policy must first
acknowledge that when Congress raises taxes, it makes manufacturers in
the U.S. less competitive. Our tax system must promote fair rules for
taxing active foreign income of U.S. based businesses. Congress must
reduce the corporate tax rate to 25 percent or lower without imposing
offsetting tax increases. Over 70 percent of American manufacturers are
S-corporations that file taxes at the individual rate. We must
institute permanent lower tax rates for individuals and small
businesses.
We must also recognize that one of America's great competitive
advantages is our dynamic labor market. Companies must move quickly to
meet the demands of a rapidly changing marketplace, and the continuing
expansion of federal mandates and labor regulations undermines employer
flexibility. In addition, increasing costs discourage the hiring of new
employees.
To encourage competitiveness, the United States should reject new
federal regulations that dictate rigid work rules, wages and benefits
and that introduce conflict into employer-employee relations. We must
also support initiatives at the Occupational Safety and Health
Administration (OSHA) and other oversight agencies that encourage
employers and employees to join in cooperative efforts for safer
working environments. Employers' voluntary efforts to meet the needs of
individual employees through flexible work schedules and benefit
arrangements need to be recognized and promoted.
It is important that manufacturers are able to engage in positive
and fair employee-employer relations. As employers, manufacturers face
growing uncertainty in the area of labor law--especially from case
decisions and regulations from the National Labor Relations Board
(NLRB). While manufacturers greatly appreciate that Congress has
rightfully recognized the dangers of ``card check'' legislation, any
effort to implement the goals of that misguided legislation would be a
threat to job creation. We continue to urge policymakers to uphold the
principles of fairness and balance on which our labor laws have been
developed for over seven decades.
Congress must also support health care reform that drives down
costs. Above all, health care solutions must contain costs by building
upon the existing employer-sponsored health care system without
jeopardizing or mandating plan design. The health care law passed by
Congress in 2010 must be continually assessed for its effectiveness,
cost and unintended consequences. Regulations to implement this law
must be fully transparent and must not add new employer mandates and
costs.
The U.S. Must Be the Best Country in the World to Innovate
Innovation has long helped manufacturing in the United States
maintain its global leadership. Between 2000 and 2006, manufacturing
productivity increased annually by an average of 3.8 percent, primarily
due to innovation and technological advances spurred by research and
development (R&D). U.S. manufacturers perform half of all R&D in the
nation, which drives more innovation than any other sector. To maintain
this competitive advantage, tax provisions must be enacted that will
stimulate investment and recovery, including strengthening the R&D tax
credit and making it permanent. Manufacturers in the United States need
the certainty and incentives provided by a permanent and robust R&D tax
credit.
The federal government must continue its focus on basic R&D that
expands the knowledge base, spurring private-sector R&D as well as
commercial development. Innovation is served by robust funding for
federal research agencies as well as financial support for public- and
private-sector research.
To ensure that we have the skilled workforce necessary to ensure
our economic competitiveness, manufacturers must be able to attract the
best talent from here in the United States and from the entire world.
Between 1995 and 2005, immigrants founded or co-founded 25 percent of
all U.S. high-tech firms. Our nation's immigration rules must allow
substantial increases in the number of employer-sponsored visas.
The United States Will Be a Great Place to Manufacture
An effective manufacturing strategy promotes domestic manufacturing
that serves the U.S. and the increasingly integrated North American
markets. It also supports companies that export and expand abroad to
serve foreign markets. Manufacturing shipped a record $5.8 trillion in
2008 ($1.6 trillion in value added) and provided 11 percent of the
nation's GDP. Manufacturers rely on overseas markets because the bulk
(57 percent) of all U.S. exports of goods and services are manufactured
goods. Exports of manufactured goods have driven the 2009-2010 economic
recovery which is demonstrated by the fact that 75 percent of Power
Curbers product is shipped overseas.
Manufacturers need a level playing field. In today's global
marketplace, we are no longer competing only against businesses in our
state or region or even the country. We face competition from around
the world. Foreign manufacturers often must comply with fewer
regulations and have governments that use every tool at their disposal
to give those companies a competitive edge, frequently at the expense
of manufacturers in the United States.
The solution is to increase access to foreign markets through trade
agreements and ensure the regulatory environment in the U.S does not
put manufacturers at a disadvantage.
To do this, manufacturers need a progressive international trade
policy that opens global markets, reduces regulatory and tariff
barriers and reduces distortions due to currency exchange rates,
ownership restrictions and various ``national champion strategies.''
Congress must enact pending trade agreements and the Administration
must negotiate additional agreements in the Pacific area and elsewhere.
Trade agreements reduce the barriers to U.S. exports and create jobs.
In addition to leveling the playing field on trade, policies must
help small and medium-sized manufacturers through expanded programs to
help drive U.S. exports.
Manufacturers also need a comprehensive energy strategy that
embraces an ``all of the above'' approach to energy independence that
will allow access to affordable energy. Such a policy should encourage
production of baseload electricity--the dependable power that is
critical to manufacturing processes--including traditional coal,
hydropower and natural gas, nuclear and renewable and alternative
fuels. Reducing our dependence on foreign energy by increasing domestic
supply will help achieve this goal. Congress should allow expanded
production of oil and natural gas by lifting the moratorium on Outer
Continental Shelf development, and encourage development of shale gas.
Regulatory Environment
Employers across the U.S., especially manufacturers, face
considerable uncertainty that stifles economic growth and prevents job
creation. Burdensome regulations and government mandates do little to
address this uncertainty. A regulatory environment needs to allow
economic growth. For laws that affect manufacturers, there are often
scores of regulations that impose substantial compliance costs--burdens
often never anticipated by the lawmakers who passed the legislation.
The Small Business Administration recently estimated that the
annual cost of federal regulations in the United States increased to
more than $1.75 trillion in 2008. The portion of these regulatory costs
that falls initially on businesses was $8,086 per employee in 2008.
This study represents the best research available to identify the
disproportionate burden placed on small business by regulation, and it
is 36 percent higher than larger firms. Manufacturers bear the heaviest
burden from environmental regulation, while facing similar or more
stringent regulations in workplace safety, health, transportation,
financial, trade, tax administration, homeland security and export
controls.
This Administration is in the midst of proposing or implementing
numerous regulations. If they are not substantially changed from their
present form, they could cost millions of jobs and weaken an economy in
a still fragile recovery.
Based on data from the Government Accountability Office, 43 major
new regulations were imposed over the previous two years. Collectively,
the cost of these rules topped $26.5 billion. Manufacturers appreciate
President Obama's recent executive order to review federal regulations
harming economic growth. Growing overregulation from Washington harms
job creation and stifles economic growth. This call for a government-
wide review of regulations and rules is an opportunity for the
President to demonstrate results by eliminating unnecessary regulations
already in the pipeline or delaying poorly thought-out proposals that
are costing jobs.
Some of the most concerning regulatory proposals stem from the
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). At the beginning of this year,
the EPA began regulating greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions from stationary
sources under the Clean Air Act. While only the largest facilities will
be regulated at first, this action sets the stage for future regulation
of much smaller sources. Manufacturers are also concerned that states
are unprepared for the new permitting requirements, which will cause
significant delays. This permitting gridlock will discourage
manufacturers from building new facilities or expanding their current
facilities, hurting competitiveness and discouraging job creation.
Furthermore, additional facilities--including hospitals, agricultural
establishments and even the smallest businesses--will be phased into
the onerous permitting requirements in the near future.
While we are pleased that OSHA has announced that it intends to
withdraw its proposed changes to noise control requirements,
manufacturers still face many burdens from this agency. Specifically,
manufacturers are concerned with OSHA's plans to make it more difficult
for employers to work cooperatively with the agency to comply with
workplace safety standards. Through a series of both proposed
regulations and sub-regulatory administrative actions, OSHA is in the
process of gutting key components of compliance assistance programs
that have been proven to help employers make their workplaces safer
while allowing the agency to focus its resources more effectively.
Conclusion
I appreciate the opportunity to testify before the Committee today
to provide an overview of some of the many challenges currently facing
manufacturers. It is my hope that Congress can embrace strategies that
enhance our competitiveness and foster job creation. I respectfully
request permission to submit a plan created by the National Association
of Manufacturers in June 2010--the Manufacturing Strategy for Jobs and
a Competitive America.
______

Chairman Kline. Dr. Boushey.

STATEMENT OF HEATHER BOUSHEY, SENIOR ECONOMIST, CENTER FOR
AMERICAN PROGRESS

Ms. Boushey. Thank you, Chairman Kline, Ranking Member
Miller, Representative Andrews, and everyone on this committee
today for inviting me here to speak. My name is Heather Boushey
and I am the senior economist with the Center for American
Progress Action Fund, and I am glad to be here to discuss the
state of the American workforce. Until we fill the demand gap,
we will have continued high unemployment which, in turn, will
continue to drag our economy down.
Today's high unemployment was caused by the mismanagement
of the economy in the 2000s, a financial sector not focused on
fostering productive investments and a housing bubble.
We must address these root causes. Creating jobs now means
making investments that not only boost employment in the short
term, but lay the foundation for long-term economic growth.
Jobs will not be created by limiting regulation, repealing the
Affordable Care Act or focusing exclusively on the short-term
deficit.
Now, the private sector has been adding jobs every month
for a full year and at a faster rate than during the 2000
economic recovery. Even with the success of the Recovery Act in
boosting job growth, however, at this pace we will not reach 5
percent unemployment for decades. Unemployment has stood at or
above 9 percent for a record 20 months, and there is growing
evidence that workers may not again find jobs at their prior
pay rates. Job losses have been widespread and not only
concentrated in the sectors hardest hit by the bursting of the
housing bubble.
This directly contradicts the notion that the jobs crisis
is a structural program. The continuing slow pace of the jobs
recovery stems from insufficient aggregate demand in the
overall economy. Gross domestic product has grown for five
quarters now, and it is likely we will find out on Friday it
has grown again. Much of this growth has been due to the
Recovery Act and other policies aimed at addressing the fallout
from the financial crisis. Yet our economy continues to have a
gap between what our economy currently produces and what it
would be producing if workers and the economy's productive
assets were to be used at full employment.
About a third of this total output gap is due to the lost
wages of the unemployed. Unemployment insurance fills that gap,
and that is why it is critical to sustaining the economic
recovery and that is why we can't just fill the gap with tax
cuts.
Now, investment is the key to creating jobs now and
building the foundation for a high productivity future. Even
though corporate America is flush with cash, investment is at
its lowest level in more than five decades. Yet the cost of
capital continues to be at lows not seen since the 1960s, and
small businesses continue to point to the problem as being the
lack of customers. A lack of demand is their key problem.
Now, we know that we need to spend at least $2.2 trillion
over the next 5 years just to repair our crumbling
infrastructure. This doesn't even include things like high-
speed rail, mass transit, and renewable energy investments,
many of the things that the President talked about last night
that we need to do to free ourselves from foreign oil and
climate change.
Infrastructure investments have traditionally been a
bipartisan issue and one that hopefully this Congress can build
a bridge across the aisle to address. We should not, however,
repeat the mistakes of the Great Depression, or, as it now
seems, the conservatives have done in the U.K. with austerity
policies that will not create jobs.
The most important reason for the rise in the deficit is
rising unemployment and falling incomes. Economists Allen Blind
and Mark Zandi have estimated that had Congress done nothing to
address the fallout of the financial crisis, the deficit would
have ballooned to more than 2\1/2\ times as large as it is
currently projected to grow.
Moving forward, policymakers like yourselves must continue
to ensure that financial markets are focused on their real
purpose: making funds available to promote investment in
America, not just speculation and greater profits for those in
the financial services industry.
Yesterday the Financial Crisis Inquiry Commission clearly
placed blame for the crisis on the lack of oversight and
regulation of the financial sector. The agencies that oversee
the financial markets must be fully staffed and allowed to do
their job.
We also need to make sure that if a goal of our trade
policy is job creation, then we need to evaluate whether or not
these policies that we are pursuing will actually reduce our
trade deficit and, on net, create jobs. We know from economic
research that local labor markets that have increased exposure
to Chinese exports have had high unemployment, lower labor
force participation, and reduced wages. And there is not good
empirical evidence that shows that the Korea free trade
agreement would generate economically meaningful job gains. We
need jobs now and we need the kind of investments that will
transform our economy and renew long-run prosperity.
Thank you very much.
Chairman Kline. Thank you.
[The statement of Ms. Boushey follows:]

Prepared Statement of Heather Boushey, Senior Economist,
Center for American Progress Action Fund

Thank you, Chairman Kline and Ranking Member Miller for inviting me
here today to testify on the state of the American workforce. My name
is Heather Boushey and I'm a senior economist with the Center for
American Progress Action Fund.
The challenges workers are as great as they've been in generations.
The Great Recession has wrought havoc in the lives of millions of
families. The policies that will create jobs are those that will
increase aggregate demand by making investments that will not only
boost employment in the short-term, but lay the foundations for long-
term economic growth.
Until we fill the demand gap, we will have continued unemployment,
which in turn will continue to drag down economic growth.
Unemployment--the ultimate unused capacity--is a terrible thing.
Allowing it to fester when you have tools at your disposal to alleviate
it sends a message that our government not only doesn't care about the
very real hardships families are facing, but that they don't recognize
the enormous waste of human potential.
The real question is whether policymakers will focus on not
repeating the mistakes of the Great Depression and, rather, continue to
focus on boosting investment until the recovery solidly takes hold.\1\
While the immediate imperative is to address in the short-term high
unemployment, we must also simultaneously begin to address the deep
structural challenges to long-term growth and job creation.
Jobs will not, however, be created by limiting regulation or
repealing the Affordable Care Act, nor by creating by cutting spending
or focusing on the short-term deficit. And, I would caution you on
focusing too much on the short-term deficit. That deficit is not due
the result of overspending, but rather due to the failed economic
policies and two unfunded wars of the Bush Administration, and the
higher costs and lower tax revenues caused by the Great Recession.
The issues facing workers
Today's high unemployment is a function of the reality that there
simply aren't enough jobs to go around because there is not sufficient
demand in our economy. While the economy has been growing for at least
five quarters now, businesses have not yet begun to ramp up hiring.
While unemployment creates significant hardships for individual
families, it also threatens the nascent economic recovery: the
unemployed can't spend what they don't earn and spending is what keeps
our economy humming. Thus, there is a direct link between lack of
hiring and future economic growth.
High unemployment threatens economic stability of millions of American
families
While the recession ended in June 2009, for everyday Americans,
there's been no recovery. The private sector has been adding jobs every
month for a full year and averaged 128,000 jobs per month over the past
three months.\2\ This is a faster pace than in the 2000s economic
recovery, but at this rate, we won't reach 5 percent unemployment for
decades (Figure 1).\3\ To get to 5 percent unemployment by November
2012, we'd need to add more than four times the number of jobs that our
economy is adding now--551,000 jobs each month.
Unemployment has stood at or above 9 percent for a record 20 months
and economists predict it will remain this high at least through 2011.
Nearly half of those unemployed have been job searching for at least
six months.\4\ The odds of finding work continue to look rather grim.
For every five people searching for a job, there is only one job
available. It's like a sad game of musical chairs: one chair, five
seeking a seat. We all know how that game ends.
High unemployment has long-term consequences for workers and their
families, as well as our economy overall. The more than 6 million
unemployed workers who have been searching for a new job for at least
six months are unable to make use of their skills or contribute to our
nation's productive capacity. Consider these facts: Average mature
workers who lose a stable job will see their earnings fall by 20
percent over 15 years to 20 years,\5\ and the labor market consequences
of graduating from college in a bad economy are large, negative, and
persistent.\6\
Many workers may never find jobs at the level of the job they lost
during this Great Recession. Recent data from the Bureau of Labor
Statistics has found that as of last year at this time among those who
were displaced from their job--permanently losing their job or laid off
because their employer's plant closed or business failed--between 2007
and 2009, just half (49 percent) were reemployed. This is lowest
reemployment rate on record for the series, which began in 1984. Of
those reemployed in full-time work, more than half (55 percent) were
earning less than they did prior to displacement.\7\
figure 1

The continuing slow pace of the jobs recovery stems from one factor:
Insufficient aggregate demand in the overall economy
Gross domestic product, or GDP, grew at an annual rate of 2.6
percent in the third quarter of 2010, the fifth quarter of positive
growth in a row.\8\ Much of this growth would not have happened without
the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act and other policies aimed at
addressing the fallout from the financial crisis.
Yet, our economy continues to have what economists call ``excess
capacity,'' which means there is not enough demand for all the goods
and services we have the capacity to produce, and thus not enough
demand for more workers. As of December 2010, capacity utilization was
76 percent, 4.6 percent below its average from 1972 to 2009.\9\ Excess
capacity is a technical term that economists use to describe what
Americans are currently seeing everyday around them--excruciatingly
high unemployment, especially long-term unemployment, and the
devastation it causes families and communities all around our nation.
Another way to measure excess capacity is the ``output gap,'' the
gap between what our economy currently produces and what it would be
producing if workers and the economy's productive assets were to be
used at full employment. Currently, the output gap is equal to over 6
percent of our total gross domestic product (Figure 2). This is down
from 7.5 percent when growth was at its nadir and just before the
American Recovery and Reinvestment Act was passed and signed into
law.\10\
figure 2

Currently, about a third of the total output gap is due to the lost
wages of the unemployed.\11\ To put some back of the envelope numbers
on this, think of it this way: the typical worker brings home about
$40,000 annually and about 15 million are out of work, leaving our
economy about $600 billion smaller this year due to unemployment.\12\
It's that gap that unemployment insurance fills and why it's critical
to sustaining the economic recovery. And, why we can't just fill the
output gap with tax cuts.
And, we are now in another jobless recovery, while profits soar.
From December 2008 to September 2010, profits in the nonfinancial
corporate sector rose in inflation-adjusted terms by 92.0 percent
before taxes and 93.3 percent after taxes. In September 2010, profits
were at their highest point since at least September 2007, before the
recession started. The nonfarm nonfinancial business sector is holding
more than $1.9 trillion in cash, totaling 7.4 percent of total
corporate assets in the third quarter of 2010--the highest level since
the fourth quarter of 1959.\13\
Even though corporate America is flush with cash, investment is at
the lowest level in more than five decades. So far in this business
cycle, from December 2007 to September 2010, business investment has
averaged 9.8 percent of gross domestic product, the lowest average for
any business cycle since the late 1950s (Figure 3). This low level of
investment is not because of the cost or availability of capital, which
continues to be at lows not seen since the 1960s.\14\
Without investment, our resources--the American people--languish in
unemployment. A key challenge for policymakers is sorting out how to
encourage investment.
figure 3

This jobs crisis is not a structural problem
In May of 2007, the unemployment rate was 4.5 percent. Just over a
year and a half later, the private sector was shedding 700,000 to
800,000 jobs per month and unemployment continues to linger above 9
percent. For the unemployment problem to be structural, it would have
to be the case that our nation's workers and employers all of a sudden
become mismatched due to some new set of technological advances that
made one in 10 workers instantaneously obsolete. There is no evidence
that this has been the case in the years since 2007.
If today's high unemployment were largely about shifting workers
out of the sectors hardest hit by the bursting of the housing bubble--
primarily construction--job losses would have to be concentrated there.
But, this has not been the case. In fact, the Great Recession has seen
fairly broad, widespread job losses across industry, which contradicts
the idea that there's one or two sectors that U.S. workers need to
transition out of (Figure 4). Manufacturing, professional and business
services, transportation and warehousing, financial activities, leisure
and hospitality, and information services have all lost a larger share
of jobs than construction.
Further, if unemployment was structural, the money pumped into the
economy through monetary and fiscal policy would lead to higher prices.
If more money were chasing a limited pool or workers or capacity, then
prices should go up. Yet, in fact what we've seen is the opposite. Over
the past year, prices have risen by just half a percent, just barely
above deflation.
figure 4

If the problem with unemployment were structural, the primary
policy lever to address this is education and training. There are many
reasons for policymakers to be concerned about the skills of the U.S.
labor force: American students are consistently behind their academic
peers internationally. According the U.S. Department of Education, out
of 30 peer countries, students in the United States were ranked 30th
for math, 23rd for science, and 17th for reading.\15\ However, even if
unemployment was a structural problem and training and education could
solve it, this is not a solution that can address our immediate high
unemployment. Setting up those programs, getting workers the skills
they need will take time and our economy will not see the fruits of
those endeavors for years. Investing in education is critical for our
economy, but it cannot solve our current unemployment problem.
In thinking about the challenges facing workers and their families,
we also need to remain cognizant of the difference in employment
patterns for specific demographic groups. Workers of color continue to
experience higher unemployment than white workers and the trends in
employment continue to play out differently by gender. Between December
2007 and June 2009, the official timeframe for the recession according
to the National Bureau of Economic Research, jobs held by men accounted
for more than 70 percent of all the jobs lost. In ten of the past 12
months of job gains, the growth in jobs for men outpaced the growth for
women and last summer, women actually lost jobs while men saw small
increases. Over 2010, men gained just more than a million jobs, while
women gained a paltry 149,000 (Figure 5).
The biggest gains for men have been in professional business
services, where men gained 278,000 jobs, compared to 103,000 for women;
trade, transportation, and utilities, where men have gained 245,000
jobs, while women lost 74,000; and administrative and waste services,
where men gained 231,000 and women gained 137,000. One of the biggest
gender gaps in employment trends is in government employment
The aid to the states as a part of the ARRA helped sustain women's
employment through the Great Recession, but with the state budget
crisis lingering, this could continue to bring down women's
employment.\16\ Women make up the majority of state and local
government employees. Last year, local governments shed 259,000
workers, of whom 225,000 were women. At the state level, women have
gained 55,000 jobs and men lost 43,000, but these gains for women were
not enough to offset the local layoffs.
figure 5

How did we get here?
Mismanagement of the economy in the 2000s, a financial sector only
in service of its own profit rather than fostering productive
investments, and a housing bubble all led to the economic disaster in
front of us.
The failed economic policies of the 2000s
We now know that the perception of prosperity in the 2000s was in
many ways a mirage. The housing bubble and financial innovations and
the Great Recession masked deeper structural problems. The housing
bubble, rapid growth of the real estate and financial sectors, and
debt-fueled growth during the Bush era masked what were otherwise
largely negative trends for American workers.
While the economy was growing, American workers were living through
a lost decade. The 2000s saw no income gains for the typical American
family \17\ and saw the weakest employment gains and weakest growth in
business investment of any economic cycle in the post-World War II
era.\18\ For most Americans, wages were stagnant, even though
productivity rose.\19\ Moreover, over the past two decades, we've seen
two ``jobless'' economic recoveries and, with the exception of a few
years in the late 1990s, widening wage and income inequality.\20\
Our labor market has become bifurcated, with fewer and fewer good
jobs paying good wages and benefits and growth in employment at the
high and low ends, leaving out the middle.\21\ This is not a recipe for
a strong middle class, restoring economic opportunity, or long-term
economic competitiveness. Beyond the Great Recession and its global
consequences, this is the great economic policy challenge of our time.
Most women now work outside the home and families have no one
available to provide full-time care for children or ailing family
members. Coupled with declining prospects for future job growth, this
analysis gives a whole new meaning to middle-class squeeze.
The Recovery and Reinvestment Act
Congress has taken important steps to encourage private sector job
creation. The Congressional Budget Office credits the American Recovery
and Reinvestment Act, or ARRA, signed into law in February 2009 with
saving or creating 1.4 to 3.6 million jobs and they estimate that 2.6
million jobs will be saved or created by in 2011.\22\ Last summer,
economists Alan Blinder and Mark Zandi estimated that the American
Recovery and Reinvestment Act and other fiscal policies have saved or
created 2.7 million jobs and without them, unemployment would stand at
11 percent and job losses would have totaled 10 million. On top of
this, they estimate that if nothing had been done to address the
financial crisis--no Troubled Asset Relief Program, no bailouts of
American International Group Inc, and no investment in the auto
industry--our economy would have 5 million fewer jobs than we do today
and unemployment would be sharply higher, at 12.5 percent.\23\
The ARRA kept teachers in schools and police officers on their
beats, even as tax revenues fell. It kept money flowing into the
pockets of the long-term unemployed, which in turn has not only helped
those individual families hardest hit by the Great Recession, but also
helped keep dollars flowing their local communities. It helped
unemployed workers access health care, undoubtedly mitigating the well-
documented negative health effects of unemployment.
Even with the success of the Recovery Act, there have been clear
indications since 2009 that in order to fill in the output gap and
lower unemployment, Congress will need to focus on policies that raise,
not lower, aggregate demand.\24\ As Federal Reserve Chairman Ben
Bernanke noted this month in testimony:
Our nation's fiscal position has deteriorated appreciably since the
onset of the financial crisis and the recession. To a significant
extent, this deterioration is the result of the effects of the weak
economy on revenues and outlays, along with the actions that were taken
to ease the recession and steady financial markets. In their planning
for the near term, fiscal policymakers will need to continue to take
into account the low level of economic activity and the still-fragile
nature of the economic recovery (emphasis added).\25\
In this Great Recession, sustained government spending until the
recovery hits its full stride is the best--and only--option to push the
unemployment rate down. Because the Great Recession was preceded by a
massive financial crisis, we knew from day one that it was likely to be
deeper and more protracted than more recent recessions.\26\ We've also
known for two years now that the Federal Reserve has no more room to
lower interest rates to boost demand.\27\
In other recent recessions, lowering interest rates was sufficient
to push the economy toward sustainable growth, but this time it's not
possible. The last recession that brought us double-digit unemployment,
in the 1980s, was caused by tightening of monetary policy by the
Federal Reserve under Chairman Paul Volcker as they were trying to
address rampant inflation. The Federal Funds Rate hit nearly 20 percent
in the 1981, which stopped inflation, but then also gave the Federal
Reserve a great deal of room to lower rates to encourage economic
activity. To boost growth, the Fed has pursued quantitative easing,
using the proceeds from the central bank's mortgage bond portfolio to
buy long-term government debt. That is, they are using unorthodox
methods of pumping money into an economy and working to lower interest
rates that central bankers do not usually control. Their effect is the
same as printing money in vast quantities, but without ever turning on
the printing presses.
Yet there is a rising chorus of voices singing the praises of
deficit reduction over the benefits of saving our economy through
expansionary fiscal policies. Once our economy recovers, of course, the
deficit must be addressed, but until unemployment begins to fall and
the economic recovery is firmly in train, these voices push us in the
wrong direction. Their rhetoric argues that we not burden the next
generation with unsustainable debts, but the reality is this: by not
boosting demand for goods and services by helping existing excess
capacity--the nearly 15 million unemployed workers in our country
today--millions of workers will find no means of support today and will
see their economic future grows dimmer by the week.
It is important to remember that by taking actions to avert greater
unemployment, we averted a bigger federal deficit. The steps taken to
shore up our economy have ended up being a better investment for jobs
and for the deficit than doing nothing at all (Figure 6). Economists
Blinder and Zandi estimated that had Congress done nothing, the deficit
would have ballooned to more than 2.5 times as large as it did, hitting
more than $2 trillion by the end of the 2010 fiscal year, $2.6 trillion
in fiscal year 2011, and $2.25 trillion in fiscal year 2012. In
actuality, they estimate that by the end of the 2010 fiscal year, the
federal budget deficit will be $1.4 trillion and it will fall to $1.15
trillion in fiscal year 2011 and $900 billion in fiscal year 2012.\28\
figure 6

The most important reason for the rise in the deficit is rising
unemployment and falling incomes.\29\ In 2009, federal receipts were
$419 billion below 2008 levels, a 17 percent drop, which was the
largest decline from one year to the next in more than 70 years.
Individual income tax receipts decreased by 20 percent, and corporate
income tax revenues plummeted by more than 54 percent, which means
corporations paid less than half in taxes than they paid the year
before.\30\
To fix the jobs problem, fix the aggregate demand problem
Unlike any point in the decades since before World War II, the
challenge of laying the foundation for a strong economy lies with you
and this body of government. These are unusual times because it
continues to be the case that fiscal policy is the primary lever that
the federal government has at its disposal to spur economic growth. I
urge you to consider that these extraordinary times call for
extraordinary action--continued spending to aid to the long-term
unemployed. The sense of imminent collapse of our financial sector,
thankfully, now appears behind us, but the fallout for our economy
remains and it is just as dramatic and continues to require bold steps.
Let's be clear: An overgrown financial sector, bloated on the real
estate bubble it helped create, threw our economy into crisis. Moving
forward, policymakers must continue to ensure that financial markets
are focused on making funds available to promote investment in America,
not just speculation and dividends for those in the financial services
industry. We need vibrant capital markets so that innovative companies
can access funds to invest; we do not need innovative financial
products to allow Wall Street to siphon off these funds for its own
gain.
Investment is the key to creating jobs now and building the
foundation for a high-productivity future. The American Society of
Civil Engineers estimates that we need to spend at least $2.2 trillion
over the next five years just to repair our crumbling
infrastructure.\31\ This doesn't even include things like high-speed
rail, mass transit, and renewable energy investments we need to free
ourselves from foreign oil and climate change.
The Obama administration has proposed a $50 billion fund, which is
a good start, but we need to invest more to both address today's jobs
problem and lay the foundation for long-term economic growth.
Infrastructure has been a traditionally bipartisan issue and one that
hopefully this Congress can build a bridge across the aisle to address.
We also need to make sure that if a goal of our trade policy is job
creation, then we need to evaluate whether these policies reduces our
trade deficit and, on net, create jobs.\32\ Economists estimate that
local labor markets that have had increased exposure to Chinese imports
have had higher unemployment, lower labor force participation, and
reduced wages relative to local labor markets that have not had such
exposure. What is notable is that although employment decline is
concentrated in manufacturing, the declines in wages occur across the
local labor market and are actually most pronounced outside of
manufacturing.\33\ The authors note that:
Growing import exposure spurs a substantial increase in transfer
payments to individuals and households in the form of unemployment
insurance benefits, disability benefits, income support payments, and
in-kind medical benefits. These transfer payments are two orders of
magnitude larger than the corresponding rise in Trade Adjustment
Assistance benefits. Nevertheless, transfers fall far short of
offsetting the large decline in average household incomes found in
local labor markets that are most heavily exposed to China trade.\34\
There is also not strong evidence that the Korea Free Trade
Agreement will generate economically meaningful job gains. The U.S.
International Trade Commission, the independent federal body that
analyzes potential effects of trade pacts for Congress and the
executive branch, estimate that while the Korea FTA would increase
exports, it would increase imports even more and result in an increase
in the total U.S. goods trade deficit of between $308 million and $416
million.\35\ The largest estimated increases in the trade deficit would
be in motor vehicles, electronic equipment, ``other transportation
equipment,'' iron, metal products, textiles, and apparel.
The unemployment insurance system and other automatic stabilizers
must remain in working order. Filling the gap in demand will require
continued attention to one of the key sources of demand: high
unemployment. Most of the state's unemployment insurance trust funds
are insolvent, however, with 30 states' owing a total of $41 billion, a
debt that could rise to $80 billion.\36\ The loans from the federal
government will require that in 2011, 25 states must pay an extra $2
billion in federal unemployment taxes levied on employers, an increase
of 30 percent over 2010.\37\
We all have an interest in not seeing the cost of hiring workers
rise as firms struggle to ramp up hiring, but we also need to make sure
that the unemployment insurance system has the integrity to continue to
act as an important automatic stabilizer. Recent analysis shows that
this system generated significant positive economic effects and kept
unemployment from rising to more than 11 percent.\38\
With a mess like this, creating jobs isn't simple, but there
couldn't be a better time to invest in America. Interest rates are low.
Wages are low. We need jobs now and we need the kind of investments
that will transform our economy and renew long-run prosperity.
Thank you.
references
Autor, David H., David Dorn, and Gordon H. Hanson. 2010. ``The China
Syndrome: Local Labor Market Effects of Import Competition in
the U.S.'' Working Paper UCSD and NBER.
Blinder, Alan, and Mark Zandi. 2010. ``How the Great Recession Was
Brought to an End.'' Washington, DC: Economy.com.
Bureau of Labor Statistics, 2010. Employment Status of the Civilian
Population by Sex and Age U.S. Department of Labor.
Bureau of Labor Statistics. 2010. ``Worker Displacement: 2007-2009.''
U.S. Department of Labor (http://www.bls.gov/news.release/
disp.nr0.htm)
David H. Autor, Lawrence F. Katz, and Melissa S. Kearney. 2008 ``Trends
in U.S. Wage Inequality: Revising the Revisionists.''The Review
of Economics and Statistics 90 (2): 300-23.
Farber, Henry. 2005 ``What Do We Know About Job Loss in the United
States? Evidence from the Displaced Workers Survey, 1984-
2004.''Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago: Economic Perspectives 2
(
Heather Boushey, Karen Davenport, Joy Moses, Melissa Boteach. 2010.
``What the Census Tells Us About the Great Recession: New Data
Reveals Decreased Income and Health Coverage.'' Washington, DC:
Center for American Progress.
Hersh, Adam S., and Christian E. Weller. 2011. ``Measuring Future U.S.
Competitiveness: U.S. Productivity and Innovation Snapshot.''
Washington, DC: Center for American Progress.
Hersh, Adam, and Isha Vij. 2011. ``Economic Growth Continues, but Too
Slowly to Secure Recovery: Policy Consistency Targeting Jobs Is
Necessary.'' Center for American Progress (http://
www.americanprogress.org/issues/2011/01/december--jobs.html [1/
25/2011, 2011]).
Kahn, Lisa B. 2010 ``The Long-Term Labor Market Consequence of
Graduating from College in a Bad Economy.''Labour Economics 17
(303-16.
Linden, Michael. 2009. ``Breaking Down the Deficit.'' Washington, DC:
Center for American Progress.
McArthur, Travis, and Todd Tucker. 2010. ``Lies, Damn Lies and Export
Statistics: How Corporate Lobbyists Distort Record of Flawed
Trade Deals.'' Washington, DC: Public Citizen's Global Trade
Watch.
Mishel, Lawrence, Jared Bernstein, and Heidi Shierholz. 2009. The State
of Working America 2008-9. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University
Press.
Piketty, Thomas, and Emmanuel Saez. 2003 ``Income Inequality in the
United States, 1913-1998.''Quarterly Journal of Economics 118
(1): 1-39.
Reinhart, Carmen, and Kenneth Rogoff. 2009 ``The Aftermath of Financial
Crises.''American Economic Review (Papers and Proceedings) 99
(2): 466-72.
Romer, Christina D. ``Back to a Better Normal: Unemployment and Growth
in the Wake of the Great Recession'' In Woodrow Wilson School
of Public and International Affairs, Princeton University
Princeton, N.J.: 2010. Reprint.
U.S. Congressional Budget Office. 2010. ``Estimated Impact of the
American Recovery and Reinvestment Act on Employment and
Economic Output from January 2010 through March 2010.''
Washington, DC.
U.S. Congressional Joint Economic Committee. 2008. ``Stemming the
Current Economic Downturn Will Require More Stimulus.''
Washington, DC.
Vroman, Wayne. 2010. ``The Role of Unemployment Insurance as an
Automatic Stabilizer During a Recession.'' Washington, DC: U.S.
Department of Labor.
Xie, Holly, Howard L. Fleischman, Paul J. Hopstock, Marisa P. Pelczar,
and Brooke E. Shelley. 2010. ``Highlights from Pisa 2009:
Performance of U.S. 15-Year-Old Students in Reading,
Mathematics, and Science Literacy in an International
Context.'' Washington, DC: National Center for Education
Statistics.
US Congress, Senate Committee on Finance. 2010. Testimony of Mark Zandi
on Using Unemployment Insurance to Help Americans Get Back to
Work: Creating Opportunities and Overcoming Challenges 111th
Congress, 2nd session sess.
endnotes
\1\ Christina D. Romer, ``Back to a Better Normal: Unemployment and
Growth in the Wake of the Great Recession'' in Woodrow Wilson School of
Public and International Affairs, Princeton University (Princeton,
N.J.2010).
\2\ Bureau of Labor Statistics, Employment Status of the Civilian
Population by Sex and Age (U.S. Department of Labor, 2010), table A-1,
Adam Hersh and Isha Vij, ``Economic Growth Continues, but Too Slowly to
Secure Recovery: Policy Consistency Targeting Jobs Is Necessary,''
available at http://www.americanprogress.org/issues/2011/01/december--
jobs.html (last accessed 1/25/2011 2011).
\3\ ------, ``Economic Growth Continues, but Too Slowly to Secure
Recovery: Policy Consistency Targeting Jobs Is Necessary''.
\4\ Bureau of Labor Statistics, ``Employment Status of the Civilian
Population by Sex and Age'', Hersh and Vij, ``Economic Growth
Continues, but Too Slowly to Secure Recovery: Policy Consistency
Targeting Jobs Is Necessary''.
\5\ Henry Farber, ``What Do We Know About Job Loss in the United
States? Evidence from the Displaced Workers Survey, 1984-2004,''
Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago: Economic Perspectives 2 (2005).
\6\ Lisa B Kahn, ``The Long-Term Labor Market Consequence of
Graduating from College in a Bad Economy,'' Labour Economics 17 (2010):
303-16.
\7\ Bureau of Labor Statistics, ``Worker Displacement: 2007-2009,''
available at http://www.bls.gov/news.release/disp.nr0.htm.
\8\ Bureau of Economic Analysis, National Income and Product
Accounts Table 1.1.1, (December 22, 2010).
\9\ Federal Reserve Statistical Release. ``Industrial Production
and Capacity Utilization.'' Table G.17, (January 14, 2011).
\10\ Hersh and Vij, ``Economic Growth Continues, but Too Slowly to
Secure Recovery: Policy Consistency Targeting Jobs Is Necessary''.
\11\ Bureau of Economic Analysis, National Income and Product
Accounts.
\12\ Author's calculations from U.S. Census Bureau and U.S. Bureau
of Labor Statistics
\13\ Adam S. Hersh and Christian E. Weller, ``Measuring Future U.S.
Competitiveness: U.S. Productivity and Innovation Snapshot''
(Washington, DC: Center for American Progress, 2011).
\14\ Ibid.
\15\ Holly Xie, Howard L. Fleischman, Paul J. Hopstock, Marisa P.
Pelczar, and Brooke E. Shelley, ``Highlights from Pisa 2009:
Performance of U.S. 15-Year-Old Students in Reading, Mathematics, and
Science Literacy in an International Context'' (Washington, DC:
National Center for Education Statistics, 2010).
\16\ Boushey, Heather. ``Compromising Women's Jobs.'' Center for
American Progress, (February 9, 2009).
\17\ Karen Davenport Heather Boushey, Joy Moses, Melissa Boteach,
``What the Census Tells Us About the Great Recession: New Data Reveals
Decreased Income and Health Coverage'' (Washington, DC: Center for
American Progress, 2010).
\18\ U.S. Congressional Joint Economic Committee, ``Stemming the
Current Economic Downturn Will Require More Stimulus'' (Washington, DC,
2008).
\19\ Lawrence Mishel, Jared Bernstein, and Heidi Shierholz, The
State of Working America 2008-9 (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.,
2009).
\20\ Thomas Piketty and Emmanuel Saez, ``Income Inequality in the
United States, 1913-1998,'' Quarterly Journal of Economics 118 (1)
(2003): 1-39.
\21\ Lawrence F. Katz David H. Autor, and Melissa S. Kearney,
``Trends in U.S. Wage Inequality: Revising the Revisionists,'' The
Review of Economics and Statistics 90 (2) (2008): 300-23.
\22\ U.S. Congressional Budget Office, ``Estimated Impact of the
American Recovery and Reinvestment Act on Employment and Economic
Output from January 2010 through March 2010'' (Washington, DC, 2010).
\23\ Alan Blinder and Mark Zandi, ``How the Great Recession Was
Brought to an End'' (Washington, DC: Economy.com, 2010).
\24\ A wide array of economists agree with this sentiment. See: US
Congress, Senate Committee on Finance, Testimony of Mark Zandi on Using
Unemployment Insurance to Help Americans Get Back to Work: Creating
Opportunities and Overcoming Challenges,Cong., 111th Congress, 2nd
session sess., 2010.; Lawrence H. Summers, ``Reflections on Fiscal
Policy and Economic Strategy, ``Remarks at the John Hopkins University,
May 2010;
\25\ Testimony before Committee on the Budget, U.S. Senate http://
www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/testimony/bernanke20110107a.htm
\26\ Carmen Reinhart and Kenneth Rogoff, ``The Aftermath of
Financial Crises,'' American Economic Review (Papers and Proceedings)
99 (2) (2009): 466-72.
\27\ Boushey, Heather. ``Keep the Money Flowing.'' The New York
Times, (June 24, 2010).
\28\ Blinder and Zandi, ``How the Great Recession Was Brought to an
End''.
\29\ Michael Linden, ``Breaking Down the Deficit'' (Washington, DC:
Center for American Progress, 2009).
\30\ Ibid.
\31\ American Society of Civil Engineers. ``America's
Infrastructure Report Card.'' (March 25, 2009).
\32\ As Paul Krugman wrote in a recent column: ``If you want a
trade policy that helps employment, it has to be a policy that induces
other countries to run bigger deficits or smaller surpluses. A
countervailing duty on Chinese exports would be job-creating; a deal
with South Korea, not.'' Paul Krugman, ``Trade Does Not Equal Jobs,''
The New York Times, Dec. 6, 2010.
\33\ David H. Autor, David Dorn, and Gordon H. Hanson, ``The China
Syndrome: Local Labor Market Effects of Import Competition in the
U.S.'' Working Paper Cambridge, MA: UCSD and NBER, 2010).
\34\ Ibid.
\35\ U.S. International Trade Commission. ``U.S.-Korea Free Trade
Agreement: Potential Economy-wide and Selected Sectoral Effects.''
USITC Publication 3949. September 2007, Corrected printing March 2010,
at 2-14, Table 2.3, Available at: http://www.usitc.gov/publications/
332/pub3949.pdf
\36\ Cooper, Michael and Mary Williams Walsh. ``U.S. Bills States
$1.3 Billion in Interest Amid Tight Budgets.'' The New York Times. pg.
A1 (January 15, 2011).
\37\ U.S. Department of Labor
\38\ Wayne Vroman, ``The Role of Unemployment Insurance as an
Automatic Stabilizer During a Recession'' (Washington, DC: U.S.
Department of Labor, 2010).
______

Chairman Kline. Dr. Holtz-Eakin.

STATEMENT OF DOUGLAS HOLTZ-EAKIN, PRESIDENT, AMERICAN ACTION
FORUM

Mr. Holtz-Eakin. Thank you Chairman Kline, Ranking Member
Miller, and Mr. Andrews and members of the committee, it is a
great honor to be here today.
In my written testimony I emphasized four points. First,
that the distress of the American workforce is very real and
easy to document.
The second, that the most imperative thing at the moment is
to concentrate on pro-growth policies and at every juncture,
when faced with a policy decision, ask will this or will this
not make it easier for an employer to put one more person on
the payroll. With about 6 million employers, if everyone hired
1 person, we would take care of three-quarters of the
unemployment problem very fast.
The third is that many of the policies in which we are
currently engaged are at odds with that requirement for pro-
growth imperatives.
And then the last is that over the longer term, when it is
the return to full employment, our workforce will be best
served by being better skilled, more flexible and better able
to compete internationally, and that this committee is well
situated to discuss the K-12 and higher education reforms that
would be necessary to pursue that.
Given the limited time that I have, I am going to go very
light on number one--not because it is unimportant, the
distress is real--and number four, not because it is
unimportant, but you already know everything about it and I
have nothing really to add here.
I want to focus on the need for pro-growth policies and
some of the things that I see on the landscape right now. Pro-
growth policies are different than countersystemic cyclical
policies, or stimulus in the political parlance. Stimulus is
appropriate when the economy is falling, and we can debate the
effectiveness of the American Recovery Act, and probably will,
as an economics profession, for a long long time.
But that is not the situation in which we find ourselves.
We have been growing since the third quarter, a year ago. We
are growing far too slowly. It is a growth rate that is
consistent with the trajectory of the economy's postfinancial
crisis. All the evidence is, there are slow and long recoveries
from financial crisis. That places an imperative on raising the
growth rate to the maximum amount possible during that
trajectory to get people back to work.
Where will that growth come from? It won't be from
households. Households have seen their net worth badly damaged.
Their pensions aren't worth what they used to be. They are
badly in debt. Their homes are underwater in some case. They
are not going to spend this economy to prosperity. And if we
write them checks, it will be--there is no way to do that to
replace their lost wealth. It is a strategy that will fail.
The same is true for governments. Our governments are on
red ink everywhere. I applaud Governor McDonnell for avoiding
such distress in Virginia, but if you look across the
landscape, State and local governments are in deep financial
trouble. They cannot be counted on to spend their way to
prosperity.
The Federal Government budget is something I am happy to
expand on but, put simply, if we pursue the path that is laid
out, for example, in last year's administration budget or
something that looks like the CBO report released earlier
today, we will be downgraded as a sovereign borrower within
this decade. And we cannot pretend that we can spend as a
sustained mechanism to recover.
That leaves, by process of elimination, the business
community and then exports, both of which have to be given
every opportunity to power this economy going forward.
What is on the landscape at the moment in that area? Well,
we have the fiscal outlook, which is in and of itself a threat
to expansion. It is a promise of either higher taxes or higher
interest rates in the financial classes in years to come, and
the sooner Congress closes that debt by reducing the growth of
spending, the better off the business environment will be.
We have on the agenda the administration's commitment to
higher taxes. We heard last night about corporate tax reform. I
am happy to give a sermon on the virtues of internationally
competitive tax policies. But we also have the promise to raise
taxes in 2013, including those on small businesses, which are
the engines of job creation in the United States. That is a
negative from the point of view of the jobs outlook.
The recently passed Patient Protection and Affordable Care
Act is riddled with bad economic policy from the point of view
of growth. There are $700 billion worth of new taxes in that
act. Those taxes, by any measure, will be passed along to
workers in the form of lower wages or fewer jobs. And even the
research of Christy Roemer, who was the former chairwoman of
the President's Council of Economic Advisors, suggests that
discretionary tax increases have the single most powerful
negative impact on economic recovery. It is the wrong time to
be doing that. There are higher mandates. Employers are going
to have to pay the cost of those mandates by again cutting
wages or jobs, and higher premiums.
The law, as I lay out in my written testimony, is a recipe
for higher insurance premiums, which in the end will hurt
employers as they try to hire people.
And the last, which has been mentioned before, is the
regulatory environment. 2010 was a banner year for regulators
and saw an 18 percent increase in Federal Register pages
devoted to regulation. The cost of that regulation ranged from
$20 billion, as Governor McDonnell mentioned, to 40 billion by
some of our estimates. We can do better in providing an
environment in which employers can put workers on the payroll
and those workers can receive higher pay as we move forward.
So I thank you for the opportunity to be here today and
look forward to answering your questions.
[The statement of Mr. Holtz-Eakin follows:]

------

Chairman Kline. Thank you all for your testimony. We will
move now to questions from the members. We will be abiding by
the 5-minute rule here. I don't have the same reservations
about the gavel for my colleagues as I might for the witnesses.
And we will try to get as many questions in as we can. And,
again, I am mindful of the fact that members are having to
leave as they look at their flight schedules shifting. You may
see people taking a look at their BlackBerries and discovering
that they have to leave even sooner. And so to give members a
maximum opportunity, I am going to delay my own questioning and
turn on my side to Dr. Bucshon.
Mr. Bucshon. Thank you, Chairman. I am going to direct this
question to Governor McDonnell. Thank you all for coming. We
appreciate it. I am from Indiana and the Daniel's
administration has estimated that the expansion of the Medicaid
program, if 100 percent of the people sign up, may cost the
State as much as $3.6 billion. I am going to make a few
comments about Medicaid and what it does to access to health
care, and then I will ask you a question about what your
options are, what you see as the State's options if we can't
get around that type of a mandate.
As a physician, the Medicaid programs in many States
already are severely strapped for funds. In fact, a neighboring
State of mine, they run out of money in September or October
every year. And from a provider's standpoint, from a hospital
or a physician, you basically have to re-bill the State later
on, of which a good portion of that is further written off.
What this has done across the country is it severely limits
access to health care for Medicaid patients because providers
won't take them or they limit the amount of time that they have
available in their day to see these patients. So at a time when
we are trying to expand health care coverage for Americans, the
Medicaid program, in my view, will expand coverage; but if you
don't have anybody to take care of you or that will accept what
you have, then that doesn't really help you very much.
The other thing I would like to comment on is our strapped
emergency rooms. Across the country already, as everyone knows,
emergency rooms already are overcrowded with long wait times,
and statistically this population of folks are the highest
utilizers of emergency room services. So if you see that in
your public hospitals in your States, a massive expansion of ER
utilization at a time when we are trying to control health care
costs, we are going to have the opposite effect.
So my question, Governor, is from your State's standpoint,
what do you see as the options for the States if they have to
come up with this extra money? What do they do with their
public hospitals for funding? How will it affect your overall
budget at your State? Will it cause tax increases at your
State? And just give me kind of a general overall view of what
you see this particular portion of the health care bill will
affect you.
Governor McDonnell. Well, thank you Congressman Bucshon. We
have looked at that and, of course, while my State is in
litigation, we still know that with the clock ticking to 2014,
we still have to take the prudent steps to build exchanges and
do the things to implement the law.
Let me give you a pre-health-care reform view of Medicaid
in my State, and this is across the board with other Governors
as well. Medicaid spending in Virginia has gone from--it has
increased 1,600 percent in the last 27 years. It has gone from
consuming 5 percent of the budget to now 20 percent. Other
States are already in the high 20s, 27, 28.
We are a relatively low-coverage State, and so with the
impact of the Federal health care reform, we will have a
precipitous increase in the Medicaid population in our State,
such that we estimate by over the next 10 years it will--
Medicaid spending in Virginia will go up even that much more
and consume close to 30 percent of the budget. And that is
about $2 billion of increased spending for Medicaid, unfunded
from the Federal Government, by the year 2022.
So we are looking at ways now to implement these
requirements from the Federal law in a way that is least
bureaucratic and most efficient. I have got initiatives before
our general assembly this year to look at far more use of
managed care across the spectrum for all health services,
including mental health, more generics, co-pays, but also more
education.
You mentioned the issue of the overuse of the emergency
room, which is the most expensive place to get medical care by
this population, so education is obviously a part of it. But
there is a tremendous budget-busting concern, I believe, of
every Governor in the country about the growth in Medicaid on
its own, plus the Federal mandate, with the new legislation
growth and what it is going to do. So we are struggling to find
ways to reduce Medicaid spending in a way that still keeps a
healthy, quality, safety net but doesn't break the bank on
spending and force cuts in other areas or pressure more tax
increases.
It is a timely question. We don't yet have the answer and,
ultimately, depending on what the courts decide on this
measure, and what we can implement in our legislatures for
reductions, that will make a difference.
The one last thing I would say, Mr. Chairman, is I know you
have gotten letters from a number of us Governors asking you
for some consideration on flexibility with the MOE
requirements. For us to be innovators in our State governments
and to find ways to implement this law and also to keep the
costs of Medicaid as low as possible, we have got to have some
relief from some of the mandates, from some of the MOE
requirements, more flexibility.
I talked to Governor Daniels, in fact, yesterday about this
issue. I think we will probably have another letter to you
coming on this exact subject to say, Please, as long as this is
the law, at least provide us more flexibility on how we can
implement creative cost-cutting measures in Medicaid so that we
can control our populations and our costs a little better.
Chairman Kline. Thank you, Governor. The gentleman's time
has expired. Mr. Andrews.
Mr. Andrews. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank the ladies and
gentlemen of the panel for excellent testimony.
The President said last night, and I think we should all
embrace the goal you have reiterated of working together to
foster an environment where entrepreneurs and businesses can
create jobs for the people of our county.
And Mr. Messinger, I wanted to thank you for taking time
away from your family and your business. You are a very
effective advocate for your beliefs as a small manufacturer.
And I wanted to ask you just retrospectively for a minute, do
you think that Congress did the right thing when we passed the
TARP bill?
Mr. Messinger. I happen to think that the TARP legislation
was excellent. A quick story: I happened to go see Congressman
Coble who had voted initially against it, and requested that he
please vote for it. And I don't know if it was just my showing
up, but others too on the telephone, I think it stabilized our
country.
Mr. Andrews. I appreciate your advocacy efforts. I agree
with you. And I think it was an important step forward and I
appreciate you saying that, both previously and now.
Governor, welcome. It is not an easy time to be Governor. I
sure do know that. And I wanted to ask you about an initiative
that you have launched that sounds a lot like some of what we
have heard the last few days around here, which I understand is
a $4 billion transportation investment program for the
Commonwealth of Virginia. And if I understand it correctly, you
are expediting some bonds the Commonwealth already issued, I
think to the tune of like 1.8 billion or so. And then you are
proposing to borrow 1.1 billion and support that debt service
with Federal payments from the transportation trust fund.
Two questions. One is, you know, there is consideration of
reduction of discretionary domestic spending by 25 percent.
Would you ever want to see us exempt the transportation trust
fund from that 25 percent, or would you want to see us do the
25 percent cut?
Governor McDonnell. Obviously, that policy is very similar
to yours. What I can say is that I think infrastructure
investment in Virginia and America is one of our top
priorities, especially for us in Virginia. You have probably
driven around the southern part of the Beltway and understand
what congestion does to the quality of life.
Mr. Andrews. I was actually parked on the southern part of
the Beltway.
Governor McDonnell. I increased the speed limit to 70 miles
an hour last year. Some in Northern Virginia said, We would be
happy going 30.
Mr. Andrews. Seventy miles a day would be pretty good in
Northern Virginia.
Governor McDonnell. But I would say to you that
infrastructure investment is critical. I honestly think it was
a lost opportunity to the degree that the stimulus policy was
the right thing to do, there was very little money in there.
Only about 6 percent of your total spending was there. That
would have been nice. But I do think that, given the posture we
are in, for us to use debt responsibly for the mortgage-like
infrastructure is prudent, and I think we are going to get that
done.
Mr. Andrews. I agree. I do think that is one of the areas
we should avoid, that 25 percent. And I want to square that
comment with Mr. Holtz-Eakin's testimony. And please forgive me
if I mischaracterize what you say, or misunderstood, Mr. Holtz-
Eakin, but I think you said that further stimulus at this time
is ill-advised. And it seems to me the kind of transportation
investment the Governor is supporting in Virginia, using
Federal funds, is that kind of stimulus. Do you disagree with
him about that point?
Mr. Holtz-Eakin. Infrastructure can be a central part of
the supply-side economics where you get good long-term growth
as part of the productivity of the Nation. What I would urge
you to not do is judge it by construction jobs created. If we
look back and somehow judge the construction of the interstate
highway system by the construction jobs created, we would have
missed its economic importance completely.
Mr. Andrews. Using that litmus test, what would you think
about the expansion of high-speed rail, like the President
proposed last night?
Mr. Holtz-Eakin. The thing I would most urge you to do is
before you start looking at the dollars, you start looking at
the quality of the programs. I participated for the past 3
years in something known as the Bipartisan Policy Center's
national transportation policy project. And I won't belabor you
with the findings. It is a bipartisan project. We have a bigger
report called Performance Driven, all of which suggests that
before you spend a dollar, you have to take the hundred or so
programs in the Department of Transportation and turn them into
something that generally has a Federal rationale and is
motivated on economic growth.
Mr. Andrews. What about high-speed rail? Do you think it
fits that litmus test or not? Do you agree with the President
or disagree?
Mr. Holtz-Eakin. I would probably disagree at this point
because the notion that you should pick a mode--we should not,
you should not care how it gets done. You should care what gets
done.
Mr. Andrews. What do you think would have a higher
priority, then? Which program would be better?
Mr. Holtz-Eakin. That which from a national perspective
most improved national connectivity. Whether it is from a port
to a rail or from a port to a passenger will differ in parts of
the country, and to pick a single mode, high-speed rail, is to
actually get the formulation of the policy wrong.
Mr. Andrews. So transportation investment based on economic
productivity is something you support.
Mr. Holtz-Eakin. Yes.
Mr. Andrews. Thank you very much. I yield back.
Chairman Kline. I thank the gentleman. Dr. Heck, you are
recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Heck. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And also I would like to
thank the panelists for braving the elements and taking the
time to be with us this afternoon.
My question is for the Governor. I represent southern
Nevada which has the dubious honor of having the highest
unemployment rate in the Nation right now with 14.9 percent,
estimated that actual unemployment is about 22 percent. But I
am intrigued by Virginia's ability to be the fourth best in job
creation and having an unemployment rate that is, you know, at
ninth in the country, showing that there is still opportunity
for success even in these tough economic times. I realize the
demographics between Virginia and Nevada are very different.
But Governor, if you were to pick one or two policies or
programs that you could state had a significant effect on your
unemployment rate and lowering it and creating jobs, what would
those be? And likewise, were there any policies or programs you
tried which you found were not successful?
Governor McDonnell. I guess I would like to answer in part
where I started with my remarks is there are certain
fundamentals to economy and job creation and recruitment of
entrepreneurs and innovation for small business that I think
are universal, and that is keeping an environment where taxes
and regulation and litigation are low. And the President
frankly commented on all of those last night: that he wanted to
see spending reform; keep taxes low; discretionary spending
freezes; regulatory reform; medical malpractice reform. I mean,
he said a lot of the right things last night that, if you all
will work on that, I think are going to do some good things.
We have tried to do that. For instance last year, we were
faced with a $4.2 billion budget deficit. Some had proposed
halving that with a tax increase of $2 billion, the largest in
Virginia history. We said no. We made the tough decisions. We
have cut spending $4.2 billion and now we have got 5 percent-
plus revenue growth, robust job creation numbers, and we have a
$400 million surplus. I think those kind of physical principles
is what I would say is the foundation.
And then secondly is, you have got to be aggressive. The
American dream is still well and alive, but you have got to be
able to reach out to the entrepreneur and the small business
person in particular and show them why coming to your State is
going to make a difference for them; 71 or so percent of all
the jobs in America are still created by that small business
person, under 250 jobs or so, and they have unique challenges;
and a lot of them are the tax policies and the regulatory
policies that inhibit them from getting started and then
staying in business. Sixty percent fail within the first 5
years, and the number one reason is bad management. The number
two reason is government interference, taxes, regulation,
litigation, et cetera.
So I think those fundamentals are universal and we have
found a way for a while, frankly, with Democrat and Republican
Governors to keep that formula in place and it is working.
Mr. Heck. Mr. Chair, if I may. Were there any programs or
policies that you put into place that you found might have been
detrimental to your job creation and job growth, things that
you would advise others to avoid?
Governor McDonnell. Well, of course, I would say the flip
side is the tax increases. We had our largest tax increase back
in 04 and we didn't fare too well after that. Of course, some
of that was the global economic downturn.
But I would say that the programs that are used--and we
have created some--and my response to Mr. Andrews earlier, we
have created some that are targeted at things like mega sites
and corporate tax credits to come to Virginia, particularly in
the tech and manufacturing sectors. And I have an opportunity
fund of essentially flexible money for me to make offers for
businesses to come here, as most States do, and frankly, a lot
of foreign countries, particularly the Pacific Rim has now. So
that is part of the market right now.
But if it is just corporate giveaways without targeted ROI
analysis aimed at your core strengths, then I think you will
waste money, and we have probably done a little bit of that
over the years. So I think that is the key--strategic, targeted
investments in those things that are going to grow on your core
competencies in your State, and then be aggressive telling your
story.
Mr. Heck. Thank you, Governor. Thank you, Mr. Chair. I
yield back.
Chairman Kline. Thank you. Mr. Scott.
Mr. Scott. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And Governor, as a
resident of Hampton Roads, spending a lot of time up here in
Northern Virginia, I am looking forward to those transportation
improvements.
You referred to your Top Jobs of the 21st Century
Initiative. And the President talked last night about there is
a close correlation between education and jobs. Can you tell me
what it is going to take to create 100,000 new degrees over the
next 15 years, a total of 6,000 a year. That is a lot of
students. How are we going to do that?
Governor McDonnell. First, we have got to be able to get
the universities to grow the pie and expand the number of
degrees that they offer. UVA has been the first taker; 1,400
new degrees they are going to offer over the next couple of
years. Right now, only 38 percent of the kids in Virginia can
actually go to a Virginia university. So we have got enormous
physical plant--only 38 percent of Virginians that are applying
to college can actually go to a Virginia college. That is the
limits on our capacity. About 42 percent have a college degree,
but 4 percent or so of those earn those out of State. But we
have to be able to use the enormous physical plant at our
universities, weekends, summers, et cetera, to expand the
opportunities.
Secondly, there is enormous potential with the Internet for
distance education, having partnerships between multiple
universities, which we now see in Virginia, to use virtual
learning experiences. And they have to focus, Congressman, I
believe on the STEM areas.
The President mentioned that last night. I think he is
absolutely right. That is where our future competitive
disadvantages will occur compared to the Pacific Rim countries
and other emerging countries that get that and are graduating
more engineers and scientists per capita than we are. But I
think we have to realize, then, that universities can't be all
things to all people. We may not need 43 different degrees in,
let's say, philosophy. But we need a lot more in science and
medical schools and engineering.
So what it is going to cost in Virginia, I am investing
about $75 million by cutting other things out of the budget and
reinvesting it in these core priorities of transportation and
higher education. But it is going to take a sustained
investment to create about 1,000 new degrees over a year.
Mr. Scott. Now, the President mentioned education past the
high school level. All of that won't be 4-year degrees. Are you
focussing also on vocational educational opportunities?
Governor McDonnell. Yeah. I think that is exactly right.
There are a number of great paying jobs, not only in Virginia
but around the country, that a 2-year certificate in welding or
firefighting or a 2-year associate's degree will earn you. And
that is why I think the focus on workforce development is
critically important. It is probably the number one or two
thing people ask for when they want to come to Virginia: What
kind of educational establishment do you have? How well trained
are your workers? Because in the long term, that is what is
going to be able to sustain their growth.
Mr. Scott. From a jobs perspective, you faced, as all
States did, significant budgetary challenges last year. Can you
indicate what the revenue sharing part of the stimulus package
did to your budget and how many fewer people you had to lay off
because you got money from the stimulus package?
Governor McDonnell. Well, I think certainly the components
dealing with education and the Medicaid funding certainly were
helping us in plugging some of the holes that we had, although,
you know what? If I didn't have it, I would have asked for more
cuts. We cut $4.2 billion. Another billion, we would have found
a way to do it, but it certainly lessened the blow in the short
run.
Mr. Scott. Well, if you had cut a billion dollars out of
the State budget, that would have had employment implications,
would it not?
Governor McDonnell. It would. But I tell you what,
virtually all the claims that were made were vastly overblown.
We did some cuts to education. Your money that you provided
last year helped to plug some of that. But the estimates were
laying off 30,000 teachers. In essence, it really came out to
be less than 1,000. And I will tell you why. When you give
people less resources and you tell them to do more with less,
our dedicated employees at the State and Federal level will do
it. They will be more entrepreneurial, they will be more
innovative, they will be more efficient.
And that is what happened in Virginia, Congressman, is we
didn't have nearly those kind of layoffs. And of the job
creation--maybe this will help answer your question. Of the job
creation numbers that I have mentioned, about 60,000 net new
jobs created over the last year in Virginia, only about 15
percent of those were public sector jobs.
Governor McDonnell. The rest of them were all private
sector jobs.
Mr. Scott. Do you count government contracts like a road
project as a private job or a public job? Although it is paid
for----
Governor McDonnell. No, I don't know how they are counted.
I assume they are counted probably as private sector jobs
because they would contract those out.
Mr. Scott. Mr. Holtz-Eakin, you know in the 1990s we had
great budget surpluses being developed and many jobs. In the
2000s we had a bad budget and bad jobs. Was that a coincidence?
Mr. Holtz-Eakin. I think that there are many more
complicated explanations of that. We also had a dot-com bubble
in the late 1990s, early 2000s, that drove Federal receipts and
probably the primary factor on top of some severe budgetary
stringency in the late '90s that drove the budget to surplus.
2000 was littered with some bad economic shocks that. Attacks
on the U.S. directly, Sarbanes-Oxley, scandals, Enron,
WorldCom. We have had a number of impacts both on the up and
the downside over that period, and there is no simple
explanation for the performance.
Chairman Kline. The gentleman's time has expired. Mrs.
Roby.
Mrs. Roby. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. My question is for
Governor McDonnell. Being from another right-to-work State,
could you explain more about how it has either helped or
hindered the economic growth in increasing jobs during a
recession? And are there any specific lessons or insights that
you could share with the committee as it relates to that?
Governor McDonnell. Of course there is another 22 right-to-
work States, and I have the privilege of being Governor of one
of them. And it just obviously makes the opportunities and the
flexibility for management that much greater in how they
control their workforce.
It is one of the top selling points that I use when I ask
companies to come to Virginia. We recently had Northrop Grumman
moving their corporate headquarters to Fairfax County. The
largest data center in Microsoft's history I believe is coming
to Mecklenburg County this year. And one of the things that I
tell them about why they ought to come here is because they
will be able to have maximum flexibility under our law to
control their workforce, set their policies.
And so I think that is a critical selling point. I
mentioned the card check bill. We were strongly opposed to that
in Virginia, almost unanimously. Almost every business
organization in Virginia sent letters and lobbied against that
when you considered that in a last couple of years because we
thought that would be a significant undermining of a key asset
for our State and yours, Congresswoman, as well for expanding
jobs and creating opportunities that reduce costs.
Mrs. Roby. Thank you. I yield back.
Chairman Kline. Thank the gentlelady for setting that
example.
Ms. Hirono, you are recognized.
Ms. Hirono. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. My first question is
for Governor McDonnell. I completely agree with you that more
of the stimulus money should have gone for infrastructure
support for our States and counties. It is good that you have
that perspective.
Would you support the Federal Government putting more money
into supporting infrastructure development for our States and
counties?
Governor McDonnell. Not if it adds a penny to the debt or
the deficit. That is the overriding concern that I hear from
people in my State. And you have to understand it is a foreign
concept, honestly, for a Governor. I think all but--49 States
have a balanced budget amendment. We do not understand deficit
spending very well because we are not allowed to do that under
our Constitution.
So I would say if you would reset the priorities and make
some of the tough choices even in entitlements. Essentially
that is what we did in Virginia last year with health care and
education and things that are quasi-entitlements in our State.
We cut, and it worked out pretty well. People did more with
less, with smart decisions. If you retargeted that into
infrastructure, I think that would be a good thing. That is
real new jobs.
The Federal Government has estimated that $100 million in
transportation construction supports about 3,000 jobs. That is
a significant return, not only in getting something done but
also in job creation.
Ms. Hirono. So as long as it does not add to the deficit,
then you would be all for it? Is that a view that is shared by
your fellow Governors of the other 49 States?
Governor McDonnell. I think we do believe that to the
degree that you discern in Article I, section 8 that it is the
responsibility of Congress at all to get into transportation.
Perhaps under the general welfare clause.
Ms. Hirono. The jurisdiction of this committee.
Governor McDonnell. If you deem that to be a proper role of
the government, then I would say that these infrastructure
investments in partnership with the State governments are
something that is a top need for States and for our Nation. You
have heard the stories obviously about roads, bridges, other
infrastructure crumbling, 60, 70 years old. Something that I am
focusing on, as I said to Mr. Andrews earlier here.
Ms. Hirono. It is clear in our country that we are
trillions of dollars behind in supporting our infrastructure.
You noted in your testimony that one of the areas that you
would like Congress to focus on is the burden of regulation and
you cite to the Heritage Foundation report that focused on 43
significant new rules. And I have a copy of that report. It is
called Red Tape Rising. And one of the regulations that was
focused on by the Heritage Foundation is one that has to do
with crane and derrick safety standards to prevent cranes from
falling into buildings and killing people, which is what was
going on. If you read the regulation, the Heritage Foundation
focused on the cost of the regulation, which it is true about
150 million, but when you look at the benefit side of the
equation it actually saved 209 million.
So if you were just doing a simple cost-benefit analysis
then the savings or the benefits would exceed the costs. But
you know when you are talking about saving lives, I would say
that that should have been even heavier on the side of the
benefit side.
So my question is are you aware whether the Heritage
Foundation took the offsetting of the benefits into account
when they cited to these 43 rules and the costs of those rules?
Governor McDonnell. I can't tell you. Under your analysis I
think there are qualitative aspects after you do the cost-
benefit analysis just on dollars, then there has to be some
good management judgment applied. So perhaps in your analysis
or your example that might not be one we might all embrace. But
the macro point is that if this is the largest number of major
new rules at 43 that has promulgated since 1981, there is a
problem. And I have the same problem in Virginia. When I was
Attorney General we did a regulatory reform task force for 2
years and we had a similar standard that is what President
Obama just put in his executive order. And that is that if
there is a better way to do it that respects the free market,
that reduces cost, then we ought to look at a different way of
doing it and we got rid of about 350 pages of regulations. I
have got 24,000 pages left.
Ms. Hirono. I agree with you. I am not a big fan of
unnecessary regulations either. But there is also a danger when
you do the cost-benefit analysis that we really have the full
package.
Going on to Mr. Messinger, did you say that you thought the
stimulus bill was a good thing? Did I hear you correctly?
Mr. Messinger. I think the question was on TARP.
Ms. Hirono. What did you think of the stimulus?
Mr. Messinger. I think parts of it were very helpful. I
will give you an example. Our customers are highway contractors
and they, and I think the rest of the country, expected more
infrastructure money to come out of the stimulus.
Ms. Hirono. I am with you on that.
Mr. Messinger. Okay. And as a result our customers put off
purchases of new equipment because they didn't see any
certainty to what was going on. So we didn't see a huge benefit
for our business out of the stimulus.
Chairman Kline. The gentlewoman's time has expired.
Ms. Hirono. I am so sorry. Thank you very much.
Chairman Kline. Mr. Thompson, you are recognized.
Mr. Thompson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thanks to the panel
for being here and lending your expertise today.
Governor McDonnell, my question has do with workforce in an
area that we haven't touched on specific to your State;
concerns offshore oil and gas development off of Virginia's
coast. As I understand it, the President announced that
Virginia's lease sale 220 would be included in the current
2007-2012 5-year plan and then following the Deep Water Horizon
accident the administration withdrew the sale. Did Virginia
play a role in making that decision not to move forward?
Governor McDonnell. No, we didn't. I will say with respect
to the administration we did play a role in the initial
decision that the President made in March to authorize Virginia
lease sale 220 to go forward. We were delighted and we thought
the President made the right decision. I had a number of
conversations with Secretary Salazar and meetings with him in
advance, and I was delighted with the administration's decision
to allow us to go forward as the first State on the East Coast
to drill for oil and natural gas.
The Secretary did call me shortly about an hour before the
President made the decision that he was pulling the plug,
frankly indefinitely, on offshore exploration. I told the
Secretary that I appreciated the call but it was short-sighted
and reflected no confidence in the Federal Government to be
able to properly react to this disaster in the Gulf and no
confidence in the ability of American industry to create the
new technology that was necessary to react. And I didn't think
we ought to give up and write off an entire industry that could
create tremendous capital investment and jobs at this time in
America and that I was very disappointed.
Mr. Thompson. Given that sounds like a unilateral decision
on the part of the administration, have you made any estimates
as to the economic impact exploration might have for the State
or frankly the potential job growth that could be associated
with the industry?
Governor McDonnell. Congressman Thompson, there were
several estimates by various groups that have been made over
the last couple of years. Some of the problems dealt with the
fact that because the ban had been in place for so long that
the seismic studies were largely outdated and so there is so
much better technology to know better what is out there. And I
would say that a couple of the more reputable estimates
indicated about 1,900 to 2,600 jobs over the next 10 years,
about $10 billion in capital investment, and about $250 million
in revenue sharing. And that would assume that Congress would
allow offshore drilling off the Atlantic Coast to have the same
revenue sharing deal that the Gulf States have, which is about
37.5 percent. If we got something like that sharing it with
Virginia, it would be significant new revenue.
In fact, I had a bill passed the last session of the
general assembly approving offshore drilling and dedicating 80
percent of that new revenue from offshore drilling to
transportation infrastructure. So we were ready to go with the
President's announcement. Unfortunately, now that is not the
case.
But what we do know is that it is an extraordinary
opportunity. We don't have great beaches just like they do on
the Gulf Coast. I don't want to drop a well on those beaches.
We understand the need to be slow and prudent, but not to pull
the plug indefinitely as I understand where we are now where
Virginia really does not have a shot for an indefinite period
of time.
Mr. Thompson. You mentioned the beautiful beaches in
Virginia. Do you believe that the oil and natural gas
exploration in the Atlantic could coexist not just with the
beautiful beaches, but obviously the presence of the Navy in
that area?
Governor McDonnell. We do. And I think national security
ought to take the first priority. We have got the greatest
naval base in the world in Norfolk, Virginia. It is a great
source of pride for us in Virginia. We have had some
discussions with some of the leaders down there about their
operations to discuss what areas might need to be off limits
and what areas could still be used for offshore exploration of
gas, oil, or wind without affecting naval operations. We have
the same issue with Wallops Island, the spaceport off of the
Virginia-Maryland coast. But I believe those industries can
coexist very well with offshore energy exploration.
Some areas would have to be off limits, but some can still
be used and I think that is just a matter of logistics. My
concern is writing off the industry indefinitely because of
clearly a disaster of significant proportions. But when you
have 4,000 oil rigs that have been working reasonably well for
40 years and then to throw in the towel on the industry, that
does not seem like the American way. We are better than that.
And that is what I expressed to the Secretary, and I hope
Congress would consider taking some action maybe to move this
along a little bit quicker.
Thank you.
Mr. Thompson. Thank you, Chairman.
Chairman Kline. The gentleman's time has expired. Mrs.
McCarthy, you are recognized.
Mrs. McCarthy. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Ms. Boushey,
listening to the testimony, one of the things I think is
missing is we are hearing everybody saying the job killing
effects of Federal regulation. And yet when you look at this
chart, the brown area is basically during the Bush years and
they had deregulation. During Obama's 2 years we had
regulation, yet we had job growth.
Can you explain the difference between the regulation and
deregulation and why we have job growth during those years?
Ms. Boushey. Thank you. That is an excellent question, and
it does underscore that that can't necessarily be the answer to
what was going on with jobs necessarily. Two things that I
would point out on the regulatory front. First of all, the
Recovery Act was not necessarily a bunch of new regulations but
was a bunch of spending designed to spur economic growth and to
spur job creation, which clearly it did. It has been
significantly effective.
And I very much enjoyed some of the conversation on this
panel talking about how we should have spent more of that money
on infrastructure. My understanding of the political process
was that a lot of--about a third of that money went towards tax
cuts that did not have the biggest bang for the buck that those
infrastructure dollars would have had. So that is something the
next time this comes around I hope this conversation comes back
up and we can spend all of that money on infrastructure.
But the second piece that we need to note when we are
thinking about regulation is of course when we are talking
about regulation it is a wide array of different sorts of
themes and different things that the government is doing. One
piece--and again I would point to the report that came out
yesterday from the commission that studied the financial
markets and what happened. It was the lack of regulation that
actually caused this whole crisis to begin with.
And so when we are talking about this as if it was some
sort of monolith, I would like us to just focus for a moment.
The reason we saw these massive job losses was because we
weren't doing our job regulating the financial markets, and
that is something that looks like is going to come up again in
this Congress, whether or not we are going to make sure that
the money is there to fund the agencies to do that regulation,
to hire that staff to do that.
One thing that I always sort of note when you look at the
fantastic people that do government service, those folks who
are doing the regulating in those agencies are folks like you
that are not making the big bonuses trying to regulate this
very large industry with a lot of money at its disposal. But we
need to make sure that those agencies are fully funded.
I hope that answers at least part of your question.
Mrs. McCarthy. Last night the President talked about the
infrastructure of this country and many of us, probably many of
us sitting here and in certainly some of the other committees,
happen to think of putting more money into the stimulus for
infrastructure. I can talk about the great State of New York.
You know, our bridges, roads, basically are falling apart.
States don't have the money to do it. The high unemployment
rate with our union contractors and our union laborers. So I
happen to think that is where we are going with it.
On the financial, I think people are starting to forget
because the economy is coming back now. The Dow went over
12,000 today, and that is something that everybody has been
looking for. But with that being said, we had a slow economy as
far as getting people back to work because people were still
holding their money. And as far as saying there are too many
regulations out there, when you think of all the tax cuts we
gave to those particular corporations to be able to buy
equipment, to be able to have a tax write-off going down 5
years on equipment that they bought, I don't think people
actually understand what we have been doing. And if you have
any answers to that, that would be great.
Ms. Boushey. I would like to comment on infrastructure and
needing to do more. Where I live here in the District of
Columbia I have seen a small business owner across the street
from me have to deal with three different water main breaks
that has closed down his business for a number of days at a
time. One of the things that we haven't heard enough about in
this infrastructure conversation is how important these
investments are, especially for small- and medium-sized
businesses who can't relocate as easy as the big multinational
can to a State with a better infrastructure to deal with it.
But the traffic, the kinds of things that we were joking about
earlier, that has a real impact on economic growth.
And so making those investments will certainly boost jobs
and boost employment, but it is also good for small business,
even if it is not directly employment. It is helping them to do
their business better.
Mrs. McCarthy. Extremely important for small businesses. I
live in Mineola, Nassau County, Long Island, New York. Most of
our villages are 50 to 100 years old and the pipes are all 50
to 100 years old and we have already had reports of many of the
mains breaking. They have no money and they can't even do the
roads because there is no sense doing the roads until the mains
are fixed. So it has been a round robin. That hurts our small
businesses and that hurts downtown. And those revenues
basically go into the villages to keep up the upkeep as far as
they can. So I agree with you on that.
And I guess what I would say, too, also, if right-to-work
States--I happen to think it is a problem mainly because one of
the things when you talk about OSHA, they haven't been
aggressive enough to make sure that our people aren't getting
injured. The amount of injuries and the amount of deaths in
this country because of workplace violations, shall we say, and
we have seen those statistics and yet in my opinion it does not
matter what administration has been there, they have not
enforced the laws that are already on the books.
Chairman Kline. The gentlelady's time has expired. I am
going to take this opportunity to ask--take a little bit of
time and ask some questions.
Mr. Holtz-Eakin. Mr. Chairman?
Chairman Kline. Yes.
Mr. Holtz-Eakin. With all due respect, I want to make the
record to correct----
Chairman Kline. I am going to start with you. We have
multiple competing things here. Let me go to you, Dr. Holtz-
Eakin, because I know that you wanted to say something about
the regulatory issues.
Mr. Holtz-Eakin. I wish mostly to make sure the record
correctly reflects that I am a sitting member of the Financial
Crisis Inquiry Commission. I have served for nearly 2 years and
I appreciate the honor of the appointment. The commission will
not report until tomorrow at 10 a.m. So anything that Ms.
Boushey may believe about the findings of that commission are
premature. There is no public release of the document. I don't
know what she is referring to. I would ask members to read the
complete report and the additional views by all members before
drawing any conclusions.
Chairman Kline. Thank you. I am going to continue to ask
questions. I will yield just a moment for a unanimous consent
request.
Mr. Andrews. I ask unanimous consent to include the
statement of Congressman Kucinich in the record.
Chairman Kline. Hearing no objection, so ordered.
[The statement of Mr. Kucinich follows:]

Statement and Questions Submitted From Hon. Dennis J. Kucinich,
a Representative in Congress From the State of Ohio

I thank the Chairman for holding this important hearing on the
state of the American workforce.
We know from our constituents that they are hurting. In my home
state of Ohio, the unemployment rate is at 9.6%. In October of 2010,
there were 588,000 individuals in the State of Ohio who were forced to
rely on unemployment insurance benefits to keep their heads and their
families' heads above water. And nationwide, according to the
Department of Labor, nearly 8.3 million Americans were receiving
unemployment compensation as of early November. The recession has
pushed America's middle class to the brink. Families across America are
hanging on by their fingertips.
Many are blaming the dire state of America's workforce on small
businesses regulations, unions, pension obligations, the health care
bill, and even China. In my home state of Ohio, there is a movement to
eliminate collective bargaining rights for home health care and child
care workers, and to restrict the bargaining rights of police officers
and fire fighters. I want to say clearly: targeting the right of
workers to organize is no solution to our continuing economic crisis.
Placing the blame on workers or on regulations ignores one of the
main reasons for job loss in the United States: free trade policies. We
have actively pursued policies that have shipped American jobs overseas
and left our domestic manufacturing sector in shambles. We are here
because we all agree we must do more to ensure that American
industries, as a foundational part of our economy, remain strong.
Some of the witnesses today have spoken about the effect of
regulations on small business. Yet they neglected to mention the free
trade policies that give the same U.S. business incentives to close
local factories and ship their production and jobs overseas for cheap
labor.
Question: In your testimony, Ms. Boushey, you make a very important
point that I would like to highlight to the other members of this
Committee. As you know, the President is urging Congress to approve a
free trade agreement with South Korea that the Administration recently
negotiated. You state in your testimony:

There is also not strong evidence that the Korea Free Trade
Agreement will generate economically meaningful job gains.

Ohio's economy was already struggling long before the current
recession hit. According to the Bureau of Labor Statistics, Ohio lost
approximately 430,000 manufacturing jobs from 1990 through July of
2010.
So it seems that the ``free trade'' is actually a complex class war
in which US CEOs who move their manufacturing to other countries are
among the winners, and US workers are among the losers.
Question: Ms. Boushey, would it be correct to say that one of the
main effects of free trade policies is to incentivize US corporations
into taking advantage of cheaper foreign labor by moving jobs to those
other countries?
So would you agree that the evidence is that free trade policies do
not automatically increase employment, as some claim?
Second Question: Ms. Boushey: I am particularly concerned with the
bleak budget situation faced by state and local governments, who are
the backbone of service to Americans. When our constituents turn to
help from their government, they are most often using a state or local
government service. In your testimony, you sound the alarm that funds
from the President's Economic Stimulus program (the American Recovery
and Reinvestment Act) has prevented the employment level of women from
dropping, and that this support is running out. You state in your
testimony that last year, local governments in this country cut 259,000
workers, of which 225,000 were women, offsetting some modest statewide
government increases in employment of women. You state in your
testimony that we need policies that create jobs and measures to
increase aggregate demand and lay the foundations for economic growth.
And I know that this means, among other efforts, a big movement to
repair and replace infrastructure in this country. It is correct to say
that in the area of infrastructure investment, it is not that the
private sector does not want to invest in massive infrastructure
projects but that they simply do not have the resources to do so?
______

Chairman Kline. Put me on the clock. I am going to try to
mind my own regulations here. It is a little bit of a challenge
sometime.
I want to continue with you, Dr. Holtz-Eakin, for just a
minute. You mentioned trade, and I think the Governor may have
as well. What impact do you think that the year after year
delay of enacting the free trade agreements that have been
sitting in front of us has had on economic growth and job
creation?
Mr. Holtz-Eakin. I think they are unambiguously bad. If you
look at the Colombia free trade agreement, for example, it is
already the case that Colombian companies have free access to
American markets. The only thing that signing that agreement
would do would be to allow U.S. workers through American
companies to have the same access to Colombian markets, and we
are sitting on the sidelines giving up the opportunity to sell
these products abroad and create jobs in America.
It also sends the signal to our international competitors
that we will not be at the table and we are not an important
country to negotiate with and we get bypassed in other
opportunities to expand our access to trade. 95 percent of the
world's consumers are outside of our borders. Those are the
markets our children will sell into and each day that we are on
the sidelines we harm our future.
Chairman Kline. What about, we talk about regulations. What
about other regulations that may exist that are getting in the
way or causing U.S. jobs to go overseas in this regulatory
environment?
Mr. Holtz-Eakin. Every business location decision is a
weighing of the value of the business proposition: What do I
get in the way of a skilled labor force, the capacity to
produce, and low taxes, low regulation, low litigation. We have
at the moment a range of regulatory initiatives that are quite
threatening to the business community. The EPA has five
separate rulemakings at the moment ranging from the mercury
rule to greenhouse gases under the Clean Air Act, intake for
clean water; all are estimated to be quite expensive. Some will
have dramatic impacts on particularly the electricity
generation industry and that affects the manufacturing. So this
is not in and of itself an explanation of anything but it is
another piece of a puzzle that says if you want to create jobs
do not create barriers over which businesses have to leap.
Chairman Kline. Okay. One more question. We have voted a
number of times in this Congress to extend unemployment
benefits, as we have had historically high unemployment
continually month after month. And we hear an argument that Dr.
Boushey mentioned and others have said that continuing these
unemployment benefits is good for the economy. Fills the gap, I
think. I am trying not to put words in her mouth. Do you have
some observation on the effects of extending these unemployment
benefits?
Mr. Holtz-Eakin. It is a complicated issue. The first thing
is to recognize what dominates anything is getting a job. And
so the premium should be put on all the factors that create
pro-growth policy environment.
The second would be that at some point you no longer are
doing unemployment benefits. This is not a temporary bridge
between jobs. You need to have effective education programs for
workers to move into new industries, because they are not
temporarily unemployed and we should recognize that.
The third is that the extension is not unambiguously a good
thing. Economics is in the end a calculus of benefits versus
cost and there are costs to extensions of unemployment
insurance, including harm to the worker's skills themselves.
Lots of evidence suggest that the longer someone is on a UI
program the less likely they are to be employed and when
employed at lower wages. And so in the research literature you
find unemployment insurance extensions associated with
continued high unemployment. Reduced extensions actually do
lower the unemployment rate. And in some cases that is a
benefit to the worker by getting them back into the labor force
before their skills deteriorate.
Chairman Kline. I was going to move to the Governor but I
can see that I am going to run out of time. I think an
important message there is that we have workers now who are
simply never going to go back to the job, maybe even the
industry where they were employed. And so worker training and
education is going to be an important part of what we look at.
Thank you. I see I am about to run out of time. And Ms.
Woolsey.
Ms. Woolsey. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I am concerned that
because of this new found fever to cut regulations we might
have an open season on any regulations a Member of Congress or
the business community doesn't like regardless of its merits.
So let's be very careful that that is not where we go with all
of this. The everything-on-the-table approach is quite
worrisome because it has the potential to undermine rules meant
to protect workers, rules that took decades to achieve.
So as the President stated in his speech last night, we
have to keep common sense regulations that protect people, even
as we do away with rules that may in some way hinder job
growth. The fact of the matter is that if more regulations had
been on the books and government regulators had done their
jobs, we may have averted the housing crisis that jump-started
the recession in the first place. It should be clear to all of
us that some areas of the economy need to be highly regulated.
Complying with regulations should not be an excuse for failing
to create jobs. And as the President pointed out last night,
corporate profits are at record highs. Corporate profits are at
record highs and the stock market is booming. United States
businesses are sitting on nearly $2 trillion in cash. They need
to start spending some of that money and making investments
necessary to get our economy moving again.
So this brings me to questions to you, Dr. Boushey. You are
quoted and you have said in your statement that we need to find
and fill the demand gap, that women--which I am assuming means
that women and minorities have to be trained and educated and
prepared for the jobs that we have available in our country now
and jobs of the future.
But what we are finding out and we do find out that most
women are already working outside of the home and their
families and they are struggling. Not only finding a job that
pays a livable wage--not only finding a job but finding one
that pays a livable wage but also affording to work in the
first place, including child care.
So what would be your recommendation that this--how can
they contribute to balancing work and family--not just for
women but for all workers--with these profits they are sitting
on? What would you do to ensure a better workplace?
Ms. Boushey. Thank you, Congresswoman. I appreciate the
question. There is a couple of things. Certainly first and
foremost there is a lot of the great companies out there that
are already doing a lot for their employees in terms of their
families and in terms of workplace flexibility. There is a lot
of opportunity for other companies to learn from that and to do
more and the White House has had an initiative this year and
they are going out to places around the country and talking
about flexibility and what companies can do and doing some
community forums. I think that is number one.
Number two, as we have seen the budget crisis play out in
the States, we have seen a lot of things that help them keep
their jobs be some of the first things on the chopping block.
Child care assistance, home health aides, after school
programs. These are things that not only disproportionately
employ women but also help families and provide the care they
need and do their jobs. And one of the tragedies--there are so
many tragedies of this great recession, but one of them is that
as we have seen job losses at State level and a quarter of
million job losses at the local level over the past year, that
has disproportionately affected women workers. So making sure
that that those items are not always the first on the chopping
block is something that we can think about.
If I may just digress for just one moment, I did want to
add one thing about the unemployment insurance system, which is
that we do know that it is not from the conversation earlier, a
lot of the economics, the bulk of the economics research shows
that people who get these benefits, they need them and this has
had the biggest bang for the buck relative to almost any other
program we have. A recent report from the DLS shows that it has
been about $2 into the economy for every $1 spent on those
programs. I would just venture to say that we do need to
continue these benefits until the unemployment rate comes down
and not have them be sacrificed in the name of short-term
deficit cutting. But I will let you continue your questions.
Ms. Woolsey. Well, thank you very much. I have just a short
question if I have time for the Governor. You mentioned
regulations and the importance of the oil industry in the Gulf
Coast area. There were regulations that are safety regulations
that were ignored that had something to do, of course, with the
deaths and the destruction that occurred. Would that cost jobs
if those regulations had been in place or do you think there
are some regulations we should be stricter with and about?
Governor McDonnell. Yes, ma'am, absolutely. I don't think
anybody is advocating some arbitrary 30 percent across-the-
board reduction. There should be a targeted strategy. We
mentioned some of them. The President did in his executive
order; That is, essentially does the cost of compliance and the
cost of enforcement, does it far exceed whatever the benefit is
from a public safety or consumer protection standpoint? Is
there a better way to do it with less bureaucracy? And those
ought to be the test.
And in your example not only should those regulations have
been in place, they should have been enforced better than what
we are hearing now. That certainly is not the type of
regulation we are talking about. It is the ones--we all know
that regulations are such that businesses don't pay taxes, nor
do they really pay for the cost of regulations. They
incorporate it in their price of goods and services and pass it
on to you and me.
So that is, I think, the concern that I have. Those that
don't pass that kind of test, that increase the cost of goods
and services, is the ones that we ought to get rid of.
Chairman Kline. Thank you. The gentlewoman's time has
expired.
Mr. Rokita.
Mr. Rokita. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I thank the
panelists for your time. Following up on that a little bit,
Governor, I appreciate the test that you just proposed but it
is also true, isn't it, that we can develop a regulation or a
thousand that protects everyone? We could do things to make
sure that no one gets killed and watch every single job that is
left in this country go to China. So there is a balance test
here. It is intangible. And the fact of the matter is in a free
society and a free public, if we are going to keep it,
sometimes bad things happen to very good people. And it can't
be the mission of the Federal Government at every turn to try
to stop it because it will fail.
Governor, another point to you. You mentioned the word
``latitude'' at the very beginning of your remarks when you
said if the Federal Government or this Congress would allow the
States more latitude. I imagine you said that because you are a
gentleman. That is all I have known from Virginia. But as a
former statewide official and knowing a little bit of your
history, I also understand that you are a constitutionalist.
And it seems to me that we ought to be recognizing the fact
that it is not for us to decide what latitude to give to the
States. It is for the States and the people to decide under the
enumeration clause what latitude to give us. And I have only
been here 19 or so days, but I can already say that the last
thing that this Federal Government needs or anyone even up here
on the dais needs is more latitude to control, run, and
otherwise dictate the lives of the people.
I would ask you then, and the question is to you: Would you
help us? There are some of us here who would like to see that
turned around. Would you help us, with Governor Daniels,
Governor Christie, others, to see the enumeration clause
empowered again?
Governor McDonnell. It is a very good question and you are
correct. Philosophically I agree 100 percent with what you
said. Many of us Governors in both parties talk about the 10th
amendment as the forgotten amendment and that is the by-product
of both Republican and Democrat congressional actions probably
over the last 70 or 80 years.
And so most Governors, while we appreciate certain Federal
help and actions, especially if it is consistent with Article
I, section 8, which is pretty much the founder's mission for
you, we do believe that most of the rest of those things to the
maximum extent possible should be left to the States and the
people respectively. That is the charter.
So I think that is a great prescription for success in a
new system of federalism for all of us going forward because
when the Federal Government is not doing things that it
shouldn't be doing, one, you save money. And two, you allow the
States, the laboratories of democracy closer to the people, to
do some of the things that they ought to do. And we got an
example of that I think just yesterday where we had a
bipartisan letter from both Governor Gregory and Governor
Heinemann, the Chairman and Vice Chairman of the National
Governors' Association, saying please don't pass a law letting
States file bankruptcy. One, you will take accountability away
from us, and, two, we don't need that kind of help. What we do
need to do is make sure that we are governing ourselves
accordingly in the States.
I do think that you are going to hear more from the
Nation's Governors, and we appreciate the invitations like
today for us to come and speak on these issues, to help us to
discuss--have a robust dialogue about the rebirth of federalism
and maybe a little bit different balance in State-Federal power
because of the 10th amendment. I think you are right.
Mr. Rokita. Thank you, Governor. I yield, sir.
Chairman Kline. I thank the gentleman.
Mr. Payne.
Mr. Payne. Thank you very much to the panel. Governor, I
was interested in your comment that you like a program if it
doesn't add to the debt. I recall years ago, in the 50s and
60s, I used to travel in Virginia a lot and there was just
Route 1. Many, many years later I came to Congress and met a
late Congressman, Norm Sisisky. Norm was very effective. I know
that many of the new Members do not like programs called by
earmark, but Norm Sisisky actually added to the national debt
because he built that highway system that brought Home Depot
and all those great businesses into Virginia.
Now, if he took your notion--of course, it did add to the
Federal debt. Of course I think it has been paid back many
times, at least to the State of Virginia. So I am trying to
reconcile if you say it is a penny into debt, even though
outward years it is going to be beneficial. Could you go
through that again very briefly? Because Virginia wouldn't be
in the great position it is in today as a hub for Home Depot
and those roads that were built through Norm Sisisky from
Virginia getting the money to Virginia, adding to the debt. But
it is helping your State in a robust way.
Governor McDonnell. Congressman Sisisky was a very
effective Congressman and we are fortunate to have a lot of
effective Congressmen from the Great Commonwealth. What I would
say, Congressman, is I think what I have heard from a lot of
Virginians and on both sides of the political spectrum is that
they are tremendously concerned about the future of this
country if we stay on this trail of debt now at $14 trillion,
the deficit going up a trillion over the last couple of years,
and frankly billions, hundreds of billions before that under
Republican administrations. So it is a bipartisan problem.
When I as a Governor have to balance the budget every year,
we borrow up to 5 percent of our total revenues solely for
capital projects. What we don't do is what people are concerned
about Congress doing, and that is borrowing for the hot dogs,
diapers, pencils, and cigarettes, the daily operations of
government. That is a concern.
So these targeted investments in infrastructure that are
made by the Congress to invest in the States and claiming that
as a priority without increasing spending in other areas, I
think that is something a lot of people embrace. But if it
continues to add to the price tag that my kids and your kids
and our grandchildren have to pay back, that is what you are
hearing from citizens far and wide that they are rejecting.
Mr. Payne. Another--thank you for that clarification. You
mention in your testimony that to post a workplace notice to
employees outlining their rights under the NLRA that it is
counterproductive, detrimental to the message that you are
trying to send in Virginia. So I am just wondering how is
informing a worker of their rights to you detrimental to the
State of Virginia?
Governor McDonnell. That may have been a little harsh.
Mr. Payne. It is your testimony. You said it.
Governor McDonnell. I know. I said it. But what I believe
we don't need to do in a right-to-work State is advertise how
to create more labor unions. It has been a hallmark of
Virginia's success. That is why we are ranked number one in
Forbes and CNBC and every other periodical in the last 5 years
as a place that business wants to relocate because of the tax
regulatory litigation climate, the right-to-work laws, and our
education system. Those are the fundamentals that build that.
My point in that, while not stated as best as I could, my
point is that a right-to-work State if we are advertising how
to create more unions it is the opposite message that we are
trying to send to create jobs and opportunity.
Mr. Payne. Just very quickly, talking about right-to-work
States, out of the three worst unemployment problems in the
country, two are right-to-work States, including the worst in
the Nation, Nevada, right-to-work, 14.5; California is a free
bargaining State, 12.5; Florida, right-to-work State, 12
percent.
So I think a lot is being played into the right to work and
not right to work. It does not seem that much of an impact. As
a matter of fact, out of the 10 or highest unemployment, five
are right-to-work, five are not.
But just before my time expires, on the drilling we are
happy about the President's order to hold back. The companies
did know what was right and wrong, but we had the big spill
because they took a shortcut. And I think America is great, as
you mentioned, and we ought to be able to get over these
problems. However--and we don't have time for an answer--but
business seems that enough profit is not enough. So there is no
ceiling. The question is how do you get people to know that
that cap was not sufficient to prevent that blowup in the Gulf?
Chairman Kline. The gentleman's time has expired. I am
eager to keep my commitment to close this hearing at 4 o'clock,
but I would like to yield a couple of minutes to Mr. Barletta,
who has been waiting patiently.
Mr. Barletta. My question is to Mr. Messinger. As a former
business owner, I understand what a business looks for when
making decisions for investment for the long-term. Uncertainty
in the business environment today is handcuffing businesses in
deciding whether to expand or invest or start a new business.
We all can agree that we would like to save whatever
manufacturing jobs we have left here in America, and I believe
you had mentioned in your testimony that 70 percent of American
manufacturers are subchapter S corporations. My question to you
is do you believe that the current health care bill and the
extension of the current tax rates for only 2 years is
contributing to that uncertainty?
Mr. Messinger. Absolutely, Congressman. I am going through
a renewal process right now in our health insurance, and while
we don't have a final rate they are telling us in the 15
percent range. And clearly that is on top of prior years of
multiple rate increases employing. The private insurers are
unsure of what is going on and how they are going to be
effected. So yes, on health insurance for sure.
While I applauded many things the President said last
night, especially concerning jobs in this country, I was
concerned that he laid out his own cap for taxes, saying that
they should be increased. Now is not the time for us to be
worrying about what tax rates should be in 2 years. We should
be worried about job creation today. And I think in my
testimony, I have laid out some of the things that I feel are
important there.
Mr. Barletta. Thank you.
Chairman Kline. I thank the gentleman. We are rapidly
approaching 4 o'clock. I would like to certainly thank the
witnesses and yield to Mr. Andrews for any closing remarks he
might have.
Mr. Andrews. I would also like to thank the witnesses for
their preparation and their time. I have a unanimous consent
request that a letter prepared by 250 economists supporting the
health care bill be entered into the record.
Chairman Kline. Without objection.
[The information follows:]

January 26, 2011.
Hon. John Kline, Chairman; Hon. George Miller, Ranking Member,
U.S. House of Representatives, Education and the Workforce Committee,
Washington, DC 20515.
Dear Chairman Kline and Representative Miller: Congress this week
is holding hearings on the economic impact of health care reform. We
write to convey our strong conclusion that leaving in place the Patient
Protection and Affordable Care Act of 2010 will significantly
strengthen our nation's economy over the long haul and promote more
rapid economic recovery in the immediate years ahead. Repealing the
Affordable Care Act would cause needless economic harm and would set
back efforts to create a more disciplined and more effective health
care system.
Our conclusion is based on two economic principles. First, high
medical spending harms our nation's workers, new job creation, and
overall economic growth. Many studies demonstrate that employers
respond to rising health insurance costs by reducing wages, hiring
fewer workers, or some combination of the two. Lack of universal
coverage impairs job mobility as well because many workers pass up
opportunities for self-employment or positions working for small firms
because they fear losing their health insurance or facing higher
premiums.
Second, the Affordable Care Act contains essentially every cost-
containment provision policy analysts have considered effective in
reducing the rate of medical spending. These provisions include:

Payment innovations such as greater reimbursement for
patient-centered primary care; bundled payments for hospital care,
physician care, and other medical services provided for a single
episode of care; shared savings approaches or capitation payments that
reward accountable provider groups that assume responsibility for the
continuum of a patient's care; and pay-for-performance incentives for
Medicare providers.

An Independent Payment Advisory Board with authority to
make recommendations to reduce cost growth and improve quality within
both Medicare and the health system as a whole

A new Innovation Center within the Centers for Medicare
and Medicaid Services charged with streamlining the testing of
demonstration and pilot projects in Medicare and rapidly expanding
successful models across the program

Measures to inform patients and payers about the quality
of medical care providers, which provide relatively low-quality, high-
cost providers financial incentives to improve their care

Increased funding for comparative effectiveness research

Increased emphasis on wellness and prevention
Taken together, these provisions are likely to reduce employer
spending on health insurance. Estimates suggest spending reductions
ranging from tens of billions of dollars to hundreds of billions of
dollars. Because repealing our nation's new health reform law would
eliminate the above provisions, it would increase business spending on
health insurance, and hence reduce employment.
One study concludes that repealing the Affordable Care Act would
produce job reductions of 250,000 to 400,000 annually over the next
decade. Worker mobility would be impaired as well, as people remain
locked into less productive jobs just to get health insurance.
The budgetary impact of repeal also would be severe. The
Congressional Budget Office concludes that repealing the Affordable
Care Act would increase the cumulative federal deficit by $230 billion
over the next decade, and would further increase the deficit in later
years. Other studies suggest that the budgetary impact of repeal is
even greater. State and local governments would face even more serious
fiscal challenges if the Affordable Care Act were repealed, as they
would lose substantial resources provided under the new law while
facing the burdens of caring for 32 million more uninsured people.
Repeal, in short, would thus make a difficult budget situation even
worse.
Rather than undermining health reform, Congress needs to make the
Affordable Care Act as successful as it can be. This would be as good
for our economy as it would be for the health of our citizens.
Sincerely,

Henry J. Aaron, Senior Fellow, The Brookings Institution
Jean Marie Abraham, Assistant Professor, University of Minnesota School
of Public Health
Randy Albelda, Professor of Economics, University of Massachusetts,
Boston
Sylvia A. Allegretto, Economist, University of California, Berkeley
Stuart Altman, Sol C. Chaikin Professor of National Health Policy,
Brandeis University
Elizabeth Oltmans Anant, Assistant Professor of Public Policy and
Economics, Duke University
Rania Antonopoulos, Director, Gender Equality and the Economy Program,
Levy Economics Institute
Kenneth J. Arrow, Professor of Economics Emeritus, Stanford University
Michael Ash, Associate Professor of Economics and Public Policy,
University of Massachusetts, Amherst
David Autor, Professor and Associate Head, Department of Economics,
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Susan L. Averett, Charles A. Dana Professor of Economics, Lafayette
College
Christopher Avery, Roy E. Larsen Professor of Public Policy, Harvard
University, Kennedy School of Government
Rojhat B. Avsar, Assistant Professor of Economics, Columbia College
M.V. Lee Badgett, Professor of Economics, University of Massachusetts,
Amherst
El-hadj Bah, Lecturer, University of Auckland
Ron Baiman, Director of Budget and Policy Analysis Center for Tax and
Budget Accountability
Asatar Bair, Professor of Economics, City College of San Francisco
Dean Baker, Co-Director Center for Economic and Policy Research
Radhika Balakrishnan, Professor, Women's and Gender Studies, Rutgers,
The State University of New Jersey
Nesecan Balkan, Department of Economics, Hamilton College
Erol Balkan, Professor of Economics, Hamilton College
Steve Balkin, Professor of Economics, Roosevelt University
Nina Banks, Associate Professor of Economics, Bucknell University
William Barclay, Adjunct Professor, University of Illinois at Chicago
Drucilla K. Barker, Professor and Director, Women's and Gender Studies,
University of South Carolina
David Barkin, Profesor de Economia, Universidad Autonoma Metropolitana-
Xochimilco
Anirban Basu, Associate Professor, Department of Health Services,
University of Washington
Francis M. Bator, Lucius N. Littauer Professor of Political Economy
Emeritus, Harvard University, Kennedy School of Government
Charles M. Becker, Associate Chair and Research Professor, Department
of Economics, Duke University
Marc F. Bellemare, Assistant Professor, Duke University
Gunseli Berik, Professor of Economics, University of Utah
Carole Biewener, Professor of Economics, Simmons College
Cyrus Bina, Distinguished Research Professor of Economics, University
of Minnesota
Christine E. Bishop, Atran Professor of Labor Economics, Brandeis
University
Josh Bivens, Economist, Economic Policy Institute
Heather Boushey, Senior Economist, Center for American Progress
Roger Even Bove, Department of Economics & Finance (retired), West
Chester University
James K. Boyce, Professor of Economics, University of Massachusetts,
Amherst
Elissa Braunstein, Associate Professor, Colorado State University
Clair Brown, Professor of Economics, University of California, Berkeley
Thomas Buchmueller, Waldo O. Hildebrand Professor of Risk Management
and Insurance, Ross School of Business, University of Michigan
Colin Cameron, Professor of Economics, University of California, Davis
Jim Campen, Professor of Emeritus, Economics University of
Massachusetts, Boston
Kathleen Carey, Associate Professor, Boston University School of Public
Health
Ann M. Carlos, Professor, Department of Economics, University of
Colorado
Frank Chaloupka, Distiguished Professor of Economics and Director,
Health Policy Center, University of Illinois at Chicago
Richard Chapman, Professor of Economics, Westminster College
John Dennis Chasse, Professor Emeritus, State University of New York,
Brockport
Howard Chernick, Professor of Economics, Hunter College and the
Graduate Center, City University of New York
Raj Chetty, Professor of Economics, Harvard University
Kimberly Christensen, Joanne Woodward Chair of Public Policy, Sarah
Lawarence College
Betsy Jane Clary, Professor of Economics, College of Charleston
Paul D. Cleary, Dean of Public Health, Yale School of Public Health
Jonathan Conning, Associate Professor of Economics, Hunter College and
the Graduate Center, City University of New York
Karen Smith Conway, Professor of Economics, University of New Hampshire
Philip J. Cook, ITT/Sanford Professor of Public Policy, Duke University
Paul Cooney, Associate Professor, Federal University of Para, Brazil
Richard R. Cornwall, Professor of Economics, Emeritus, Middlebury
College
J. Kevin Crocker, Undergraduate Program Director, University of
Massachusetts, Amherst
David Cutler, Otto Eckstein Professor of Applied Economics, Harvard
University
Rada K. Dagher, Assistant Professor, University of Maryland
Anita Dancs, Assistant Professor, Department of Economics, Western New
England College
Charles Davis, Professor, Labor Studies, Indiana University
Susan M. Davis, Associate Professor, Department of Economics and
Finance, Buffalo State College
Partha Deb, Professor of Economics, Hunter College and the Graduate
Center, City University of New York
Gregory E. DeFreitas, Professor of Economics, Hofstra University
Brad DeLong, Professor of Economics, University of California, Berkeley
Timothy M. Diette, Assistant Professor of Economics, Washington and Lee
University
Marisa Elena Domino, Associate Professor of Health Economics, The
University of North Carolina
David E. Dowall, Professor, University of California, Berkeley
Arindraijit Dube, Assistant Professor, Department of Economics,
University of Massachusetts, Amherst
Niev Duffy, President, Eastern Economic Research
Mark Duggan, Professor of Economics, University of Maryland
Randall P. Ellis, Professor of Economics, Boston University
Elizabeth Elmore, Professor of Economics, Richard Stockton College of
New Jersey
Christopher L. Erickson, Professor, UCLA Anderson School of Management
Jose Escarce, Professor of Medicine, David Geffen School of Medicine at
UCLA
Loretta Fairchild, Professor of Economics, Nebraska Wesleyan University
Sasan Fayazmanesh, Professor Emeritus of Economics, California State
University, Fresno
Steven Fazzari, Professor of Economics, Washington University
Judy Feder, Professor of Public Policy, Georgetown University
Susan Feiner, Professor of Economics, University of Southern Maine
Deborah M. Figart, Professor of Education and Economics, Richard
Stockton College of New Jersey
Kade Finhoff, Assistant Professor of Economics, University of
Massachusetts, Boston
Jason Fletcher, Assistant Professor of Public Health, Yale University
Nancy Folbre, Professor of Economics, University of Massachusetts,
Amherst
Austin Frakt, Assistant Professor of Health Policy and Management,
Boston University School of Public Health
Jeffrey Frankel, Harpel Professor of Capital Formation and Growth,
Harvard University
Gerald Friedman, Professor of Economics, University of Massachusetts,
Amherst
Bianca Frogner, Assistant Professor, The George Washington University
Bill Ganley, Professor of Economics and Finance, Buffalo State College
Lorenzo Garbo, Professor of Economics, University of Redlands
Irwin Garfinkel, Mitchell I. Ginsberg Professor of Contemporary Urban
Problems, Columbia University School of Social Work
Paul J Gertler, Li Ka Shing Professor of Health Policy and Management,
University of California, Berkeley
Mwangi wa Githinji, Assistant Professor of Economics, University of
Massachusetts, Amherst
Devra L. Golbe, Professor of Economics, Hunter College and the Graduate
Center, City University of New York
Heather Taffet Gold, Associate Professor of Public Health, Weill
Cornell Medical College
Claudia Goldin, Henry Lee Professor of Economics, Harvard University
Don Goldstein, Professor of Economics, Allegheny College
Jose A. Gomez-Ibanez, Derek C. Bok Professor of Urban Planning and
Public Policy, Harvard University, Kennedy School of Government
Joshua Goodman, Assistant Professor of Public Policy, Harvard
University, Kennedy School of Government
Neva Goodwin, Co-Director, Global Environment and Environment
Institute, Tufts University
Elise Gould, Economist, Economic Policy Institute
Ulla Grapard, Associate Professor of Economics and Women's Studies,
Colgate University
Daphne Greenwood, Professor of Economics and Director, Colorado Center
for Policy Studies, University of Colorado, Colorado Springs
Tai Gross, Assistant Professor, Department of Health Policy and
Management, Mailman School of Public Health, Columbia
University
Michael Grossman, Distinguished Professor of Economics, City University
of New York Graduate Center
Jonathan Gruber, Professor of Economics, Massachusetts Institute of
Technology
Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong, Professor and Chair, Department of Economics,
University of Souh Florida
Jack Hadley, Professor and Senior Health Services Researcher, George
Mason University
Paul Hancock, Professor of Economics, Green Mountain College
Jeffrey S. Harman, University of Florida Research Foundation Professor,
University of Florida
Oliver Hart, Professor of Economics, Harvard University
John T. Havey, Professor of Economics, Texas Christian University
Gillian Hewitson, Department of Political Economy, University of Sydney
Richard Hirth, Professor of Health Management and Policy, University of
Michigan School of Public Health
Vivian Ho, Baker Institute Chair of Health Economics and Professor,
Rice University
Joan Hoffman, Professor and Chair, Department of Economics, John Jay
College of Criminal Justice, City University of New York
Ann M. Holmes, Associate Professor, Indiana University-Purdue
University, Indianapolis
Barbara Hopkins, Associate Professor of Economics, Wright State
University
Jill R. Horwitz, Professor of Law, Co-Director, Program on Law and
Economics, University of Michigan Law School
Candace Howes, Professor of Economics, Connecticut College
Hilary Hoynes, Professor of Economics, University of California, Davis
Dorene Isenberg, Professor and Chair, Department of Economics,
University of Redlands
Ken Jacobs, Chair, Labor Center University of California, Berkeley
Joyce P. Jacobsen, Andrews Professor of Economics, Wesleyan University
Sanford M. Jacoby, Professor of Management and Public Policy,
University of California, Los Angeles
Habib Jam, Associate Professor of Economics, Rowan University
Russell A. Janis, Senior Lecturer in Economics, University of
Massachusetts, Amherst
Arjun Jayadev, Assistant Professor of Economics, University of
Massachusetts, Boston
Neil Jordan, Assistant Professor and Director, Health Economics Center,
Feinberg School of Medicine, Northwestern University
Ted Joyce, Professor of Economics and Finance, Baruch College, City
University of New York
Geoffrey Joyce, Director of Health Policy, Schaeffer Center for Health
Policy & Economics, University of Southern California
Kyoungrae Jung, Assistant Professor, Health Policy and Administration,
Pennsylvania State University
Daniel Kahneman, Professor of Public Affairs, Emeritus, Princeton
University
Rajani Kanth, Professor of Economics (Visiting), Loras College &
Washington College
Ethan Kaplan, Visiting Professor of Economics, Columbia University
Lawrence Katz, Allison Professor of Economics, Harvard University
Donald Katzner, Professor of Economics, University of Massachusetts,
Amherst
Paula M. Kazi, Assistant Professor, Bucknell University
Valerie K. Kepner, Assistant Professor of Economics, King's College
Farida Khan, Professor of Economics, University of Wisconsin-Parkside
Marlene Kim, Associate Professor, Department of Economics, University
of Massachusetts, Boston
Steven J. Klees, Professor of Education and Economic Development,
University of Maryland
Andrew I. Kohen, Professor Emeritus of Economics, James Madison
University
Brent Kramer, City University of New York
Brent Kreider, Professor of Economics, Iowa State University
Jill Kriesky, Economist, West Virginia Center on Budget and Policy
Karl Kronebusch, Associate Professor, City University of New York
Alan Krueger, Professor of Economics, Princeton University
David Laibman, Professor (retired), Deparment of Economics, City
University of New York
Melaku Lakew, Professor of Economics, Richard Stockton College of New
Jersey
Thomas Lambert, Economics Lecturer, Indiana University Southeast
Robert Lawrence, Albert L. Williams Professor of Trade and Investment,
Harvard University, Kennedy School of Government
Arleen A. Leibowitz, Professor, School of Public Affairs, University of
California, Los Angeles
David I. Levine, Trefethen Professor of Business Administration, Haas
School of Business, University of California, Berkeley
Frank Levy, Rose Professor of Urban Economics, Massachusetts Institute
of Technology
Peter M. Lichtenstein, Emeritus Professor of Economics, Boise State
University
Jeffrey B. Liebman, Malcolm Wiener Professor of Public Policy, Harvard
University, Kennedy School of Government
Peter H. Lindert, Distinguished Research Professor of Economics,
University of California, Davis
Richard C. Lindrooth, Associate Professor, Colorado School of Public
Health, University of Colorado
Victor D. Lippit, Professor of Economics, University of California,
Riverside
Linda Loubert, Assistant Professor, Economics Department, Morgan State
University
Harold S. Luft, University of California, San Francisco
Catherine Lynde, Associate Professor, Economics, University of
Massachusetts, Amherst
Sean P. MacDonald, Assistant Professor of Economics, City University of
New York
Diane J. Macunovich, Department of Economics, University of Redlands
Mark Maier, Professor of Economics, Glendale College
Ann Markusen, Professor, Humphrey School of Public Affairs, University
of Minnesota
Eric S. Maskin, A.O. Hirschman Professor of Social Science, Institute
for Advanced Study
Thomas Masterson, Research Scholar, Levy Economics Institute of Bard
College
Julie Matthaei, Professor of Economics, Wellesley College
Peter Hans Matthews, James Jermain Professor of Political Economy,
Department of Economics, Middlebury College
Kathleen McAfee, Associate Professor, Political Economy and
International Relations, San Francisco State University
Elaine McCrate, Associate Professor, Economic and Women's and Gender
Studies, University of Vermont
Thomas G. McGuire, Professor of Health Economics, Harvard Medical
School
Ellen Meara, Associate Professor, Darmouth Institute for Health Policy
and Clinical Practice
Michael Meeropol, Visiting Professor, Economics, John Jay College of
Criminal Justice, City University of New York
Martin Melkonian, Adjunct Associate Professor, Economics, Hofstra
University
David Meltzer, Associate Professor, Department of Medicine and
Associated Faculty Member, Department of Economics, University
of Chicago
Peter B. Meyer, Professor Emeritus of Urban Policy and Economics,
University of Louisville
Marcelo Milan, Assistant Professor of Economics, University of
Wisconsin-Parkside
Lawrence Mishel, President, Economic Policy Institute
Alan C. Monheit, Professor of Health Economics, School of Public
Health, University of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey
Taryn Morrissey, Assistant Professor of Public Administration and
Policy, American University
Karoline Mortensen, Assistant Professor of Health Services
Administration, University of Maryland
Tracy Mott, Associate Professor and Department Chair, Department of
Economics, University of Denver
Alicia H. Munnell, Peter F. Drucker Professor, Carroll School of
Management, Boston College
Richard J. Murnane, Professor, Harvard University
Jason Burke Murphy, Department of Philosophy, Elms College
Ellen Mutari, Professor of Economics, Richard Stockton College of New
Jersey
Reynold F. Nesiba, Associate Professor of Economics, Augustana College
David Neumark, Professor of Economics and Director of Graduate Studies,
University of California, Irvine
Len M. Nichols, Director of the Center for Health Policy Research and
Ethnics, Professor of Health Policy, George Mason University
Laurie Nisonoff, Professor of Economics, Hampshire College
Brendan O'Flaherty, Professor of Economics, Columbia University
Albert A. Okunade, Professor of Health Economics, University of Memphis
Oladele Omosegbon, Professor of Economics, Indiana Wesleyan University
Shaianne T. Osterreich, Associate Professor, Economics, Ithaca College
Zhaochang Peng, Department of Economics, Rollins College
George Perry, Senior Fellow, The Brookings Institution
Mark A. Peterson, Professor of Public Policy and Political Science,
UCLA School of Public Affairs
Karl Petrick, Assistant Professor of Economics, Western New England
College
Kathryn A. Phillips, Professor of Health Economics and Health Services
Research, University of California, San Francisco
Steven D. Pizer, Associate Professor, Boston University School of
Public Health
Harold Pollack, Helen Ross Professor of Social Service Administration,
University of Chicago
Daniel Polsky, Professor of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania
Paddy Quick, Professor of Economics, St. Francis College
Matthew Rabin, Professor of Economics, University of California,
Berkeley
Sarah Reber, Assistant Professor of Public Policy, University of
California, Los Angeles
Jim Rebitzer, Professor of Management, Economics and Public Policy,
Boston University School of Management
Michael Reich, Professor of Economics, University of California,
Berkeley
Uwe Reinhardt, James Madison Professor of Political Economy, Princeton
University
Dahlia Remler, Professor, School of Public Affairs, Baruch College,
City University of New York
Alice M. Rivlin, Senior Fellow, The Brookings Institution
Charles P. Rock, Professor of Economics, Rollins College
Christina D. Romer, Class of 1957, Professor of Economics, University
of California, Berkeley
Samuel Rosenberg, Acting Vice Provost for Faculty and Academic
Administration, Roosevelt University
Meredith Rosenthal, Associate Professor of Health Economics, Harvard
University School of Public Health
Roy J. Rotheim, Professor of Economics, Skidmore College
Anne Beeson Royalty, Associate Professor of Economics, Indiana
University, Purdue University, Indianapolis
Cristopher J. Ruhm, Professor of Public Policy and Economics,
University of Virginia
Emmanuel Saez, E. Morris Cox Professor of Economics, University of
California, Berkeley
Harwood D. Schaffer, Research Assistant Professor, University of
Tennessee
John Schmitt, Senior Economist, Center for Economic and Policy Research
Charles L. Schultze, Senior Fellow Emeritus, Economic Studies, The
Brookings Institution
Eric A. Schutz, Professor, Economics, Rollins College
Joseph M. Schwartz, Professor of Political Science, Temple University
Charles R. Sebuharara, Visiting Assistant Professor of Finance, Pamplin
College of Business, Virginia Tech
Eric Seiber, Assistant Professor of Health Services Management and
Policy, The Ohio State University
Janet Seiz, Associate Professor of Economics, Grinnell College
Bisakha Sen, Associate Professor, Department of Healthcare Organization
and Policy, University of Alabama, Birmingham
Mark Setterfield, Professor of Economics, Trinity College
Anwar Shaikh, Professor of Economics, New School for Social Research
Nina Shapiro, Professor of Economics, Saint Peter's College
Judith Shinogle, Senior Research Scientist, Maryland Institute for
Policy Analysis
Peter Skott, Professor of Economics, University of Massachusetts,
Amherst
Timothy Smeeding, Arts and Sciences Distinguished Professor for Public
Affairs, University of Wisconsin-Madison
Eugene Smolensky, Professor of the Graduate School, University of
California, Berkeley
Bryan Snyder, Department of Economics, Bentley University
Eswaran Somanathan, Visiting Professor, Princeton University
Paula H. Song, Assistant Professor, Health Services Management &
Policy, The Ohio State University
Neeraj Sood, Associate Professor, Schaeffer Center for Health Policy
and Economics, University of Southern California
Janet Spitz, Associate Professor of Business, College of Saint Rose
James Ronald Stanfield, Emeritus Professor of Economics, Colorado State
University
Sally C. Stearns, Professor of Health Economics, University of North
Carolina at Chapel Hill
Bruce Stuart, Professor, University of Maryland School of Pharmacy
Paul Swanson, Professor of Economics, William Paterson University
Katherine Swartz, Professor of Health Economics and Policy, Harvard
University School of Public Health
Donald H. Taylor, Jr., Associate Professor of Public Policy, Duke
University
Mark Thoma, Professor of Economics, University of Oregon
Chris Tilly, Professor and Director of the Institute for Research and
Employment, University of California, Los Angeles
Mariano Torras, Professor of Economics, Adelphi University
Pravin K. Trivedia, J.H. Rudy Professor of Economics, Indiana
University-Bloomington
Jennifer Troyer, Associate Professor of Economics, University of North
Carolina at Charlotte
Laura Tyson, S.K. and Angela Chan Chair in Global Management, Haas
School of Business, University of California, Berkeley
Robert Otto Valdez, Robert Wood Johnson Foundation Professor, Family &
Community Medicine and Economics, University of New Mexico
Paul N. Van de Water, Senior Fellow, Center on Budget and Policy
Priorities
Courtney Harold Van Houtven, Associate Professor, Duke University
Lane Vanderslice, Editor, Hunger Notes, worldhunger.org
Elizabeth Richardson Vigdor, Research Scholar, Duke University
Anca Voicu, Assistant Professor of Economics, Rollins College
Mark E. Votruba, Associate Professor of Economics and Medicine, Case
Western Reserve University
Geetha Waehrer, Research Scientist, Pacific Institute for Research and
Evaluation
Jane Waldfogel, Professor of Social Work and Public Affairs, Columbia
University
Kenneth E. Warner, Avedis Donebedian Distinguished University Professor
of Public Health, University of Michigan
David Warner, Wilbur Cohen Professor of Public Affairs, LBJ School of
Public Affairs, University of Texas at Austin
Mark Weisbrot, Co-Director Center for Economic and Policy Research
Thomas E. Weisskopf, Professor Emeritus of Economics, University of
Michigan
Charles K. Wilber, Emeritus Professor of Economics, University of Notre
Dame
Michael Wilson, Instructor, Harvard Medical School
Cecilia Ann Winters, Associate Professor of Economics, Manhattanville
College
Jon D. Wisman, Professor of Economics, American University
Barbara Wolfe, Professor, Economics and Political Science, University
of Wisconsin-Madison
Justin Wolfers, Associate Professor of Business and Public Policy, The
Wharton School, University of Pennsylvania
Robert S. Woodward, Professor of Health Economics, University of New
Hampshire
Vivian Wu, Assistant Professor, University of Southern California
David Zalewski, Professor of Finance, Providence College
Joshua Graff Zivin, Associate Professor of Economics, University of
California, San Diego
______

Mr. Andrews. Finally, thank you for conducting this hearing
so fairly. We would like to move to working together on good
legislation that will help create jobs in our country. Thank
you.
Chairman Kline. I thank the gentleman. I will close by
saying thanks to my colleagues. Thank you very much to our
witnesses--what a terrific panel--for enduring the weather and
the voting and all of those things. Thank you very much. And
thanks to my colleagues. Have a good safe trip.
The committee is adjourned.
[Additional submission of Mr. Messinger follows:]

------

[Ms. Boushey's responses to questions submitted by Mr.
Kucinich follow:]

Dear Congressman Kucinich: Thank you for your interest in my
testimony before the Committee on Education and Workforces' hearing
entitled ``State of the American Workforce,'' on January 27, 2011. My
answers for the record to your questions are:

Question 1. You ask whether it would be correct to say that one of
the main effects of free trade policies is to incentivize U.S.
corporations into taking advantage of cheaper foreign labor by moving
jobs to those other countries? Would you agree that the evidence is
that free trade policies do not automatically increase employment, as
some claim?

Answer: Let's start with what free trade agreements are supposed to
do. The U.S. interest in these agreements is to promote trade, both
imports and exports, with other countries. These agreements do not
typically lower tariffs only in one direction but rather lower tariffs
in both directions. Our economy's total demand for goods and services
is defined as consumption, plus investment, plus government spending,
plus net exports, exports minus imports. Trade agreements typically
lower tariffs for both U.S. exports and imports from other countries
and should therefore raise both exports and imports. Given this, a
pirori, there's no reason to think they will increase U.S. jobs, unless
we sign agreements heavily weighted in favor of U.S. exports.
In the case of the Korea free trade agreement, the U.S.
International Trade Commission, the independent federal body that
analyzes potential effects of trade pacts for Congress and the
executive branch, has estimated that while the Korea FTA would increase
exports, it would increase imports even more. As a result, the U.S. ITC
estimates that the Korea FTA will lead to an increase in the total U.S.
goods trade deficit of between $308 million and $416 million.\1\ The
largest estimated increases in the trade deficit would be in motor
vehicles, electronic equipment, ``other transportation equipment,''
iron, metal products, textiles, and apparel.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ U.S. International Trade Commission. ``U.S.-Korea Free Trade
Agreement: Potential Economy-wide and Selected Sectoral Effects.''
USITC Publication 3949. September 2007, Corrected printing March 2010,
at 2-14, Table 2.3, Available at: http://www.usitc.gov/publications/
332/pub3949.pdf

Question 2: You ask, is it correct to say that in the area of
infrastructure investment, it is not that the private sector does not
want to invest in massive infrastructure projects but that they simply
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
do not have the resources to do so?

Answer: As daunting as it seems, the level of capital investment
needed in our nation's infrastructure must grow. American businesses
have the funds and access to credit markets to make investments. From
December 2008 to September 2010, profits in the nonfinancial corporate
sector rose in inflation-adjusted terms by 92.0 percent before taxes
and 93.3 percent after taxes. In September 2010, profits were at their
highest point since at least September 2007, several months before the
start of the Great Recession.\2\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ Christian Weller, ``Economic Snapshot for January 2011,''
Center for American Progress, January 31, 2011, available at http://
www.americanprogress.org/issues/2011/01/econsnap0111.html.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
But, even with strong profits, much of the infrastructure
investment we need to do is in repairing our crumbling basic
infrastructure. The American Society of Civil Engineers estimates that
we need to spend at least $2.2 trillion over the next five years just
to make repairs.\3\ This includes projects like replacing aging water
facilities that are near the end of their useful life, repairing aging
and deficient dams, and quarter of our nation's bridges that are either
structurally deficient or functionally obsolete.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ American Society of Civil Engineers, ``America's Infrastructure
Report Card'' (2009), available at http://
www.infrastructurereportcard.org/sites/default/files/
RC2009_full_report.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Roads, bridges, broadband, water and sewer lines, and a host of
other goods require large-scale investments. For any one company it may
be too expensive, but moreover, the public has an interest in creating
widespread access to these goods. Businesses large and small and
employees all benefit from infrastructure investments that they are
able to make use of. If every bridge were private, then the toll costs
and time wasted stopping for tolls might be prohibitively expensive and
inefficient. Programs like Build America Bonds, which provides
municipalities with subsidies to float bonds for long-term
infrastructure projects, could help increase the capital available for
these kinds of projects.
______

[Whereupon, at 4:00 p.m., the committee was adjourned.]


