- [H.A.S.C. No. 113-74] REBALANCING TO THE ASIA-PACIFIC REGION: EXAMINING ITS IMPLEMENTATION

[House Hearing, 113 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

[H.A.S.C. No. 113-74]

REBALANCING TO THE ASIA-PACIFIC

REGION: EXAMINING ITS IMPLEMENTATION

__________

COMMITTEE ON ARMED SERVICES

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED THIRTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

HEARING HELD

JANUARY 28, 2014

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE

86-964                         WASHINGTON : 2014
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office, http://bookstore.gpo.gov For more information, contact the GPO
Customer Contact Center, U.S. Government Printing Office. Phone 202-512-1800,
or 866-512-1800 (toll free). E-mail,
[email protected]
.

COMMITTEE ON ARMED SERVICES
One Hundred Thirteenth Congress

HOWARD P. ``BUCK'' McKEON, California, Chairman

MAC THORNBERRY, Texas                ADAM SMITH, Washington
WALTER B. JONES, North Carolina      LORETTA SANCHEZ, California
J. RANDY FORBES, Virginia            MIKE McINTYRE, North Carolina
JEFF MILLER, Florida                 ROBERT A. BRADY, Pennsylvania
JOE WILSON, South Carolina           ROBERT E. ANDREWS, New Jersey
FRANK A. LoBIONDO, New Jersey        SUSAN A. DAVIS, California
ROB BISHOP, Utah                     JAMES R. LANGEVIN, Rhode Island
MICHAEL R. TURNER, Ohio              RICK LARSEN, Washington
JOHN KLINE, Minnesota                JIM COOPER, Tennessee
MIKE ROGERS, Alabama                 MADELEINE Z. BORDALLO, Guam
TRENT FRANKS, Arizona                JOE COURTNEY, Connecticut
BILL SHUSTER, Pennsylvania           DAVID LOEBSACK, Iowa
K. MICHAEL CONAWAY, Texas            NIKI TSONGAS, Massachusetts
DOUG LAMBORN, Colorado               JOHN GARAMENDI, California
ROBERT J. WITTMAN, Virginia          HENRY C. ``HANK'' JOHNSON, Jr.,
DUNCAN HUNTER, California                Georgia
JOHN FLEMING, Louisiana              COLLEEN W. HANABUSA, Hawaii
MIKE COFFMAN, Colorado               JACKIE SPEIER, California
E. SCOTT RIGELL, Virginia            RON BARBER, Arizona
CHRISTOPHER P. GIBSON, New York      ANDRE CARSON, Indiana
VICKY HARTZLER, Missouri             CAROL SHEA-PORTER, New Hampshire
JOSEPH J. HECK, Nevada               DANIEL B. MAFFEI, New York
JON RUNYAN, New Jersey               DEREK KILMER, Washington
AUSTIN SCOTT, Georgia                JOAQUIN CASTRO, Texas
STEVEN M. PALAZZO, Mississippi       TAMMY DUCKWORTH, Illinois
MO BROOKS, Alabama                   SCOTT H. PETERS, California
RICHARD B. NUGENT, Florida           WILLIAM L. ENYART, Illinois
KRISTI L. NOEM, South Dakota         PETE P. GALLEGO, Texas
PAUL COOK, California                MARC A. VEASEY, Texas
JIM BRIDENSTINE, Oklahoma
BRAD R. WENSTRUP, Ohio
JACKIE WALORSKI, Indiana
BRADLEY BYRNE, Alabama

Robert L. Simmons II, Staff Director
Kari Bingen, Professional Staff Member
Spencer Johnson, Counsel
Aaron Falk, Clerk

C O N T E N T S

----------

CHRONOLOGICAL LIST OF HEARINGS
2014

Page

Hearing:

Tuesday, January 28, 2014, Rebalancing to the Asia-Pacific
Region: Examining Its Implementation...........................     1

Appendix:

Tuesday, January 28, 2014........................................    43
----------

TUESDAY, JANUARY 28, 2014
REBALANCING TO THE ASIA-PACIFIC REGION: EXAMINING ITS IMPLEMENTATION
STATEMENTS PRESENTED BY MEMBERS OF CONGRESS

McKeon, Hon. Howard P. ``Buck,'' a Representative from
California, Chairman, Committee on Armed Services..............     1
Smith, Hon. Adam, a Representative from Washington, Ranking
Member, Committee on Armed Services............................     2

WITNESSES

Kendall, Hon. Frank, Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition,
Technology and Logistics, U.S. Department of Defense...........     7
Lumpkin, Hon. Michael D., Performing the Duties of Under
Secretary of Defense for Policy, U.S. Department of Defense....     3
Pandolfe, VADM Frank C., USN, Director for Strategic Plans and
Policy, Joint Staff, J-5.......................................     5

APPENDIX

Prepared Statements:

Kendall, Hon. Frank..........................................    62
Lumpkin, Hon. Michael D......................................    50
McKeon, Hon. Howard P. ``Buck''..............................    47
Pandolfe, VADM Frank C.......................................    57
Smith, Hon. Adam.............................................    48

Documents Submitted for the Record:

[There were no Documents submitted.]

Witness Responses to Questions Asked During the Hearing:

Mrs. Davis...................................................    69
Ms. Duckworth................................................    70
Mr. Enyart...................................................    71
Mr. Franks...................................................    69
Mr. Nugent...................................................    71
Mr. McIntyre.................................................    69
Ms. Speier...................................................    70
Mr. Thornberry...............................................    69
Mr. Wittman..................................................    70

Questions Submitted by Members Post Hearing:

Mr. Carson...................................................    78
Ms. Hanabusa.................................................    75
Mr. Kilmer...................................................    79
Mr. Nugent...................................................    80
Mr. Runyan...................................................    79

REBALANCING TO THE ASIA-PACIFIC REGION: EXAMINING ITS IMPLEMENTATION

----------

House of Representatives,
Committee on Armed Services,
Washington, DC, Tuesday, January 28, 2014.
The committee met, pursuant to call, at 10:01 a.m., in room
2118, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Howard P. ``Buck''
McKeon (chairman of the committee) presiding.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. HOWARD P. ``BUCK'' MCKEON, A
REPRESENTATIVE FROM CALIFORNIA, CHAIRMAN, COMMITTEE ON ARMED
SERVICES

The Chairman. The committee will come to order.
Welcome to the committee's first hearing in 2014. Before I
begin, I would like to recognize our newest member of the
committee. He attended the briefing we had last week, but this
is his first full committee--Mr. Bradley Byrne.
Bradley is a former State senator, attorney, university
chancellor from the shipbuilding district of Mobile, Alabama.
Glad to have you hear, Bradley.
We are glad to have him. We appreciate the strong support
that his constituents provide to our military.
As a Californian, I have long understood the importance of
the Asia-Pacific region to trade and our economic well-being,
and that security underpins progress in the region.
I welcome the focus on the Asia-Pacific. However, time will
tell whether words and promises are followed by action. There
are some positive signs that U.S. forces in the Pacific are
receiving less cuts and readiness is being maintained, but I am
concerned about the total force.
When the President framed rebalance, he discussed how we
could now safely turn our attention to Asia, because the war in
Afghanistan was receding and Al Qaeda was on the path to
defeat. I am concerned these conditions haven't panned out.
Violence and instability rage in the Middle East and
Africa. Preserving forces, readiness, and capabilities in PACOM
[Pacific Command] means less elsewhere. Can we afford to take
risk in CENTCOM [Central Command] or AFRICOM [Africa Command]?
Budget cuts only exacerbate the problem. There is some
stability for the next 2 years with the budget that we just
passed, but what happens after that? As we look forward,
defense funding is basically flat out into the future. We are
back to sequestration levels. And military leaders are left
with no choice but to cut end strength, readiness, and
capabilities. And that has consequences for our security and
military commitments in PACOM and across the globe, unless we
adequately resource defense.
I just in the last couple of weeks I have had five
ambassadors in to see me, concerned about where America is
going, what are we doing. We hope we can get some answers to
that today with the rebalance in the Pacific area.
We have with us Mr. Frank Kendall, Under Secretary of
Defense for Acquisition, Technology and Logistics; Mr. Michael
Lumpkin, Acting Under Secretary of Defense for Policy; and Vice
Admiral Pandolfe, is that--that is good? Joint Staff Director
for Strategic Plans and Policy.
I think Congress can play a constructive role in shaping
the rebalance, but we must have a candid discussion on the
opportunities, the challenges, and the risks in its
implementation.
Mr. Smith.
[The prepared statement of Mr. McKeon can be found in the
Appendix on page 47.]

STATEMENT OF HON. ADAM SMITH, A REPRESENTATIVE FROM WASHINGTON,
RANKING MEMBER, COMMITTEE ON ARMED SERVICES

Mr. Smith. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you for
having this hearing. I welcome our witnesses and look forward
to their testimony and our discussion.
The Asia-Pacific region has been, for some time will
continue to be, very critical to U.S. interests. I applaud the
efforts of the Department of Defense and the administration
over the course of the last couple of years, as they have
outlined our rebalancing towards Asia, really a re-emphasis of
how important Asia is to our interests, and the various allies'
interests, and countries that we are concerned about in that
region.
I think it is a very appropriate move.
Now the chairman correctly points out, it was done at a
difficult time in two respects. One, the budget challenges
remain. I share the chairman's opinion that it is good that we
passed appropriations bills for fiscal years 2014 and fiscal
year 2015, that we set in place a budget that is going to, at
least, give us some stability.
But that has not changed the fact that cuts will come, nor
has it changed the fact that sequestration is still out there,
after fiscal year 2015, issues that we have to deal with. So we
will have to look at this rebalance within the concept of a
difficult budget environment.
And also, and I think it is clear the administration never
meant that there weren't other parts of the world that will
continue to be important. There are. Certainly we face
challenges across the Middle East and North Africa and in a
number of other places.
But when you look at the number of players involved in
Asia, the economic impact, the importance of trade, the
challenges to stability that are there, you understand why Asia
is so important to us.
So I look forward to hearing from the witnesses today about
how we can properly make this rebalance, what allies are
critical, how we work to make sure that that region of the
world knows that we will continue to be a Pacific power.
I think the biggest thing is the presence of the United
States in Asia is something that helps bring stability to that
region. And therefore we need to make sure we maintain that
presence and be as strategic as we can in dealing with the many
challenges that are there.
I, again, look forward to the testimony, and I thank the
chairman for holding this hearing.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Smith can be found in the
Appendix on page 48.]
The Chairman. Thank you.
Mr. Lumpkin, if you will go first, and Vice Admiral
Pandolfe, and then Mr. Kendall.

STATEMENT OF HON. MICHAEL D. LUMPKIN, PERFORMING THE DUTIES OF
UNDER SECRETARY OF DEFENSE FOR POLICY, U.S. DEPARTMENT OF
DEFENSE

Mr. Lumpkin. Thank you, Chairman McKeon, Ranking Member
Smith, members of the committee. Thank you for the opportunity
to discuss the Defense Department's role and the whole-of-
government rebalance to the Asia-Pacific region.
I would like to express my appreciation for the support of
this committee to our men and women in uniform and the
civilians who support them.
Let me begin by telling you why we are rebalancing to the
Asia-Pacific. The administration's focus on the Asia-Pacific is
based on a careful assessment that America's prosperity and
continued security are increasingly tied to the Asia-Pacific.
One-third of global trade, including $1.4 trillion in two-
way trade annually with the United States, is with Asia. Half
of the world's shipping by tonnage passes through the waters of
the South China Sea.
As countries and people throughout the region become more
prosperous, it is ever more important to the global economy,
the United States will be an active partner in the region's
growth.
Rebalance also reflects strong and long-standing ties
between the United States and the countries of the Asia-
Pacific, where the United States has long supported security
and stability with our military presence and partnerships.
I want to emphasize that the Department of Defense's role
in the rebalance is only part of the broader U.S. Government
effort that also includes our diplomatic, social, cultural,
political, and trade initiatives.
The Defense Department contributes to the administration's
aim of a secure and prosperous Asia-Pacific through five
primary lines of effort: transforming and modernizing alliance
and partnerships; enhancing our defense posture in the region;
updating operational concepts and plans; investing in the
capabilities we need to secure our interests throughout the
region; and finally, strengthening multilateral cooperation and
engagement.
Admiral Pandolfe and Under Secretary Kendall will have more
to say about posture, plans, capabilities, so I will focus my
opening remarks on what we are doing with allies, partners, and
regional institutions to achieve our strategic objectives.
The Department is modernizing our defense alliances and
partnerships, including with our five treaty allies in the
region, to address the challenges of the 21st century.
With Japan's Ministry of Defense, for the first time since
1997, the Defense Department is reviewing the defense
guidelines that underpin our cooperation.
We are also realigning our forces to ensure a sustainable
presence over the long-term, most notably, our Marine Corps
presence in Okinawa.
We are also cooperating to enhance defense and space
architectures. A new cost-sharing agreement with the Republic
of Korea, completed earlier this month, will help to ensure
that we have the resources necessary for the combined defense
of the peninsula.
We remain committed to the conditions-based transition of
operational control. And together, we have developed a plan to
effectively counter North Korean provocations.
With Australia, we are building upon the interoperability
gained by fighting side-by-side in Iraq and Afghanistan, by
rotationally deploying up to 2,500 marines and additional
aircraft to the Northern Territory.
We are also deepening cooperation in areas like space and
cybersecurity.
The Department is negotiating a framework agreement with
the Philippines, which will provide U.S. forces the opportunity
for greater rotational presence, and will contribute to the
Philippine Armed Forces' modernization and capacity-building
efforts.
We continue our work with Thailand's military to implement
the Joint Vision Statement for the alliance, focused on
supporting interoperability, encouraging Thailand to take a
greater regional leadership role, and strengthening
relationships at all levels.
In addition to this work with our treaty allies, the
Department engages with many other partners throughout the
Asia-Pacific to contribute to common security needs. For
example, participation in numerous exercises in support to the
Philippines, following Typhoon Haiyan, by the littoral combat
ship USS Freedom, during its rotational deployment to
Singapore; improving Indonesia's maritime security and
international peacekeeping capability; increasing Vietnam's
capacity to conduct maritime search and rescue activities; and
working with New Zealand through renewed defense policy and
military staff talks. A critical element of our long-term
strategy in Asia is to build a strong relationship with India
and China. As rising powers, they have a special role to play
in the future security order.
With India, we are successfully moving toward a partnership
based on shared interests, including maritime security,
humanitarian assistance, disaster relief, and counterterrorism.
We are also deepening our discussions of defense trade,
technology, and regional security.
The Department of Defense also continues to engage with
China, where our cooperation directly supports the maintenance
of the peace and stability in the Asia-Pacific, and is a key
component to our overall approach in the region.
We have made progress in cooperative capacity-building in
areas such as military medicine, counter-piracy, humanitarian
assistance, and disaster relief.
With regard to Taiwan, the Department continues to comply
with the one-China policy, three U.S.-PRC [Peoples' Republic of
China] joint communiques and the Taiwan Relations Act, making
available to Taiwan the defense articles it needs to maintain
sufficient self-defense.
Our relationship with Burma is another area we expect
progress in the coming years. Further progress on defense ties
will be contingent on continued progress by Burma in the areas
of human rights, democratization, national reconciliation, and
suspending defense ties with North Korea.
We have also significantly increased our efforts to
increase multilaterally, both through institutions such as
ASEAN [Association of Southeast Asian Nations] Defense
Ministers Meeting Plus [ADMM-Plus], and by enhancing trilateral
cooperation with allies and partners on common interests. Last
year, the ADMM-Plus hosted three multilateral exercises focused
on maritime security, counterterrorism, and humanitarian
assistance and disaster response.
These efforts offer a critical avenue for increasing
familiarity and building habits of cooperation that help
nations effectively work together and reduce the risk of
miscalculation when military forces interact.
The Defense Department will continue to prioritize the
Asia-Pacific region in our activities, exercises, and
investments over the coming years. We look forward to the
continued support and contributions of this committee and to
ensure the United States is positioned to protect our interests
across the region.
Thank you very much, and I look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Lumpkin can be found in the
Appendix on page 50.]
The Chairman. Thank you.

STATEMENT OF VADM FRANK C. PANDOLFE, USN, DIRECTOR FOR
STRATEGIC PLANS AND POLICY, JOINT STAFF, J-5

Admiral Pandolfe. Good morning, ladies and gentlemen.
Chairman McKeon, Ranking Member Smith and distinguished
committee members, thank you for the opportunity to offer my
thoughts on the Asia-Pacific rebalance.
Every day, the joint force conducts real-world operations,
exercises, and senior leader engagement in the Asia-Pacific
region in support of the administration's rebalance policy.
These activities facilitate greater interoperability with
regional forces, mitigate risk of miscalculation, and reduce
the likelihood of conflict. Supported by our robust regional
force posture, U.S. engagement in the Asia-Pacific is essential
to regional security.
I will speak for a moment about operations. The United
States forces in the Asia-Pacific region operate continuously
on land, in the air, and on the sea. These forces routinely
conduct freedom-of-navigation operations, deployments, and port
visits. They also work with regional partners to respond to
natural disasters. Our presence deters North Korean aggression
and ensures unrestricted access to the global commons.
As a recent example, U.S. forces responded quickly and
efficiently by supporting the U.S. Agency for International
Development's humanitarian response to the Philippines in the
wake of Super Typhoon Haiyan in November of 2013. The scope and
speed of our response--more than 13,400 personnel, 66 aircraft,
and 12 naval vessels--clearly demonstrated the depth of U.S.
commitment to the region.
By evacuating 21,000 people and delivering nearly 2,500
tons of relief supplies, U.S. forces again showcased the
ability to respond rapidly and effectively. Activities like
this increase interoperability with allies and partners, which
in turn improves their ability to respond to a range of
contingencies. U.S. forces' long-term operational presence in
the region also serves to deter threats to peace and stability.
Let me turn for a moment to exercises. As Acting Under
Secretary of Defense Lumpkin stated, regional relationships
form the foundation of our alliances and partnerships in the
Asia-Pacific. Solid relationships are built on familiarity,
trust, and communication. These effectively increase our
capability to work together in any number of scenarios.
Military exercises have proven to increase interoperability
across key mission areas such as humanitarian assistance and
disaster relief, counterterrorism, maritime security, and
peacekeeping. As the rebalance continues, regional exercises
continue to grow in scope, participation, and sophistication,
ranging from basic unit-level training to complex,
multinational exercises such as RIMPAC [Rim of the Pacific] and
Cobra Gold. In 2014, RIMPAC will include Brunei and China for
the first time. Thailand-based Cobra Gold will see
participation by Indonesia, Japan, Malaysia, Singapore, and the
Republic of Korea, among others.
Through our exercise program and other engagements, we are
helping our partners take the lead in addressing regional
challenges. Additionally, we are working closely with the
Department of State to assist nations in strengthening their
maritime security capabilities.
A few thoughts on senior leader engagement. Senior
uniformed leaders are taking advantage of opportunities to
reach out to our counterparts in the region. For example,
Chairman Dempsey traveled to China in April 2013 for high-level
meetings with the Chinese chief of the General Staff and other
key Chinese leaders. And he will host a reciprocal visit in
May. He hosted allied defense chiefs from the Philippines and
Australia in 2013, as well as the Malaysian chief of defense
just this month.
The chairman also accompanied Secretary Hagel to Korea for
the annual alliance conference in September of 2013. PACOM
commander Admiral Locklear and his service component commanders
continuously engage with their regional counterparts, hearing
their concerns, reassuring them of continued support, and
demonstrating U.S. commitment to the rebalance.
Regarding force posture, this commitment is most vividly
demonstrated by physical presence. Our close relationship with
regional allies and partners is enabled by U.S. force posture
in the Asia-Pacific, which assures access and reduces response
time.
In addition to our long-term presence in Korea and Japan,
rebalance initiatives in Darwin, Australia, and Singapore
continue to bear fruit. Rotational Marine Corps deployments to
Darwin began in 2012. We sent a company-level rotation of
marines there for 6 months last year and will eventually grow
this rotational presence to 2,500.
Additionally, the littoral combat ship [LCS] USS Freedom
completed her first deployment to Singapore in November of
2013, and we will see up to four LCS rotationally deploy there
by 2017. These are just two of a number of ongoing force
posture initiatives in the region.
As the rebalance to Asia continues, our commitment to the
region reassures allies and partners and deters those who would
undermine stability. U.S. commitment to the region is
demonstrated by our ongoing activities, our ongoing exercises,
and senior leader engagement, all underpinned by our physical
presence.
I look forward to your questions on these and other topics
this morning. And please, accept my thanks to this committee
for all you have done for our men and women in uniform.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Admiral Pandolfe can be found in
the Appendix on page 57.]
The Chairman. Thank you.
Mr. Kendall.

STATEMENT OF HON. FRANK KENDALL, UNDER SECRETARY OF DEFENSE FOR
ACQUISITION, TECHNOLOGY AND LOGISTICS, U.S. DEPARTMENT OF
DEFENSE

Secretary Kendall. Chairman McKeon, Vice Chairman
Thornberry, Ranking Member Smith, distinguished members of the
committee, thank you for the opportunity to testify before you
today also.
My responsibilities in the Pentagon are focused in large
part on maintaining the military technological superiority of
the United States. As Mr. Lumpkin and Admiral Pandolfe
described, we face numerous challenges and opportunities in the
region of the Asia-Pacific. The investments in technology and
materiel we are making are intended to enable us to continue to
effectively pursue America's interests in this region,
particularly in the face of North Korea's nuclear weapons
proliferation and missile programs and the increase in what we
call anti-access area denial military capabilities.
North Korea's most significant development is in the area
of medium- and long-range ballistic missiles that could be
equipped with nuclear warheads. Our investments to counter
these threats fall primarily into the area of missile defense,
both national missile defense and regional missile defense. We
are increasing the number of ground-based interceptors at Fort
Greely, Alaska, have deployed a THAAD [Terminal High Altitude
Air Defense] missile defense system battery to Guam, and are in
the process of introducing a second TPY-2 [Transportable Radar
Surveillance] ballistic missile defense radar into Japan.
These investments will enhance our ability to defend the
homeland and Japan. These efforts complement our ongoing
initiatives to strengthen ballistic missile defense
capabilities in general, including our SM3 Block IIA standard
missile codevelopment program with Japan, and work on more
capable and reliable interceptors, and on the ability to
discriminate between reentry vehicles and other objects.
Anti-access area denial capabilities that concern us cover
a range of conventional capabilities. In the case of China in
particular, for example, they include space control
investments; offensive cyber capabilities; conventional
ballistic and cruise missiles with precision-seekers designed
to attack both fixed land installations and surface ships,
including aircraft carriers; air-to-air capabilities, including
fifth-generation fighters; long-range missiles with advance
technologies seekers; and electronic warfare systems.
China is also developing and fielding advanced air defense
systems. China is pursuing a long-term comprehensive military
modernization program focused on anti-access area denial
capabilities. Today, our investments, on the other hand, are
being limited by budget cuts that fall disproportionately on
modernization, research and development, and procurement.
The size of the immediate reductions we are experiencing is
bad enough. Uncertainty about future budget reductions make
sizing our force problematic and encourages a slower drawdown
in our force structure. This in turn causes even larger
reductions in modernization. This issue was highlighted in the
Department's Strategic Choices Management Review last year.
Until we reduce our force size to sustainable levels, we will
be forced to disproportionately reduce modernization--the very
investments that provide us with technological superiority in
the Asia-Pacific region and elsewhere.
Despite our resource constraints, the Department has taken
steps to address these threats. Over the past 3 years, but
especially since the Defense Strategic Guidance was published 2
years ago, we have been making R&D [research and development]
and procurement investments focused on the Asia-Pacific region
and the type of concerns that I mentioned.
I cannot comment on planning for the fiscal year 2015
investments. However, I can discuss example fiscal year 2014
investments that were requested by the President, authorized by
this committee, and appropriated by the Congress. These
investments include the following categories: cyber defense,
man-based key asset defense, surface ship defense, maritime
surveillance, air dominance including electronic warfare, and
precision strike.
I would like to conclude with the following key points.
First and foremost, on the perspective of technological
superiority, the Department of Defense is being challenged in
ways that I have not seen for decades, particularly in the
Asia-Pacific region. Technological superiority is not assured
and we cannot be complacent about our posture. This is not a
future problem. It is a here-now problem.
Second, our ability within the Department to respond to
that challenge is severely limited by the current budget
situation. While we wrestle with the uncertainty caused by
sequestration and therefore the uncertainty about what force
size we will be able to afford over the long term, we are
losing time, an asset that we can never recover.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
[The prepared statement of Secretary Kendall can be found
in the Appendix on page 62.]
The Chairman. Thank you very much.
Deterring a rising China and assuring our Asian allies and
partners are critically important to the security and stability
of the region. Our allies are wary, wondering if we will follow
through on the rebalance. The worst thing we can do is build up
expectations and not follow through. I welcome the focus on the
Asia-Pacific and appreciate the priority given to our forces in
the region.
However, as I said in my previous statement, when President
Obama announced this rebalance, he assumed the war in
Afghanistan was winding down and Al Qaeda was on the path to
defeat. If you look at the headlines over the last year, you
know that that is not the case. We are struggling now to see if
we can even get the bilateral security agreement, if we can get
through the elections, if we can leave a residual force to
continue the training. So we still have serious problems there.
So how do we reprioritize the Asia-Pacific while also
maintaining sufficient force posture in the Middle East and
Africa, and sufficient force posture to meet the rest of our
military commitments across the globe, and to respond to
potential crises, all while our force size and defense budget
are declining?
Our commanders in the Asia-Pacific are telling us they are
being cut less than others. So prioritizing the rebalance does
not mean prioritizing additional resources for the region; it
really means being cut less. It also means the other geographic
commands are being cut more.
So the question to follow up on is, What exactly is being
rebalanced if the Department is still cutting PACOM and cutting
other commands more? Additionally, we have to be worried about
the volatility in the Middle East and Africa, and the
likelihood of conflict there.
In order to support the rebalance to Asia, are cuts being
made to forces and readiness in the Middle East and Africa?
This sets us down a dangerous path towards one major
contingency operation, where, in order to support one region,
the PACOM, we are exposing another, the Middle East.
Now, I know that you don't create the budgets. This
committee doesn't create the budgets. And I think we all have
these same questions, but we want to hear from you how best we
can deal with these situations in a really declining budget
situation for our Armed Forces. How do we make--how do we do
more with less, I guess is what my question is. How do you see
us moving forward?
Mr. Lumpkin.
Mr. Lumpkin. Mr. Chairman, thank you for the question.
The commitment to the Asia-Pacific rebalance is steadfast.
However, I think what we will see as we have requirements in
other theaters that our timing, and the pace of the rebalance,
may be subject to adjustments as we move forward, depending on
what the rest of the world has.
But we are 2 years into the rebalance, as we are moving
forward; it was announced in 2012. And we are moving forward,
and it is happening, as we outlined in our opening comments.
Admiral Pandolfe. Sir, the situation you point out is very
compelling. I would offer three thoughts to how to address as
best we can, within the current set of circumstances, our goal
of reorienting towards the Asia-Pacific.
First, we have to continue to prioritize the posture
changes which are in play now and keep them funded so that the
reallocation of forces from the Middle East back into, in this
case, their home bases in Asia-Pacific region and the
redistribution of forces within the Asia-Pacific region
continues apace.
You have seen that with the Navy's intention and the Air
Force's intention to rebalance their forces to roughly a 60/40
orientation. Additionally, the Marines are looking at
relocating some of their forces, and the Army is having their
forces return to home bases out there, now that Iraq is over
and as Afghanistan winds down.
Secondly, I think we need to continue to focus on keeping
our most capable capabilities flowing into that direction, and
that is the intent.
And thirdly, to Mr. Kendall's world, we need to keep a
sharp eye on R&D dollars to make sure that they are moving in
the direction that is the most effective regarding the emergent
challenges from that theater.
The Chairman. Thank you.
Mr. Kendall.
Secretary Kendall. This is a little bit out of my lane, Mr.
Chairman, but I just want to echo what Mr. Lumpkin said
earlier, that this is a whole-of-government rebalance to Asia-
Pacific. It is not just the Defense Department, and it is
certainly not just about forces.
A great deal of what we are doing is partnership building.
A great deal of what we are doing is senior leader tension in
relationship-building in the area. Increased exercises, as
Admiral Pandolfe mentioned. So a lot of those things can
happen, even in a reduced-budget situation.
The Chairman. Thank you. Mr. Smith.
Mr. Smith. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Just seeking a greater
clarity on what you mean by the rebalance. And I think it is
more complicated than just: we are going to put more troops
there. That, I don't even think is really the most important
part of it, but I want to get some specifics.
And Mr. Kendall, you mentioned relationship-building. What
are some of the key elements with whom--who--are we wanting to
make--build these relationships with? And what are the key
aspects of U.S. foreign policy that are going to be important
in the rebalance, aside from the moment on, you know, how many
ships, troops, or whatever we have in the region.
When you guys are thinking about, you know, whether or not
the rebalance to Asia is going to be done, we are going to
follow through on the commitment, as the chairman is concerned
about. What are the three things you say that we need to be
doing to make sure that the region knows that we have done this
rebalance? I guess, outside of troop numbers, relationship-
building. What is really important to make sure that we know
that we have a strong presence there and that we care about the
region.
Secretary Kendall. I will take my piece of that.
The Chairman. Sure.
Secretary Kendall. And I think the others should comment as
well.
In my own case, I have been to Asia twice within the past
year. And it has been largely to talk to our friends and allies
about cooperative activities.
The Asia-Pacific region includes India, which is very
important to us. Japan, South Korea, Australia, Singapore,
other nations out there that we are building our relationships
with, where we are giving cooperation.
In my world of acquisition programs and technology
development, that is just one facet of it, and I think the
broader issues are more with the policy side of the house.
The Chairman. Mr. Lumpkin, you want to take a stab at that?
Mr. Lumpkin. Absolutely. And I think it goes back to it,
for three principal things we can do is--and that is to, as I
mentioned earlier, is to modernize those alliances and
partnerships, some of them going back a number of years, and to
re-looking as the security situation in the region is changed,
to make sure we are opening those dialogues, and continuing to
update things as they go.
But also, it is the mil-to-mil [military-to-military]
relationships as doing--increase our mil-to-mil engagements
throughout the region.
And finally, I think another key piece to this is the focus
on updating operational concepts. As we look at Air-Sea Battle,
as we look at things of that nature, is to bring things and we
can harmonize everything with, not only within the Department
of Defense, but also within the region, based on the security
concerns.
The Chairman. All right.
Mr. Smith. It is not necessarily your lane, but on the
economic side, obviously we have got the Trans-Pacific
Partnership hanging out there. How important is that, and
Admiral, I will ask you as the one in the region the most. You
know, how important is that to the relationship? And what other
things are out there on the economic side that are important to
our rebalance to Asia?
Admiral Pandolfe. Well, if I could, I would like to add to
what these two gentlemen said regarding your initial question
that, you know at the COCOM [combatant command] and fleet
level, additional initiatives to pursue--pertain to continuing
the exercise program and expanding it, as we are doing with
traditional allies and with new friends.
Conducting operations together, when that becomes called-
for, for instance, the typhoon response was an excellent
example----
Mr. Smith. Right.
Admiral Pandolfe [continuing]. Of working together, and key
leader engagement are the things that we do in our realm.
Pertaining to economics, it is not really my sphere. My
understanding is that the conclusion of that agreement will
foster economic growth in the area. And to Mr. Lumpkin's
opening statement, the Pacific rebalance was really a whole-of-
government approach, of which the military was a subset.
So that your focus on the importance of strengthening
economic ties, I think, is absolutely critical, and my
understanding is this vehicle is key to that effort.
Unfortunately, it really isn't my area of expertise.
Mr. Smith. Okay. Thank you.
I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. Thank you.
Mr. Thornberry.
Mr. Thornberry. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
You all may feel like you are getting a similar question
several times, but if rebalancing is going to be something more
than just a marketing label, then something has to change.
Something has to be done differently than was previously done.
And so Admiral, I understand the point about ``it is a
whole-of-government, it is not all DOD [Department of
Defense],'' but, under, from an operational standpoint for DOD,
if you had to tick off the three main pieces of evidence that
show that something has been done differently over the past
year or so, to show a rebalance to Asia, what are the three
most significant things you would just tick off, right quick?
Admiral Pandolfe. I think the first pertains to the
chairman's comments about force flow.
The Chairman. Admiral, can you move that mic a little
closer please?
Admiral Pandolfe. How is that, is that better?
So I think I would start by commenting on force flow.
During the previous 10 years, when we had two major conflicts
raging in the Middle East, a disproportion of forces flowed to
that area relative to where they would normally be operating.
So we became out of balance in terms of an equitable spread
of force structure, and in terms of resource allocation. So the
rebalance is really about restoring that balance: getting
forces more equitably applied and in the case of the Asia-
Pacific, applied to an area where we see great equity
importance as we move forward.
And you are seeing the forces flow back into those bases as
we have now have left Iraq and we are starting to build down in
Afghanistan.
Secondly I think, I would look at, again, posture. And
again, it is more of a policy lane, but the agreements we have
made to relocate forces from say, Okinawa, and into Guam, et
cetera, the agreements we have with Australia. Posture is just
better, we feel, for the emerging challenges in that area that
we may see in the future.
And thirdly, it gets back to the point I made a moment ago.
We are evolving both our exercise program and our engagement
program so that it focuses on the skill sets that we think will
need to be strengthened and expanded in the area to best deal
with the kinds of scenarios that we face.
So you see a physical movement. You see a quantitative
adjustment. And you see an area of focus being sharpened,
looking to the future in this area.
Mr. Thornberry. How many more people do we have in the
Asia-Pacific region today than we had 3 years ago?
Admiral Pandolfe. Sir, I would have to take that for the
record and come back with a precise answer.
[The information referred to can be found in the Appendix
on page 69.]
Mr. Thornberry. You think we have more or----
Admiral Pandolfe. If you benchmarked it against the height
of the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan, I believe forces have
returned, and the answer is yes.
I would have to give you a year-by-year breakdown as to how
that balance adjusted as we drew down in Iraq, and have drawn
down in Afghanistan; and for instance, the 25th ID [Infantry
Division] heads home, and these forces go back to their--and so
forth, go back to their home bases.
Mr. Thornberry. Mr. Kendall, your last paragraph was kind
of sobering, I think, about we are not necessarily guaranteed
to maintain a technological edge, and particularly, with the
Chinese putting a lot of investment into anti-access/area
denial [A2/AD], counter-space and cyber.
And I guess, in this forum, I kind of--I guess I would like
to know, are we keeping up? Because they are pushing a lot of
money, resources, and effort, and making some progress, if you
believe the press. We have budget constraints.
So the question is, how is this race going?
Secretary Kendall. Overall, China's military investment are
increasing in double-digit numbers each year, about 10 percent.
Their budget is far smaller than ours. But their personnel
costs are also far smaller than ours.
Our budget is going the opposite direction. So despite that
metric alone, it is not positive.
I came back to the Pentagon about 4 years ago after having
been away for about 15 years. And every morning I get an
intelligence brief, which is largely technical intelligence,
because of my position.
And I was struck immediately by the nature, scope, and
quality of the investments that are being made in A2/AD, as we
call it, anti-access or denial capabilities. And over the last
3\1/2\, almost 4 years, nothing has changed that initial
impression.
The Department has responded to this. And it is very
consciously responded to this as we have gone through,
particularly, the strategic review we did 2 years ago.
As we go through our budget cycles, we are looking very
carefully at specific commands' requirements and what they need
for the operations in that area with potential future concerns
Admiral Locklear might have. And we are prioritizing those
investments. So we are responding.
As you mentioned, the constraints on budgets alone make it
more difficult for us to do that. Couple that with the
uncertainty about how much force structure we are going to be
able to retain; the lack of a ramp to get us more gracefully to
a future budget size you may end up with.
That all compounds the problem for us. So it is difficult
to do everything we need to do right now.
The Chairman. Thank you. Mr. Andrews.
Mr. Andrews. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I thank the witnesses
for their excellent testimony.
I believe that this rebalancing is the right priority for
the country. And I think that the strategy that you gentlemen
have outlined to us this morning strikes a sober balance
between an optimistic context in which our economic relations
with the emerging Chinese power there are improving, and a more
pessimistic sense that they may not.
I want to focus on that pessimism, since that is what
Members of Congress are really very good at. And without being
provocative or in any way jeopardizing relationships, let's
look at the worst-case scenario.
I think it is the worst-case scenario, in which our
relations with the PRC would turn quite frigid. There would be
bellicose behavior by the PRC. And we find it necessary to
position ourselves for the possibility of some conflict,
kinetic activities in that area involving the PRC.
I think that is truly the worst-case scenario. I don't
predict it. I don't wish for it. But I would like to know what
we do about it.
How does this rebalancing position ourselves for that
worst-case scenario?
Mr. Lumpkin. I think the key focus of the rebalance here
that exists there is building the relationships with our
partners and our allies in the region to make sure we are all
working together to make sure that this situation that you are
hypothesizing actually doesn't come to be; that we have
collective interests, and we work together, again, to make sure
the security environment doesn't get us to that point.
Mr. Andrews. But what does that mean in practical terms? I
mean, let me use this example: To the extent it would be
necessary to establish significant operating bases in South
Korea or Japan, how viable is that, given our present posture
toward those nations and some of the legalities that exist?
I mean, if we had to turn South Korea into a Kuwait, for
example, in terms of operational capability, how ready are we
to do that under this rebalancing plan?
Mr. Lumpkin. That is a hypothetical that I would prefer not
to get into, just because I don't think it is helpful to that.
Mr. Andrews. And I fully appreciate that. Provocation is
not the goal of these questions; a sober analysis is.
Let me ask it in a little less provocative way. Are there
any shortages we have in our force structure, or our naval
structure, our infrastructure? Are there any shortages that you
see, and given the present budget realities, that would impede
our ability to be as ready as we need to be under that worst-
case scenario?
Mr. Lumpkin. I would defer to my joint staff counterpart
here.
Admiral Pandolfe. So these are excellent questions, and we
would be happy to address them in a closed session where we
could get into some of the details.
Mr. Andrews. I would welcome that. I think that is
appropriate as well. Yes.
Admiral Pandolfe. So if you don't mind, I will leave it at
that.
Mr. Andrews. Sure. Secretary Kendall.
Secretary Kendall. I don't want to dig the hole deeper, but
I will give you a very general answer.
First of all, it depends a lot on the timeframe. The
situation today, I feel very comfortable about our
capabilities. I am not sure we would be able to say that in 5
or 10 years down the road.
The trajectory for our relationship with China is uncertain
today. Where are we going to go in the future? One of the
reasons we are focused on Asia-Pacific is we want to exert our
best influence, that trajectory, to go in a positive way, and
not to get into a----
Mr. Andrews. If we had the ability to make the investments
that would make you more confident about 5 to 10 years down the
road, where would we put the first dollar in order to raise
that confidence?
Secretary Kendall. I think there are a range of things that
deserve greater investment than we may be able to afford with
the current levels. I would like to get into--it is very hard
for me to talk about some of these without getting into
classified matters.
Mr. Andrews. I understand.
Secretary Kendall. Both with the point of view of our
capabilities, and the point of view----
Mr. Andrews. I don't want to, in any way, come close to
that line. So to the extent that you would like to pursue this
in a classified setting, I would like that.
Just again, I think that these grim scenarios are the least
likely. And I think that is great. But--and our history is
dotted with circumstances where the grim scenario comes to
being. And I just want to be sure, as we do this rebalancing,
we thought about all of them; and in our role, as people who
write the budget bills, and who do the oversight, that we are
appropriately sober and aware about those risks.
I thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
The Chairman. Thank you. Mr. Forbes.
Mr. Forbes. Mr. Chairman, thank you, first of all, for
holding this hearing, and for this important focus. Gentlemen,
thank you for your preparation in coming here. I know you have
all worked very hard and done so much in this area.
Mr. Lumpkin, much of the debate over American military
strategy in Asia is focused on the high-end warfighting
scenarios. And certainly, while this remains central, Chinese
actions in recent months, including continued patrols in the
Senkaku Islands, its declaration of ADIZ [Air Defense
Identification Zone] in the East China Sea, the event involving
the USS Cowpens, and the new Chinese fishing regulations in the
South China Sea, have led some observers to conclude that the
most likely competition in Asia today, and the most likely
source of a crisis that escalates to conflict, is occurring in
a state of perpetual low-level contest in what the Japanese
call the gray zone between war and peace.
The administration has responded with efforts to build
partner capacity and strengthen regional institutions. But this
will take years, if not decades, to bear fruit.
And beyond the normal kind of roundup the usual suspects
of, we need more diplomacy with the Chinese, we need to
encourage our allies to do something, whatever that might be,
we need to set up more talks, or express our frustration more
boldly, what specifically can the administration do to defend
its interest in this gray zone, in terms of acquisition and
planning?
And then the second question, does the administration share
the view that China's actions have violated U.S. national
interests in the freedom of navigation, the free flow of
commerce, and the peaceful settlement of disputes in accordance
with international law?
Mr. Lumpkin. Thank you for the question, sir. I would defer
any acquisition, you know, to Under Secretary Kendall.
But I will tell you that as we look at China in our ongoing
relationship, China is a rising power. There is no doubt. And
as they build their military capability, they are extending
their reach as it goes out throughout the Pacific region. And
our interaction with them is going to continue to increase,
just because of the size of--the ocean looks very big, but when
you get ships out there, and you have people working in the
same areas, they are going to run into each other. That is just
the nature.
Mr. Forbes. But Mr. Lumpkin, I don't think these are just
accidental run-ins. I think China has taken a policy of more
aggression, wouldn't you agree with that, over the last year, 2
years?
Mr. Lumpkin. Well, I would agree that, again, they are
going out, and making their presence known in the region. For
issues--for example, the ADIZ that was created, we don't
recognize that. We are doing business like we were before.
So that said, I don't see that U.S. national security
concerns are being directly challenged. I just think the
interaction, as we have more assets together in the same area,
our interaction is going to increase.
Mr. Forbes. So it would be your conclusion that none of the
Chinese actions have violated any U.S. national interest in
freedom of navigation, free flow of commerce, or peaceful
settlement disputes in accordance with international law?
Mr. Lumpkin. At this juncture, they have not done anything
that we recognize as to be a violation of our national
security.
Mr. Forbes. Mr. Kendall, if I could--my last minute and a
half, if you could address maybe the acquisition part of it. I
am going to follow up Mr. Thornberry's line of questioning. It
concerns me on the technological situation, too, because
throughout history, these things have been game-changers when
they come up and surprise us.
One of my questions to you, along with what we can do
additional in acquisition, is when did the Pentagon
administration first realize that this technological
superiority was challenged? Because we have had a steady
decline over the last several years of cuts. So we had, first,
$100 billion, and then $487 billion. We have been pleading with
you guys to come over here and tell us the problem.
When did it first become a concern to you? And how come you
guys haven't come over here and told Congress way before we got
to January of last year, ``Hey, this is a big concern, and we
are worried about it''?
Secretary Kendall. It became a concern to me personally
fairly early in my tenure in this position. It became a more
visible concern, I think, to the Department after the strategic
review that we did when we were faced with the BCA [Budget
Control Act] cuts, the first round of BCA cuts.
So I think that if you look at the documents we have been
publishing each year on China, which Congress requested of us,
and that review and the product that came out of that, with the
rebalance Asia-Pacific is a central piece of that strategy
that, for some time, we have been talking about this.
We have also been talking, I think, about the needs for
modern weapon systems, in general, for quite some time. I don't
think anybody has been quite as pointed as I may have----
Mr. Forbes. My time is up. But I would love to talk to you
more about this and maybe put some response to the record
because I appreciate all your work.
Secretary Kendall. I would be happy to do that.
Mr. Forbes. Thank you, and I just--I apologize, Mr.
Chairman. I yield back.
The Chairman. Thank you.
Ms. Bordallo.
Ms. Bordallo. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for calling this
meeting.
And I have a question here for Secretary Lumpkin. As you
know, the recently passed fiscal year 2014 defense bill
provides resources and it loosens restrictions on the spending
of Japanese funds for the realignment of Marines from Okinawa
to Guam.
Now I am a strong proponent of this initiative, and I
believe that it is the cornerstone of the rebalance effort, and
it enhances our bilateral relations with Japan.
Can you comment on the tangible impacts or benefits that
progress on the realignment that it has to do to our overall
rebalance strategy? Does progress on this realignment help to
demonstrate our commitment to allies in the region?
Mr. Lumpkin. Yes, ma'am, absolutely it does. It does just
that.
As we move from Futenma to the Camp Schwab, the northern
part of Okinawa, we remove the U.S. Marine Corps concentration
to a more--an area with less population and makes, provides
less risk to the population there.
Also, the other key piece that it does is it firmly
reestablishes Guam as a hub, as we move the up to 5,000 marines
to that area, as we continue to build more assets.
So I think it does several things. One is that it does
continue to demonstrate our commitment to the Japanese people
and our treaties and partnerships. But also demonstrates to the
region that Guam is going to be an increasingly pivotal player
in the area.
Ms. Bordallo. Thank you. Thank you very much.
I just returned with our chairman of the Readiness
Subcommittee, Mr. Wittman, and we had a very thorough
examination of Camp Schwab and Futenma and all the other camps
in Okinawa.
Admiral, I have a question for you. As Readiness
Subcommittee ranking member, I am concerned about the readiness
of our military forces in the PACOM area of responsibility. Now
do the military services have adequate capacities to meet the
PACOM combatant commander's war plan requirements?
And if not, what are the consequences? And how is the
Department working to address these shortfalls? In particular,
is equipment from retrograde being prioritized to this region?
Admiral Pandolfe. Well, again, as stated earlier, we really
can't get into a detailed discussion of war plan execution. But
I will take on the larger issue of readiness, to which you
speak.
And we are concerned about the readiness of the force and
particularly the consequence of sequestration on readiness. As
you look at the way the budget cuts unfold--and I am a strategy
guy, not a budget guy, but I follow this inside my service and
others--readiness suffers first. And we have seen that.
The service chiefs, the service secretaries, the chairman
and the vice chairman have been up on the Hill, they have made
very clear their concern for the impact of sequestration both
long-term and even under the latest respite that concern of the
impact of these cuts on readiness immediately.
Ms. Bordallo. Thank you. Thank you.
My last question is for Secretary Lumpkin. I am deeply
concerned about the current status of relations between Japan
and South Korea. Actors on both sides have either taken
unfortunate actions or made unfortunate statements. Now how
does this current situation impact our training and operations
in the region? And does this make integration between South
Korea and Japan more difficult? And how is the U.S. working to
bridge the gap between our two most critical allies?
I really believe the U.S. needs to take a more proactive
role and spend a little diplomatic capital to right the
situation.
Mr. Lumpkin. Well, we have a long, multilateral
relationship, of course, with Japan and the Republic of Korea.
And we continue to dialogue with them on issues of this nature.
I would argue that the relationship between the three,
historically, is much larger and much deeper than these issues
that we have seen as of late. So I remain very optimistic that
we will get past some of these obstacles that have recently
appeared. And I think we are--those dialogues and discussions
are happening.
Ms. Bordallo. Well, I hope you are right in that.
And Mr. Chairman, thank you. I yield back.
The Chairman. Thank you.
Mr. Wilson.
Mr. Wilson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank you each for
being here today.
It is an honor for me to follow Representative Madeleine
Bordallo. She is such a dedicated Member of Congress, and we
are very fortunate as we think of the Asia-Pacific area, how
fortunate we are to have this strategic outpost, the great
territory of Guam, the extraordinarily patriotic people of
Guam.
And so as we look at the Pacific-Asia area, gosh, we can
begin at Guam. And I am very pleased about that for each of you
as we plan ahead.
Admiral Pandolfe, are we appropriately postured to address
the intelligence challenges presented by denied environments?
And if not, what investments do we need to make?
Admiral Pandolfe. Well, clearly maintaining dependable and
robust what we call intelligence, surveillance, and
reconnaissance, ISR, is critical, both at the national level as
well as the operational and tactical levels.
And as Mr. Kendall can elaborate, we have a set of
initiatives to sustain our ability to assess the theater and to
detect problems should they emerge.
To your point, sir, maintaining that capability is a
critical focus of investment. And without getting, again, into
sensitive programs, it is recognized that the realm of
information management is critical in this age, and we are--
that is one of the areas that we do focus on.
Mr. Wilson. And Mr. Lumpkin, how do the countries of the
Asia-Pacific region view the rebalance strategy? How do these
Asian-Pacific states perceive challenges, such as the fiscal
constraints facing the U.S. military as it rebalances?
Mr. Lumpkin. Thank you for that question.
Our partners and our allies are very pleased with the
rebalance, as that we are shifting and our focus on the area,
and they understand through senior leader engagements--the
Secretary was--visited three times last year in the Asia-
Pacific region. They enjoy the additional dialogue, focus, and
effort.
So to date it has been very well received.
Mr. Wilson. And I have had the opportunity to visit with
Congresswoman Bordallo, Vietnam, and the capability--capacity
of POW/MIA [prisoner of war/missing in action] efforts. And it
is really reassuring to me to see the new relationships that we
have with the Republic of Vietnam and what this can mean for
our security.
For each of you, what is your assessment of the U.S.
military relationship with South Korea and Japan? And what is
the potential of building trust and cooperation between these
two countries to counter the threat of Pyongyang?
Mr. Lumpkin. Again, the relationship remains very good with
both. And our commitment on all three sides of this
relationship is enduring. And I, again, remain extremely
optimistic that together we are going to continue to do good
things for the security and the economic prosperity of the
region.
Mr. Wilson. And Mr. Kendall.
Secretary Kendall. My experience of my area with both South
Korea and Japan has been very positive. Japan, I think, is
making some very constructive changes in terms of how it is
organizing and manages its military, and how--its ability to
interact with partners such as the United States.
Korea is wrestling with how to best modernize its force,
given its resource constraints, but working very closely with
U.S. Command in Korea, as it sorts all that out.
My own experiences have been very positive with both
nations.
Mr. Wilson. Additionally, I am very grateful, I have been
the chairman of the India Caucus. India, the world's largest
democracy. America, the world's oldest democracy. What is our
status currently with the military of India?
Mr. Lumpkin. Our relationship with India continues to
blossom, as we find common interests and work together
throughout the region. We have done our military defense sales
from a decade ago to now have increased from zero to a
significant amount. So we have a very good relationship and we
are continuing to build it.
Mr. Wilson. And in conclusion, my dad served with Flying
Tigers, CBI, China-Burma-India. And as I was growing up, he
told me how capable and confident the people of India are.
So thank you again for all of your efforts.
The Chairman. Thank you.
Mr. Courtney.
Mr. Courtney. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Lumpkin, I just want to follow up on that first
question that Mr. Wilson just asked about our allies' sort of,
you know, belief that this rebalance is tangible.
The New York Times--and I will be very specific--the New
York Times reported recently that there is sort of like a
submarine acquisition and building boom going on in Asia right
now, where, I mean, everybody from Vietnam, Malaysia,
Philippines, India, are out buying or building submarines.
And it would seem that that is kind of happening kind of
willy-nilly. And maybe in reaction to just sort of whether or
not our Navy is going to be able to match the policy, again,
because of the fiscal constraints.
So again, I just wondered if you could sort of use that as
an example of whether or not people are in agreement with it,
as you said, but whether they are still kind of hedging their
bets with their own sort of build-ups?
Mr. Lumpkin. Well, I think everybody realizes that a strong
military-to-military relationship across the entire area based
on common interests will support everybody equally. I think
when it comes down to it, the proof is in the pudding. You
know, in the long term, we have to follow through on everything
that we have said we are going to do, not just the Defense
Department, but again, the whole of government.
So we are 2 years into a kind of a multi-decade rebalance.
So, we are kind of in the early stages right now. So, arguably
our partners and allies are waiting to see us come through. And
I would also argue that they are probably hedging their bets
somewhat just to make sure that they can, you know, have the
ability to self-defend on their own.
Mr. Courtney. Do you see that as a positive development? I
mean, again, they feel--or that they are building up their
navies and--I mean, they are our allies and, you know, we
certainly support their--you know, their right to defend
themselves. But it seems like, again, we are sort of--there is
an arms buildup that is happening there.
Mr. Lumpkin. Well, I actually think--I do see it as a
positive issue. And the reason why is that we are not
responsible, therefore, for the defense of everybody. We have
partners that can provide forces based on common interests and
it gives us the ability--mechanisms for us to work together
with our allies and our partners. Again, I don't see it as a
negative thing.
Mr. Courtney. A number of you mentioned in your testimony
the 2014 RIMPAC [Rim of the Pacific] exercises that China is
going to participate in. That is kind of extraordinary. I am
trying to get my head around that. I mean, because obviously
the A2/AD issue is one of the challenges that certainly our
Navy--naval forces are going to have to contend with. And
having China participate, can you explain it a little bit, how
that works and how--you know, the benefits of it in terms of
having their participation?
Admiral Pandolfe. The invitation for the Chinese to
participate in the 2014 RIMPAC is part of the larger set of
initiatives to engage China, to try to continue to integrate
them into the family of nations as they become more prosperous
and to expose them to the international norms by which the
family of nations respects each other and cooperates in the
international commons.
So, this was one initiative in a family of initiatives to
include visits and talks aimed toward that end. In the
exercise, they will participate. They will send a ship and they
will participate in the humanitarian assistance, disaster
relief, search and rescue, and medical end of the exercise.
Mr. Courtney. Okay, so those are sort of more in the
benign, non-military end of operations, I guess. Is that a safe
description of it or accurate description of it?
Admiral Pandolfe. Correct.
Mr. Courtney. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
The Chairman. Thank you.
Mr. Kline.
Mr. Kline. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I want to pick up a little bit on where the chairman and
Mr. Thornberry were kind of going.
And that is a recognition that we have been at war with
Islamist extremists, as the 9/11 Commission told us more than a
decade ago; have done a lot of fighting. That war is still
there whether we choose to recognize it or not because they
have chosen to be at war with us. And we see actually growth
and spreading of some organizations--Al Shabaab, Al Qaeda and
Islamic Maghreb, in the Arabian peninsula, and so forth.
So, my point is that didn't go away. And as we start to
rebalance to the Pacific, I am trusting that there is some
significant effort in that war. Not that you can't have
Islamist extremists in the Pacific, but clearly things in some
parts of the world outside of Pacific Command are still in
pretty tough shape.
So, I spent a lot of years in PACOM back in my uniformed
days and I am a little bit excited about this. But I am
concerned that we not try to move too quickly. And so, I want
to go to Secretary Kendall. Some 20 years ago, we were just
reminiscing, we were working down the hall from each other in
the Pentagon. And I would argue that the defense acquisition
system was in not the best of shape back then, and nor is it
today.
So, this committee has worked on this. We had a bipartisan
effort, sort of a special ad hoc committee that Mr. Andrews and
Mr. Conaway put together talking about trying to straighten out
a mess where you have got the Pentagon, whose finances are so
bad it is not even capable of being audited. So, I would say
that, Secretary Kendall, you have got a really big job because
you have got an acquisitions system that is kind of a mess. And
I see the title has changed over the years since I was there
and you are the Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition,
Technology and Logistics. So you have got a pretty big handful.
And part of that logistics and so forth is you have got
equipment that is still moving, trying to be moved back and
forth from Afghanistan. And you have got equipment that has had
to be replaced. The services have got some pretty aging stuff,
and so you have got a replacement piece of this. You have got a
modernization piece. And now you have got a rebalancing piece.
So, good luck, but my question--what I am trying to get to
here is how are you, sort of, what is your workload? Are you
mostly logisticians? Are you worried more about R&D? Where do
you see this rebalancing changing any focus that you have?
Secretary Kendall. Interesting question, Congressman. Great
to see you again, by the way. And I apologize for remembering
you as an Army officer earlier when you were actually a Marine.
Excuse me for that.
Mr. Kline. That hurt, but----
Secretary Kendall. I know. But I was an Army officer, so
take it as a compliment.
Mr. Kline. And I have forgiven you that years ago, Frank.
It is all right.
Secretary Kendall. I said in my opening comments that a
large part of my job was about technological superiority. The
other large part of my job is about getting as much value as
possible for the money we spend outside the Department with
contractors. And that covers all those other areas you talked
about. It covers all the services that we buy, as well as all
the products that we buy. It encompasses, of course,
acquisition, logistics and technology--all of those things.
I am on a long quest to make improvements in our efficiency
and effectiveness of our acquisition system. Dr. Carter and I
when I was his deputy started something called the Better
Buying Power initiatives. And I have revised that and upgraded
it and continued it in the last 2 years since I have been in
the position.
We are going to keep doing that. I think there have been a
lot of attempts to solve acquisition problems with silver
bullets. None of them have ever worked. It is hard work. It is
professionalism. It is attention to detail. It is 100 different
things done well and we have got to be able to do all of them.
And it is just a continuing effort. It is a long-term
effort. I have a rare opportunity for acquisition executives to
be in this position over a number of years so I can keep that
pressure on to improve how we do business. It is particularly
important right now while we are under the resource constraints
that we get as much as we can for every penny that we have. And
that is what we are squeezing our workforce to make sure that
they do.
But thanks for the question. It is a very, very important
part of what I do.
Mr. Kline. Well, thanks for the answer. And I meant it
seriously, not flippantly, when I said good luck. You have got
an awful lot to do. We want to be helpful and we will hopefully
be able to continue to work with you to help improve that
acquisition system. And then, of course, we have got the whole
challenge of resources which we will be working on.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Secretary Kendall. If I could, Congressman, I just want to
point out what Congressman Thornberry is doing in acquisition
reform. We are working closely with him on that and we are very
happy to be helpful as the committee moves forward.
The Chairman. Thank you.
Mr. Enyart.
Mr. Enyart. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Gentlemen, could you indicate what impact, if any, do you
anticipate the downturn of the Chinese economy would have on
their long-term military budgets?
Mr. Lumpkin. Again, this is kind of speculation, is that my
sense is that they will have to make some tough choices at that
juncture as far as what do they resource--they will be in a
similar situation as we are looking at as how do they spend
their money. And my sense is right now because they are in the
growth phase, they will probably be unlikely to level off for
some period of time. But I think there is going to be some
trade-space they are going to have to sit down and really
consider on what they are going to do in the long term.
Mr. Enyart. What is the relative size of the Chinese
military budget compared to our military budget?
Mr. Lumpkin. I don't know that off the top of my head. I
could take that for the record unless somebody here has that.
Secretary Kendall. The published number is about a quarter
of ours, but that is considered to be way under what they
actually spend. The other thing to factor into the equation
with China is that their personnel costs are much less than
ours are. That skews the results a little bit.
Mr. Enyart. You had indicated that in an earlier answer,
Mr. Kendall, could you tell me what the difference between
personnel costs amounts to?
Secretary Kendall. I will take that for the record,
Congressman.
[The information referred to can be found in the Appendix
on page 71.]
Mr. Enyart. Thank you.
Could one of you indicate for me what are the strategic
implications of the aging Chinese population, and additionally,
the strategic implications of the aging Japanese population?
Mr. Lumpkin. Candidly, sir, that is outside kind of my--
what I deal with as far as the economics and the population,
but I could take that for the record and do some homework and
work with the interagency to try to get something back to you.
[The information referred to can be found in the Appendix
on page 71.]
Mr. Enyart. And can one of you indicate to me at what point
the Chinese fifth generation fighter will be fully operational?
Secretary Kendall. I think we would have to get into
classified matters to talk about that, but it is the next few
years in general.
Mr. Enyart. And this may verge into classified, too, but
could you indicate what you anticipate the eventual size of the
Chinese fifth generation fighter fleet to be and at what point
do you expect it to reach that culminating point?
Secretary Kendall. Those estimates would definitely be
classified, Congressman.
Mr. Enyart. Okay.
Do we anticipate that the Chinese will be exporting the
fifth gen fighter?
Secretary Kendall. In general, we would expect the Chinese
to have export versions of the equipment that they build. That
is their pattern. I don't know if would be exactly the same or
what time they would export it, but we can expect it at some
point in time.
One of the concerns about China is not just that they are
modernizing. We don't anticipate a conflict with China,
certainly. But that they do export, and the focus systems that
they develop, we would face potentially with other people.
Mr. Enyart. And at what point do you anticipate those
exports might begin and to whom?
Secretary Kendall. We would have to get into classified
data to talk about that.
Mr. Enyart. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
The Chairman. Thank you.
Mr. Scott.
Mr. Scott. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Secretary Kendall, I want to come back and talk
specifically about some of the intelligence, surveillance, and
reconnaissance programs in the pivot. I was glad to hear you
talk about value for the money. I represent Robins Air Force
Base, which is home of the J-STARS [Joint Surveillance Target
Attack Radar System]. It is certainly a battlefield management
program that we couldn't have operated without high-demand,
low-density.
And I would like to, you know, hear your thoughts on that
platform as it relates to the Asia-Pacific region. Certainly
their ability to give us the tracks and the targets that we
need. And I would like to know, you know, when it comes to
these ISR platforms, one of my concerns is that when we have a
platform that is paid for by one branch, but predominantly
supports the mission of another branch, as we get into the
budget decisions, you are going to be the one that has to
balance that. And, wondering if you have seen any difference
there with what the branches have recommended in the future for
ISR platforms.
Secretary Kendall. Well, in general, I think the importance
of ISR was highlighted by Admiral Pandolfe earlier. It is of
course, important to us. It is particularly important in the
Pacific region because just of the geography, the expanse of
the Pacific region.
We are and have been considering all of the programs that
are associated with that. I am not going to be able to get
ahead of the Secretary and the President in terms of announcing
budget decisions or talking about them, really.
Mr. Scott. Sure.
Secretary Kendall. But, I will say that we are conscious of
ISR requirements from our combatant commanders, and they are
looked at both by the joint staff and at the Secretary and
Deputy Secretary level to determine what the overall needs of
the Department are and how to best meet those.
We do try to balance that across, and Admiral Pandolfe may
want to talk a little bit about allocation of joint ISR in
response to your question.
Mr. Scott. Thank you.
Admiral Pandolfe. Well, once it is acquired and it is in
the inventory, we have a global management process by which the
competing requirements of the different combatant commanders
are adjudicated and prioritized to try to ensure that the most
critical needs are met for all of them, and that if there
happens to be a particular focus at the moment that is driving
a greater amount of need for that theater or for that time,
that the emergent requirement is fulfilled as well.
So it is both. It attempts to be both equitable and
somewhat predictable to allow for program management and
budgeting. But also flexible enough to respond to emergent
requirements.
Mr. Scott. I would like to again reiterate, you know, the
J-STARS have been flying consistently for decades now. The
battlefield management platform, I think, is extremely
important to all branches. It is pretty much, you know, the
guys on the ground, the Army guys, rely on it a lot. And I just
want to make sure that when we get into reductions in spending
that we are looking at the overall operations and the mission
for the country as a whole and not getting into conflict among
the different branches, if you will.
Secretary Kendall. I can assure you that we are looking at
it at the joint level, at the departmental level, and
considering the whole, total requirements that we have.
Mr. Scott. Well, with that said, Secretary, if you have a
chance to come to Georgia, I would love to take you on a flight
on a J-STAR. Show you.
Secretary Kendall. I have some history with J-STARS. I was
in the Pentagon when we deployed it into the first Gulf War.
Mr. Scott. Right.
Secretary Kendall. And we are lobbying very hard to see it
deployed there. Also had a ride about a year ago and really
enjoyed it very much.
Mr. Scott. Right.
Thank you very much. Mr. Chairman, I yield the remainder of
my time.
The Chairman. Thank you very much. Mr. Johnson.
Mr. Johnson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Gentlemen, thank you for your service.
There are troop--we have withdrawn troops from Iraq. We
will have all of our combat troops home from Afghanistan by the
end of this year. Meanwhile, conflict continues to either rage
or percolate throughout the Middle East. And we have had a
diminution of resources to our Defense Department. And now, we
are rebalancing to the Asian Pacific. What does this rebalance
mean to our allies in the Middle East? What are the
ramifications of the rebalance to our ability to sustain
whatever level of operations are called for in the Middle East,
and what are we looking at for our future?
Mr. Lumpkin. Thank you for that question, sir.
As you are keenly aware, the way the Department on the
military side is organized is by geographic combatant
commanders. So each one of them has not only a focus, a long-
term focus on their specific regions, and the two that you
bring out specifically are the Pacific and the Middle East. So
we have CENTCOM focused on there, who is always working to
planning pieces and identifying the force requirements, and we
have the same thing in AFRICOM, focus in Africa, and throughout
the globe.
So it is certain that there is a finite amount of military
assets to cover the entire, you know, the globe, and the
requirements out there will always supersede the demand signal,
it will supersede what we have in our inventory. But we do have
the ability to make those decisions to put the assets where
they best serve U.S. national interest.
So I do not believe that we are going to see a significant
degradation in capability in the Middle East or Africa based on
the rebalance.
Mr. Johnson. Anyone else care to respond?
Admiral Pandolfe. I would echo Mr. Lumpkin's comments that
if you refer to the Defense Strategic Guidance, it points out
two particularly critical parts of the world: one is Asia-
Pacific, and the other is the Middle East. Our staying engaged
in that part of the world is also critical.
And you know, to use your word, we are working very hard to
sustain those commitments, to make sure that our allies and
friends in that area understand that we remain dedicated to
also addressing the challenges of that part of the world.
Mr. Johnson. Thank you.
Mr. Lumpkin, beyond its overt military capabilities, how
does China utilize its economic and diplomatic instruments of
power to wield influence in that region, and are those
instruments effective?
Mr. Lumpkin. There is no doubt that China is on the
economic rise and therefore, it affects relationships, you
know, free trade, and trade arrangements within the region.
So economically, as they continue to realize the growth
that they are realizing, they have cash, and they have assets,
and they have the ability to reach out and touch people
throughout the region. So there is an effect, and again, I
think that is why, as we look--we need to look at the entire
region to make sure that our best interests are realized, and
that we work to support with our allies to make sure our end
states are achieved.
Mr. Johnson. All right. Thank you. I will yield back.
The Chairman. Thank you. Mr. Nugent.
Mr. Nugent. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I appreciate this
panel particularly. I want to thank Mr. Kendall for his
graduation from West Point. I am a proud dad of two West Point
grads, so it means an awful lot.
Secretary Kendall. Beat Navy.
Mr. Nugent. Go Army, beat Navy. It hasn't happened in 13
times, but we are pulling. Last time we won, was, my son was a
plebe at West Point. My older son.
But getting on to the questions, I have many, but one is--
it relates to CHAMP [Counter-electronics High Powered Microwave
Advanced Missile Program]. And I am sure you are all aware of
what CHAMP is. That is a non-lethal weapon. It uses a microwave
emitter to knock out electronics of an enemy without causing
damage to people or structures.
Now, I know the Air Force has successfully tested CHAMP on
a cruise missile delivery vehicle in Russia. Fitting that
weapon to cruise missiles is cheap for us to produce. We have
them in our inventory, and it will only take about 18 months to
start delivering CHAMP cruise missiles to PACOM.
Where do we stand? I know the Air Force has talked about a
different delivery vehicle which is obviously years down the
road in acquisition and cost. Where do we stand in utilizing
the current platforms that we have available to us?
Secretary Kendall. Congressman, I am going to have to take
that one for the record.
[The information referred to can be found in the Appendix
on page 71.]
Mr. Nugent. Okay.
Secretary Kendall. I don't have a good answer for you right
now, sorry. I am aware of the program but I am not that
familiar----
Mr. Nugent. I understand. There are a whole bunch of
questions that can be asked, and I understand that you can't
know all the answers, but I do appreciate you taking that for
the record.
Secondly, there is--the Air Force--and this may be off-
topic somewhat so you may have to answer this also, but the Air
Force, in its allocation this year for a replacement of the, I
believe it is the Pave Hawk, or the Pave.
Secretary Kendall. Yep, Pave Hawk.
Mr. Nugent. That is our search and rescue helicopter that
was, in 2000, it was indicated that that bird should be
replaced. And we know that we have issues in regards to keeping
those in the sky, and it is particularly troubling for me as to
the Air Force's position as to, are we going to actually do
that contract starting this year? Because it is budgeted for.
Because I want to make sure that, you know, our airmen and
soldiers and marines that are in combat, if needed, we have the
resources to rescue them. So I want to know, and that may have
to go to the record also, but could you comment on the
acquisition of those?
Secretary Kendall. In general, we had a procurement in
process for that capability, but in the budget situation we are
in, we had to revisit whether that could continue, and I am not
going to be able to get into what is in the fiscal year 2015
budget at this point. It hasn't come out yet, so----
[The information referred to can be found in the Appendix
on page 71.]
Mr. Nugent. And lastly, on the issue of the National Guard.
Obviously, the National Guard is of utmost importance to
States. It is very important to the State of Florida, obviously
the readiness. Deployments of National Guard resources are a
plus for those guardsmen, because of particularly, on the
training aspect of it, it gives them the ability to learn their
craft, trade craft, better, particularly for our aviation
assets.
Do you see that being utilized--National Guard rotations--
to PACOM to assist, obviously National Guard, but to assist in
the mission of PACOM?
Secretary Kendall. I am sorry. I think we are going to have
to take that one for the record also.
[The information referred to can be found in the Appendix
on page 71.]
Mr. Nugent. Okay. Well, I am sorry I stumped the panel. So
three for three. So once again, we will leave it at that. And
go Army, beat Navy. So thank you very much.
I yield back.
The Chairman. Thank you.
Mr. Larsen.
Mr. Larsen. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I only have a couple of questions. A lot of good questions
have been asked today. I got here late, so all my questions or
most of my questions were asked. But a few that were not.
First off, for Mr. Kendall, in your comments, your written
comments to the committee today, near the end you discussed the
budget situation a little bit and challenges they have with
regards to maintaining the investment in the technology that we
need.
I am just curious. I am not asking you to divulge what is
in the 2015 budget. But my understanding is that the direction
the Pentagon received recently was to find a certain percentage
cut in order to invest that into readiness, including cuts in
technology.
So I am curious, generally, if that is the case? Second, if
the debate within the budget, since in 2015 the administration
will have about $1 trillion and $15 billion to split among the
Defense Department and domestic agencies, if the budget deal
that we passed in December holds. That is the discretionary
budget.
If that, in fact, does hold, how much of this debate about
the budget within the Pentagon has to do with Congress and how
much of it has to do with the choices the Pentagon is going to
have to make itself given the budget limitations?
I mean, in other words, is technology going to win or is
readiness going to win?
Secretary Kendall. Interesting way to put it. I think we
will--I don't want to get ahead of the Secretary, but what we
will try to do is strike the best balance that we can. We would
do that under any circumstances, I think.
The problem that the Department has is a combination of the
degree of cuts from what we wanted to meet our strategy 2 years
ago, and the quickness with which those cuts occur. This is the
problem of a lack of a ramp that was highlighted in the
Strategic Choices Management Review.
There is also the other factor, which is the uncertainty
about where we are going, which as I mentioned in my opening
comments--I am not sure if you were here--makes it very
difficult for us to plan.
I have never in--I have been doing this for about 40 years
now, and I have never seen such a big disconnect between our
budgets and our budget requests--and the potential that we
would get back from the Congress. A $50 billion gap between
what we would request and what we would get back.
Our budget isn't just requests for money, it is also our
plan. It is what we intend to try to execute. And it is what we
think we need. So this large disconnect is creating a lot of
problems with us, from a planning perspective.
In one sense, the budget is also the opening round of a
negotiation over where we are going to end up. So it has that
feature, as well.
What we have been wrestling with, and the Bipartisan Budget
Act gave us a little bit of help, certainly in 2014, less so in
2015, is how do we work our way through this, deal with this
uncertainty, deal with the potential lack of a ramp, knowing
what we would like to have to meet our strategy and what we
might actually end up? It is a real dilemma for the Department.
The Secretary will be over here to explain to you how he
has tried to resolve that, he and the President have tried to
resolve that, in a few weeks. And I don't want to get ahead of
what they are going to come over here to talk about.
Mr. Larsen. Thanks.
And then probably for Mr. Lumpkin, could you talk about,
with regards to the rebalance, how we try to--I don't know the
term--how does the U.S. try to massage itself into existing
historic tensions that already exist in that region, even among
allies? And how that impacts our ability to implement
rebalance?
Mr. Lumpkin. It is a great question because that is
frequently what you are kind of doing, to use your word,
massage. It is how you work the relationships to optimize the
end states and to make sure that we are all working based on
collective interests.
So I would argue that it is a process and it is done
through increased dialogue and discussion. And this is why our
multilateral partnerships are so important. Because you can
bring multiple people to the table at the same time and find
those common interests and to work to overcome those issues
that you described.
Mr. Larsen. Is there any--do we ever get any resentment or
any sort of blowback sort of under the theme of ``if you only
knew,'' ``if you really understood it, America, then X?''
Mr. Lumpkin. I haven't heard of any specifically, but I
will tell you that it is a process. You know, it is just
building on--there are personal relationships that go back
decades, people who have been working these issues. And so--
some discussions are more candid than others. And when you can
achieve that where you are having very candid discussions on
the issues is where you make the greatest gains.
Mr. Larsen. Yes, there are just some issues outside of this
committee's control or even outside of the administration's
control we just have to work with.
Mr. Lumpkin. Correct. Yes, sir.
Mr. Larsen. Okay. Thank you so much. I appreciate it.
I yield back.
The Chairman. Thank you.
Mrs. Davis.
Mrs. Davis. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you all for
being here.
I wanted to start off by asking a rather parochial question
about San Diego. And if you could respond, obviously with a
pivot to the Pacific, I think that San Diego has some
expectations about the number of carriers in the future and
also about the number of additional ships and high-technology
ships in the region.
Could you respond in terms of whether or not that makes
sense for San Diego? And whether or not we are sending that
message to others as well that we are shifting some of our
operations there?
Mr. Lumpkin. Thank you for that question.
San Diego, of course, where I was born and raised, is a
critical location for the Asia-Pacific region. We have the
Navy, the Marine Corps team, RIT, working throughout the area.
And we have a long and deep history there.
I don't have--you asked a question about carriers. I don't
have that off the top of my head, but I can go ahead and take
that for the record and what it will look like today and in the
future.
But I do understand that there will be carrier swaps going
on as we are doing refueling and things of that nature within
Japan itself, but I can take that one for the record for you.
[The information referred to can be found in the Appendix
on page 69.]
Mrs. Davis. So we certainly recognize the necessity in
terms of maintenance and other issues, but I guess what I am
wondering about particularly is the message that we are sending
that we are beefing up our Pacific position and the role that
San Diego might play in that.
Thank you. I appreciate it.
I also wanted to just to turn to it a second. We have been
focusing a lot on budgetary issues, quite understandable, and
certainly the concerns that we had over sequestration.
But I wanted to also ask about the increased military
presence in the Pacific--PACOM AOR [area of responsibility],
affecting deployment lengths, troop morale, and military
families. We would anticipate more military members would be
stationed overseas or outside the continental U.S.
And how are we planning for that and anticipating the need
that that is going to have on our personnel issues?
Admiral Pandolfe. Well, as we withdraw from Afghanistan,
and we have completed the withdrawal from Iraq, we have reset a
portion of the force, which has allowed us to gain some
breathing space in the personnel tempo, which has been very,
very high, as you know, for a number of years.
So there is some good news there. Counterbalancing that,
however, is the fact that we are simply not as large as we used
to be in the services. And as mentioned earlier, several times,
the world remains a complex place, which generates significant
demand on presence, not just in the Asia-Pacific region but
elsewhere.
So the services are working very hard to try to find the
balance between having the right forces forward to deter
conflict and to respond effectively to crisis, but also
maintain a quality of life for our volunteer force that would
allow them to remain in for a career, and equally or more
important, make sure their families get to see their loved one
and they have a good quality of life.
Without getting into the next budget, that tension is going
to be something that we have to keep a very close eye on.
Mrs. Davis. Are there issues, as well--we talk about the
Pacific and we are obviously focused on the Navy, the Marines
in the Pacific. But in terms of how we balance and align in the
Pacific theater, we are also concerned about the Army and the
role that they would be playing differently in terms of that
joint force. How does--what are the questions, then, that have
to be answered in that regard, as well, that would have a real
impact on how we move forward?
Admiral Pandolfe. So, so, you are absolutely right. The
theater is heavily maritime and aerospace. My Air Force friends
would tell me. And so----
Mrs. Davis. Yes, of course.
Admiral Pandolfe [continuing]. Both the Navy and the Air
Force are moving 60 percent of their force structure into the
Pacific area by 2020, into that timeframe.
But the Army and the Marine Corps are also changing. The
Marine Corps, as you know, is redistributing its footprint and
addressing its emergent missions in a more efficient way, it
feels, both in terms of operations but also in terms of host
nation sensitivities, in the case of Okinawa.
For the Army, as I understand it, they have elevated the
Pacific Army Commander to a four-star position. He is focusing
on interacting with his counterparts in a heavily militarized
part of the world. He has proposed some innovative ideas about
how to train with his counterpart forces and train his forces
to be complementary and effective, given the kinds of scenarios
which we can foresee in that part of the world.
The Chairman. The lady's time has expired.
Mr. McIntyre.
Mr. McIntyre. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And thank you, gentlemen.
Mr. Lumpkin, I noticed in your testimony on page 4 at the
top, you talk about our decade-long relationship with fighting
side-by-side with Australia in Iraq and Afghanistan, and
mention the Marine deployment to Darwin, and also the agreement
for U.S. military aircraft to use Royal Australian Air Force
facilities in Northern Australia. Is there any agreement with
regard to--Admiral, you can answer this as well--with regard to
the Navy and ships using the Australian ports for exercises
that are occurring?
Mr. Lumpkin. I will have to defer to you, Admiral.
Admiral Pandolfe. We have been making port calls to
Australia for many, many years. And they are a wonderful ally.
My understanding is that the negotiations as to the longer-term
relationship with Australia are still taking place.
So the focus of the effort has been on the rotational
Marine presence. And I am really not in the position to comment
beyond that.
Mr. McIntyre. Okay. Is that something you could get back to
me separately?
Admiral Pandolfe. Absolutely.
Mr. McIntyre. Could you do that in the next 5 business
days?
Admiral Pandolfe. Yes, sir.
[The information referred to can be found in the Appendix
on page 69.]
Mr. McIntyre. Okay. That would be great. Thank you. And
then to all of you, I wanted to just develop this a tad more.
We know that among the strategic initiatives that DOD is
developing, is the new Air-Sea Battle Concept that is intended
to increase joint operational effectiveness of U.S. Naval and
Air Force units, particularly in operations for countering
anti-access strategies.
What I am wondering is how are we resourcing this concept?
And what next? What new next-generation capabilities will be
required for these resources to be met?
Admiral Pandolfe. I will start with the conceptual side,
and I will hand off to Mr. Kendall for the specifics of the
resourcing.
Air-Sea Battle is an operational concept. And the thrust of
it is to find efficiencies, both business efficiencies and
operational efficiencies between the services--specifically,
the Navy and the Air Force, but other services as well--to
ensure that we can maintain access around the world, wherever
it might be threatened.
So Air-Sea Battle is something we are working on. It is a
service-level initiative. And again, it is about planning and
investing wisely to generate capabilities that are
complementary, and optimized for the kinds of challenges we see
coming at us in the decades ahead.
Mr. McIntyre. And what are we doing to resource it for the
new next-generation capabilities?
Secretary Kendall. The resources, it is more about how we
use equipment than it is about what we buy. But there are some
resource implications.
Increasingly, we fight as a network force. And to a degree,
would make that network force joint, we could be much more
capable. So systems like the F-35 will be coming into the
inventory with the ability to fight as a team with other
assets, including cost-service assets, much more capably than
we can do today; also, some things in the command, control,
communications world that we can do, dealing with current
inventory.
The Navy has a concept called NIFC-CA [Navy Integrated Fire
Control-Counter Air], which is basically integrated fire
control for their forces, which we can expand. We are looking
at integrated air and missile defense capabilities as well.
So there are a number of things we can do that essentially
enable the kind of cooperative operations that are envisioned
by the Air-Sea Battle Concept.
Mr. McIntyre. There were some comments in your remarks
about space capabilities and reconnaissance in working, for
instance, with the Australians on space. Does that mainly deal
with defensive measures, or is that more research and
exploration measures, with regard to space?
Secretary Kendall. We do work with the Australians in a
number of areas. Space is one of them. I can't get--I am not
sure I can get into much more detail than that without getting
into classified--trying to be careful here.
But they are one of our closest partners. And that is one
of the areas where we are cooperating.
Mr. McIntyre. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Forbes [presiding]. Ms. Speier is recognized for 5
minutes.
Ms. Speier. Mr. Chairman, thank you. And thank you,
gentlemen, for your testimony. I was able to hear your
testimony, but had to leave to participate in another committee
hearing. So I apologize if these questions have been already
asked.
But let me start by asking the question. There appears to
be confusion by our Japanese allies about how much we are
willing to commit to the Asia-Pacific corridor. And all intents
and purposes, it has been robust, even though there has been
sequestration in other areas.
So I guess my question to each of you is, how do we go
about clarifying that to them so they have more confidence in
our commitment there?
Mr. Lumpkin. We have regular dialogue with our Japanese
counterparts on the rebalance and what we are doing
particularly with regard to Japan; hence, the Futenma
replacement facility movement, moving U.S. Marine Corps assets
out of Okinawa.
So I feel actually quite comfortable that they are
cognizant----
Ms. Speier. There is no longer confusion----
Mr. Lumpkin. Yes. I don't see the confusion with where we
are going or what we are trying to do.
Ms. Speier. All right. Mr. Kendall, in your testimony, you
highlighted the P-8A [Poseidon] surveillance aircraft. And the
Director of Operational Testing and Evaluation [OT&E] found the
aircraft as not effective for the mission of hunting submarines
or performing reconnaissance over large areas due to a number
of, quote--``major deficiencies.''
So tell me why the Department decided to go into full-rate
production anyway?
Secretary Kendall. The P-8 is being fielded in incremental
capabilities. There is a pre-plan--this is all part of the way
the program is laid out. It was laid out to fill a certain
level of capabilities initially and then to add more
capabilities in the next increment.
That increment is ongoing. It is in development. So the
capabilities that the OT&E report talked about not being there
are underway, they are coming. They just haven't gotten to that
phase of development in the program yet.
The things that we did put in are working as expected. They
are doing what we wanted them to do. That was our highest
priority. We are going to move on to a wider area of
surveillance capabilities within a few years.
So the aircraft actually is, I think, a relatively
successful program, despite the tone of that report.
Ms. Speier. So you just dispute the report outright?
Secretary Kendall. The report is factually correct, but it
doesn't acknowledge the fact that this was the plan. The plan
was to develop a certain set, and fill a certain set of initial
capabilities for local anti-submarine warfare [ASW]
capabilities, and then add capabilities to that in increments.
It is an acquisition strategy that has been used in a
number of programs to--instead of trying to go for everything
at once, you get the first capability first, and then you
incrementally add more to that. That is exactly what we are
doing. That was exactly what we had planned. And it is being
executed successfully. We just are not there yet.
So he is right, in that we do not have all the capabilities
we want to have. But we are going to get them.
Ms. Speier. Okay. So if there are major deficiencies right
now in this one mission component----
Secretary Kendall. But the other things that it was----
Ms. Speier. The others are working admirably.
Secretary Kendall. It is local area, ASW, is the initial
capability, essentially. And we get wider-area capabilities as
we get additional centers, and additional processing, so on, on
the aircraft. But that is underway. That is in process.
Ms. Speier. But have we continued the production of this
particular component, even though it has major deficiencies, is
my question?
Secretary Kendall. When you say ``deficiencies,'' what that
means is it can't do certain things. It doesn't mean it is a
bad design. It doesn't mean that there are problems with the
airplane. It is a very good product.
It just hasn't put on to it yet the things that it needs to
have on it to do the other jobs it is going to do. So as we put
them on, it will not have those deficiencies. But they are not
there yet, but they are going to be put on.
Ms. Speier. Okay. The report also speaks to the fact that
the cybersecurity is quite poor. And maybe this has already
been discussed during the hearing. But the report says, ``Red
Teams were consistently able to penetrate and exploit networks
during testing, which showed that local network defenses are
insufficient to protect against a determined or well-resourced
cyber adversary. An execution of wartime missions should be
considered at moderate to high risk until it can be
demonstrated to be resilient.''
I just left a committee hearing where our total focus is on
whether there are cyber issues relative to the Affordable Care
Act. And here, we already have a report that says this is a big
problem.
And I guess my question to you is, what are we doing about
it?
Secretary Kendall. We are trying to strengthen our cyber
defense capabilities across the board. Anything that hooks up
to the Internet has some vulnerabilities built into it. And we
put protections in place, but it is a constant struggle to stay
ahead of potential adversaries, or people who are actually not
potential adversaries, they are current adversaries. They are
trying to get into our systems.
So we are continuously trying to improve the level of cyber
defense that we have. But many of our systems do need to tie
into commercial applications for supply reasons and so on.
The other thing that happens often in the red-teaming that
OT&E does is that they are able to talk their way into the
system somehow, gain the confidence of somebody and get into
it. And that is one of the things that they often point out.
It is more of a training issue than it is anything else. It
is what we call ``hygiene,'' where people who operate the
system have to understand their jobs, be much more careful
about who they give access to. That is the other thing we
actually have to work on more.
Ms. Speier. Mr. Chair, my time is expired. But I would like
to have a more specific answer in terms of what tasks are being
undertaken to prevent the cyber break-in.
Mr. Forbes. Thank you. So they can submit that for the
record or in a private briefing, Ms. Speier.
[The information referred to can be found in the Appendix
on page 70.]
Ms. Speier. Thank you.
Mr. Forbes. Gentlelady's time is expired. Gentleman from
Virginia, Mr. Wittman, is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Wittman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would like to thank
our witnesses for joining us today.
Secretary Kendall, as you know, I am a proponent for a
robust naval fleet. One of the things that concerns me these
days is making sure we have significant industrial base to be
able to do that, and make sure we have a significant capacity
and capability in our fleet for the future.
In that context, in these financially strained times, in
making sure, too, that we are keeping in mind timeliness, how
can we not continue the LPD-17 [Landing Platform Dock] class?
And I say that because we have now the LXR class to replace
the LSD [Landing Ship Docks]. The LSD is an aging class. Those
ships are going to be retired.
We have before us an opportunity to be able to make an
efficient decision to make sure we meet the needs within our L-
class ships, making sure that we meet the requirements that are
out there, both in the rebalance to the Asia-Pacific, but also
where other needs are.
And if we are really going to have a wise strategy to
optimize our investments and make sure that our strategy going
forward provides us the ships that we need, it seems like, to
me, would be foolish to start from the keel up to start another
class of ships that takes years to get to actually being at
sea, and we are not going to take advantage of the economies
that we have already gained by developing the LPD class to put
a replacement in place for the LXR, or the replacement for the
LSD class of ships.
Can you give us your perspective on where we need to go to
optimize our strategy as far as shipbuilding, especially in
light of constrained budgets and the timeframes that we are
talking about, in trying to create a replacement class for LSD?
Secretary Kendall. Well, first of all, the amphibious
shipping is important to us. And in the context of the
rebalance to the Asia-Pacific, obviously naval forces are
important to us. That said, we have to live within our budget
constraints.
I am not going to be able to comment on that specific plans
at this point just because the budget hasn't come out yet. We
are not prepared to do that. I can say that in the case of some
of our amphibious shipping that the Navy is re-looking at some
of their requirements to try to determine the best way ahead
and some of that work is still ongoing.
Do you want to comment on that, Admiral?
Admiral Pandolfe. As you know, sir, the LPD-17 is a superb
ship. It had a little bit of a rough start. We have worked
through those problems and it is an excellent ship and it fits
within the family of ships. So, the Navy, and I am a joint
staff officer at the moment, but I am sure they are looking at
a number of options for the LSD replacement. But I cannot
comment on what the preferred option could be. I don't have
insights into that and at this point in the budget cycle, it
wouldn't be proper.
Mr. Wittman. Well, let me ask you this--just your
professional comment, then, from both you and Secretary
Kendall. Based upon the cost of going through the development
and design and then ultimately the build of a new class of
ships, and knowing what the requirements are for the LXR,
knowing what we have, and knowing the timeframe it takes to put
a new ship class to sea.
And as you spoke about, the challenges in putting a new
ship class through the paces to actually get it to work out the
bugs, do you believe that using a whole form like the LPD in
looking at the LXR class is a viable way to go about making
sure that we look at cost and timeframes to get the new ship
class to sea?
Secretary Kendall. I think we are looking at--the Navy is
looking at a range of options and it is--their re-look at all
of this is driven by affordability constraints. So, we will be
looking for the most cost-effective option when we make a
decision. And if that is one of the ones that should be on that
list to be considered, then I hope we will do so.
Mr. Wittman. Very good.
Admiral, let me ask, I was just in the PACOM AOR, had
meetings there with our allies. And we have made a number of
trips there. And the big thing that we are hearing back from
allies there is, you know, we hear the words of rebalance, but
we want to see what the commitment is as far as resources. We
want to make sure that you have your forces here that are not
just here, but are properly sized, properly trained, and
properly equipped for the missions there in that particular
AOR.
And knowing, too, that the requests from the COCOM
specifically, the PACOM combatant commanders in their war plan
requirements and their OPLAN [operational plan] requirements,
will they be able to execute plans based on the current efforts
within the PACOM AOR? And if the existing capabilities aren't
there, will they be there? And do we have the resources
necessary to place the necessary capabilities and capacities
there in the PACOM AOR?
Mr. Forbes. We are going to have to ask you--unless you can
give us a yes or no on that one, if you can submit that for the
record, because the gentleman's time is expired.
[The information referred to can be found in the Appendix
on page 70.]
Mr. Forbes. Mr. Kilmer is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Kilmer. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And I apologize in advance if any of these questions were
previously asked and answered.
I have just got three questions. One, I am hoping you can
speak, Mr. Kendall, to some of the implications of the pivot on
maintenance of naval vessels. Should the committee be aware of
any future stresses that may arise?
Secretary Kendall. I am not aware of any. There is general
stress in the Department on readiness, including maintenance at
this point, because of sequestration or the potential for
sequestration going forward. I am not aware of any specific
issues that are focused on rebalance to the Asia-Pacific.
Obviously, if we increase the size of the fleet there, we will
have to increase the amount of maintenance we do in that area
at the same time, but that goes with the force structure
deployments.
Mr. Kilmer. Thank you.
And any changes necessary related to overseas work and the
deployment of civilians overseas? I know just in talking with
the Federal workforce in my neck of the woods, sometimes some
of the specialized work in Japan, for example, around nuclear
engineering, it is hard to get folks to uproot their families
and things of that nature.
Any changes we ought to be thinking about in that regard to
deal with that challenge?
Secretary Kendall. I can't give you any specific data on
this, but in general, we are trying to find ways to save cost.
And those do tend to be expensive. So if there are ways we can
cut costs there and still get the job done, we would be very
open to that. On the other hand, if there is a legitimate
requirement and we need to have the people there, then we are
going to have to do it.
Mr. Kilmer. And then my final question is more, I guess, of
local interest. Several minutes ago, I learned of DLA's
[Defense Logistics Agency] interest in either reducing or
closing the Defense Fuel Support Point-Manchester. This raises
several concerns with regard to numerous national security
missions that are carried out by the Army, Navy, Air Force, and
Coast Guard who are customers of the facility.
I am concerned that a move of that nature would negatively
impact the rebalance and unfortunately DLA I think hasn't
sufficiently studied the effects of this intended action. To
ensure that the subject is studied accurately, NAVSUP [Naval
Supply Systems Command] has commissioned a business case
analysis [BCA] of their own which is due out next month.
Could you please assure me that all of the findings from
NAVSUP's BCA will be specifically addressed in DLA's BCA before
it is approved?
Secretary Kendall. Congressman, I am not familiar with that
specific issue, but I will look into it and I will ensure that
any appropriate input is taken into account.
Mr. Kilmer. Thank you. I would be grateful if you could
follow up with us.
Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Forbes. Thank you.
The gentleman from Arizona is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Franks. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And thank all of you for being here.
Admiral Pandolfe, my first question to you, sir. There is
really no doubt about China's increasing ballistic missile
threat. I am especially concerned about their hypersonic
technology. And I am wondering how do you think that our
missile defense capability is postured to respond? And what
should we be doing more and how should we be trying to involve
our allies in what they can do more to help us deal with that
growing threat?
Admiral Pandolfe. Let me, Congressman, address the issue
broadly first, and then, quite frankly, come back to you with a
classified answer for the specific question you ask.
But ballistic missile defense, as you know, is a key area
that we feel is vital to assuring access and protecting our
allies in the immediate and far future. So we have taken a
number of initiatives in the theater to upgrade sensors and
shooters and to work with allies, with their capabilities--to
further their capabilities in this vital area.
So, it is a recognized area of importance and it is an area
that we are focusing on.
Regarding the specific technology you refer to, I would
like to come back to you in a classified setting and give you a
more detailed answer to that specific question.
[The information referred to can be found in the Appendix
on page 69.]
Mr. Franks. Well, thank you, and I appreciate that and I
look forward to that.
Secretary Kendall. Congressman Franks, if I could?
Mr. Franks. Please, sir.
Secretary Kendall. On hypersonics. This is a good example
of an area of technology which is going to move forward whether
we invest in it or not. We do have some investments in
hypersonics. It comes in two forms--a ballistic missile boost
glide vehicle, essentially, and cruise missiles that are
powered flight within the atmosphere.
The high speed of these systems makes them much more
difficult for air defenses to engage. China is doing work in
this area. Admiral Locklear made a comment about it recently in
something he said. When I spoke earlier about, you know,
feeling reasonably comfortable about where we are today, but
not necessarily so comfortable 5 or 10 years from now, this is
one of the technologies that would be on that list of things
that in 5 or 10 years we might have a much bigger problem with.
Mr. Franks. Well, obviously, the rationale for the question
was that I completely embrace what you just said. I believe
that to be absolutely true. And, you know, I served here on the
Strategic Forces Committee for 11 years, and so let me just
suggest to you that I--my purpose here is to try to elevate
that concern because I think it is a significant one that
especially given time will manifest.
So let me, if I could, just continue with you, Mr. Kendall.
Contrary to what many in the administration, quite frankly,
have said, Al Qaeda and its affiliates are really not on the
run. There is a growing reach of Al Qaeda that really has a lot
of us concerned and they are finding ways, of course, to try to
terrorize the civilized world.
How does this Asia-Pacific rebalance affect our readiness
posture and our resources in the Middle East and Africa that
are meant to really counter this ongoing effort? If we are
moving resources away from that effort, help me understand how
we are keeping our eye on the ball here.
Secretary Kendall. I am probably the wrong person to take
that question. I think I will hand it over to Mr. Lumpkin. The
short answer is that we are very aware of the threat of Al
Qaeda and extremist organizations and we are trying to balance
what we do to deal with that threat as well as the other
priorities of the Department at the same time.
But I will let Mr. Lumpkin take the question.
Mr. Lumpkin. Thank you.
To build on what Under Secretary Kendall was saying is that
the rebalance to the Pacific is not truly at the expense of
other ongoing operations; for example, at the expense of
continuing to combat and to defeat Al Qaeda. So we remain
committed to that mission, whether it is in the Middle East or
it is in Africa, but we remain committed to that mission.
Mr. Franks. A rebalance takes with it necessarily some sort
of movement of resources in a finite source basis. So you think
that--you are suggesting to me that our fight against Al Qaeda
is not going to be diminished by this rebalance. Is that what
you are saying?
Mr. Lumpkin. I see us remain committed and we will have the
assets necessary to continue that fight.
Mr. Franks. Okay. Slightly different answer, but close
enough.
Secretary Kendall. Congressman Franks, the resources we are
applying against extremist groups tend to be more of the
intelligence and special operations part of the force
structure. Whereas, rebalance to the Asia-Pacific tends to be
more about our air and naval forces. So it is not necessarily
the same parts of the Defense Department that are engaged.
Mr. Franks. Well, thank you, gentlemen. I hope you keep
doing good things. A lot of folks are counting on it. Thank
you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Forbes. I thank the gentleman for his questions.
Ms. Duckworth is recognized for 5 minutes.
Ms. Duckworth. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And thank you, gentlemen, for being here. And a special
personal welcome to Mr. Lumpkin. Good to see you again. We used
to work at Veterans Affairs together. I understand your very
personal commitment to our military men and women and our
veterans as well.
My first question is going to be to Secretary Kendall. You
know, at a time of the drawdown and the effects of the
sequester, I really believe that the Foreign Military Sales
[FMS] program has great potential as both a source of income
and to cultivate better relations with our allies, especially
in the Asia-Pacific region.
I visited Thailand last year and met with several military
leaders. And some of the things I found is that they were not
aware, for example, about the repatriation of our MRAPs [Mine
Resistant, Ambush Protected vehicles] from Afghanistan; that
there is potential that if they had wanted to purchase some of
those and move them to Thailand on their own to use in the
southern part of the country where they are experiencing a lot
of land mine attacks, that would have been useful.
So can you tell me a little bit about what we are doing to
increase our FMS program for equipment from the drawdown in
Afghanistan and to fit the needs of our allies in Asia-Pacific
region?
Secretary Kendall. We are making equipment available as
part of the drawdown. But in the specific case of MRAPs, we
have a large, excess number of MRAPs. We bought--we are talking
about 1,000 of them for the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan. Most
of that excess is actually not in Afghanistan. A lot of it is
in Kuwait. So it is much more accessible than the specific
vehicles that are in Afghanistan are, although there is a small
excess there as well we are having to deal with.
So we are making these available to people. It is
disappointing that a country that was a friend and is
interested in them was not aware of that.
FMS in general, Foreign Military Sales in general, we are
encouraging that for a variety of reasons. It is very good
policy to do that. It brings us closer to the people that we
are working with in a number of areas, increases the strength
of relationship.
It is also obviously good for our industrial base. It makes
it easier for us to inter-operate with other people's forces if
they are equipped with similar equipment. That simplifies
things enormously for us from an operational perspective.
So we are very encouraging of FMS, particularly in a time
when budgets are coming down.
One of the initiatives that I have is to try to put
exportability features, the things that allow a product to be
exported, to get a license for export, more easily into the
design up front. So some of our newer systems that are now in
development will be coming online in the next few years we hope
we will be more ready for FMS at the time that they are
initially going into production for the U.S.
Our biggest program by far is the F-35 fighter, right now.
And that is a good example of, you know, a large, you know,
many, initially eight partners originally, at least two FMS
sales already, and then more coming. So, we are stressing FMS
for the variety of reasons that I mentioned to you.
Ms. Duckworth. I was pleased to see the first couple of
Black Hawks show up in Thailand, as well, under that program.
Admiral, I wanted to chat with you a little bit about the
State Partnership Program. This committee, in the past year,
has heard from both EUCOM [European Command] commander and
AFRICOM commander about how valuable the program is to them and
that it is certainly one of the best tools in their toolbox
when it comes to maintaining relationships with nations under--
that they deal with under their command.
As far as the Pacific region is concerned, I know we have
some partnerships, certainly fewer than in say, Europe or
Africa. I know that, you know, Hawaii has had a long-time
partnership with both Indonesia and Thailand, but I notice
that, you know, Singapore is still not part of that program,
and a nation like Malaysia, which has certainly done its share
in terms of peace--providing peace-keeping forces to unite
under the United Nations flag, we are still not engaging with
them under the State Partnership Program. Could you talk a
little bit about what your vision is for that, going into the
future?
Admiral Pandolfe. I don't know a lot about the program.
What I have heard from the COCOMs is very positive. And they,
as you say, see it as a valuable outreach effort and very
helpful to them as they, as one more tool in the toolkit for
helping strengthen friendships and alliances in the area.
Ma'am, with your permission, I will go back to PACOM and
get from them their vision as to what the future of this
program is in their area of responsibility, and provide you
with a clearer picture as to the way ahead.
[The information referred to can be found in the Appendix
on page 70.]
Ms. Duckworth. Thank you. I think it will be very
insightful, especially since the, you know, the unique
capabilities of those National Guard troops. You know, the
average guardsmen out of Hawaii that are second generation
Filipinos, you know, can meld very easily into the cultures of
the Philippines similarly with other nations in the Asia-
Pacific region.
And I think, as we look to increase trade, increase our
participation in the Asia-Pacific region, they will be a
critical resource.
I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Forbes. Thank the lady for her questions.
And gentlemen, once again, we thank you for all your
service you do for our country. Thank you so much for your
preparation and being willing to share your expertise with this
committee, and with that, there are no additional questions, we
are adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 12:02 p.m., the committee was adjourned.]

=======================================================================

A P P E N D I X

January 28, 2014

=======================================================================

PREPARED STATEMENTS SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD

January 28, 2014

=======================================================================

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

=======================================================================

WITNESS RESPONSES TO QUESTIONS ASKED DURING

THE HEARING

January 28, 2014

=======================================================================

RESPONSE TO QUESTION SUBMITTED BY MR. THORNBERRY

Admiral Pandolfe. There are approximately 40,000 more military
personnel in the Asia-Pacific region today than three years ago.   [See
page 13.]
______

RESPONSE TO QUESTION SUBMITTED BY MR. MCINTYRE
Admiral Pandolfe. Australia is one of America's closest and most
steadfast Allies in the Asia-Pacific. We have operated routinely with
their superb Naval Forces in the region and across the globe for many
years. This interaction provides opportunities for port visits, both in
conjunction with exercises and during routine regional operations. A
key aspect of our rebalance will be increased opportunities to work
with the Royal Australian Navy, to include additional port visits.
You asked about agreements that govern using Australian ports in
conjunction with these interactions. They are conducted through various
agreements and arrangements, including: the Security Treaty between
Australia, New Zealand and the United States of America (ANZUS Treaty);
the Status of Force Agreement between the United States and Australia;
the Exchange of Notes constituting an Agreement between the Government
of Australia and the Government of the United States of America
concerning Mutual Defense Commitments (Chapeau Agreement); the
Acquisition and Cross Servicing Agreement (ACSA); and the Agreement
Concerning Cooperation in Defense Logistic Support. Individual military
activities are also typically covered by tailored arrangements aimed
specifically at such activities, including exercises, ship visits and
aircraft visits.   [See page 31.]
______

RESPONSE TO QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MRS. DAVIS
Mr. Lumpkin. The Navy's Strategic Laydown and Dispersal (SLD) Plan
is an annual process reviewed by the Chief of Naval Operations (CNO)
and the Secretary of the Navy (SecNav) each year. The SLD13 plan,
completed in March 2013 and based on the President's Fiscal Year (FY)
2014 budget (PB14), provided for up to three CVNs homeported in San
Diego by FY 2018. There would be minor adjustments from year to year
due to maintenance requirements that must be completed in Bremerton,
Washington, or Newport News, Virginia. The plan also included
stationing a Fifth Amphibious Ready Group of three ships in San Diego
by FY 2018, including a big deck ship.
The 2014 SLD plan (SLD14) would be based on the President's FY 2015
budget (PB15) and should be completed in March 2014. PB15 may include
impacts on the CVN Fleet that would require changes to the SLD13 plan.
[See page 30.]
______

RESPONSE TO QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. FRANKS
Admiral Pandolfe. While the hypersonic threat is nascent, DOD is
evaluating defensive capabilities and working to identify potential
solutions. The Missile Defense Agency is conducting a technical review
of the threat implications of hypersonic technology.
DOD also is committed to improving the effectiveness of its
existing detection and engagement systems in order to outpace the
increasing near-term ballistic missile threat. Operationally, the
United States' missile defense assets, including forward-deployed
systems in Japan and Korea and the Ground-Based Midcourse Defense
System (GMD) at home, are capable of providing defensive coverage of
the United States against a limited long range ballistic missile
attack. The FY14 President's Budget supports our commitment to increase
our operational effectiveness. It includes $9.5B in funding to: improve
sensor discrimination capability, invest in advanced radars, upgrade
land- and sea-based interceptor missiles, and conduct additional
operational testing of the GMD. We will continue to advocate those
priorities in the FY15 budget request.
America's allies in the Asia-Pacific region also are engaged in
regional missile defense. Japan and the Republic of Korea have invested
in missile defense capabilities that are largely interoperable with
U.S. systems. DOD will continue to encourage these allies and others
around the world to invest in missile defense technologies and to
participate in multi-national exercises that enhance interoperability.
[See page 38.]
______

RESPONSE TO QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. WITTMAN
Admiral Pandolfe. [The information is classified and retained in
the committee files.]   [See page 36.]
______

RESPONSE TO QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MS. SPEIER
Secretary Kendall. The cybersecurity of our networks is one of our
top missions. Our goal is: ``mission dependability in the face of a
capable cyber adversary.''
The recently released, ``DOD Strategy for Defending Networks,
Systems, and Data'' positions the Department to execute its role in
defending the nation against cyber-attacks through transformation of
DOD cybersecurity and cyber defense operations; assuring networks and
systems are capable of operating in contested cyber environments; and
reshaping the Department's cyberculture, technology, policy, and
processes to focus on achieving warfighter missions and needs.
The strategy identifies four focus areas and their critical
elements as necessary to achieve the cyber mission now and in the
future:
1) Establish a Resilient Cyber Defense Posture: Improving personal
security practices, architecture and engineering, and delivery of new
capabilities and solutions to address shortfalls in the current DOD
Information and Communication Technology (ICT) infrastructure rapidly
2) Transform Cyber Defense Operations: Shift from reactive cyber
defense operations to operations that focus a greater portion of their
efforts on adversary activities and intent
3) Enhance Cyber Situational Awareness: Significantly improving the
sensing infrastructure, focusing on intelligence collection and
analysis, and applying advanced correlation and analytic techniques to
the resultant ``Big Data''
4) Assure Survivability against Highly-Sophisticated Cyber Attacks:
Resiliency and regenerative methods, including strong, survivable
approaches and architectures, will be employed to provide increased
confidence that mission systems are neither compromised nor degraded to
the point of unacceptable mission impact.   [See page 34.]
______

RESPONSE TO QUESTION SUBMITTED BY MS. DUCKWORTH
Admiral Pandolfe. The vision for the SPP in the Asia-Pacific is to
reassure our allies through increased presence at nominal cost. Public
announcement of new SPP partnerships over the next several years will
demonstrate increased U.S. engagement in the Pacific. SPP will help
build our partners' capabilities and capacity to respond to natural and
man-made disasters and help strengthen collaboration on regional
security interests.
There are seven (7) SPP partnerships in PACOM dating back to 2000:
Alaska/Mongolia; Guam, Hawaii/Philippines; Hawaii/Indonesia; Idaho/
Cambodia; Oregon/Bangladesh; Oregon/Vietnam; and Washington/Thailand.
PACOM is in the final stages of acquiring its eighth state partnership;
Nevada and Tonga will solidify their partnership in March. PACOM also
intends to expand its SPP programs in coming years to other countries
and is working with the Joint Staff and National Guard Bureau to
finalize plans.
SPP has shown significant return on investment. For example,
Mongolia agreed to become an Operation IRAQI FREEDOM coalition member
contingent upon co-deploying with their SPP partner, Alaska. Since
2004, 3,500 Mongolians have deployed with 28 Alaskan Guardsmen during
14 rotations supporting Operation ENDURING FREEDOM. Mongolia currently
deploys approximately 1,000 peacekeeping personnel to six UN
peacekeeping missions, in part because of Alaska's close partnership in
developing Mongolia's deployment capabilities.
Across the Asia-Pacific Region, this program plays a valuable role
in achieving the goals and objectives of the PACOM Theater Security
Cooperation Plan. Disaster preparedness and response are particular
focus areas for PACOM. Existing National Guard capabilities in domestic
security and disaster response are directly applicable to building
partner capacity to help secure these objectives. Additionally, SPP
States are becoming fully vested in PACOM planning processes, attending
key planning work groups and conducting ongoing coordination of
bilateral engagements. Such efforts will ensure SPP contributions are
fully aligned and synchronized with other USG activities in the region.
[See page 40.]
______

RESPONSES TO QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. ENYART
Mr. Lumpkin. Demographic trends in China and Japan are important as
they could, singly or in combination with other long-term trends such
as economic growth or environmental quality, have an effect on the
strategic, economic, and domestic policy priorities of both China and
Japan, as well as other countries in the region. Although it is hard to
forecast with precision if, when, and how the effects of these trends
will manifest themselves, the Department of Defense considers them as
part of our comprehensive assessments of the future security
environment.   [See page 23.]
Secretary Kendall. The Chinese defense budget is not as clearly
delineated as the U.S. defense budget, and comparing expenditures
between the two is difficult. However, the Chinese Defense Ministry
maintains publically that the official defense budget is divided into
three roughly equal parts: personnel expenses, operating and official
business expenses (including training), and equipment expenses. In the
last military expenditure submission to the United Nations, China
reported that 34.0 percent of its official budget went to personnel
expenses. The Chinese Defense White Papers indicate that personnel
costs include pay and living expenses for military personnel (civilians
working for the People's Liberation Army (PLA) are considered military
personnel in the budget and force structure numbers).
China announced that its official 2012 military budget was $106.4
billion; however, we know that China's published military budget omits
several major categories of expenditure, such as procurement of foreign
weapons systems and equipment and research and development costs.
Estimates of the actual military budget range from 1.5 to 3 times
China's official defense budget. A senior member of a PLA-affiliated
think tank stated unofficially that the budget was approximately 1.7
times the announced budget. Therefore, the percentage of personnel
costs as part of the actual budget could range from 11.3-22.6 percent
of the actual military-related expenditures.
By comparison, in the U.S. Defense budget for FY 2012, excluding
Overseas Contingency Operations funding, was $530.4 billion, and of
that amount, DOD spent approximately $253.7 billion on what would be
considered military and civilian pay and benefit costs--nearly half of
the budget in comparison to the Chinese personnel costs of 11.3-22.6
percent.   [See page 23.]
______

RESPONSES TO QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. NUGENT
Secretary Kendall. There is no plan at this time to procure and
deliver the Counter-electronics High-power microwave Advanced Missile
Project (CHAMP) missiles in the Joint Capability Technology
Demonstration (JCTD) configuration to U.S. Pacific Command. The U.S.
Air Force is using the results from this successful JCTD to inform the
non-kinetic counter-electronics effort, which is currently in the pre-
material development decision phase. This effort seeks to have a
procured and operational weapon system to support the targets and
requirements of the Combatant Commanders in the mid-2020 time frame.
[See page 27.]
Secretary Kendall. The Fiscal Year 2015 President's Budget includes
$1B across the Future Year Defense Plan for Combat Rescue Helicopter, a
replacement for the HH-60G Pave Hawk. The Air Force is proceeding
toward a request for acquisition program approval to proceed into the
Engineering and Manufacturing Development phase, contract award in June
2014, and the realignment of the necessary $436M in offsets to fully
fund the program. These offsets will be appropriately reflected in the
FY16 President's Budget. Meanwhile, the legacy rescue platform has
$148M budgeted in the FY15 President's Budget for sustainment and
operational loss replacement initiatives.   [See page 27.]
Secretary Kendall. The role of the National Guard in the USPACOM
Area of Responsibility (AOR) is significant--and is diverse in nature.
In terms of the Guard's contribution to Security Cooperation, their
engagements cover an array of mission sets including:

Humanitarian & Civic Assistance;

Exchanges focusing on Aviation Maintenance, Air Defense,
Engineering, and Medicine;

Activities involving Port Security as well as Cyber
Security; and

Non-Commission Officer Development--just to name a few.
The level of National Guard soldier, airmen, and unit participation
in a great many of our exercises is noteworthy as well. Since just
2010, more than 11,800 National Guard Soldiers from 33 different
states/territories, including Florida, have been involved in exercise
activity in over 15 different nations within the AOR. As for the
involvement of Air National Guard (ANG) aviation assets, our exercise
program provides the perfect opportunity for the ANG to train with
Active Duty counterparts as well as with a host of countries within the
region; in fiscal year 2014 alone, there are 19 such planned events,
each with multiple State ANG participation, utilizing a wide variety of
aircraft types in order to maximize total force training value.
USPACOM's focus on National Guard utilization in these exercises
and events will continue to enhance operational readiness,
interoperability, and valuable overseas deployment training for all
forces involved, active and reserve alike.   [See page 27.]
?

=======================================================================

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MEMBERS POST HEARING

January 28, 2014

=======================================================================

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MS. HANABUSA

Ms. Hanabusa. Could you define the overall strategic importance of
Hawaii to the rebalance?
Mr. Lumpkin. Hawaii occupies a unique strategic position for the
United States in the Asia-Pacific region. First, Hawaii possesses rich
historical and cultural ties to countries throughout the region.
Second, Hawaii has emerged as an influential center for scholarship of,
and partnership with, the Asia-Pacific region. Hawaii-based, U.S.
institutions--including the Asia-Pacific Center for Security Studies
and the National Ocean and Atmospheric Administration's Daniel K.
Inouye Regional Center--provide the United States opportunities to
learn with and add value to our relationships with other countries.
Third, Hawaii serves as the Headquarters of U.S. Pacific Command, the
Combatant Command most often called upon to implement military elements
of the rebalance approach. Hawaii will continue to play a strategic
role in the ongoing rebalance to the Asia-Pacific region, including
hosting rotational deployments of advanced capabilities.
Ms. Hanabusa. As you know, perhaps the premier training range
existing in the Asia-Pacific is Pohakuloa Training Area. What is being
done to expand its use? To include multilateral exercises with allies?
As you know, all service components are based on the island of Oahu
and have high transportation costs to move equipment and personnel to
address these costs. What initiatives have been undertaken to ensure
that these costs are manageable?
High-speed vessels have been used to transport this equipment
successfully, like the MV Westpac Express in Okinawa, which will give
way to the USNS Guam (HST-1) this year. There is currently another
high-speed vessel acquired by the Navy, USNS Puerto Rico (HST-2) that
could be repurposed to Hawaii. Have any studies been conducted on this?
Mr. Lumpkin. U.S. Army, Pacific, is conducting a review to develop
a plan for establishing the Pohakuloa Training Area as a premier
Regional Collective Training Center. A briefing to the Office of the
Secretary of Defense on the requirements for this project is scheduled
for May 2014, which will be followed by engagement with interagency
partners and discussions with congressional staff members.
It is my understanding, from the Department of the Navy, that
managing the cost of transportation remains a priority. Current sealift
plans do include the replacement of the M/V Westpac Express with the
USNS Guam (HST-1) in order to support U.S. Marine Corps requirements in
the region. DOD requires funding in order to convert the USNS Puerto
Rico (HST-2) from civilian to military use and will continue to review
the costs associated with the conversion.
Ms. Hanabusa. Another premier asset in Hawaii is the Pacific
Missile Range Facility. What initiatives are currently underway to
initiate total fleet inclusion at the range to expand its usage?
Mr. Lumpkin. The Pacific Missile Range Facility's (PMRF) role in
support of the U.S. Navy fleet has expanded over the last few years and
will continue to grow. PMRF fleet training growth is directly tied to
enhancing training support for our Forward Deployed Naval Forces (FDNF)
in the Western Pacific (WESTPAC). Over the past five years, PMRF
established training support capability personnel (primarily civil
servants and contractors) to support the U.S. Navy fleet and other
service training requirements. Our long range goal is to provide our
forward deployed forces training comparable to that provided to CONUS
forces.
In addition to PMRF's recent WESTPAC-driven mission growth, PMRF's
Middle Pacific mission has systematically increased. PMRF has partnered
with the U.S. Army's Pohakuloa training requirements. These
enhancements include the installation of targets, aircraft tracking
improving the training conducted during Rim of the Pacific (RIMPAC)
exercises and the U.S. Marine Corps LAVA VIPER exercise events. They
also provide added training value for transiting U.S. Pacific Fleet
(PACFLT) Carrier Strike Groups and other forces (schedules permitting)
en route to their deployed locations. PMRF increased its role in
supporting advanced pre-deployment exercises for Oahu-based Fleet and
Joint units, as recently demonstrated during EXERCISE KOA KAI. PMRF
also modified their runway in support of ``short-field'' training
support to U.S. Air Force C-17s stationed at Joint Base Pearl Harbor/
Hickam.
Currently, Commander U.S. Pacific Fleet is working with the
Commander, U.S. Marine Forces Pacific to identify desired PMRF training
support capability for the projected increased Marine Corps presence in
Hawaii and the Marianas. PMRF capabilities will be leveraged to
continue to support Marine Corps training including Unmanned Aerial
System (UAS), aviation maritime gunnery, low-level flight, V-22
operations, and amphibious warfare training.
Ms. Hanabusa. As you know, 2,700 Marines will be relocated to
Hawaii as part of the DPRI and recently a land use study was completed.
What outcomes did you learn from this study about the infrastructure in
Hawaii? Could Hawaii handle additional personnel if necessary?
Mr. Lumpkin. It is my understanding from the Department of the
Navy, that the U.S. Marine Corps Base Hawaii Optimization study, Oahu
Land Use study, and Kalaeloa evaluation reviewed possible bed-down
locations in Hawaii for the additional Marines and determined that
existing DOD property on Oahu could be utilized for the relocation.
However, final basing decisions will not be made until after the
National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA) Environmental Impact Statement
(EIS) and Record of Decision are completed. The environmental
assessment process will begin in 2019.
Ms. Hanabusa. Could you define the overall strategic importance of
Hawaii to the rebalance?
Admiral Pandolfe. Hawaii is a critical center of operations for the
Asia-Pacific Region and will become more important as we continue to
rebalance to the Pacific. Its location in the middle of the Pacific
Ocean makes it the operational, logistics, and command and control hub
for our Asia-Pacific forces.
Operationally, the state is a vital site as we redistribute the
Joint Force between Japan, Korea, Australia, Guam, and Hawaii. Hawaii
hosts the U.S. Pacific Command (USPACOM) headquarters, as well as
headquarters of the U.S. Pacific Fleet, U.S. Pacific Air Forces, U.S.
Army Pacific, and U.S. Marine Forces who deploy throughout the Asia-
Pacific. From Hawaii, USPACOM oversees approximately 330,000 U.S.
military and civilian personnel (roughly one-fifth of total U.S.
military strength), approximately 180 ships (including five aircraft
carrier strike groups) and nearly 2,000 aircraft.
Hawaii also possesses invaluable infrastructure that supports those
forces. These facilities include many important repair and maintenance
facilities, missile tracking sites, warehouses, ports and airfields,
and range facilities. These facilities support both current and
contingency operations throughout the region.
Hawaii also serves as the command and control center for major
regional engagements and exercises throughout the region. These include
TALISMAN SABER with Australia; COBRA GOLD with Thailand; BALIKATAN with
the Republic of the Philippines; KEEN SWORD/KEEN EDGE with Japan; and
RIM OF THE PACIFIC, which includes major allies such as Canada,
Australia, Japan, South Korea, and the United Kingdom.
Ms. Hanabusa. As you know, perhaps the premier training range
existing in the Asia-Pacific is Pohakuloa Training Area. What is being
done to expand its use? To include multilateral exercises with allies?
As you know, all service components are based on the island of Oahu
and have high transportation costs to move equipment and personnel to
address these costs. What initiatives have been undertaken to ensure
that these costs are manageable?
High-speed vessels have been used to transport this equipment
successfully, like the MV Westpac Express in Okinawa, which will give
way to the USNS Guam (HST-1) this year. There is currently another
high-speed vessel acquired by the Navy, USNS Puerto Rico (HST-2) that
could be repurposed to Hawaii. Have any studies been conducted on this?
Admiral Pandolfe. The Army is interested in establishing Pohakuloa
Training Area (PTA) as a Regional Collective Training Center. This
center would provide a joint/multinational training site in the mid-
Pacific and host biennial multilateral training exercises. The Army is
developing a plan to provide intermodal transportation, suitable life
support and infrastructure, and sustainable training facilities to meet
Army and Joint training requirements. After the Army completes its
plans, the DOD, Department of State, and other interagency stakeholders
will have a chance to review them.
Ms. Hanabusa. Another premier asset in Hawaii is the Pacific
Missile Range Facility. What initiatives are currently underway to
initiate total fleet inclusion at the range to expand its usage?
Admiral Pandolfe. The value and utility of the Pacific Missile
Range Facility (PMRF) has expanded steadily and will continue to grow.
Over the past five years, PMRF has established training support
capability for USN and USMC forces in Guam and Okinawa. PMRF also
partnered with the U.S. Army's Pohakuloa Training Area (PTA) to improve
range infrastructure in support of all Services' aviation strike
training requirements. These improvements include the installation of
targets and aircraft tracking systems and the deployment of portable
electronic warfare support teams to the PTA. PMRF also increased its
support of advanced pre-deployment exercises for Oahu-based Fleet and
Joint units, as recently demonstrated during exercise KOA KAI.
Additionally, PMRF has modified its runway in support of ``short-
field'' training for USAF C-17's stationed at Joint Base Pearl Harbor-
Hickam.
PACOM is also seeking expanded PMRF training support capability for
the projected increase of Marine Corps presence in Hawaii and the
Marianas. New or enhanced range capabilities could include unmanned
aerial systems, aviation maritime gunner, low-level flight, V-22
operations, and amphibious warfare training areas. Our goal is to
provide forward deployed forces training comparable to that provided to
CONUS forces.
Ms. Hanabusa. As you know, 2,700 Marines will be relocated to
Hawaii as part of the DPRI and recently a land use study was completed.
What outcomes did you learn from this study about the infrastructure in
Hawaii? Could Hawaii handle additional personnel if necessary?
Admiral Pandolfe. Our plans call for up to 2,700 Marines and nearly
1,900 family members to relocate from Okinawa to Hawaii starting in
approximately 2027. The land use study completed in December 2013
revealed sufficient land exists on DOD property in Oahu to accommodate
additional personnel. The study did not propose any final basing
decisions. Those decisions will occur after a National Environmental
Policy Act Environmental Impact Statement and Record of Decision have
been completed. The environmental review process is planned to begin in
2019.
Ms. Hanabusa. As you know, perhaps the premier training range
existing in the Asia-Pacific is Pohakuloa Training Area. What is being
done to expand its use? To include multilateral exercises with allies?
As you know, all service components are based on the island of Oahu
and have high transportation costs to move equipment and personnel to
address these costs. What initiatives have been undertaken to ensure
that these costs are manageable?
High-speed vessels have been used to transport this equipment
successfully, like the MV Westpac Express in Okinawa, which will give
way to the USNS Guam (HST-1) this year. There is currently another
high-speed vessel acquired by the Navy, USNS Puerto Rico (HST-2) that
could be repurposed to Hawaii. Have any studies been conducted on this?
Secretary Kendall. One of the Army's seven priorities in the
Pacific is ``to gain a mutually agreed Joint master plan for Pohakuloa
Training Area/Center (PTA/PTC).'' To this end, the Army is focused on
establishing PTA as a premier Regional Collective Training Center in
the mid Pacific. The Army is laying out an inclusive plan that provides
efficient intermodal transportation, which could include a high-speed
vessel, suitable life support and infrastructure, and sustainable
training facilities and lands to satisfy Army and joint community
current and evolving training requirements. PTA, Joint Pacific Alaskan
Range Complex, and Yakima Training Center (in support of Joint Base
Lewis McChord in central Washington) are to be U.S. Army Pacific's
three primary collective training Centers of Excellence. Once the full
set of requirements is identified, a resourcing strategy will be
developed that will lead to a fiscally executable master plan. In the
past, PTA has supported a series of Service bilateral exercises and
training exchanges, mainly with Army, Marine Corps, and Special
Operations forces. Most recently, elements of the Australian and
Singaporean forces and the Japanese Ground Self Defense Force have
trained at PTA. PTA is the U.S. Army's Training Center of choice for
mid Pacific training.
Ms. Hanabusa. Another premier asset in Hawaii is the Pacific
Missile Range Facility. What initiatives are currently underway to
initiate total fleet inclusion at the range to expand its usage?
Secretary Kendall. The Pacific Missile Range Facility (PMRF) is a
critical training/readiness and test and evaluation (T&E) asset. PRMF's
support to the U.S. Pacific Fleet mission has systematically increased.
PMRF has partnered with the U.S. Army's Pohakuloa Training Area (PTA)
to improve range infrastructure in support of all of the Military
Departments' aviation strike training requirements. These enhancements
include the installation of targets and aircraft tracking systems and
the deployment of portable electronic warfare support teams to PTA--
improving the training conducted during U.S. Pacific Command (USPACOM)
Rim of the Pacific exercise and the Marine Corps LAVA VIPER exercise
events. They also provide added training value for transiting Pacific
Fleet Carrier Strike Groups and other forces (schedules permitting)
enroute to their deployed locations.
PMRF fleet training growth is directly tied to enhancing training
support for our Forward Deployed Naval Forces in the Western Pacific.
Over the past 5 years, PMRF has established training support capability
for Navy and Marine Corps forces in Guam and Okinawa. To provide this
Training, PMRF ``deploys'' U.S. Government personnel (primarily civil
servants) and utilizes contractors to support Navy Fleet and other
Service training requirements. The goal is to provide to our forward
deployed forces training comparable to that provided to forces based
within the continental United States. PMRF increased its role in
supporting advanced, pre-deployment exercises for Oahu-based Fleet and
Joint units, as recently demonstrated during KOA KAI, the semiannual
exercise in the waters around Hawaii. PMRF has modified its runway in
support of ``short-field'' training for the Air Force C-17s stationed
at Joint Base Pearl Harbor/Hickam.
Currently, the Commander, U.S. Pacific Fleet is working directly
with the Commander, U.S. Marine Forces Pacific to identify desired PMRF
training support capabilities for the projected, increased Marine Corps
presence in Hawaii and the Marianas, leveraging PMRF capabilities.
Unmanned Aerial Systems, aviation maritime gunnery, low-level flight,
V-22 operations, and amphibious warfare are training areas in which
enhanced capability may be warranted.
PRMF hosts both joint and coalition weapons systems T&E events.
PMRF provides valuable T&E support to Aegis Ballistic Missile Defense,
Standard Missile, Trident II, Minuteman II, and Missile Defense Agency
programs. The Navy continues to program Major Range and Test Facility
Base operations and maintenance funding to support PMRF's Coherent
Signal Processing (COSIP) radars, telemetry, optics, and the Mobile At
Sea Sensor (MATSS) maintenance. The Navy also has programmed additional
funding to improve and modernize PMRF's COSIP radars and the telemetry
system, and the MATSS recently was refurbished to extend its service
life.
Ms. Hanabusa. As you know, 2,700 Marines will be relocated to
Hawaii as part of the DPRI and recently a land use study was completed.
What outcomes did you learn from this study about the infrastructure in
Hawaii? Could Hawaii handle additional personnel if necessary?
Secretary Kendall. The study was completed in December 2013 by the
U.S. Marine Corps. They are currently evaluating its results. The study
assessed the potential for optimizing space on Marine Corps Base Hawaii
and potential available space on other Department of Navy and
Department of Defense installations on the island of Oahu. The results
of the analysis will inform a future National Environmental Policy Act
analysis that will examine locations on Hawaii (Oahu).
______

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. CARSON
Mr. Carson. Given that sequestration has injected a level of
uncertainty into our defense budget, what specific strategic objectives
do you consider to be the highest priority in the rebalance in the
Asia-Pacific? In the event that sequestration continues and budgets
become tighter, which objectives would receive less focus?
Mr. Lumpkin. The primary lines of effort for the Department of
Defense's effort to rebalance to the Asia-Pacific region are:
transforming and modernizing alliances and partnerships; enhancing our
defense posture in the region; updating operational concepts and plans,
investing in the capabilities we need to secure our interests
throughout the region; and strengthening multilateral cooperation and
engagement. Should available funding be reduced as a result of
sequestration, the pace and scale of implementation would be adjusted,
possibly including changes to our rotational deployments or the pace at
which new capabilities are available, or by altering the mix of forces
available globally. The ongoing efforts to rebalance to the Asia-
Pacific region would, however, remain consistent. Any decisions about
specific changes would be made based on conditions at the time.
Mr. Carson. Given that sequestration has injected a level of
uncertainty into our defense budget, what specific strategic objectives
do you consider to be the highest priority in the rebalance in the
Asia-Pacific? In the event that sequestration continues and budgets
become tighter, which objectives would receive less focus?
Admiral Pandolfe. PACOM has strategic objectives derived from
national-level guidance and the Secretary of Defense's Guidance for
Employment of the Force. Among our highest priorities are to strengthen
allies, mature our military-to-military relationship with China,
develop a U.S.-India strategic partnership, remain prepared to respond
to a Korean Peninsula contingency, and counter transnational threats.
In the event of sequestration, PACOM's strategic objectives will
not change. However, budget cuts will impact the range of options
available to meet those objectives. We are concerned the cancellation
or deferment of exercises and engagements will reduce opportunities to
build partner capacity and interoperability. Sequestration also will
impact PACOM's ability to respond to operations, crises, and
contingencies due to force structure reductions that adversely affect
capabilities.
Mr. Carson. Given that sequestration has injected a level of
uncertainty into our defense budget, what specific strategic objectives
do you consider to be the highest priority in the rebalance in the
Asia-Pacific? In the event that sequestration continues and budgets
become tighter, which objectives would receive less focus?
Secretary Kendall. In striving to achieve our strategic objectives,
the Department will continue to rebalance and sustain its global
posture, while appropriately managing risk, as necessary, given the
challenges presented by a constrained budget environment and a dynamic
global threat environment.
We will continue our contributions to the U.S. rebalance in the
Asia-Pacific region, seeking to preserve peace and stability in a
region that is increasingly central to U.S. political, economic, and
security interests, particularly in the face of North Korea's long-
range missiles and Weapons of Mass Destruction programs--especially its
pursuit of nuclear weapons. As part of our broader efforts for
stability in the Asia-Pacific region, the United States will maintain a
robust footprint in Northeast Asia while enhancing our presence in
Oceania and Southeast Asia. We will also invest in key capabilities
that preserve or enhance our technological superiority over any
potential adversary.
As we draw down forces in Afghanistan, we are prepared to
transition to a limited mission focused on counterterrorism and
training, advising, and assisting Afghan security forces. These
objectives remain a high priority despite sequestration and a
constrained budget.
______

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. KILMER
Mr. Kilmer. Several months ago, I learned of the DLA's interest in
either reducing or closing the Defense Fuel Support Point Manchester.
This action raises several concerns with regard to the numerous
national security missions that are carried out by the Army, Navy, Air
Force and Coast Guard who are customers of the facility. I am concerned
that such a move would negatively impact the rebalance. Unfortunately,
DLA is insufficiently studying the effects of their intended action. As
such, many important factors may be missed. To ensure that the subject
is studied accurately, NAVSUP has commissioned a Business Case Analysis
(BCA) of their own which is due out next month. Could you please assure
me that all of the findings from NAVSUP's BCA will be specifically
addressed in DLA's BCA before its approved?
Secretary Kendall. As the Department of Defense's Executive Agent
for bulk petroleum, the Defense Logistics Agency's (DLA) mission is to
deliver effective fuel support in the most efficient manner possible.
DLA's ongoing review of Manchester and its fuel delivery network
supports this effort. DLA understands the importance of working with
all stakeholders to address their concerns to ensure exceptional
warfighter support at the lowest cost to the taxpayer. Please be
assured, all pertinent information, to include the NAVSUP BCA, will be
addressed as part of DLA's Manchester review prior to any decisions.
______

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. RUNYAN
Mr. Runyan. Secretary Kendall, as you may know, the Department of
Defense has long been supported by the GSA's Eastern and Western
Distribution Centers. One of the largest and most important missions of
these centers is to supply much needed logistical items to our
warfighters overseas. What are the projected outlays for costs to the
DOD when GSA shuts down these Distribution Centers and shifts to full
vendor support overseas?
Secretary Kendall. Reducing cost is the whole premise of our Big 6
efforts with GSA, specifically the integration of the Eastern
Distribution Center and Western Distribution Center into our
distribution system; as well as the transfer of approximately 5,300
items from the General Services Administration (GSA) to the Defense
Logistics Agency (DLA). While both the WDC and EDC have supported the
Warfighters in the past, a majority of the items from these centers
come through DLA's Central Control Points (CCPs) for further transfer
to the requisitioning customer worldwide. GSA is transitioning stock
from these depots to Direct Vendor Delivery (DVD) contracts, and the
remaining 480 items are transferring to DLA ownership, where DLA will
manage these items either via DVD or physically locating them in our
depots. The DLA solution will depend upon which is most cost efficient
and effective to support the customer.
I am assuming the comment about full vendor support overseas
implies that GSA will use DVD solutions to support overseas orders,
primarily to DOD customers. In that context, we are working closely
with GSA to ensure current and future GSA DVD contracts include the
necessary provisions to ensure all packaging and labelling conforms to
DOD and commercial standards and that shipments can go directly from
their DVD vendors to overseas customers. If they cannot, then they will
transit through our CCPs, but with proper labeling to ensure the cargo
does not become misdirected, thereby delaying deliveries to the
customer.
We do not anticipate any projected outlays in terms of cost as DLA
has the current capacity within our depots for those items coming to
DLA from GSA. Similarly, we already perform the CCP function for GSA on
many of their items, so there are no additional costs associated with
the CCP effort. As I previously mentioned, we anticipate a reduction in
cost once the contracts have the correct provisions for shipping and
labeling, as there will be a significant reduction in the level of
effort required to process inbound shipments that in the past may have
been misdirected.
______

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. NUGENT
Mr. Nugent. The Counter-electronic High-power-microwave Advanced
Missile Project (CHAMP) is developing a non-lethal weapon that uses a
microwave emitter to knock out the electronics of an enemy without
causing damage to people or structures. The Air Force successfully
tested CHAMP on a cruise missile delivery vehicle. Retrofitting this
weapon on cruise missiles is cheap for us to produce and expensive for
our adversaries to defend. It will only take 18 months before we can
start delivering CHAMP cruise missiles to PACOM.
As the Chinese continue to expand their territorial claims and
assert force over their neighbors, tensions will rise with the American
forces operating in the same contested space. In the menu of options to
calm an escalating situation and deter conflict, I would imagine a non-
lethal weapon that renders our enemy without electricity would be a
valuable tool.
Would you talk about some of the uses for the CHAMP non-lethal
weapon system in the Asia-Pacific?
Secretary Kendall. CHAMP was developed by the Air Force Research
Laboratory and demonstrated under a Joint Capabilities Technology
Demonstration program to determine the ability of an aerial platform
with a high-power microwave energy source to disrupt, degrade, or
disable critical electronic and communication equipment.
A non-kinetic weapon similar to CHAMP could reduce collateral
damage and reconstruction costs, and would be non-lethal (no
casualties). Due to its capability of attacking multiple targets with
one weapon, the cost per target could be less than the cost of kinetic
missile weapons, and thus it could be a force multiplier for
commanders.

[all]

