- [H.A.S.C. No. 113-122] AMPHIBIOUS FLEET REQUIREMENTS

[House Hearing, 113 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

[H.A.S.C. No. 113-122]

AMPHIBIOUS FLEET REQUIREMENTS

__________

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON SEAPOWER AND PROJECTION FORCES

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON ARMED SERVICES

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED THIRTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

HEARING HELD

JULY 25, 2014

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

_______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE

89-515                   WASHINGTON : 2015
___________________________________________________________________________
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing Office,
http://bookstore.gpo.gov. For more information, contact the GPO Customer
Contact Center, U.S. Government Printing Office. Phone 202-512-1800, or
866-512-1800 (toll-free). E-mail,
[email protected]
.

SUBCOMMITTEE ON SEAPOWER AND PROJECTION FORCES

J. RANDY FORBES, Virginia, Chairman

K. MICHAEL CONAWAY, Texas            MIKE McINTYRE, North Carolina
DUNCAN HUNTER, California            JOE COURTNEY, Connecticut
E. SCOTT RIGELL, Virginia            JAMES R. LANGEVIN, Rhode Island
STEVEN M. PALAZZO, Mississippi       RICK LARSEN, Washington
ROBERT J. WITTMAN, Virginia          HENRY C. ``HANK'' JOHNSON, Jr.,
MIKE COFFMAN, Colorado                   Georgia
JON RUNYAN, New Jersey               COLLEEN W. HANABUSA, Hawaii
KRISTI L. NOEM, South Dakota         DEREK KILMER, Washington
PAUL COOK, California                SCOTT H. PETERS, California
BRADLEY BYRNE, Alabama
David Sienicki, Professional Staff Member
Phil MacNaughton, Professional Staff Member
Katie Rember, Clerk
C O N T E N T S

----------

CHRONOLOGICAL LIST OF HEARINGS
2014

Page

Hearing:

Friday, July 25, 2014, Amphibious Fleet Requirements.............     1

Appendix:

Friday, July 25, 2014............................................    21
----------

FRIDAY, JULY 25, 2014
AMPHIBIOUS FLEET REQUIREMENTS
STATEMENTS PRESENTED BY MEMBERS OF CONGRESS

Forbes, Hon. J. Randy, a Representative from Virginia, Chairman,
Subcommittee on Seapower and Projection Forces.................     1
McIntyre, Hon. Mike, a Representative from North Carolina,
Ranking Member, Subcommittee on Seapower and Projection Forces.     2

WITNESSES

Aucoin, VADM Joseph P., USN, Deputy Chief of Naval Operations
Warfare Systems (N9)...........................................     7
Paxton, Gen John M., Jr., USMC, Assistant Commandant of the
Marine Corps...................................................     6
Stackley, Hon. Sean A., Assistant Secretary of the Navy for
Research, Development and Acquisition..........................     3

APPENDIX

Prepared Statements:

Forbes, Hon. J. Randy........................................    25
Stackley, Hon. Sean A., joint with Gen John M. Paxton, Jr.,
and VADM Joseph P. Aucoin..................................    27

Documents Submitted for the Record:

[There were no Documents submitted.]

Witness Responses to Questions Asked During the Hearing:

[There were no Questions submitted during the hearing.]

Questions Submitted by Members Post Hearing:

[There were no Questions submitted post hearing.]

AMPHIBIOUS FLEET REQUIREMENTS

----------

House of Representatives,
Committee on Armed Services,
Subcommittee on Seapower and Projection Forces,
Washington, DC, Friday, July 25, 2014.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 9:04 a.m., in
room 2118, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. J. Randy Forbes
(chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. J. RANDY FORBES, A REPRESENTATIVE
FROM VIRGINIA, CHAIRMAN, SUBCOMMITTEE ON SEAPOWER AND
PROJECTION FORCES

Mr. Forbes. Today the subcommittee convenes to receive
testimony on amphibious ship requirements. I want to welcome
our distinguished witnesses and appreciate your time and
efforts to this most important issue. Specifically, I want to
welcome the Honorable Sean Stackley, Assistant Secretary of the
Navy for Research, Development and Acquisition. Mr. Stackley,
thank you so much for your service to the country, and thank
you for continuing briefing this committee and testifying and
giving us the benefit of your expertise.
General John M. Paxton, Jr., Assistant Commandant of the
Marine Corps. General, thank you for your service and all the
Marines do for us.
And Admiral Joseph P. Aucoin, Deputy Chief of Naval
Operations, Office of Naval Operations Warfare Systems.
Admiral, thank you so much for all that you do.
We thank you all for being with us today on this very
important hearing. And as we continue what many of us believe
to be the dismantling of the world's greatest fighting force,
it is worth considering the critical role played by the U.S.
Marine Corps in protecting and sustaining national interests
far from our shores.
Alongside the other elements of American naval power--
dominant surface and submarine forces, and the world's most
mobile and lethal form of airpower--the Marines represent a
middle-weight force designed to project land power from the
sea.
I continue to have reservations about the direction of the
capacity and capabilities of our fleet, and specifically our
amphibious power-projection capabilities. I would note that the
Navy and Marine Corps have both agreed that the amphibious
fleet of 38 ships is necessary to support two Marine
Expeditionary Brigades, but because of fiscal constraints, this
administration is planning to acquire 33 amphibious ships.
I would further note Secretary Stackley stated earlier this
year before this subcommittee that a plan for 33 ships
introduces some risk in terms of being able to provide the
total lift for a major combat operation. The Navy and Marine
Corps have agreed that that is an acceptable risk.
I think that we need to provide the capabilities that our
combatant commanders need and look forward to better
understanding the risk that our Nation is accepting in not
providing this full complement of amphibious ships.
I also understand that the Navy and Marine Corps team wants
to build 11 LX(R) amphibious ships to replace the 12 Whidbey
Island and Harpers Ferry-class Dock Landing Ships. An analysis
of alternatives to consider various options is ongoing. I agree
with Secretary Stackley that this next class of ships needs to
be developed within an affordable budget top line, and look
forward to better understanding the various options that the
Navy is considering and the timeline for finalizing this newest
class of ships.
Finally, I want to highlight that our committee authorized
for appropriations $800 million and provided incremental
funding authority to start construction of LPD-28 [landing
platform/dock]. As I noted before, I think the amphibious fleet
is an important capability for national security, and it
appears that three of the four defense committees supported
this effort. I look forward to understanding how the Department
intends to move forward with this important project and take
advantage of the incremental funding authority that appears to
be provided by the Armed Services Committee.
I would be remiss if I did not acknowledge the challenges
that the entire shipbuilding account will have with the
development of Ohio-class replacement submarines that will be
coming online concurrent with the LX(R) class ships. We need to
work to see the development of the Ohio-class replacement
submarine funded as a national strategic asset by the
Department of Defense so that it does not crowd out important
shipbuilding capabilities like the amphibious program.
With that, I turn to my good friend and colleague and the
ranking member of the subcommittee, the gentleman from North
Carolina.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Forbes can be found in the
Appendix on page 25.]

STATEMENT OF HON. MIKE MCINTYRE, A REPRESENTATIVE FROM NORTH
CAROLINA, RANKING MEMBER, SUBCOMMITTEE ON SEAPOWER AND
PROJECTION FORCES

Mr. McIntyre. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thanks to you
gentlemen for your service to our country and for being with us
on an early Friday morning, and taking the time to come share
with us your thoughts on the topics today.
I know today we will be hearing testimony, Mr. Chairman,
from both the Navy and Marine Corps, and as we look at the
amphibious fleet, I want our gentlemen to know we want to know
how we can best support the mission, that Congress can support
what you are doing with our amphibious fleet. The Marine Corps
represents our Nation's response force that does enable us to
respond anywhere around the world on short notice, and there is
no question that the Marines have been critical to our forces
in our presence in both Iraq and Afghanistan.
We also want to make sure the Marines are not being seen as
a second land force, but rather an amphibious-based
expeditionary force true to the mission of the Marines. And in
doing so, we want to carefully examine what that force should
look like, whether the appropriate number of amphibious ships
are available, and what is the most capable platform for moving
marines ashore.
It has been established the Marine Corps requires 38
amphibious ships to conduct the two Marine Expeditionary
Brigades' forcible entry mission. The Navy and Marine Corps
have agreed they can meet this requirement with 33 ships with
acceptable risk. What I would like to know is whether or not
there are other ways to mitigate the risk of a smaller
amphibious fleet? Does the Joint High Speed Vessel or Mobile
Landing Platform help in that regard, or will the different
design options for future amphibious ships have an impact on
that number?
We know that there is support for a 12th LPD-17. It is
important for this committee to have a clear understanding of
how an additional LPD procurement may affect other shipbuilding
programs.
We also want to understand the acquisition strategy for the
LX(R) program and whether existing ship designs could meet that
requirement while also reducing the overall cost, or if a
completely new design is the best approach. It is important to
maintain competition, and I am encouraged to see that the plan
for the LX(R) program as well as the next LHA [Landing
Helicopter Assault].
Whether it is a crisis response, or a disaster, or
humanitarian relief, or forward presence, we know that our Navy
and Marine Corps amphibious capability is a vital asset for the
United States and one that we must continue to maintain. And I
know the chairman and I share in our commitment to do
everything we can to make sure you are provided with the
equipment and the resources and the ships that you need to be
able to fulfill that mission and do the great job that the
United States Navy and the United States Marine Corps do.
Thank you for being here today. We look forward to hearing
your testimony, and may God bless you and your families for
their sacrifice and your service.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Forbes. Thank you, Mike.
And, Mr. Secretary, it is my understanding you are going to
start us off. So we look forward to your remarks.

STATEMENT OF HON. SEAN A. STACKLEY, ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF THE
NAVY FOR RESEARCH, DEVELOPMENT AND ACQUISITION

Secretary Stackley. Yes, sir.
Chairman Forbes, Representative McIntyre, Representative
Palazzo, thank you for the opportunity to appear before you
today to address Navy and Marine Corps amphibious fleet
requirements. And joining me today are General Paxton, the
Assistant Commandant of the Marine Corps, and Vice Admiral
Aucoin, the Deputy Chief of Naval Operations. With the
permission of the subcommittee, I would propose to keep opening
remarks brief and submit a formal statement for the record.
Mr. Forbes. Without objection, all of the written remarks
will be made a part of record.
Secretary Stackley. Thank you, sir.
Today 99 ships, about one-third of our fleet, and over
75,000 sailors and marines are deployed around the world.
Another 63 ships are underway conducting local operations,
testing, training, and preparing to deploy. Five of our big-
deck amphibious assault ships are underway, including the
Navy's newest ship in the first of her class, the America. The
sixth big-deck is forward-deployed in Japan, and 4,600 marines
of the 22nd and 31st Marine Expeditionary Units are deployed
aboard amphibious ships operating off coasts from Africa to
Japan, conducting air operations, ship-to-shore operations,
supporting Operation Enduring Freedom, building partnerships,
deterring enemies, and responding to crises and contingencies.
They place in the hands of our Nation's leaders tools and
options to respond to today's world events and shape future
events. And to say that they are the best at what they do
doesn't do them justice, for amongst the world's fighting
forces, none other can do what they do.
It is our responsibility to Congresses and the Departments
to place in their hands the best weapons this Nation can
produce to shape, deter, defeat, and deny our enemies.
Accordingly, the seamless maneuver of marines from the sea to
conduct operations ashore, whether for training, humanitarian
assistance, or combat, remains a key priority as the Department
of the Navy shapes its future force. And to this end, from the
STOVL [short take-off and vertical landing] version of the
Joint Strike Fighter to modernized attack and utility
helicopters, to the development of the heavy-lift helicopter
CH-53K, we are recapitalizing critical Marine aviation
capabilities.
From the Joint Light Tactical Vehicle to the Amphibious
Combat Vehicle and upgrades to the legacy Amphibious Assault
Vehicle, we are modernizing the Marine Corps' tactical
vehicles. We have extended the service life of our landing
craft and are developing the next ship-to-shore connectors, and
we are fielding the next generation of Marine Corps
expeditionary command, control, and communications
capabilities, the G/ATOR [Ground/Air Task Oriented Radar]
radar, Common Aviation Command and Control System, and Global
Communication Support System.
Underpinning this expeditionary capability is our effort to
sustain and build our force of amphibious ships. Our amphibious
fleet requirements are defined in a report submitted to the
Congress by the Chief of Naval Operations and the Commandant in
2009 stating, ``The force structure to support 2.0 Marine
Expeditionary Brigade lift is 38 amphibious assault ships.''
Understanding this requirement, and in light of the fiscal
constraints with which the Navy is faced, the Department of the
Navy will sustain a minimum of 33 amphibious ships in the
assault echelon. This 33-ship force accepts risk in the arrival
of combat support and combat service support elements of the
Marine Expeditionary Brigade, but has been adjudged to be
adequate in meeting the needs of the naval service within
today's fiscal limitations.
With the recent deliveries of the Somerset and the America,
today's amphibious force stands briefly at 32 ships: 10 big-
deck amphibs [amphibious assault ships], 12 LSD 41/49 [Landing
Ship, Dock] ships, and 10 LPD-class [Amphibious Transport Dock]
ships. Numerically, with the retirement of the LPD-4 and LHA-5
in 2015, and delivery of ships currently under construction,
LPDs 26 and 27, and LHA-7, we will reach 33 amphibs in 2018.
However, a shortfall in big-deck amphibs will persist until we
deliver LHA-8, which does not start construction until 2017 and
delivers in 2024.
The LHD class and future LHA class are the backbone of the
amphibious force, providing the capacity and command and
control critical to the expeditionary group commander for ship-
to-shore air and surface operations. The new LHA-6 and future
LHA-7 add significant aviation capability to the force,
appropriate to the introduction of the Joint Strike Fighter.
Flight I to the LHA-6 class, commencing with LHA-8, will strike
a greater balance between vertical and horizontal lift
capabilities.
As you would expect, by every measure, lift, command and
control, mobility, survivability, and quality of life, the LPD-
17 class is vastly superior in capability to the LPD-4 class
she replaces, and more so the LSD-41 class that the Navy is
drawing plans to replace commencing in the 2020s.
Whether conducting missions in peacetime or combat, LPD-17
provides greater employment options to the operational
commander, and now a requirement for 11 of these ships, 1 per
amphibious ready group, provides the group commander greater
flexibility to split these ships out to operate independently.
Meanwhile, we are currently evaluating alternatives for the
future amphibious ship, LX(R), which we need to build in the
decade of the 2020s and 2030s, in order to replace the LSD-41/
49 class. In doing so, we are carefully weighing the lift
capacity the force needs, arguably greater than the lift
capacity of the LSD-41/49 class due to increased weight of
today's more-armored vehicles; the combat capability the ship
will require; and the cost with which the future Navy can
realistically bear during a period that we all understand will
bring great pressure to our shipbuilding budget.
And so when we weigh these factors, we are also mindful of
the health of our industrial base and the pressures on our ship
construction and modernization accounts. The fact is amphibious
shipbuilding is in a valley during the gap between completion
of the LPD-27 and start of construction of the LX(R). And as we
struggle today with unfunded core requirements, issues well
familiar to this subcommittee, the Navy does not have the
headroom during this period of budget downturn to place ships
above core on order to address the industrial base concerns.
That said, shipbuilding is a top priority for the Navy, and
we, the Navy and Marine Corps, hope that in working with the
Congress, which alone has the authority to provide and maintain
a Navy, that our budget requirements, our operation
requirements, and our industrial-base requirements will be
carefully weighed as you consider the impact of the Budget
Control Act caps on the future force.
Mr. Chairman, thank you for the opportunity to appear
before you today. We look forward to answering your questions.
[The joint prepared statement of Secretary Stackley,
General Paxton, and Admiral Aucoin can be found in the Appendix
on page 27.]
Mr. Forbes. Mr. Secretary, thank you so much.
General.

STATEMENT OF GEN JOHN M. PAXTON, JR., USMC, ASSISTANT
COMMANDANT OF THE MARINE CORPS

General Paxton. Thank you, sir.
Chairman Forbes, Ranking Member McIntyre, and Congressmen
Palazzo and Peters, thank you and all of the members of the
subcommittee for the opportunity to address the Department of
the Navy amphibious fleet requirements as it relates to your
United States Marine Corps in our enduring requirement to
remain our Nation's forward-deployed crisis response force.
Sir, I will keep my remarks very brief given that we have a
written statement that you have graciously accepted, and we
thank you for that, sir.
So today, as always, your Marine Corps is committed to
providing a balanced air-ground logistics team with the
requisite qualities of responsiveness, scalability, and self-
sustainment. Inherent in these traits is a synergy that is
created from being both amphibious and expeditionary as
components of a naval force.
The Navy and Marine Corps team provides a fundamental
pillar of our Nation's power and security, and has done so
since Thomas Jefferson sent marines and sailors to fight the
Barbary pirates off North Africa in 1805, over 200 years ago.
As we look forward to the future we all realize that sea-
based and forward-deployed naval forces provide day-to-day
engagement, crisis response, and assured access to our global
commons. A critical component in building, training, and
maintaining an expeditionary forward presence is the quantity,
availability, and readiness of our amphibious ships. This
necessity has been demonstrated routinely with the advent of
new security challenges as we collectively face new challenges
around the globe.
In actuality, our need far exceeds our capacity. As
testimony earlier this year indicates, our combatant commander
requirements, as well as independent amphibious warship
demands, greatly exceed the 38 ships that we have talked about
as the assault element for the two MEBs [Marine Expeditionary
Brigades], which is the stressing case for the operational
plans. This day-to-day demand will not diminish. Instead we
expect it will likely increase since amphibious ships and their
expeditionary forces provide unmatched versatility and
capability that is of much use to our combatant commanders.
Realizing this, the Marine Corps created a Special Purpose
MAGTF, [Marine] Air-Ground Task Force, and has positioned that
in key strategic areas in the European and African littorals.
These forces, however, right now are land based, and they are
not immune to the time and space realities, or what we call the
tyranny of distance. An example of this was for the U.S.
Embassy in Juba last December, and we had a special mission
there, and in order to accomplish that, we launched MV-22
aircraft from allied nations in Southern Europe. We actually
were able to execute a mission and extract some U.S. personnel
and assist the embassy, but the mission took 3,270 miles and
over 15 hours. That MAGTF subsequently redeployed elsewhere on
the African Continent.
While successful in the mission accomplishment, these
forward-deployed elements, however, are necessarily limited in
both operational reach and sustainability once they are on the
objective. As we gather here today, crisis response forces are
literally sitting on their packs elsewhere around the world to
launch within hours of a mission tasking. They are postured
this way in order to mitigate limiting factors of both time and
distance throughout those multiple geographic combatant command
areas of responsibilities.
The existence and the success of these forces, however, is
a direct indicator of the paucity of our amphibious ships. With
additional amphibious ship quantities and availability, the
Navy and Marine Corps team will be able to rapidly respond to
crises around the world, and the security will be greatly
enhanced. For this reason we ask for continued congressional
support for the Navy shipbuilding program. As Mr. Stackley
said, that includes ship-to-shore connectors and the
maintenance capability that we need to keep the modern fleet
ready. Doing so will enable us to remain naval and
expeditionary, and be able to project the United States power
around the globe, and to secure our interests and the country
whenever and wherever we need it.
I thank all of you for your faithfulness to our Nation and
request that our written testimony be accepted. And I look
forward to your questions, sir. Thank you.
[The joint prepared statement of General Paxton, Secretary
Stackley, and Admiral Aucoin can be found in the Appendix on
page 27.]
Mr. Forbes. Thank you, General.
Admiral.

STATEMENT OF VADM JOSEPH P. AUCOIN, USN, DEPUTY CHIEF OF NAVAL
OPERATIONS WARFARE SYSTEMS (N9)

Admiral Aucoin. Chairman Forbes, Congressman McIntyre,
distinguished members of the HASC [House Armed Services
Committee] Seapower committee, it is an honor to appear before
you and testify on amphibious fleet requirements. I echo what
Secretary Stackley said and also the ACMC [Assistant Commandant
of the Marine Corps], so I will keep my opening remarks short,
only to make two points first.
First, my job is relatively new, and my role as the Deputy
Chief of Naval Operations for Warfare Systems, I am responsible
to the Chief of Naval Operations for supporting and
establishing, integrating and resourcing Navy warfighting
requirements across the range of expeditionary, surface,
undersea, and air warfare.
Second point is just to say we thank you very much. We
appreciate the support Congress has shown in supporting the
amphibious force. The PB15 [President's Budget for fiscal year
2015] plan represents the most responsible effort to balance
resources with requirements, affordability, and the industrial
base considerations. It attempts to balance shortfalls in
amphibious warfare ships, large surface combatants, and attack
submarines until the force structure assessment objectives are
met.
Thank you.
[The joint prepared statement of Admiral Aucoin, Secretary
Stackley, and General Paxton can be found in the Appendix on
page 27.]
Mr. Forbes. Thank you, Admiral.
First of all, I want to say that I believe you probably
have staff represented behind you that do such a good job, and
to all of them, we want to thank you for your work in making
sure all of this continues moving in the right direction. And
thank you for the hours you put in doing that and serving your
country.
This is an incredibly bipartisan subcommittee. We have good
working relationships with each other. Mr. McIntyre, my ranking
member, and I are very, very close partners in this. And so I
want to yield to him to begin asking the questions, and I will
defer my questions until the end.
Congressman McIntyre.
Mr. McIntyre. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you for
your commitment and strong leadership of this subcommittee. I
will be brief in light of the compressed time we have on a
Friday morning.
Admiral, with LH-8 now being planned to include a well
deck, can you explain some of the steps the Navy has taken to
reduce the risks associated with a major design change like
that?
Admiral Aucoin. Well, I will speak briefly, and I am sure
Secretary----
Mr. Forbes. Admiral, is your microphone on?
Admiral Aucoin. Can you hear me?
Mr. Forbes. Yeah. Just keep that mike up kind of close.
Admiral Aucoin. We know, Congressman McIntyre, that the
Marines want the well deck put back in there, and design
efforts are underway right now between the shipyards to
incorporate that along with the large aviation requirements
associated with that flight deck. But we still have got a ways
to go on those design efforts, a couple more years, before we
finalize the design.
Secretary Stackley. Let me just add several pieces to that.
First is getting the requirements right and nailing down a
technical baseline associated with that--those requirements
that are feasible and you have got the right level of risk and
maturity. You have got that balance down. And so that is what
we are doing right now.
As you go to LHA-8 what we are actually doing is we are
going back to a well deck. So the details associated with a
well deck inside of that hull format are well understood. The
requirements that we are pinning down in further detail today
are the new capabilities that come with a Flight I to this new
ship class. So we are being very careful to ensure we don't
overreach in terms of those requirements, and to balance out
both the aviation side and then the surface side, the well deck
side, as we do that redesign. That is the requirement side.
We brought in industry into this early stage of design to
help us go from defining the requirements to constructing what
we would call a contract design, and that is the design that we
would actually put on to contract. So we have both the two
shipbuilders that would be competing for this at the table with
us working through this next phase to take a look at
feasibility, how best to complete the contract design, and also
how to go after some cost reduction initiatives in the process.
So we think we have it about right in terms of stable,
realistic requirements; leveraging a mature prior class design,
the LHD class; and then bringing industry in early before we
push out the contract design for competition.
Mr. McIntyre. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Forbes. Thank you, Mike.
The gentleman from Mississippi is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Palazzo. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Gentlemen, thank you all for being here today. I want to
thank you for your service to our Nation; also coming here,
taking time out of your busy schedules to lend us your
expertise on the amphibious force structure and to answer some
of our questions.
I also want to thank your families for their sacrifices. I
know that is sometimes overlooked and forgotten.
I think it is pretty clear to everybody in this room and to
Congress that our intent is to fund the LPD-28, or an
additional LPD-17-class ship. This committee authorized $800
million in multi-
year procurement. I think the Senate authorizing committee did
$650-, and the Senate Appropriations Committee did $800
million, so it is absolutely clear the intent is that Congress
wants the 12th ship in the LPD-17 class.
I think it is extremely important as well, and the
Commandant has expressed a huge amount of interest on these
ships, calling these ships the Swiss Army knives of the fleet.
And they are capable of doing multiple things, and, you know,
not only just projecting force, but serving as a deterrent;
also being able to providing humanitarian assistance,
evacuations, and the list goes on.
So, General Paxton, could you kind of elaborate, and, in
your view, what has the Marine Corps--what are the amphibious
assault assets today, and what do you think they are going to
need moving forward?
General Paxton. Thank you, sir. And, again, great
colleagues here beside us, so there is a good work amongst the
Navy and Marine Corps team on the way ahead.
In this particular case, we happen to be the ones who are
trying to articulate the requirements in order to do that power
projection, knowing full well--and I will come back to this at
the end--that we have some fiscal constraints and caps there,
and I will defer to Secretary Stackley to articulate what this
means in terms of the overall shipbuilding program.
In terms of the requirements, as I tried to allude to in
the comments, 38 amphibious ships is the stressing case for the
simultaneity of two operations plans, and we can talk about
that in a more classified environment, but that represents the
assault echelon of two expeditionary brigades, which is what we
need for, again, the two operation plans. What we understand,
though, is in the day-to-day environment, it is the currency
and the simultaneity of the demands from the five geographic
combatant commanders that stress our force on a day-to-day
basis. So, sir, see if I can answer both of those.
There is a hard-fast requirement for 38 ships to do the two
MEB assault echelon requirement. We agreed, at least in paper
and as recently as 2009, that we can live within fiscal
constraints for 33. Built into that, the math of that equation
is a 90 percent availability of the ships; that there is always
10 percent that are in maintenance.
We struggle under the existing number of ships today, and
the Navy, despite great work, is always challenged to get ships
into the maintenance cycle. So as we have things go on around
the world, in Yemen, in Libya, in Syria, in the hurricanes and
tornadoes and super typhoons, and Haiyan in the Pacific, we are
repeatedly asked to respond to those. We are ready to do that,
but it breaks the maintenance cycle, and that is what stresses
the force.
So when we responded last November to Super Typhoon Damayan
in the Philippines, we had marines from the 3rd Marine
Expeditionary Brigade on B-22s and en route to the Philippines
in somewhere between 5 and 6 hours. But it took us several
weeks to get two ships out of the maintenance cycle out there,
and I want to be on the record that Admiral Harris and Admiral
Thomas did great work to get them out of the yards and get them
down there, but there were two others we couldn't get there.
And we knew by doing that, though, we were going to break the
maintenance cycle for those ships, and that would further
degrade the responsiveness of the 31st MEU [Marine
Expeditionary Unit] in the Western Pacific area.
So that is yet another case, just as the Special Purpose
MAGTF and the move to Juba earlier that just shows the case
there, the position now where not only the paucity in numbers,
but the maintenance requirements in an aging fleet stresses the
use of that. And consequently, the Navy and Marine team who was
forward deployed and ready to do things is always challenged to
get there fast enough, to stay long enough, and to be able to
reset so that we can get the ships back into maintenance.
Mr. Palazzo. I have another question, but I will probably
run over my time if he tries to answer.
All right. Well, General Paxton, the recent Navy 30-year
shipbuilding plan discusses the building of the LX(R). What
capabilities do you need in this ship to best support the
Marine Corps mission?
General Paxton. Yeah, thank you, sir.
When we tried to articulate requirements, and I am sure all
of the members of the committee, given your great experience
and your fine support for us, understand, there is five
fingerprints a lift, so we are looking about the number of
individual marines you can put on a ship with their personal
equipment, and that is fingerprint number one. We are looking
at vehicle spots to get rolling stock on and off the ship. We
are looking at cube and square for those vehicles and for
cargo. And then, most importantly, looking for deck spots for
aviation, for rotary-wing aircraft, and then well deck spots
for connectors and ship-to-shore movers, whether it is an AAV
[Assault Amphibious Vehicle] or LCU [Landing Craft Utility],
LCAC [Landing Craft Air Cushioned].
We are trying to balance all five fingerprints of those
lifts, and as Secretary Stackley said earlier, we have great
design records from previous ships, and we understand the trade
space between a flight deck, a well deck, and number of people,
but how we maximize those five capabilities, how we do it
within existing cost constraints is the challenge for all of
us.
So as the Marine Corps, we will try to articulate what we
actually need, given changes in technology, to get the marines
and their equipment ashore. We are trying to hold down the
weight of our vehicles, but the weight of vehicles continues to
increase. We are trying to hold down the size of the aircraft,
but the wingspan continues to increase. As we get great
capability from our V-22s, we are now trying to make sure the
V-22, like the CH-46, is detachment capable, which means you
have an independent maintenance capability with them.
So all of these create stressors on the design of the ship,
and we are trying to make sure that the ability to project,
launch, recover, and sustain the force can be done within the
design capability of the ship and the cost that we are afforded
or the moneys that we are given. So doing this within the
challenge of Virginia and Ohio-class replacement and
everything, even as marines, we understand the challenge the
Department is under. So we are grateful for the support that
you show.
But I will now defer here to Secretary Stackley. We know
that we are probably going to need more money, to be honest
with you, above TOA [Table of Allowance Requirements] to make
sure the amphibious ship portfolio can sustain while we are
doing submarines and surface-class combatants.
Thank you, sir.
Mr. Forbes. We thank the gentleman for his questions. His
time is expired. I think that this subcommittee recognizes that
that funding for the LPD would not have been in there without
his hard work and also the gentleman from Virginia, chairman of
the Readiness Subcommittee, who both worked very, very hard to
make sure that was done.
The chair now recognizes the gentleman from California for
5 minutes, Mr. Peters.
Mr. Peters. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I don't have a lot of questions. I just want to acknowledge
that I appreciate the professionalism and the care you are
taking to deal with the constraints of the financial
circumstances, and I want to express my thanks for you doing
that.
Also, I am conscious that we have another issue coming up
next year with sequester, and I think that that is a
fundamental thing that this body has to deal with to give you
the support you need, and we have to avoid that again. So I
want you to know that that is on my mind, and I appreciate all
you are doing to deal with the constraints that--and I hope
that we will inject more rationality from the congressional
perspective into the budgeting in the future.
Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Forbes. The gentleman yields back.
The gentleman from Virginia, chairman of the Readiness
Subcommittee, Mr. Wittman is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Wittman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I thank all of our panelists today for joining us. Thank
you so much for your service to our Nation.
Secretary Stackley, let me begin with you. I want to talk
about the LX(R) program and get your perspective on that and
how do we put in place both the efficiencies from a cost
standpoint, but also operational efficiencies in making sure
that we, as you stated earlier, put to task the lessons learned
from the past.
Would it make sense for us to use the LPD hull form in
extending the LX(R) into a faster operational phase, looking at
LPD-28 as the bridge to that, and, obviously, the elements of
maintaining the industrial base? But give me your perspective
on using that as an existing hull form and the advantages that
that would bring, or possibly the other challenges it might
bring.
Secretary Stackley. Yes, sir. Let me try to wrap this all
together, the advantages of reuse of the LPD hull form, the
affordability issues that we are challenged with, and then the
specific requirements that LX(R)--that we are drafting on
LX(R).
As the ACMC described globally in discussing the LX(R) as a
replacement for the LSD-41/49 class, we have to first and
foremost ensure that the LX(R) provides the lift capacity that
the Navy and Marine Corps team needs. And if you look at what
the LSD-41/49 provide today, it is LCAC spots that we are going
to have to replace. They bring a lot of cargo, a lot of cargo
cubed, which is not a shortfall issue so much as vehicle
square. So vehicle space, LCAC well deck spots, and then flight
deck capacity. So if you look at that, that is exactly what the
LPD-17 provides.
Now, the reality is LPD-17 provides a lot more of that than
the ship class that she would potentially be replacing. So what
we have got to do, then, is moderate between the capacity of an
LPD-17 and the cost that comes with that, and then the true
requirements that we need for the LX(R). And that is the
debate, the tension that is going on right now inside the
analysis of alternatives [AOA] is trying to temper down, temper
down those capacities with cost in mind.
And so we are looking at several alternatives. The first
clear alternative is you have a hot production line, you have a
known entity in terms of LPD-17, so can you reuse it? The
answer is the LPD-17 class will not be the LX(R), but the hull
form does provide a well-known baseline that we are looking at
a modified LPD-17 to see if we can drive that in the right
direction in terms of affordability for the LX(R).
We also are looking at foreign designs. There are a number
of foreign designs that fix--fit an LX(R) mission profile. So
those are on the table as well. This would not be to repeat
those designs. Frankly, it would require some sort of teaming
agreement between our industrial base and a foreign navy that
owns that design to see if, in fact, it could be adapted. We
are doing that for thoroughness.
And then you look at clean-sheet designs. Now, the beauty
of a clean-sheet design is you can do anything with it, and it
can cost what you want it to cost. However, in going from that
paper design to reality, we are very mindful of the risks that
that introduces, and, frankly, the history that we have of
underestimating the cost and complexity of going from a paper
to digits, to steel.
So that is the trade space in the AOA. It is bringing those
clean set of requirements in that the Marine Corps require for
the lift capability, looking at those alternatives, and
figuring out across that family of alternatives how do we drive
this into an affordability box that we set for the program.
Mr. Wittman. General Paxton, let me get your perspective on
that, too. You talked about the requirement set; that is, space
on board, what it would be used for. And give me your overall
thought about, just as Secretary Stackley talked about, the
whole scope of what you are looking at, existing hull forms,
new hull forms. Kind of give me your thought about what you
believe the LX(R) ought to resemble when it becomes a complete
design.
General Paxton. Thank you, sir.
Yeah, we are, we being the Marine Corps, are huge fans of
the LPD-17. It has capability that we have not had before. It
has capacity that we have not had before in terms of well deck,
flight deck, marines, everything. So the opportunity to
continue that hull form or something similar to it has great
operational advantage to us. It gives us the ship-to-shore,
sovereign launch and recovery capability that we need. It gives
us maintenance capability that we need. It gives us command-
and-control capability for disaggregated operations in case we
have to split up that Marine Expeditionary Unit in two or three
different locations.
So in terms of the responsiveness, the versatility, the
sustainability, the LPD-17 is a great platform. So how we
capture the value of that platform and some of those key either
forcing functions or limiting factors. For example, the
Secretary and I were talking earlier about just command and
control, and we have greatly enhanced command-and-control
capability with the LPD-17 that we didn't have before. So the
ability to maintain that skill set and those capabilities on
the LX(R) is important to us, sir.
Mr. Wittman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Forbes. Thank you, Mr. Wittman.
Gentlemen, once again, thank you for being here. And, Mr.
Secretary, you made a statement that I don't think I am
paraphrasing incorrectly that Congress alone has ability to
maintain a Navy. Did I misstate that, and if so, correct me on
that.
Secretary Stackley. Sir, what I am quoting is article I,
section 8.
Mr. Forbes. I am not disagreeing with you. I am with you.
Secretary Stackley. Yes, sir.
We can set our requirements forward to the Congress in
terms of a budget request, but we rely on the Congress to bring
the budget that----
Mr. Forbes. I am with you. And the reason I say that is not
because I differ with you, but because I agree with you.
Congress alone has that ability and that responsibility to
maintain a Navy. We do not, I do not, intend to lighten that
responsibility. I don't intend to delegate that responsibility,
and I sure, by God, don't intend to fail in that
responsibility. And to do that, we realize that you guys
oftentimes have to look at your resources, you have to consider
alternatives, you have to evaluate risk, and then you make a
decision over there and come over here and say, this is the
decision we made.
But since it is our responsibility, the reason we sometimes
have to pound on you, as you have mentioned, like an anvil is
because we have got to make those decisions ultimately, and we
have got to know those same risks that you evaluated, those
same alternatives, those same budgetary things so that we make
sure we are not failing in that responsibility. And so that is
why sometimes we have to dig deep on these questions and ask
them, and sometimes it is not a pleasant process any more than
it is a pleasant process when you guys are having to deal with
it over there.
But in light of that, I want to come back, if I can, and,
General, you have stated this very articulately, but just to
help me understand this a little bit better, to go from the 38
to the 33, it is my understanding that we have acceptable risk.
I don't ever know what that term means, you know. And we can
sometimes get caught in requirements and those kind of things,
but it would be true if you had 38 of these ships, there would
be times that you wouldn't have enough. I mean, you know, you
could have a situation where you still wouldn't have enough.
Obviously, with 33, there are going to be times that you won't
have enough. So that I can tell my colleagues and share this
with them in a better picture, give me the risk that we are
accepting to go from 38 to 33.
General Paxton. Thank you, sir.
It is always a challenge to articulate risk whether it is
significant, moderate; whether it is acceptable or not. As I
tried to say earlier, it is a dual challenge here. It is both--
excuse me--the number of ships, the strict number of them, and
then also their operational availability given the maintenance
period that is in the yard.
Let's say we have accepted the requirement for 33 ships.
That includes a search capability for coming out of the yards.
It includes, as Secretary Stackley said, perhaps some new ships
that may be in the process of commissioning or older ships
decommissioning, so that the analogy would be sometimes we bank
on seven consecutive miracles. So that if you do have a
stressing scenario in one country, or, as I said earlier, the
scourge of simultaneity in two countries, we are dependent upon
getting a ship out of a maintenance cycle, bringing a newly
commissioned ship into the fray early, keeping the ship that we
are going to decommission longer into the fight.
So those are the stressors on the system. And they
consequently stress our sailors and marines to get that ship
ready to go into the fight, or to keep its maintenance
capability up if it needed a long and sustained period in the
yards.
So in a short answer, sir, the ships get there slower. We
are not sure they can stay on station as long as they can. They
go through Herculean efforts on the parts of individual marines
and sailors to keep them operationally ready. And then there is
an inherent and included risk that they can't stay on that
station that long; that they have to get back, sir.
Mr. Forbes. That is a good synopsis.
Mr. Secretary, we've talked about the LPD, and you have
been very clear on that. I think the gentleman from Mississippi
has a little bit of an interest in that issue, too. And as he
pointed out, we have anticipated an additional $800 million on
that.
When does the Navy anticipate using that incremental
funding authority if that ultimately passes both Houses, which
I think it will, and can you address a little bit your concerns
about the industrial base that we are looking at with
amphibious ships now?
Secretary Stackley. Yes, sir. It is difficult to answer
that first question because with the--I will call it advanced
procurement and incremental funding that has been provided by
Congress, either in 2014 or in the various versions of the
bills in 2015, we are still a billion-plus short of the funding
requirements for another LPD-17-class ship. And that billion-
plus has to enter into a budget process where we have got other
bills that are, frankly, higher priority.
And I will just use the carrier. We had a hearing where we
talked about the refueling of the carrier. We are working that
inside of that budget and others that are competing for that
space. So we have got competition to go into the budget and add
these priorities at the same time we have got all of the risk
associated with sequestration on the back end.
So I cannot look at you today and give you a sense of
confidence that the Navy is going to be able to budget that
additional billion-plus in PB16. Now, we are halfway through
the process, and there is going to be a lot more movement
between now and when the budget comes over to the Hill. But the
challenges are huge in terms of being able to fund the balance,
and absent that full funding, not necessarily 1 year, but using
the incremental authority, we can't move forward in terms of
contracting for a ship. We have got to show the funding in the
budget, and so that is the paradox that we have got today.
So we greatly appreciate your intent and the support for
the ship, but we are still well short of the funding required
to place that ship under contract.
Now, in terms of the industrial base--and here is where it
is critical, because all of the points that the ACMC has made
regarding 38 versus 33 and where we are today, the reality is
if we put an LPD-28 under contract in 2016, it wouldn't enter
the fleet until the 2022, 2023 timeframe. So that is not a
near-term fix to a present shortfall to the 33 amphib
requirement, but it is an immediate fix to a valley that the
amphibious shipbuilding industrial base is marching into during
this period, as I described, between the completion of the LPD-
26 and 27, the last of those two lines, and the start of the
LX(R) replacement, which isn't until the 2020s. So you are
looking at a 5-, 6-, 7-year period where that industrial base
is being drawn down to the only amphibious ships that will be
in construction will be the LHA class, so specifically the LHA-
7. It will be at its low point going back 25 to 30 years, and
that is a concern for the Navy.
Mr. Forbes. And, Secretary, I appreciate your hard work in
monitoring that industrial base because all too many people,
you know, in Congress they believe this is like a faucet. We
turn it on and turn it off whenever we want to. But if we don't
have the industrial base there, we can't turn it back on if we
need to down the road. Is that a fair statement?
Secretary Stackley. Absolutely. There are a couple of key
points on this. One is the skilled labor. You have got to be
concerned about skilled labor, losing the skilled labor during
that valley and then imagining that it will be available when
you need to climb back out of that valley.
The likelihood is that we will be dealing with green labor,
new entrants to the shipbuilding workforce. That is going to
require training, and also going to have a lot of learning
curve that goes along with that.
Mr. Forbes. So that can increase your cost and your time of
production?
Secretary Stackley. Yes, sir.
And the other reality in terms of any major manufacturing
process, facility, company is the impact on overheads. When you
lose a business base like that, your overheads go up, and that
makes it extremely difficult to invest back into your
facilities, to recapitalize, to modernize, to go after the
efficiencies that we all need.
Mr. Forbes. Good.
And I just have one more question, and I see Mr. Courtney
has arrived, too. We know that the LX(R) is scheduled to
replace some of our amphibious ships, and the LX(R) will have
less capability than the LPD-class amphibs. The Navy has
recently completed an analysis of alternatives, as I understand
it, and cost is a significant driver in the threshold
requirements for the LX(R).
Can you just provide the subcommittee with some of the
options that were considered in the analysis of alternatives
for the LX(R) program, and just a short, capsulized version of
the pros and cons associated with the various options?
Secretary Stackley. Yes, sir. First, I wouldn't say that
the AOA is complete. This is an iterative process. The team has
come forward with--I will call it--first pass on details. And
we sit down, we hammer them with questions, go back for a
second pass. We are about on the third pass right now.
The alternatives that we looked at, as I was describing
earlier, the first clear one is using the hot production line,
and starting with an LPD-17 hull form, and then looking at how
you can effectively descope some of the capabilities and also
some of the cost drivers, go after the cost drivers, to get the
LPD-17 hull form with the lift capacities that we need for
LX(R) inside of affordability box that we have set for the
program.
The second is a clean-sheet design. All AOAs include a
clean-sheet design. So you would start with a list of lift
capabilities that you need, and then other enabling
capabilities, speed, command-and-control capabilities, that
need to be added to the platform. And then now you are dealing
with a more parametric approach towards determining what size,
what shape, what cost you would be in for a new design LX(R).
And that does bring with it all of the risks associated with a
new start program in terms of how well do you understand the
requirements that you just put down on paper? What does that
carry forward in terms of risk regarding either the technology
that you are planning on employing or the costs that come with
that?
And then the third is to take a look at other existing
designs or concepts. And I described the foreign designs, and
we are going through those dutifully to understand--you know,
we have got all of the glossies. Now we are digging down into
the details in terms of, okay, are they really designed for the
level of survivability that we would plan on including in our
future LX(R)?
And then you have the hybrids. You start to take a look
at--well, honestly, we took a look at does an MLP, which has
incredible lift capacity, does that potentially play for the
roles and missions of an LX(R)?
So there has been a very broad field of alternatives that
we have looked at and all of the trades that go with what
degree, what level of capability, what are the risks either in
terms of operational risks or in terms of cost or technology
that you are anticipating, and then what are the costs that
come with that, and necking down to a smaller number of
alternatives that we are, again, trying to drive into that
affordability box that we have got to hit.
Mr. Forbes. Thank you, Mr. Secretary.
Mr. Courtney is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Courtney. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you to the
witnesses for being here.
Secretary Stackley, can you clarify the intent behind the
2002 MOU [memorandum of understanding] and the more recent 2009
MOA [memorandum of agreement], commonly referred to as swap 1
and swap 2, and how the procurement of LPD-28 could impact
those two agreements?
Secretary Stackley. Yes, sir. So in 2002, the industrial
partners associated with the LPD-17 program were effectively
split apart as a result of various mergers and acquisitions. So
Bath Iron Works and Avondale Shipyard were teamed on LPD-17.
Avondale was acquired by Litton, which was acquired by Northrop
Grumman, and then all of a sudden we found ourselves with two
competitors inside of one program, and it wasn't working out
well.
So we looked at what we referred to as ``the swap.'' And
with then Northrop Grumman and General Dynamics, we swapped
workload across contracts where Bath Iron Works permanently
exited the LPD-17 program in exchange for the LPD-17 ships that
it was awarded under contract and within its teaming agreement,
which were four--they were going to build four LPD-17-class
ships. So they permanently exited, and then there was a one-
for-one swap. An LPD-17 would go down to Northrop Grumman, and
in exchange a DDG-51 would go to Bath Iron Works in the
simplest of terms.
So in executing that swap agreement, three LPD-17s have
been placed under contract at Avondale and Ingalls, and in
exchange, an additional three DDG-51s went to Bath Iron Works.
And the language describes that if a fourth LPD goes to--is
awarded to Avondale Ingalls, then a fourth DDG-51 would go to
Bath Iron Works. That is as simply as I can put it.
In 2009, there was a separate similar type of swap
agreement, but in that case it was reorganization of the DDG-
1000 program, and it restated that that swap agreement did not
impact the existing 2002 swap agreement. So what that would
mean, frankly, is if another LPD-17-class ship was awarded to
Huntington Ingalls Industries [HII], then there is an
equivalent balancer that would be due to Bath Iron Works.
That agreement is between the Navy, General Dynamics, and
HII, and if it came down to another LPD-17 being awarded, then
we would sit down with industry to figure out how to best make
it right.
Mr. Courtney. Thank you. That is all.
Mr. Forbes. Gentlemen, thank you once again for being here.
As I said in our meeting before this meeting, I want to make
sure you get everything you need on the record. There may be
some questions that you think are important to have on the
record that none of our Members have asked at this time, or
perhaps some things that you think might have been
mischaracterized so far. So if I can give you what time you
need to sum up in those comments now, and, Admiral, if you
don't mind, we will start with you and work our way back--give
the Secretary just a minute to pause. He has been talking a lot
here, so----
Admiral Aucoin. Yes, Mr. Chairman, I appreciate the
opportunity.
As was mentioned, there is an AOA ongoing. We are doing
this iteratively. And it is no surprise, the LPD-17 is
something the Marines would like, the Commandant's been on the
record for saying that, and we would like to accommodate that.
But cost is a major driver, and the LPD-17 is cost-prohibitive
at $2 billion.
But there is money in there for advanced procurement. There
is some money there for incremental funding. If we could use
some of that advanced procurement to look at ways to bring down
the cost, as seed money to help bring down the design cost, to
use that hull form, similar to what we did with the Virginia-
class submarine--we put seed money in there, and the cost and
the schedule both have profited from those inputs to bring it
below cost and on schedule for a Virginia-class submarine. If
we could do that for this, I think it would go a long way. The
CNO mentioned that when he was here in March, and I think that
would help us a lot. That is all, sir.
Mr. Forbes. Thank you, Admiral.
General.
General Paxton. Thank you, Chairman. Just two points if I
may, sir. First is we talked about the 38 and 33, and I talked
about the demand signal and the driver being the simultaneous
operations plans. I would just like to reiterate again for the
record the challenge of what we now call the new norm, which is
the various hot spots around the world.
The utility of any amphibious ship and in particular the
LPD-17, as we said, the Swiss Army knife, it is even more
important in the new norm because of the disaggregated ops and
the way we ask either a split ARG/MEU [Amphibious Ready Group/
Marine Expeditionary Unit] or a single ship steamer to go out
and respond. So things like day-to-day and currency and
improvements of command and control, the C2 sweep, perhaps an
ISR [intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance]
capability, those are the stressors in the day-to-day
environment.
And using that as a segue, the second point is, and I
believe it was Mr. McIntyre before he left talked about a use
of the JHSV [Spearhead-class Joint High Speed Vessel] and the
MLP [Mobile Landing Platforms], and those are great platforms
with great capability, and we are amenable to taking a look at
how they may be used in certain circumstances. But if you go
back to the stressor and the op plan, we are fairly adamant
that those are in addition to as opposed to in lieu of
capabilities just because of their survivability and the
stressors of a fight. So more than amenable to looking at
those, and we appreciate Congress' funding of those, but we are
always a little bit reluctant to introduce those into a
stressing operation plan.
Thank you, sir.
Mr. Forbes. General, you also mentioned, I think, earlier
about the COCOM [combatant command] requirements and where they
were. And there is always a gap between our COCOM validating
requirements and what we can meet. Is that gap growing or
decreasing?
General Paxton. Sir, due to the nature of the world, the
demand signal is indeed growing, and we are trying to figure
out how we can keep pace with that. And that is, of course, one
of the stressors on all of the services and on all of our
programs of record, if you will.
Mr. Forbes. If you looked at that gap, is it increasing
because of the increased demands from the COCOM, or is it
increasing because we can't meet as many of the requirements as
we were meeting before, or a combination of both?
General Paxton. I believe it is a combination of both, sir.
As some of the fragile nation states devolve, and as the global
war on terrorism increases, then there is a higher demand
signal up there.
And then in addition, as Secretary Stackley said, because
of the age of our platforms, and because of the maintenance
requirements in getting them back in, we are either unable to
respond as quickly, or unable to stay as long. Or if we do,
because we are in the habit of saying yes and meeting
operational requirements, so if we go early and stay the same
length, then we know we have degraded capability and extended
our maintenance period that we are going to have to do later,
sir.
Mr. Forbes. Thank you, General.
Secretary, once again, thank you for all your help with the
subcommittee. We depend on you a great deal for your input, and
we would love to hear any closing comments you might have.
Secretary Stackley. Yes, sir, very briefly. We are spending
a great deal of time on requirements today in terms of
amphibious force requirements, but, more broadly, shipbuilding.
We have three major programs that are going through analysis of
alternatives and getting ready to go on to the next phase of
design contract and leading to construction. T-AO(X) is first
in the line, followed by LHA-8 and LX(R). That is good for the
shipbuilding industrial base. In fact, we are balancing those
programs across, frankly, our two major builders of amphibs and
auxiliaries in a competitive environment.
Today it is designed, we have got to get to production, but
there is a valley in between. And of the eight Tier 1 shipyards
that are building U.S. Navy ships, seven of the eight are going
into a valley over that period of the next 6 to 7 years. It is
straight math, and it is something the Members have to
understand. So as we try to fix issues that cross from the
shipbuilding program to shipbuilding industrial base, if it is
going to be a zero sum, then we are basically using
shipbuilding to fix shipbuilding, and that is a net negative.
With regards to affordability, we have always been focused
on affordability, but we do have this period of the Ohio
replacement coming our way where the total shipbuilding program
is not affordable. And we have tried to describe that very
clearly in report to Congress.
In that period, the 2020s out to the mid-2030s, our program
is not affordable with the Ohio replacement laid on top, and
that gives us problems on the ``eaches'' of each of the
programs. But, more importantly, no one today can stare at that
plan and predict where we will be 10, 15 years from now, except
that if we do not fix that picture, then we will be a much
smaller Navy.
Mr. Forbes. Mr. Secretary, if I could just ask you one more
elaboration not limited to the subject matter we are talking
about today. But one of the things that I know, since you
wrestled with this for so many years, oftentimes the public and
policymakers believe we can ramp this up very quickly if we
have a crisis in the world.
With the Navy, what is unique about that, why that bothers
you? Because I know you talked about the 2030s for our subs if
we don't continue building what we are looking at with Ohio
class. What message would you have that we could deliver to
them about the difficulty of ramping things up when you talk
about the Navy?
Secretary Stackley. Yes, sir. On average it takes about 5
years to build a ship, carriers longer, smaller ships less. But
5 years is a good, solid number. When you are building, say, 10
ships a year, it takes 30 years to build a Navy, and so you
can't--we are living off of the ship construction of the 1980s,
we really are. That is running to the end of its service life,
so we have to recapitalize ships that were built--in the 1980s,
we were building ships at about a 20-ship-per-year rate. Now,
we are not trying to achieve the force level that we had in the
1980s, but to sustain a 300-ship Navy, we have to recapitalize
at a rate near what it was built at back in the 1980s. That is
a very difficult problem financially with regards to the
industrial base and with regards to the trades that we have got
to make inside of our program.
You cannot wait until you need ships to start to crank up
the machinery. We have got to look far ahead. And, frankly,
this is one of the beauties of the 30-year shipbuilding report
that we turn in to the Congress. It forces everybody to look
far ahead and recognize that decisions in shipbuilding that are
5 to 10 years away are in front of us today.
We have to make those decisions today to influence events 5
to 10 years from now. And 5 to 10 years from now is that period
of the Ohio replacement program. If we aren't making those
decisions today, then the folks who are sitting in this hearing
room 5 or 10 years from now, they are going to be in an
extraordinarily different place than we are today with regards
to our force structure, our capabilities, our ability to
provide presence, and our ability to respond to crises.
Mr. Forbes. Mr. Secretary, General, Admiral, thank you so
much. Thank all your staff members for their support and help
here. With that, we are adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 10:12 a.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]

=======================================================================

A P P E N D I X

July 25, 2014

=======================================================================

PREPARED STATEMENTS SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD

July 25, 2014

=======================================================================

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
