- [H.A.S.C. No. 113-103]   FISCAL YEAR  2015 NATIONAL DEFENSE AUTHORIZATION BUDGET REQUEST FOR NATIONAL SECURITY SPACE ACTIVITIES

[House Hearing, 113 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

[H.A.S.C. No. 113-103]

HEARING

ON

NATIONAL DEFENSE AUTHORIZATION ACT

FOR FISCAL YEAR 2015

AND

OVERSIGHT OF PREVIOUSLY AUTHORIZED PROGRAMS

BEFORE THE

COMMITTEE ON ARMED SERVICES

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED THIRTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

SUBCOMMITTEE ON STRATEGIC FORCES HEARING

ON

FISCAL YEAR 2015 NATIONAL DEFENSE

AUTHORIZATION BUDGET REQUEST

FOR NATIONAL SECURITY

SPACE ACTIVITIES

__________

HEARING HELD
APRIL 3, 2014

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

87-866                         WASHINGTON : 2015
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800;
DC area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104 Mail: Stop IDCC,
Washington, DC 20402-0001

SUBCOMMITTEE ON STRATEGIC FORCES

MIKE ROGERS, Alabama, Chairman

TRENT FRANKS, Arizona                JIM COOPER, Tennessee
DOUG LAMBORN, Colorado               LORETTA SANCHEZ, California
MIKE COFFMAN, Colorado               JAMES R. LANGEVIN, Rhode Island
MO BROOKS, Alabama                   RICK LARSEN, Washington
JOE WILSON, South Carolina           JOHN GARAMENDI, California
MICHAEL R. TURNER, Ohio              HENRY C. ``HANK'' JOHNSON, Jr.,
JOHN FLEMING, Louisiana                  Georgia
RICHARD B. NUGENT, Florida           ANDREE CARSON, Indiana
JIM BRIDENSTINE, Oklahoma            MARC A. VEASEY, Texas
Steve Kitay, Professional Staff Member
Leonor Tomero, Counsel
Eric Smith, Clerk

C O N T E N T S

----------

CHRONOLOGICAL LIST OF HEARINGS
2014

Page

Hearing:

Thursday, April 3, 2014, Fiscal Year 2015 National Defense
Authorization Budget Request for National Security Space
Activities.....................................................     1

Appendix:

Thursday, April 3, 2014..........................................    21
----------

THURSDAY, APRIL 3, 2014
FISCAL YEAR 2015 NATIONAL DEFENSE AUTHORIZATION BUDGET REQUEST FOR
NATIONAL SECURITY SPACE ACTIVITIES
STATEMENTS PRESENTED BY MEMBERS OF CONGRESS

Cooper, Hon. Jim, a Representative from Tennessee, Ranking
Member, Subcommittee on Strategic Forces.......................     1
Rogers, Hon. Mike, a Representative from Alabama, Chairman,
Subcommittee on Strategic Forces...............................     1

WITNESSES

Klinger, Gil I., Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for Space
and Intelligence, Department of Defense........................     2
Loverro, Douglas L., Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for
Space Policy, Department of Defense............................     4
Raymond, Lt Gen John W. ``Jay,'' USAF, Commander, Joint
Functional Component Command for Space, United States Strategic
Command........................................................     6
Sapp, Betty J., Director, National Reconnaissance Office.........     5
Shelton, Gen William L., USAF, Commander, U.S. Air Force Space
Command, U.S. Air Force........................................     2

APPENDIX

Prepared Statements:

Klinger, Gil I...............................................    44
Loverro, Douglas L...........................................    66
Raymond, Lt Gen John W. ``Jay''..............................    91
Rogers, Hon. Mike............................................    25
Sapp, Betty J................................................    81
Shelton, Gen William L.......................................    27

Documents Submitted for the Record:

Attachment 1: JFCC SPACE Conjunction Assessment Customers....   107
Attachment 2: JFCC SPACE Orbital Data Request Customers......   113

Witness Responses to Questions Asked During the Hearing:

Mr. Coffman..................................................   121
Mr. Cooper...................................................   121

Questions Submitted by Members Post Hearing:

Mr. Cooper...................................................   131
Mr. Peters...................................................   136
Mr. Rogers...................................................   125
Ms. Sanchez..................................................   132

.
FISCAL YEAR 2015 NATIONAL DEFENSE AUTHORIZATION BUDGET REQUEST FOR
NATIONAL SECURITY SPACE ACTIVITIES

----------

House of Representatives,
Committee on Armed Services,
Subcommittee on Strategic Forces,
Washington, DC, Thursday, April 3, 2014.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 1:59 p.m., in
room 2212, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Mike Rogers
(chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. MIKE ROGERS, A REPRESENTATIVE FROM
ALABAMA, CHAIRMAN, SUBCOMMITTEE ON STRATEGIC FORCES

Mr. Rogers. This hearing of the House Armed Services
Subcommittee on Strategic Forces will come to order. I want to
welcome all of our witnesses here and thank them for their
time, not only for being here, but the time it took to prepare
for this hearing. It is very helpful to us.
We have with us today General William Shelton, Commander of
Air Force Space Command; Mr. Gil Klinger, Deputy Assistant
Secretary of Defense, Space and Intelligence Office; Mr. Doug
Loverro, Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for Space
Policy; Ms. Betty Sapp, Director of the National Reconnaissance
Office; and Lt. General John W. ``Jay'' Raymond, Commander,
Joint Functional Component Command for Space.
And what I am going to do is submit the rest of my opening
statement for the record so we can get to the opening
statements of the witnesses. And with that, I will yield to my
ranking member, my friend and colleague from Tennessee, Mr.
Cooper.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Rogers can be found in the
Appendix on page 25.]

STATEMENT OF HON. JIM COOPER, A REPRESENTATIVE FROM TENNESSEE,
RANKING MEMBER, SUBCOMMITTEE ON STRATEGIC FORCES

Mr. Cooper. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would like to follow
your fine example and do the same. And we welcome the
witnesses. Thank you.
Mr. Rogers. Thank you very much. General Shelton, we will
start with you. You are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF GEN WILLIAM L. SHELTON, USAF, COMMANDER, U.S. AIR
FORCE SPACE COMMAND, U.S. AIR FORCE

General Shelton. Mr. Chairman, Representative Cooper, and
distinguished members of the subcommittee, it is an honor to
appear before you once again as the commander of Air Force
Space Command. It is also my privilege to appear with these
colleagues from the national security space enterprise.
Our nation's advantage in space is no longer a given. The
ever-evolving space environment is increasingly contested as
potential adversary capabilities grow in number and
sophistication. Providing budget stability and flexibility in
this very dynamic strategic environment is necessary to
maintain and bolster the viability of our nation's space
capabilities.
Given this new normal in space, I believe it is--I believe
we are at a strategic crossroad. It is a reality that requires
us to address how we protect our space systems, challenge
traditional acquisition practices, and consider alternative
space architectures that are more resilient and affordable.
I thank you for your support, and I look forward to working
with Congress and this committee to keep you abreast of our
efforts to provide relilient, capable, and affordable space
capabilities for the joint force and for the nation. And I
would also like to add that just this morning, we had a very
successful defense meteorological satellite program launch out
of Vandenberg Air Force Base on an Atlas V. Just bragging a
little bit.
Mr. Rogers. Don't blame you. Is that it?
General Shelton. That is it, sir.
[The prepared statement of General Shelton can be found in
the Appendix on page 27.]
Mr. Rogers. Thank you very much. Mr. Klinger, you are
recognized.

STATEMENT OF GIL I. KLINGER, DEPUTY ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF
DEFENSE FOR SPACE AND INTELLIGENCE, DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE

Mr. Klinger. Thank you, Chairman Rogers, Congressman
Cooper, and members of the committee. The space domain has
changed significantly in 50 years. This environmental change
has occurred concurrently with the steady recovery and
improvement of our space acquisition programs and practices.
Our progress affords us an opportunity to take stock of risks
resulting from the significant increase in threats to our space
capabilities as well as the potential opportunities associated
with the growth of both U.S. and foreign commercial and allied
space capabilities and services.
This rapid evolution and expansion of threats may create a
potential strategic imbalance, in which adversaries are
increasingly able to use space to support military operations
and also threaten our ability to sustain use of our space
capabilities. Meanwhile, our abilities have lagged to protect
our own use of space and also deny the advantages of space to
an adversary. We must rectify this imbalance as a national
priority.
We must consider the impact resulting from the Budget
Control Act and sequestration. The simple truth is that most
space systems on which the U.S. Government depends are likely
to remain highly capital intensive, relatively costly
investments. Moreover, many of the changes likely to be
required to adapt to the changed threat require additional
investments at precisely the same time as the Department is
managing a significant drawdown in most other warfare areas.
Perhaps no change has had more profound impact that the
fundamental shift in the breadth, depth, and diversity of both
the uses to which space capabilities are applied and the user
population. In the past 25 years, a range of diverse space
capabilities have become to defense and intelligence users what
the dial tone on the telephone long ago became for all of us: a
service whose presence we take for granted until the moment its
availability is interrupted.
Furthermore, our belated realization that space would
become a contested battlespace leaves us with few planned or
routinely exercised alternative means to meet our needs in the
event of these interruptions. This change, when combined with
the other shifts described here, confront the space acquisition
community with a single major challenge, to maintain service
continuity while simultaneously investing in technology
innovation.
We are at a strategic crossroads. We still utilize the
advantages provided by capabilities brought about by past
large-scale investments that often enjoyed a largely unfettered
call on resources. Without wholesale sacrifices in other
domains, we simply cannot afford that path in the future.
The fiscal year 2015 President's budget reflects the DOD's
[Department of Defense's] commitment to measured, affordable,
pragmatic progress as we plan our future space capabilities.
The Space Based Infrared System, Advanced Extremely High
Frequency [AEHF], and Global Positioning System [GPS] are
utilizing Space Modernization Initiative investments to improve
affordability and capability in order to remain effective in
the changed strategic and fiscal environment.
The Department adjusted the profile for the Evolved
Expendable Launch Vehicle, EELV program, and implemented a dual
track strategy to reduce cost and stabilize key elements of the
space industrial base. This approach consists of executing a
contract for launch services over 5 years with the only
existing qualified provider, while implementing a new entrant
certification process in partnership with NASA [National
Aeronautics and Space Administration] and the NRO [National
Reconnaissance Office] that enables new entrants to compete as
soon as they are certified. We believe this strategy achieves
the optimal balance between required mission assurance and
affordability.
While we continue to use the Russian RD-180 engine to
support NSS [National Security Space] missions, the Department
has been prepared for the possibility of a potential RD-180
supply disruption and has put in place several measures to
mitigate the risk and impact. First, the nation has maintained
an additional capability to launch national security payloads
with the domestically produced Delta IV variant to the EELV.
Second, as competition becomes a reality and domestic engine
technology progresses, we become less susceptible to this
foreign supply risk. Finally, our industry partner continues to
maintain a supply of RD-180 engines in the United States,
thereby insulating the Department against any near term
disruptions to the launch manifest.
We are evaluating whether it is in the long term U.S.
national security interest and that of significant elements of
our space industrial base to develop a next generation U.S.
designed and built engine. This approach is part of the
Department's reexamination of its strategy to ensure it is
still capable of providing asssured access to space.
I would like to thank you for your continued support and
thoughtful engagement with us as we prepare for our future
challenges. I would be pleased to take your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Klinger can be found in the
Appendix on page 44.]
Mr. Rogers. Thank you, Mr. Klinger. Mr. Loverro, you are
recognized.

STATEMENT OF DOUGLAS L. LOVERRO, DEPUTY ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF
DEFENSE FOR SPACE POLICY, DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE

Mr. Loverro. Thank you. Chairman Rogers, Ranking Member
Cooper, and members of the subcommittee, I am pleased to join
my colleagues to testify on the Department of Defense space
programs and policies.
I first testified in front of this subcommittee on these
topics about 1 year ago, and I welcome the opportunity to
continue that discussion today. As I stated last year, space
remains, and will continue to remain, vital to our national
security. It underpins DOD capabilities worldwide. It enables
U.S. global operations to be executed with precision on a
worldwide basis, with reduced resources, fewer deployed troops,
lower casualties, and decreased collateral damage.
Space empowers both our forces and those of our allies to
win faster, and bring more of our warfighters home safely. It
is a key to U.S. power projection, providing a strong deterrent
to our potential adversaries and a source of confidence to our
friends. But the evolving strategic environment increasingly
challenges U.S. space advantages.
Space is no longer the sole province of world powers. It is
a frontier that is now open to all. In the last several
decades, space has become more competitive, more congested, and
contested. Those terms, the so-called three C's, have been used
extensively, and I believe it serves us well to put them into
context.
On the first, as an American, I welcome the competitive
aspect of today's space environment. I am highly confident that
with the right policies, the United States is well positioned
to remain ahead in that environment. The changes you authorized
2 years ago on export control reform, and the changes NASA and
the Department of Defense have embraced on commercial launch,
are just two of the many steps we are taking. I am not worried
about the competitive nature of space.
On the second ``C,'' congestion, I am not quite so
welcoming, but I am optimistic. Congestion and debris in space
is a real issue, and it threatens to put our use of space at
risk. But the policies and programs of the United States,
programs like the Air Force's Space Fence, are aimed at
reducing that risk.
Likewise, the work that we and the Department of State are
doing internationally at the United Nations to set rules of the
road for outer space, are aimed at bringing a similar focus on
this issue to the community of spacefaring nations. So I am
somewhat confident that we are on the right course in dealing
with congestion.
But what worries me the most, is the last ``C,'' the
contested nature of space, which we now face. Over the last 15
years, other nations have watched us closely and have
recognized that if they are to challenge the United States,
they must challenge us in space. And they are endeavoring to do
so.
The United States has successfully addressed such
challenges before in other domains, and now we must likewise
respond in space. We don't do so against the backdrop of a
decreasing budget that challenges both the ability and speed
with which we will act, but that in no way diminishes the
importance of successfully sustaining the crucial advantages
that space provides.
Our strategic approach for these issues remains consistent
with what we outlined in the 2011 National Security Space
Strategy, and reaffirmed in DOD Space Policy in 2012. In the
written testimony I submitted to the subcommittee, I have
outlined the five key elements of this strategic approach:
promoting the responsible and peaceful use of space, enhancing
the resilience of DOD space architectures, partnering with
like-minded nations in international organizations and
commercial firms, and deterring aggression and defeating
attacks while preparing to operate in a degraded environment.
My testimony describes these in specific details. I look
forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Loverro can be found in the
Appendix on page 66.]
Mr. Rogers. Thank you. Ms. Sapp, you are recognized.

STATEMENT OF BETTY J. SAPP, DIRECTOR, NATIONAL RECONNAISSANCE
OFFICE

Ms. Sapp. Chairman Rogers, Ranking Member Cooper, and other
distinguished members of the committee, I am pleased to appear
before you today on behalf of the NRO. It is a real honor for
me to appear today beside my DOD partners. I would like to
begin with a few words about the state of the NRO today.
Last year, our acquisition program successfully delivered
and launched two new satellites into orbit. We are on track to
continue our launch and acquisition success this year. We have
one launch that we have done and three more to go.
Our research and development program has done equally well,
allowing us revolutionary increases in collection capability at
risk levels compatible with successful acquisition programs.
For the fifth year in a row, the NRO received a clean audit
opinion on our financial statements, further proof of our
commitment to excellence and conscientious stewardship of
taxpayer dollars.
Lastly, I would like to highlight the real bottom line for
the NRO, our support to the warfighter. The NRO provides a wide
array of focused capabilities to help solve specific critical
ISR [intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance] needs for
the DOD. This past year, the NRO deployed a high-altitude
system known as HALO to support three-dimensional, high-
resolution mapping of geographically restricted areas in
Afghanistan. HALO flew 65 missions between September and
December, collecting over 72,000 square kilometers of
precision, wide-area mapping data, with an accuracy of 20 to 40
centimeters.
HALO gave intel analysts potential insurgent routes and
operational planners a precise terrain data necessary to
develop force protection and interdiction missions. HALO is
just one example of the NRO services, products, and tools
directly contributing to the highest priority missions across
the Department. And I am extremely proud of the critical
contributions our systems and our personnel provide on a daily
basis.
The tremendous successes we have enjoyed in acquisition,
launch, R&D [research and development], and in critical mission
support activities are a testament to the quality of the NRO
people. Ensuring we maintain that quality is fundamental to our
future success. This year we are taking steps toward a more
stable integral workforce to do just that.
We will also continue to rely on the DOD and the
Intelligence Community to provide us with rotational personnel
who will bring the diversity of thinking also necessary for
organizational success. Our goal is to ensure that we have the
NRO workforce that can continue to provide the nation with
premiere space reconnaissance capabilities for national
security.
I want to thank the committee for the support you have
shown me, and the men and women of the NRO. Thank you again for
the opportunity to be here today.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Sapp can be found in the
Appendix on page 81.]
Mr. Rogers. I thank you. And General Raymond, you are
recognized.

STATEMENT OF LT GEN JOHN W. ``JAY'' RAYMOND, USAF, COMMANDER,
JOINT FUNCTIONAL COMPONENT COMMAND FOR SPACE, UNITED STATES
STRATEGIC COMMAND

General Raymond. Chairman Rogers, Representative Cooper,
and members of the subcommittee, it is an honor to appear
before you as the United States Strategic Command's Commander
of the Joint Functional Component Command for Space. This is my
first opportunity to address the committee and I look forward
to working with each of you to advance our nation's space
capabilities.
I am proud to represent the 3,300 soldiers, sailors,
airmen, and Marines, and civilians that make up the Joint
Functional Component Command [JFCC]. These professionals, along
with our exchange officers from Australia, Canada, and the
United Kingdom, ensure our nation, our allies, and our joint
warfighters have continued access to the space capabilities
that enable the American way of life.
To meet the demands of the dynamic space environment, my
command is focused on three operational objectives: providing
timely warning and assessment; supporting national users and
joint and coalition forces; and three, protecting and defending
our space capabilities. JFCC Space is, and will continue to be,
the world premier provider of space capabilities, even as it
faces constantly evolving operating and threatened environment.
I am confident that the men and women of JFCC Space are
prepared to meet these challenges with a spirit of dedication
innovation and devotion to duty, providing the warfighter
assured access to the world's premier space capabilities. I
thank the committee for your continued support as we strive to
preserve and enhance the space capabilities which are so vital
to our nation. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of General Raymond can be found in
the Appendix on page 91.]
Mr. Rogers. I thank you and thank all of you for those
opening remarks. We will start with questions now. I recognize
myself first.
We all know the importance of the launch, and without an
effective launch program we don't have a space program. But
unfortunately we have--but fortunately, we have an exceptional
space launch program and as we just heard a little while ago,
United Launch Alliance, their Delta and Atlas rocket lines are
up to 168 successful launches in a row.
With that said, we currently use a rocket engine made by
Russia, the RD-180, to launch many of our most important
satellites into space. Do you think that developing a
competitively acquired, next generation engine, available to
all U.S. providers, that could effectively replace the RD-180
is important? Start with you, General Shelton, and we will go
down the line.
General Shelton. Mr. Chairman, we are studying the problem
of potential interruption of RD-180 supply right now. Those
study results will be available in late May.
And certainly one of the options we are thinking about is
production of an indigenously produced engine. It certainly has
it advantages, two that I can think of right off the top of my
head. One is no longer relying on a foreign supplier. And
secondly, an increase in the U.S. rocket engine industrial
base.
I think both of those would make a great contribution to
the overall launch program, and I would be a strong supporter
of that, if we can find the money to do it.
Mr. Rogers. Well, and that is the point I want to remind
all the witnesses. Money is our problem. Your job is to come up
with strategy and how to execute what we need to get done and
let us worry about the money.
Mr. Klinger, I know you made reference to this in your
opening remarks, but I would hear your thoughts in response to
that direct question.
Mr. Klinger. Thank you, sir. Excuse me. I think General, I
would echo General Shelton's comments. I would just add a
couple of things.
I think in the long run it is in the interest in the United
States Government to develop a next generation, U.S.-produced
rocket engine. That said, in addition to the 45-day study to
which General Shelton referred, we are going to have to find a
way to reconcile three different kinds of objectives that are
to some degree not intentioned, but they will probably compete
for the same body of resources.
We, of course, are looking for a next generation--if we
pursue a next generation engine, it would be based on liquid
oxygen and kerosene. If you look--as you well know, the
ballistic missile community relies on solid rocket motors and
both the Navy and the Air Force are interested in pursuing
upgrades and modernization to our solid rocket motor
capability.
At the same time, as we look to our partners in the civil
space program, NASA, they rely on cryogenic engines. Because my
personal belief is that this is a national level decision, in
terms of a new engine, I think part of the work we have to do
in the executive branch over time is to reconcile those needs
with what will inevitably be scarce resources.
Mr. Rogers. Mr. Loverro.
Mr. Loverro. Yes, Mr. Chairman. Again, I think I can echo
both General Shelton and Mr. Klinger, and I suspect you will
get five echoes of the same answer as we move down the table
here.
There is no question in my mind. Our national space
transportation policy and the policy of the U.S. encourage us
to have U.S. domestic launch capability and that just doesn't
say half of or part of it. It says U.S. domestic launch
capability. I don't think you can meet that policy and not face
the question of having domestically produced a engine in this
nation.
I think we need to find a way to do that. It is a critical
space industrial based thing for the long term. Not just for
the short term, but for the long term. And it is critical to
make sure that we maintain a secure supply of equipment like
this as we have seen in recent months.
So, I very much support the notion that we need to do this.
Clearly it is a balancing of resources. I think that there are
many, many ways to address this issue from a funding
perspective, some that you have mentioned. Other ways to do
this industrially. There is not just one company who is reliant
on Russian engines; there are many.
And there are at least several agencies of the U.S.
Government who are so interested. So we certainly believe that
this is something we need to address.
Mr. Rogers. Great. Ms. Sapp.
Ms. Sapp. As Doug said, I am one of those agencies that is
very interested. I obviously buy ULA [United Launch Alliance]
boosters and I buy those through the Air Force. So we count on
the Air Force to have those available for us. We have all
recognized that the RD-180 is a vulnerability, a risk. We have
known for quite some time. And certainly we would all feel
better if that was produced in the United States.
Mr. Rogers. General Raymond, I won't burden you with this
one because you are a user. But I do appreciate those comments.
And I did expect all of y'all to make that response. But it is
important for us to put on the record that people in your
positions acknowledge this is something that is important for
us to do as a nation.
Next, I want to talk about the acquisition strategy for the
Evolved Expendable Launch Vehicle program. I understand that
there are two elements of this strategy in the near term. There
is a block buy contract with ULA as well as opportunities for
competition with new entrants.
General Shelton, can you tell us why the program is
currently structured the way it is, the current status, and the
benefits to this approach?
General Shelton. Mr. Chairman, it is pretty simple. It is
constructed this way because that was the most cost effective
way to go at launch capability. We have got to have a way to
get national security payloads into space. We want to make it
more affordable.
So the first phase of this program was intended to give
United Launch Alliance the only certified provider, the only
capability of getting the full suite of national security
payloads into space. Giving them a launch--rather a business
base that they could spread out over time gives them an
economic order quantities with their second and third tier
suppliers. It gives them the ability to plan for longer term.
They don't have to take as much corporate risk so they can give
us a much better deal.
The introduction of competition was also considered in
this. We don't have anybody certified yet. Obviously SpaceX is
coming along, and we will have them certified, we are confident
in the not too distant future, a lot of work to do before we
get there, but we think we can get them to certification. Then
they can compete for a subset of our national security
payloads, because they don't have lift capability yet that
would lift all of it. But we will put them in competition and
it will be a heads-up competition on mission assurance, price,
and other factors.
And then in the third phase--really, it is phase 1, phase
1A, and this phase 2, we will be full and open competition for
what was originally intended to be 14 different missions.
Because of the budget pressures we have come under, because the
GPS constellation is doing much better, we were able to push
some satellites out beyond the FYDP [Future Years Defense
Program] and that gives us only seven, maybe an eighth, but for
sure seven missions that we would be able to compete.
I know some people are concerned about that. They think it
is taking away competitive capability. That was budget based.
It was not based on any reduction of our desire to have
competition. In fact, we would like competition just as soon as
possible.
We think we will have at least one mission for competition
next year and then we will see what the next few years bring
along. But it will be at least seven missions.
Mr. Rogers. What do you think would be the impact of
breaking up the currently structured block buy?
General Shelton. Yes, sir. I talked about cost effective
being the first thing. There is no question that would add
extra expense into the launch program. And I am talking about
significant expense. Any option you would consider, if you
said, okay, we are going to have to be able [to] compete all
the rockets that we have got in play right now, it is
definitely going to drive the prices up because, again, those
economic order quantities wouldn't be there.
If we were restricted from using the RD-180 engine, that
would drive us to Delta only. Delta is a little bit more
expensive, in fact, significantly more expensive in some cases
than the Atlas. So almost anything we did to the current
strategy is going to drive costs.
Mr. Rogers. Great. Thank you very much. The chair now
recognizes Mr. Cooper.
Mr. Cooper. Thank you Mr. Chairman. Mr. Loverro, in your
testimony, I was pleased to see that you would responded to
some of our questions last year, and that AFRICOM [Africa
Command] is shifting a lot of its satellite needs away from a
Chinese satellite to commercially available. And you state in
your testimony that process will be complete this May?
Mr. Loverro. Yes, sir. We have been very aggressive about
that. I made a commitment to this committee last year that we
would push as hard as we could to go ahead and make that shift.
And we have done that, working with AFRICOM, who has been a
fantastic partner in doing so.
In fact, I would say they have led the pack in doing so.
They have managed to find alternatives for 75 percent of that
communication capability. The last 25 percent they have not
been able to get off yet, but they anticipate--we fully
anticipate that by May we will be off that last 25 percent. If
that changes, I will certainly let you know. But we are on the
exact right path, and I really want to thank the commander of
AFRICOM and his communicators for the work they have done to
support that.
Mr. Cooper. I also see in your testimony that you had plans
to move a C-Band radar from Antigua to Western Australia. And
that would have allowed us to look at low altitude things, but
I presume not low enough to have seen that lost Malaysian
airplane, right?
Mr. Loverro. No, no sir. Probably not. It is not tuned for
that. That radar right now is being disassembled in Antigua on
its way to Australia. But even if it had been there, I don't
think it would have been much good for that.
Mr. Cooper. Finally, on your testimony, you talk about the
declassification of the geo-orbiting satellites that will allow
us to monitor debris at that level. So that would be kind of
the high version of the Space Fence?
Mr. Loverro. Yes, sir. Not quite like the Space Fence. The
Space Fence has a far greater ability to, excuse the
vernacular, suck up a whole bunch of data and go ahead and sort
through that. GSSAP [Geosynchronous Space Situational Awareness
Program] is--because of the nature of how the geosynchronous
orbit works, it is a much slower process. But it allows us to
see things we can't see from the ground. And that is to
identify pieces of debris or other hazards that may exist up in
geosynchronous orbit.
Mr. Cooper. I appreciate General Raymond being newly on
duty here and I asked him earlier today what it was like to
tell folks who had satellites in orbit that their satellite
might be in danger from space debris. I couldn't help but
think, is it appropriate, possible, to even charge for those
calls on a subscription basis? Because that is an incredibly
valuable service we are offering to the world for free. I am
not sure that they necessarily appreciate the time and effort
it takes to warn them about their own assets. Is that even a
conceivable thing for the community to do? Because these
warnings aren't free.
General Raymond. Sir, thanks for highlighting the work that
our airmen, sailors, and soldiers, and Marines do for the
world. We actively track over 23,000 objects in space. About
1,100 of those are active satellites and we provide warning of
potential collision between either satellites or debris.
It is in our best interest to do that as well. Because as
we have seen in other cases where we have either had a breakup
or a satellite break up into pieces, it impacts our ability to
operate in the space domain, as well. So it is in our best
interest as well for a safe and secure operating environment
and we do that for the world, and for ourselves at the same
time.
Mr. Cooper. If you wouldn't mind, if it wouldn't be too
much trouble to compile some simple list about who are the most
frequent users of your services are, that would be a helpful
thing for us to start understanding.
[The information referred to can be found in the Appendix
on page 121.]
General Raymond. I will, sir.
Mr. Cooper. General Shelton, this is apparently the third
year that the Air Force has chosen not to support Operationally
Responsive Space, ORS. So that's presumably money the Air Force
thinks we could save by zeroing out that item in the budget?
General Shelton. Yes, sir. This really is budget driven.
And it is not that we don't support the ORS concepts. In fact,
what we would like to do is push ORS concepts into all space
and missile centered system programs. So that should be the way
we acquire satellites in the future, using those principles of
acquisition and authorities, using the speed of acquisition,
using some of those special techniques in terms of how we build
satellites.
So we are pushing that across the center. We are doing a
good job of incorporating those lessons learned. What we were
talking about was a specific program, separate and distinct,
and so we have recently decided to go ahead with an ORS--I
believe it is being called an ORS 5, which would be a trail
blazer for the Space Based Space Surveillance follow-on
satellite, and teach us some lessons as we go into the
acquisition for that program. So I think we are using the
principles to good effect.
Mr. Cooper. But this might be a way that this committee--
this Congress could save some money.
General Shelton. That was what we had proposed, sir.
Mr. Cooper. Yes. I have no more questions, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Rogers. The chair now recognizes Mr. Lamborn. Oh, Mr.
Coffman. I am sorry. They are Coloradans, you know; they all
look alike.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Coffman. Thank you.
Mr. Rogers. Mr. Coffman.
Mr. Coffman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. First of all, I think
speaking to all of you, I think that Russia is certainly not an
ally of the United States. They are not a reliable partner with
the United States. And for us to be reliant upon them for our
rocket engines is, I just think it is unwise and I think we
need to move forward with finding a domestic supplier for that.
General Shelton, the Air Force has proposed to purchase one
GPS satellite this year instead of two, as originally planned.
Over the program, how much money would be saved if we purchased
in a more economic manner as was originally planned, two
satellites, this year?
General Shelton. Sir, I am going to have to take that one
for the record. I can't tell you that right off the top of my
head. I know that again, one of those budget driven decisions.
It is maybe not the most economic way to do it. But given the
money we had available to us, this was the most efficient way
to get it done, you know, with the constrained top line.
[The information referred to can be found in the Appendix
on page 121.]
Mr. Coffman. Sure, okay. Mr. Klinger, did the Cost
Assessment and Program Evaluation [CAPE] review this and offer
an opinion on the most economical way to buy those satellites?
Mr. Klinger. I think the way I would answer your question
is, sir, that the CAPE did an analysis when we incurred, as you
are probably familiar, a Nunn-McCurdy breach with respect to
the EELV program when we came out of sustainment. During that
time, CAPE did conduct another independent cost estimate.
We did vet both within the Air Force itself as well as in
cooperation with the Office of the Secretary of Defense [OSD],
very closely, the array of choices we had prior to coming to
resolution of the contract that you are now familiar with, with
regard to the 36-core block buys. So that was thoroughly vetted
both within the Air Force and throughout the Department.
Mr. Coffman. Okay. General Shelton, I think we have one
launch provider that is certified to carry the entire national
security manifest. Is that correct?
General Shelton. Yes, sir. That is true.
Mr. Coffman. Okay. Do any potential new entrants currently
possess the necessary facilities required to process and launch
the full manifest?
General Shelton. Not yet, sir. SpaceX is obviously the
Falcon IX version 1.1----
Mr. Coffman. Okay.
General Shelton [continuing]. Can go up to a certain level.
They have got plans to develop a heavy vehicle but that is not
that far along yet.
Mr. Coffman. Okay. Would you agree that the new entrants be
certified to support the full manifest before being allowed to
bid?
General Shelton. No, sir. Not necessarily. We would allow
them to bid and will allow them to bid without that full suite
of capability, the full lift capability, for all of our
payloads. So we are happy to compete one satellite at a time.
Mr. Coffman. Okay. Will new entrants be required to comply
with the same auditing oversight and accounting rules that are
currently applied to ULA?
General Shelton. I believe that is true, but that is an
acquisition question that I would----
Mr. Coffman. Okay.
General Shelton [continuing]. Ask Mr. Klinger if he
wouldn't mind commenting on that.
Mr. Coffman. Sure.
Mr. Klinger. I think the terms of the specific contract for
a new entrant, since that would be awarded competitively, the
Air Force would have to decide that. But certainly from a
mission assurance perspective, there is no question in my mind
that the Air Force will insist, as would the National
Reconnaissance Office, I believe Ms. Sapp would agree, on the
same level of mission assurance requirements associated with
what we utilize now for the EELV systems that we currently
have.
Mr. Coffman. Okay. General Shelton, Mr. Klinger, Ms. Sapp,
what steps has the Department of Defense taken to improve the
management of requirements in order to reduce program risk?
General Shelton. Are you talking about requirements just
across the board?
Mr. Coffman. Right.
General Shelton. Yes, sir. We are very judicious about our
requirements to make sure that, one, we aren't gold-plating
things, but also that we don't allow the requirements to creep
up on us in the midst of the procurement. That is what really
drives a lot of cost and technical risk as well. So we are very
disciplined about how we maintain a hold on the requirements.
Mr. Klinger. Sir, I think both within OSD and across the
services, we have a number of initiatives going on to improve
our ability to respond and improve our acquisition system. But
one example that I would highlight under my boss, Frank
Kendall, the Under Secretary for Acquisition, Technology and
Logistics, one of the things that he is working hard on, with
the services, and in particular the joint staff, is to pull the
early phases of acquisition of any system closer to the
requirements development process, thereby enabling an iterative
process of exchange of information between the users who
ultimately define the operational requirements for a given
system, and the acquirers who have to then make that into a
system implementation.
The bottom-line goal of this is to ensure that we have a
clear picture of what we are paying for in terms of
performance, and where the bright points are where--so that we
are not paying 20 or 30 percent for the last 2 or 3 percent of
performance of a given system. That is a work in progress.
Mr. Coffman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Rogers. I thank the gentleman. The chair now recognizes
Mr. Carson.
Mr. Carson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. For Lieutenant General
Raymond, has STRATCOM [Strategic Command] evaluated
disaggregation or provided any position on the issue, sir? And
how does disaggregation contribute to deterrence?
General Raymond. Sir, what STRATCOM does is talks about the
importance about being able to protect and defend our
capabilities, the how you go about doing it, the architectural
part of that is more of a services organize, train, and equip.
And I would offer General Shelton up to make a comment on that.
Mr. Carson. Yes, sir.
General Shelton. Yes, sir. There are a number of studies
underway right now to determine whether or not disaggregation
is the right approach. It seems like it is a good thing to
pursue based on the need for additional resilience in our
constellations given the new threats that are coming into the
space environments.
So, hosted payloads is a possibility, disaggregation is a
possibility, having more reliance on commercial sources, having
international cooperation. There are a number of things that we
are studying right now to determine the best way ahead to
address the new threats in space and also to address the
possibility of premature failure of our assets, making them
more resilient is the overall goal.
Mr. Carson. Yes, sir. And General Shelton, to that point
sir, as threats to space evolve and become more vulnerable to
your earlier point, are we planning contingencies for that
matter where we simply don't rely on space at all? Is adequate
training an ongoing issue in this regard?
General Shelton. Yes, sir. In my opinion, there is not an
alternative that I see, near term or mid-term, an alternative
to reliance on space capability. We don't get to choose where
we are going to fight. We don't get to choose where disasters
might occur. And our reliance on space is so heavy that there
is just really no alternative out there. So, just like we
haven't decided to walk away from the airplane because it got
tough to fight in the environment----
Mr. Carson. Yes, sir.
General Shelton [continuing]. We need to figure out how we
are going to be able to fight through this environment, as
well.
Mr. Carson. That is good. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield
back.
Mr. Rogers. I thank the gentleman. The chair now recognizes
the gentleman from Alabama, Mr. Brooks, 5 minutes.
Mr. Brooks. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I have a question for
Mr. Klinger and General Shelton. I am holding a piece of paper,
a document that my staff informs me is being used by United
Launch Alliance competitors to claim that ULA's Evolved
Expendable Launch Vehicle, single launch costs have more than
tripled.
Mr. Klinger and General Shelton, do you agree with how this
information is being used? And can you describe the vast
requirements that United Launch Alliance must meet and how and
why the block buy supported the reduction of costs?
General Shelton. Sir, I would tell you that information is
not being used correctly. I would tell you that it is an
extrapolation of 2012 data up through 2030. It doesn't give us
any credit for the block buy approach. It doesn't give us any
credit for the introduction of competition.
It doesn't give us any credit for the remarkable success
record that we have seen with this program. It just tries to
paint a picture of one versus another and it is literally
apples and oranges from my viewpoint.
Mr. Brooks. Mr. Klinger, do you have anything to add?
Mr. Klinger. Yes, sir. In addition to echoing General
Shelton's comments, I would offer the following thoughts.
One has to place the EELV program's development against the
backdrop of the environment in which we are operating. Put
bluntly, when we started this program in the late 1990s, we
made a series of assumptions, both mainly about the development
of a large commercial demand that the U.S. Government was going
to take advantage of, and therefore defray a lot of our costs.
And that is why the original costs for the EELV boosters was
set at a level that was much lower than our current costs.
But the reality is the following: virtually every
assumption we made about the world that would come to be
realized at the start of the program has not come to pass.
Effectively the bottom fell out of the commercial space launch
market with the collapse of the Internet boom, because a number
of commercial ventures that would have placed a large number of
satellites into orbit, and therefore required a large number of
boosters, never happened. Therefore the larger burden
associated with EELV costs was therefore transferred to the
government.
I don't believe that the context in which that information
is being used is accurate. I would offer the following point.
As my colleagues have mentioned that we are all in favor of
competition, here is one example had we had competition earlier
that cost increase, though contextually inaccurate, probably
would have been mitigated because there would have been a
greater incentive first for Lockheed Martin, then Boeing, and
subsequently United Launch Alliance to streamline their
operations and find reasons to cut costs. In fact, I think we
are reaping the benefits of the impending competition right
now, when you look at the new contract that the Air Force has
signed with the government, about the 36 cores.
Mr. Brooks. If I can have a follow-up question that is
similar to the first one. And this one is for General Shelton,
Mr. Klinger, and Mr. Loverro. The Air Force has signed a
contract with the United Launch Alliance for a block buy for 36
rocket cores over 5 years. This was a new approach, rather than
buying on an ad hoc, as needed basis.
Can you tell how this approach came about and what the
benefits are? How much money has the taxpayer saved as a result
of the block buy? And what would be the risk of breaking the
contract?
General Shelton. Let me go at these in reverse order. The
risk would be significant, sir, because we would have to do a
significant amount of work--engineering work, probably, to get
payloads onto a different kind of booster.
The other risk that would be significant would be cost.
There would undoubtedly, undoubtedly be much, much greater cost
per booster in the program, because, again, we don't have
economic order quantities assigned to that current provider,
the only currently certified provider.
It came about because all those things were in place. We
had one certified provider. We needed to give the industrial
base some certainty on the business base. So that is the
approach that was taken and as I said earlier to the chairman,
it was all about cost effectiveness.
Mr. Brooks. Do any of the other gentlemen have anything to
add?
Mr. Klinger. I would offer, in addition to echoing General
Shelton's points, I think one measures costs not only in dollar
value but in this case, from an acquisition perspective, in the
adverse impact on the industrial base. I don't think one can
overstate the importance of the benefits that that block buy
provides to a sector of our space industrial base that was at
best on unsteady footing.
And I am not talking about the prime contractors here. As
General Shelton mentioned, it is the second and third tier
suppliers, who supply components and subsystems for ULA
boosters, that are in a much better condition than they
otherwise would have been, had we not had the block buy.
I think the short answer to what would happen if we had to
break that contract, we don't know what it would ultimately
cost. We know that it is at least in excess of $370 million
dollars. We don't know the exact figure.
But what we do know is that, as General Shelton also
mentioned, we would simply have to probably go back and
negotiate on a mission-by-mission basis for launch services.
And our experience, as you know, our experience with that from
a cost standpoint has not been good.
Mr. Rogers. The chair now recognizes Mr. Lamborn for 5
minutes.
Mr. Lamborn. Thank you Mr. Chairman for having this
hearing. General Shelton, good to see you again. And I know we
have touched on some of these questions before, so this is
maybe a little bit of recapping.
But how many launches has the Air Force done as part of the
Evolved Expendable Launch Vehicle program, how many of them
were successful? And who was the provider of those various
launches?
General Shelton. Yes, sir. We have done 68 national
security launches under the EELV program. There have been 68
successes and United Launch Alliance is the provider.
Mr. Lamborn. Okay, thank you. Changing gears, and I don't
know who would be the best person to respond to this, but it
has to do with space situational awareness and JMS [Joint Space
Operations Center Mission System], and we have talked about
this in previous hearings. And I know that there has been talk
about establishing contracts with commercial providers for some
of the capabilities of JMS.
So can you update us on how that is working and how those
relationships are developing, if so? And then I have maybe a
follow-up on that.
General Shelton. Yes, sir. We have been very successful
with the JMS program, introducing commercial software, what we
call commercial-off-the-shelf software. Two companies are on
contract right now, AI and AGI, and both of those are providing
great services to us.
So we have broken through some of the initial concerns
about that and like I said, we have got at least a couple of
providers on contract now.
Mr. Lamborn. What would you recommend, General, as far as a
way forward that we can exploit the advantages that using a
commercial partner, a private sector partner, to reduce risk of
just having one supplier or maybe putting some of the cost risk
upon the vendor instead of the taxpayer and the DOD assuming--
what are some of the things you see going forward in that
relationship? And what can we do as a committee to help out?
General Shelton. Sir, I think the best thing the committee
can do is to continue to support the program, because the
overall architecture of the program absolutely was designed to
be open and available for drop in and pull out kinds of
software packages. So we have got this architecture that is now
ready to plug things in, use it for a while. If we don't like
that, if there is another thing that comes along, we pull that
old software out and plug in new. So it is absolutely ready for
commercial sources.
Mr. Lamborn. Okay, thank you. And to finish up with some of
the launches that have been postponed, and this may have been
asked or described before I got in the room. I was a few
minutes late getting here because of something else. But, what
is the status of launches that have been postponed and when
will they be taken up?
General Shelton. Yes, sir. I believe what you are referring
to is there were 14--we contracted with ULA for 36 cores. There
were 14 missions that we thought that we were ready to compete.
As we developed the fiscal year 2015 budget, because of
affordability and because the GPS constellation was doing well,
we were able to slip out some of those satellites outside the
FYDP. So they will still be available for competition. Just not
in this particular phase of the program. So, it is not like
those requirements go away. It is just the timing of those.
Now, one satellite is frankly too heavy for the only, what
appears to be the only additional new entrant to the game,
here. And another one was reassigned to ULA to keep our 36-core
commitment.
So, the 14 boil down to 7 in this particular budget. There
may be an eighth we can look at. We are looking at that right
now as an opportunity to provide a competitive opportunity for
that eighth satellite.
Mr. Lamborn. Okay, thank you. And Ms. Sapp, for the NRO and
the important work that it does, is there anything more that
our committee can do? I am just going to throw a general
question out for you. Is there anything more that we can be
doing to helping make sure that you have the resources and the
assets you need to successfully do your job?
Ms. Sapp. No. I appreciate the question. The NRO does quite
a bit to support the DOD and we really appreciate this
committee's support of the NRO.
Mr. Lamborn. Okay. Thank you. Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Rogers. I thank the gentleman. And the chair now
recognizes Mr. Langevin for his questions.
Mr. Langevin. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to thank the
panel for their testimony and for the great and important work
they are doing on behalf of the country. I guess I would like
to turn first to, well, to space launch if I may.
EELV launch costs have steadily risen over the last decade.
DOD and ULA have recently cited gains and efficiencies. Now if
you have already covered this, you can let me know. I know I
came in late, but my question is why weren't these efficiencies
and cost savings pursued and achieved before the new
competitors, such as SpaceX, arrived in the marketplace? And
how has the potential for competition affected price?
Mr. Klinger. I think, Congressman, that we did cover a
piece of this. But I will add to my earlier remarks. I think if
you look at the start of the EELV program in terms of the
initial program, we effectively had no choice.
We were flying out the Titan IV. We had also incurred a
series of five catastrophic launch failures over a very short
period of time. Three of those were Titan IV failures. Two of
those were Delta III failures. So we were in a position that we
had to create, along with industry, a new launch capability for
national security payloads.
The costs have risen, as I mentioned earlier, in no small
part because all of the assumptions, and the major assumptions
that we made, that underpinned the original creation of the
EELV program have simply not come to pass, or turned out to be
wrong, most notably amongst them, the disappearance of what was
anticipated to be a very significant increase in commercial
demand for space launch capabilities. In fact, that is what the
government was counting on to defray a large portion of the
costs and the result of which would have been significantly
decreased launch service costs by virtue of the volume of
launches that would be provided beyond those that were needed
by the government.
In terms of competition, I think it is a situation in which
we are now seeing the benefits of impending competition
reflected in two ways. Number one, the most concrete way is the
36-core block buy, which I think 5 or 7 years ago would have
been much harder to achieve, in no small measure because there
was absolutely no--it would have been no incentive at that
point for the United Launch Alliance to move down a path in
which it was going to not only be willing to engage in that
type of negotiation with the government, but in addition, ULA
would not have really had any incentive to streamline its own
internal operations because it was a monopoly provider, or the
sole provider in effect at the time. So I think that the large
change in the landscape in the last 3 or 4 years has not only
been the impending, for them, specter of competition, on the
landscape.
The other thing is that, I think you are familiar with the
Better Buying Power initiatives that OSD and the services have
been implementing. And in some sense, those initiatives
directed at lowering our costs are bearing fruit in terms of
the contracts like the one we see in EELV.
Mr. Langevin. All right. Before my time expires, let me
also switch to, and General perhaps this will be you or for
Director Sapp. As we face increasing counter space threats,
what are the benefits and challenges of disaggregation for the
space architecture, and how will the Department decide whether
to apply disaggregated architecture principles to future space
system acquisitions?
General Shelton. Yes, sir. We are in the midst of those
studies right now, trying to determine if that is the
appropriate response to the threats we see in space.
Disaggregation obviously spreads the capability over more
platforms. It is distributed architecture as opposed to
creating big satellites that would be potential targets.
And even if you talk about a premature failure of a
satellite, it would leave a large geographic hole in important
constellations, such as Advanced Extremely High Frequency
satellite, or the Space Based Infrared System. Those systems
that are very necessary in times of conflict to the United
States.
So I think those are existential capabilities. I think it
is essential that we look at survivability and resilience in
those constellations.
Mr. Langevin. Thank you, General. I appreciate that. I know
my time expired, so I thank the panel for being here. I will
have some additional questions I would like to submit for the
record. And I would appreciate a response on those. Thank you,
Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Rogers. I thank the gentleman, and the chair recognizes
Mr. Bridenstine, 5 minutes.
Mr. Bridenstine. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman. We spend a
lot of money on both military and commercial satellite
communication systems. And I wanted to ask you how well these
two enterprises, both the military and the commercial satellite
communication systems are managed? And if there are benefits,
and what those benefits might be to having a single manager?
General Shelton?
General Shelton. When you say single manager, Congressman,
are you talking about single manager inside the Department of
Defense, or across the United States Government, or----
Mr. Bridenstine. So, my understanding is we purchase, you
know, communications from commercial satellite providers, and
we have our own military satellites as well.
General Shelton. Yes, sir.
Mr. Bridenstine. And between these two, are they managed by
the same person? Are they managed separately? When you think
about--I guess my overall question is, when you think about
procurement, multi-year procurement of commercial satellite
communication systems is something that I think could save
money, and enable us to be more productive for the future. But
I wanted to get your assessment on that.
General Shelton. Now I understand the question. We are in
some pathfinder efforts right now to look at the way we acquire
commercial services. We obviously have, as you said, we have
dedicated military satellites for what we would call wideband
communications. But that is not nearly enough bandwidth to even
support the efforts in Afghanistan, previous efforts in Iraq,
and really the efforts around the world.
So, we also go out on what I would call the spot market and
buy those commercial services. A very inefficient way to do
business. So our pathfinder is looking at, what if we bought a
transponder on a commercial satellite? How would that work out?
What if we went increasingly all commercial and didn't have
dedicated military wideband satellites?
So there is a range of options here, and we are looking at
the full suite of those options, trying to determine what would
be most cost effective.
Mr. Bridenstine. When you buy commercial, General, can you
specify--when you buy commercial, are you buying with OCO
[Overseas Contingency Operations] funds? Is there a procurement
program for it? Can you talk about that?
General Shelton. There are--I think a lot of it is OCO
funded. But through the Defense Information Services Agency,
DISA, they go out and procure those services. So some of it is,
again, just bandwidth demand that is out there steady-state,
they procure that with non-OCO funds. But the strictly wartime
effort bandwidth that is required is obviously OCO funded.
Mr. Bridenstine. As far as a base level of necessary
communications that STRATCOM can assess will be needed for the
future, you know, there are challenges, right? We don't know
where the next conflict may be. We don't know necessarily if we
are going to have the communications capability in whatever
region that may be. How do we mitigate some of these risks?
General Shelton. That has been the basis of providing the
dedicated military satellite communications capability, at
least a basis, a worldwide basis, that you can count on. And
then you could surge from there with commercial capability. As
we look to the Pacific, there is not as much bandwidth
available to go after in some of those areas in the Pacific. So
we will have to have a different strategy. Hence, these
pathfinder efforts.
Mr. Bridenstine. Okay. Mr. Klinger.
Mr. Klinger. Congressman, just a couple of things to add to
the points General Shelton made. We have an ongoing analysis of
alternatives that is underway in the Department, focused on
protected satellite communications to include looking at non-
space alternatives. And the focus of that effort is to identify
alternatives beyond advanced AEHF vehicle six, which is the
last vehicle in the existing program.
We also are trying to assess the viability of acquisition
options that will balance the need to save money with the need
to maintain operational effectiveness. And that really requires
on three things, the stability of the requirement, the
stability of the funding, and whether in fact there are
substantial savings to be had by procuring--using a different
approach.
You made reference earlier to multi-year procurement. I
would just note the following: we and the committees continue
to look at that. But there are some structural obstacles, and I
would note scoring in particular, not to get into the arcane
details of the budget process. But finding a way to preclude or
mitigate the requirement that the Department would have to
budget in a single year for a multi-year procurement of
commercial services, is a major issue that we would need to
work through with the Congress.
Mr. Bridenstine. Thank you.
Mr. Rogers. Thank the gentleman, and thank the witnesses.
We are going to recess. Well, no, we are going to adjourn this
open hearing. But before we do I want to remind you that we are
going to leave the record open for 10 days for Members who have
additional questions that we couldn't get to in this hearing--
submitting them--I would ask you to respond to those in a
timely manner. And with that we will adjourn this hearing and
come back after this series of votes, which we should be back
in about 20-25 minutes, and go to the closed hearing.
[Whereupon, at 2:59 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]

=======================================================================

A P P E N D I X

April 3, 2014

=======================================================================

PREPARED STATEMENTS SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD

April 3, 2014

=======================================================================

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

=======================================================================

DOCUMENTS SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD

April 3, 2014

=======================================================================

Attachment 1:  JFCC SPACE Conjunction Assessment Customers
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Primary Owner/Operator                                          Country
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Aalborg University, Denmark                                                                DEN
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
ABAE--Agencia Bolivariano para Actividades Espaciales                                      VENZ
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Al Yah Satellite Communications                                                            UAE
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Algerian Space Agency                                                                      ALG
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Algerian Space Agency                                                                      ALG
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Amateur Radio Research and Development Corporation (AMRAD)                                 US
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMSAT                                                                                      US
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMSAT UK                                                                                   UK
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Arab Satellite Communication Organization (ArabSat)                                        AB
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Asia Broadcast Satellite                                                                   RP
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Astronautic Technology Sdn Bhd                                                             MALA
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Auburn University                                                                          US
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Azerkosmos                                                                                 AZER
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Bigelow Aerospace                                                                          US
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Boeing                                                                                     US
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Boeing/USAF/CCAR                                                                           US
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Bolivian Space Agency                                                                      BOL
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Boston University                                                                          US
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Broadcasting Satellite System Corporation (B-SAT)                                          JPN
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Budapest University of Technology and Economics                                            HUN
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
California Polytechnic University, San Luis Obispo                                         US
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Canadian Department of National Defence (DND)                                              CA
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Canadian Space Agency                                                                      CA
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Carlo Gavazzi Space                                                                        GER
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Centre National d'Etudes Spatiales (CNES)                                                  FR
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Cornell University                                                                         US
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Darpa                                                                                      US
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Defence Science Organisation                                                               STCT
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Deimos Imaging                                                                             SPN
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Delft University of Technology                                                             NETH
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
DigitalGlobe                                                                               US
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Echostar                                                                                   US
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Ecuadorian Civilian Space Agency (EXA)                                                     ECU
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Emirates Institution for Advanced Science and Technology (EIAST)                           UAE
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
EOS Creative Technology Solutions                                                          AUS
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
European Aeronautic Defense and Space (EADS) Company, Astrium                              FR
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
European Organisation for the Exploitation of Meteorological Satellites (EUMETSAT)         EUME
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
European Space Agency                                                                      ESA
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Eutelsat                                                                                   EUTE
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
FaCH (Chilean Air Force)                                                                   Chile
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Federal Polytechnic School of Laussane (EPFL)                                              SWTZ
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
FH Aachen, University of Applied Sciences                                                  GER
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
French Defence Force                                                                       FR
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
GE                                                                                         US
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Geo-Informatics and Space Technology Development Agency (GISTDA--Thai Ministry of Science  THAI
and Technology's Space Agency)
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
German Aerospace Center (GSOC)                                                             GER
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
German Space Situational Awareness Centre (GSSAC)                                          GER
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Gil Moore--Utah State University                                                           US
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Globalstar                                                                                 GLOB
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
GOMSpace                                                                                   DEN
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Government of Japan                                                                        JPN
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hellas Sat                                                                                 GREC
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hisdesat                                                                                   SPN
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hispasat                                                                                   SPN
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
H
ORS-1 Focus: Urgent Need. ORS-1 is delivering capability
to the war fighter today and is the first dedicated system for United
States Central Command (USCENTCOM). The program cost was $226M and
fielded in under 32 months by exercising streamlined acquisition,
shortened decision-making chains, and novel engineering and technical
solutions.
Significance: ORS-1 built the enabling infrastructure with emphasis
on ground systems architecture. ORS-1 achieved numerous ``firsts''
adding fundamentally new capabilities to tackle some of the nation's
hardest information gathering problems and a first-ever focused
capability for USCENTCOM. ORS-1 provides superb collection capability
and USCENTCOM, as well as other Combatant Commands, continues to rely
on its capabilities as an integral component to their intelligence,
surveillance and reconnaissance architecture and collection plan. These
architecture advancements will be utilized for future missions.
Status: ORS-1 was officially transferred to Air Force Space Command
in January 2012. The system is operated by the 50th Space Wing, 1st
Space Operations Squadron.

ORS-2 Focus: Enabler. ORS-2 is a modular, reconfigurable,
multi-mission satellite bus developed using a Modular Open Systems
Approach. The completed bus and its associated hardware (space common
data link radio) along with the Gryphon cryptology unit (software-based
encryption for satellite command and control) were delivered to the ORS
Rapid Assembly, Integration and Test Facility.
Significance: ORS-2's Gryphon unit was first demonstrated on the
ORS-3 enabler mission. ORS-2 will establish a baseline for future
reconfigurable, scalable, and open systems.
Status: The ORS office plans to transition the system to the AFPEO/
SP.

ORS-3 Focus: Enabler. The ORS-3 mission demonstrated an
integrated payload stack for a low-cost payload capability and
decreased range costs through automated targeting and range safety
processes. These enablers not only focus on the ability to execute a
rapid call-up mission, they reduce engineering hours from months to
days in both cases, resulting in decreased launch costs.
Significance: ORS-3 demonstrated commercial launch practices and
addressed complexity of integration of multiple payloads for
efficiencies in future launches.
Status: This launch occurred in November 2013 from the National
Aeronautics and Space Administration Wallops launch facility.

ORS-4 Focus: Enabler. The ORS-4 mission will demonstrate a
new, cost-effective, small launch capability that includes the
development of three new solid rocket motors. This will demonstrate an
alternative launch vehicle concept that reduces total mission cost
through simple and repeatable processes.
Significance: ORS-4 is the pathfinder launch to significantly drive
down launch and range costs and allow more affordable access to space
for a smaller-scale, modular space vehicle. The long-term benefit is to
also scale the Modular Space Vehicle to house various payloads for
rapid development and deployment of space assets.
Status: This launch will occur 3rd quarter FY14. A strategy of
transitioning the Super Strypi is being developed by the ORS Office and
its mission partner, Sandia National Laboratories. This strategy should
be completed by 3Q FY14.

ORS-5 Focus: Urgent Need. Commander USSTRATCOM tasked the
ORS Office to provide a formal assessment and recommendation to support
Joint Force Commanders' urgent needs compiled by the USSTRATCOM/J8
staff. ORS-5 will apply the remaining FY13/FY14 ORS funding
(approximately $60M) to address space situational awareness needs.
Significance: ORS-5 will demonstrate the tenets of ORS and address
the guiding principles outlined in congressional language. This mission
should enable ORS to step down from the $200M missions toward the
congressional cost goal of $60M. Other objectives include moving toward
smaller and more cost-effective launch alternatives, use of commercial
practices, and incorporation of commercially mass-manufactured
components to lower cost, shorten delivery time and strengthen the
industrial base.
Status: On February 25, 2014, the ORS EXCOM approved a space
situational awareness payload to meet USSTRATCOM-validated urgent
needs, address rapidly evolving threats and serve as a pathfinder for
the Space Based Space Surveillance system follow-on. ORS-5 is planned
for launch in 2017.
Mr. Rogers. Will these missions provide value to the warfighter?
General Shelton. ORS-2 will establish a baseline for future
reconfigurable, scalable, and open systems. ORS-4 will demonstrate an
alternative launch vehicle concept that reduces total mission cost
through simple and repeatable processes. ORS-5 will provide significant
risk reduction to the Space Based Surveillance System follow-on and
serve as an opportunity to continue driving down the cost and time to
space by changing how we leverage commercial capabilities and
incorporating ORS principles into programs of record.
Mr. Rogers. To what extent has DOD validated the assertion that
disaggregated architectures offer to greater resiliency, operational
efficiency, and/or cost savings? What is the status of the CAPE studies
on disaggregation? Are there any initial findings?
General Shelton. Disaggregation is one technique being examined to
achieve resiliency of our satellite constellations. Our goal is not to
validate merely one technique, but to find the best method or
combination of methods that enable the ability to continue providing
required space capability in the face of adverse actions or premature
failure. Toward this end, the recently concluded Weather Satellite
Follow-on analysis identified disaggregated alternatives that leverage
civil, international and DOD capabilities in multiple orbits. We are
also engaged in analyses of alternatives for the Space Based Infrared
System Follow-on (SBIRS-FO) and Protected Satellite Communications
Services (PSCS) capabilities that are evaluating disaggregated options
within their tradespace of possible solutions. These analyses will
inform the decision on the most resilient and cost effective solutions
for follow-on programs. We have yet to validate any particular
technique as the best approach; however, we are certain that business
as usual is unsustainable in the face of a growing threat, stressed
budgets and growing demand.
Mr. Rogers. There have been major advances in Overhead Persistent
Infrared with the launch of the Space-Based Infrared System. Are we
leveraging this capability to the fullest extent?
General Shelton. We have been exploiting additional capabilities
since we operationally accepted two SBIRS Geosynchronous Earth Orbit
(GEO) satellites last year; however, we are still working to realize
the full potential of the sensors on these satellites. The SBIRS GEO
scanning sensors have been fully integrated into the Air Force Space
Command OPIR constellation. They are providing excellent service and
have already demonstrated capability superior to that of the legacy
Defense Support Program sensors. We will not, however, achieve full
capability on SBIRS GEO until the SBIRS ground segment is capable of
processing data from the GEO staring sensor. This will occur with
implementation of the SBIRS Block 10 ground segment upgrade in Spring
2016. The staring sensor will allow SBIRS to begin meeting all program
theater missile warning and technical intelligence mission
requirements. We are already sharing un-tuned staring sensor data with
the technical intelligence community so they can calibrate their
systems. We will not know the staring sensor's full capabilities until
we have a chance to operate them following the Block 10 upgrade.
Mr. Rogers. The National Space Policy, signed by the President,
states that ``The United States will employ a variety of measures to
help assure the use of space for all responsible parties, and,
consistent with the inherent right of self-defense, deter others from
interference and attack, defend our space systems and contribute to the
defense of allied space systems, and, if deterrence fails, defeat
efforts to attack them.'' Can you provide your thoughts on the
importance of an effective space defense?
Mr. Klinger. Our current national security space systems and those
we are planning for in the near future trace their origins primarily in
response to the Cold War stand-off with the Soviet Union. For the first
thirty years of the Space Age our systems were designed principally to
respond to the threat of nuclear war with the USSR. Since the end of
the Cold War, the space domain has changed radically in fifty years. It
has evolved from a relatively uncontested sanctuary to a likely theater
of combat operations. Space has become equally pervasive in all aspects
of our thinking about warfare and military operations--from major
campaigns like Operation ENDURING FREEDOM to smaller scale relief
operations in response to humanitarian crises, such as Operation
UNIFIED ASSISTANCE to aid tsunami victims. Our asymmetrical advantage
in space also creates asymmetrical vulnerabilities. Our adversaries
recognize our dependence on space and continue to think of ways to
respond to our space advantage.
From an acquisition perspective, it's evident that existing
requirements validation, architecture development, and investment
funding decisions do not account for the attrition, survivability, or
resilience of our space capabilities in a contested domain. The rapidly
changing environment, with new and evolving threats, in a difficult
budget environment, requires a new approach to ensuring unfettered
access to, and use of, space capabilities for the United States and its
allies. Space domain mission assurance is essential for an effective
space defense posture. In many programs the Department needs more
analysis to implement optimal means of achieving that assurance. In
order to implement an effective space defense, resilience should be a
key performance parameter of our future space architecture, judging
effectiveness relative to its contribution to resilience in addition to
other requirements.
In summary, we are undergoing a fundamental cultural shift in how
we view the space domain. As we begin to fundamentally think about and
approach the space domain as a theater of combat operations, we will
develop and implement the required degree of resilience as part of an
effective space defense posture.
Mr. Rogers. How can we should change the current system to purchase
commercial satellite communications services in a more cost effective
and strategic manner?
Mr. Klinger.

Senate Report 113-44, dated June 20, 2013, included a section
titled ``Satellite communications strategy'' in which the Secretary of
Defense is requested to provide a 5-, 10-, and 25-year strategy for
using an appropriate mix of Department of Defense (DOD) and commercial
satellite communications (SATCOM) bandwidth. As part of the strategy,
the Secretary was directed to consider the use of a capital working
fund or other mechanisms for leasing or multi-year procurement of
commercial bandwidth.

In addition, in response to FY14 NDAA Section 913, DASD C3CB
briefed the HASC on March 26, 2014 on a strategy to enable multi-year
procurement of COMSATCOM services. Key objectives included a budgeting
approach for stable funding, acquisition pathfinders to reduce risk,
determination of best value contract terms, and planning and
operational management process improvements to create the framework
necessary to devise long term needs and manage for affordability and
savings.

In the strategy in response to Senate Report 113-44, DOD will
address how commercial SATCOM is being used by DOD components, predict
future demand, identify budgetary sources to fund the contracts, and
instantiate an iterative process for managing the utilization of the
purchased assets. This response is currently in final coordination
within the Department and will be forwarded as soon as practicable.

DOD recognizes that long-term contracts place the burden of
defining the contract requirements, budgeting for contract execution
(and potential termination), and managing the efficient utilization of
the procured bandwidth on the DOD, not the satellite service provider.
Consequently, execution of this strategy will require a unique
management concept of operations.

The strategy includes specific tasks and recommendations for
pathfinder projects to test the results of the tasks against various
multi-year contract methods.
Mr. Rogers. To what extent has DOD validated the assertion that
disaggregated architectures offer to greater resiliency, operational
efficiency, and/or cost savings? What is the status of the CAPE studies
on disaggregation? Are there any initial findings?
Mr. Klinger. There is no current or planned CAPE study on
disaggregation. Disaggregation is one option (as a subset of many
resiliency options) that is being studied as part of AoA's for follow-
on systems for Protected Satellite Communications (SATCOM) and Overhead
Persistent Infrared (OPIR) capabilities. There are no preliminary
findings at this time to report to the Committee.
Mr. Rogers. There have been major advances in Overhead Persistent
Infrared with the launch of the Space-Based Infrared System. Are we
leveraging this capability to the fullest extent?
Mr. Klinger. For the ground layer, data processing and exploitation
of the SBIRS GEO and HEO scanner capabilities is being leveraged to the
fullest extent possible and GEO starer data is already being leveraged
prior to final calibration later this summer. The program accelerated
delivery of calibrated starer data for the technical intelligence and
battlespace awareness missions. All scanner and starer data is flowing
to the National Air and Space Intelligence Center for data analysis and
algorithm development. The program of record and Joint Overhead
Persistent Infrared Ground (JOG) program are delivering the
foundational communication capabilities to enable and enhance data
dissemination and processing. The JOG program is also integrating
starer data into the Space Awareness and Global Exploitation (SAGE)
software tool which fuses/integrates multiple data sources and already
contains a mature set of algorithms for battlespace awareness targets
of interest. SBIRS Block 10 will consolidate mission control into two
ops centers (one primary and one back-up) in 2016, and the remaining
Block 20 ground development will fuse and automate starer data for the
missile warning and missile defense missions in the 2018 timeframe.
In addition, SBIRS Space Modernization Investment (SMI) funds are
already addressing how best to adapt the SBIRS architecture as part of
the overall OPIR enterprise. We are looking at: investigation of
evolving the current SBIRS design (e.g., simplified scanner);
architecture studies to understand how best to adapt the SBIRS
architecture beyond GEO 6 and HEO 4 as part of the overall OPIR
Enterprise; wide field-of-view (WFOV) staring sensor technology for
future satellite concepts and technology insertion; and associated
sensor algorithm development. All of these SBIRS SMI efforts have
universal application regardless of the specific direction resulting
from the OPIR AoA.
Mr. Rogers. The National Space Policy, signed by the President,
states that ``The United States will employ a variety of measures to
help assure the use of space for all responsible parties, and,
consistent with the inherent right of self-defense, deter others from
interference and attack, defend our space systems and contribute to the
defense of allied space systems, and, if deterrence fails, defeat
efforts to attack them.'' Can you provide your thoughts on the
importance of an effective space defense?
Mr. Loverro. The United States considers the use of space to be
vital to its national interests from both an economic and security
standpoint. Therefore, ensuring the ability to use space for the future
is of utmost importance, especially in the contested space environment
we envision. DOD Space Policy (DOD Directive 3100.10, ``Space Policy,''
October 18, 2012) describes the Department's overall strategy to deter
threats to both U.S. and allied space systems by: (1) supporting the
development of international norms of responsible behavior that promote
the safety, stability, and security of the space domain; (2) building
coalitions to enhance collective security capabilities; (3) mitigating
the benefits to an adversary of attacking U.S. space systems by
enhancing the resilience of our space enterprise and by ensuring that
U.S. forces can operate effectively even when our space-derived
capabilities have been degraded; and (4) possessing the capabilities,
not limited to space, to respond to an attack on U.S. or allied space
systems in an asymmetric manner by using any or all elements of
national power.
As we examine the specific question of space defense, it is in the
context of these broad policy guidelines. Our preferred approach is
deterrence--to persuade potential adversaries to refrain from
conducting an attack or otherwise compromising the responsible use of
space. We believe that this goal is best achieved by clearly denying
the benefits of adversary attacks through substantial increases in the
resilience of our space mission architectures. Architectural resilience
ensures the continuity of space-derived services, maintains the
effectiveness of U.S. conventional force projection capabilities, and,
married to the stated intent of the United States to respond,
significantly deters any likelihood of attack. It is my view that this
is the most effective form of space defense.
Making architectures more resilient is a combination of adequate
protection, increased numbers of satellites, service diversity through
the use of commercial, allied, and wholly owned elements, distribution
of service nodes, well-reasoned disaggregation, and operational
ambiguity--all to create a service that can stand up to an adversary's
attack. These are the same force structure ideas we use in every other
field of warfighting to help our systems survive in a hostile
environment and to increase conventional force deterrence.
Additionally, increases in resilience can be combined with other
elements of space defense, such as active defensive operations, which
can provide warning of or interruption to an adversary's attack, and
the ability to replenish lost or degraded capabilities. Taken as a
whole, we are confident these measures can defend critical U.S.
interests in space for the long term.
Mr. Rogers. How can we should change the current system to purchase
commercial satellite communications services in a more cost effective
and strategic manner?
Mr. Loverro. Although there are short-term opportunities for
improving the processes by which we purchase commercial satellite
communications (SatCom) services (e.g., longer-term leases), full
incorporation of commercial SatCom services into an operationally
responsive, user-focused, and mission-reliant capability will require
more than simple changes to buying or contracting practices. A recent
DOD tiger team outlined a step-by-step approach to addressing some of
these issues and proposed actions that could be taken in the short-term
to reduce risks and uncertainties by establishing tools and completing
``pathfinder'' activities necessary to inform a future strategic
approaches.
The team's study found that, based on historical lease data, and
the recent Mix of Media study, the Department requires at least 3 GHz
of commercial wideband SatCom bandwidth globally to satisfy its
requirements through the Future Years Defense Program (FYDP). Further,
as the Department begins to formulate its vision for a follow-on to the
Wideband Global System, it must fully assess the operational, fiscal,
and resilience implications of a more strategic relationship with
commercial SatCom service solutions.
Due diligence suggests that near-term risk mitigation strategies
should be pursued immediately to gain crucial insights prior to the
next series of SatCom investment decisions. Investment costs for the
tiger team's recommended pathfinder activities are almost negligible
compared to expected lease expenditures, and several of these
activities may reduce lease expenditure costs in the near term.
But the primary benefit related to utilizing commercial SatCom
services would not merely be minor reductions in cost, but rather would
include the array of benefits that may only be realized once commercial
SatCom services are fully incorporated into DOD's operational model. To
do so, DOD must identify the right combination of prospective
solutions, and current and future pathfinder activities are critical to
that understanding.
Mr. Rogers. To what extent has DOD validated the assertion that
disaggregated architectures offer to greater resiliency, operational
efficiency, and/or cost savings? What is the status of the CAPE studies
on disaggregation? Are there any initial findings?
Mr. Loverro. The National Security Space Strategy and the DOD Space
Policy (DOD Directive 3100.10, ``Space Policy,'' October 18, 2012) make
clear that just as in all areas of warfighting, resilience must be a
factor that is considered in developing and fielding future space
architectures and systems. Although disaggregation has been viewed as a
promising method to enable resilience, it is but one of several
approaches we are examining to achieve overall space mission assurance.
System-level studies, conducted by the Air Force, have indicated
that for the two specific missions of Protected Communications (e.g.,
the Advanced Extremely High Frequency (AEHF) system), and Missile
Warning (e.g., the Space-Based Infrared System (SBIRS)), disaggregation
appears to be viable, although further analysis is needed. Those
conclusions are still being examined in analyses of alternatives (AoAs)
led by the Office of the Director of Cost Assessment and Program
Evaluation (CAPE) and the Office of the Under Secretary of Defense for
Acquisition, Technology, and Logistics (USD/AT&L). Alternative
approaches to achieve necessary space mission assurance, such as
defensive operations or reconstitution, could obviate the need to
enhance the resilience of our space architecture through
disaggregation, and other means, but these approaches also increase
costs and are, themselves, untested.
It is important to clarify, therefore, that the question is not
whether disaggregation is needed to achieve resilience, but rather,
whether resilience, through disaggregation, is more cost effective than
other ways to achieve mission warfighting assurance, or whether the
value of the mission itself warrants that investment in the first
place. This is what we are examining in the relevant AoAs.
Mr. Rogers. The National Space Policy, signed by the President,
states that ``The United States will employ a variety of measures to
help assure the use of space for all responsible parties, and,
consistent with the inherent right of self-defense, deter others from
interference and attack, defend our space systems and contribute to the
defense of allied space systems, and, if deterrence fails, defeat
efforts to attack them.'' Can you provide your thoughts on the
importance of an effective space defense?
Ms. Sapp. The NRO places a high priority on space protection,
though specific details regarding space protection are classified.
Situational awareness and protection, including the monitoring of
space, terrestrial, and cyber threats, is a key element of NRO's
survivability strategy. Continuous monitoring of these elements
establishes both a baseline of normal activity and changes to the
baseline associated with foreign counterspace actions. Such monitoring
and awareness are critical for indicating when potential responses/
actions may be warranted. Actions available to operators include
various courses of action and concepts of operation that either
minimize or mitigate counterspace threats. The NRO has key partnerships
with the AF to ensure that we have the strongest team possible in
addressing these critical threats.
Timely and appropriate response to space situational awareness
indications and warning is particularly important due to operational
requirements. Because of this, the NRO places a high priority on
monitoring, categorizing, and characterizing potential threats through
all possible means, domains, and partnerships. The NRO continues to
refine a process to better respond to satellite interference and/or
attack, but these activities are largely classified. In addition, the
NRO has established a process and timeline for senior interagency and
congressional leadership notification in the event of suspect or
confirmed satellite interference and/or attack.
Mr. Rogers. The National Space Policy, signed by the President,
states that ``The United States will employ a variety of measures to
help assure the use of space for all responsible parties, and,
consistent with the inherent right of self-defense, deter others from
interference and attack, defend our space systems and contribute to the
defense of allied space systems, and, if deterrence fails, defeat
efforts to attack them.'' Can you provide your thoughts on the
importance of an effective space defense?
General Raymond. An effective space defense is critical for
national security and global economic stability.
Mr. Rogers. Has STRATCOM evaluated disaggregation as a means to
provide more resilience to current space constellations, or provided
any position on the issue?
General Raymond. U.S. Air Force Space Command (AFSPC) and U.S. Air
Force Space and Missile Systems Center (SMC) are leading the study of
disaggregated space system planning. They're studying SATCOM as their
initial effort to better understand the concept.
The space environment continues to evolve and there are attributes
of disaggregation which may offer the possibility of attractive
options; however, disaggregation requires more analysis to determine if
this will be the best way ahead. Disaggregation is only one means by
which we may create more resilient architectures to ensure continuity
of space-derived services.
Mr. Rogers. How are the warfighter requirements for satellite
communications projected in the future? Is there a base level of
necessary communications that STRATCOM can assess will be needed for
the next several years?
General Raymond. Combatant Commands, Services, and Agencies submit
satellite communications (SATCOM) requirements to the Joint Staff and
USSTRATCOM for validation on a quarterly basis. These requirements are
then leveraged by the DOD when planning for future Military SATCOM
systems and by the Defense Information Systems Agency when contracting
for Commercial SATCOM services.
______

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. COOPER
Mr. Cooper. How will the Department decide whether to apply
disaggregated architecture principles to future space system
acquisitions? What role is there for using additional hosted payload
opportunities? What, if any, additional knowledge is needed to make an
informed decision on whether to disaggregate DOD space systems?
General Shelton. DOD is conducting analyses of alternatives for the
Space Based Infrared System Follow-on (SBIRS-FO) and Protected
Satellite Communications Services (PSCS) capabilities. These studies
are evaluating disaggregated options within their stable of possible
solutions. Hosted payloads also are part of the solution set being
examined in these studies. These analyses will inform the decision on
the most resilient and cost effective solution for each satellite
constellation.
Mr. Cooper. To what extent have these potential benefits and
limitations of disaggregation been proven out in pilots,
demonstrations, or other tests, such as the Commercially Hosted
Infrared Payload (CHIRP)? What knowledge or lessons have these
provided?
General Shelton. CHIRP demonstrated the viability of commercially
hosted overhead persistent infrared (OPIR) payloads and gave tremendous
insights into the applicability of wide field-of-view (WFOV) staring
technology to the missile warning, missile defense, technical
intelligence, and battlespace awareness missions. The sensor's ability
to provide continuous coverage within the field-of-view proved to be
particularly valuable in understanding short duration infrared events.
Lessons learned from CHIRP will be applied to the Tactical WFOV Testbed
and other ongoing OPIR Space Modernization Initiative (SMI) activities.
These explore various space architectures, to include disaggregation,
and develop/test lower-cost WFOV payloads to assess performance, cost
and risk. CHIRP also provided many lessons on the benefits and
constraints of a commercially hosted DOD payload.
The Space and Missile Systems Center (SMC) also conducted several
over the air demonstrations in CY13 to explore MILSATCOM
disaggregation. These demonstrations provided early risk reduction for
the Protected Tactical Waveform (PTW) which will be utilized for future
disaggregated protected tactical satellite communications. These
demonstrations provided insight into the maturity of many of the major
PTW functions and how they behaved over the Wideband Global Satellites
and Intelsat. Successful demonstration of the government reference PTW
over operational constellations proves the feasibility of a low-cost
future Protected SATCOM architecture.
Lastly, SMC has several ongoing efforts that will further develop
our understanding of the benefits and limitations of disaggregation. In
the OPIR mission area, the Space Based Infrared System (SBIRS) Follow-
on Analysis of Alternatives (AoA) will assess a disaggregated system as
one of alternatives to the current program of record. For MILSATCOM,
the Protected SATCOM Services (PSCS) AoA is comparing the current
program of record to a disaggregated satellite system or a new
aggregated satellite system. And the Hosted Payload Office, established
in 2011, is working to complete source selection for the Hosted Payload
Solutions contract in June 2014. This contract will enable
demonstrations and pilots for commercial hosting opportunities.
Mr. Cooper. How will the Department decide whether to apply
disaggregated architecture principles to future space system
acquisitions? What role is there for using additional hosted payload
opportunities? What, if any, additional knowledge is needed to make an
informed decision on whether to disaggregate DOD space systems?
Mr. Klinger. The Department is considering disaggregated solutions
in several analyses of alternatives (AoA) studies, as we endeavor to
create more resilient architectures. Disaggregation is only one
solution; however, in the spectrum of solutions that can be implemented
to address space architecture vulnerabilities in an effort to gain more
resilience and more affordable capabilities. Similar effects may be
achievable by diversification, proliferation, and distribution of the
mission across commercial, USG or Allied satellites.
Hosted payloads (assuming they are not hosted on USG satellites),
have significant implications that must be assessed prior to an
implementation decision. Alignment of commercial and USG development
timelines, inability to command and control the vehicle, infrastructure
requirements (user terminals, etc.), and counter-space and protection
responsibilities of the USG are just a few of the concerns associated
with the use of hosted payloads.
Mr. Cooper. To what extent have these potential benefits and
limitations of disaggregation been proven out in pilots,
demonstrations, or other tests, such as the Commercially Hosted
Infrared Payload (CHIRP)? What knowledge or lessons have these
provided?
Mr. Klinger. CHIRP was an acknowledged technical success as it did
provide some valuable lessons on the viability of utilizing commercial
services for hosted payloads and demonstrated the utility of Wide Field
of View (WFOV) sensors. However, the Department is still in the very
early stages of analyzing the concept of disaggregation. The benefits
and limitations of disaggregation are currently being studied through
the on-going Analysis of Alternatives (AoA) processes for Protected
Satellite Communications Services and Overhead Persistent Infrared
(OPIR). The results of these efforts are not available for report at
this time. We are also leveraging information across all of the AoAs to
explicitly address findings related to new concepts of operation.
Finally, disaggregation is but one tool in the resiliency taxonomy
which the Department is exploring and we are focused on the resiliency
of our capabilities, not just individual systems.
Mr. Cooper. Has STRATCOM evaluated disaggregation, or provided any
position on the issue? How does disaggregation contribute to
deterrence?
General Raymond. U.S. Air Force Space Command (AFSPC) and U.S. Air
Force Space and Missile Systems Center (SMC) are leading the study of
disaggregated space system planning. They're studying SATCOM as their
initial effort to better understand the concept.
Disaggregation may contribute to deterrence by influencing
adversary calculations on the cost and benefits of attacking our space
assets. Making our architectures more resilient--disaggregation is one
means by which we may do so--enables our ability to deny an adversary
the benefits of an attack. Other means to enhance the resilience of our
architectures include adequate protection, increased numbers of
satellites, service diversity through the use of commercial, allied,
and wholly-owned elements, distribution of service nodes, and
operational ambiguity.
______

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MS. SANCHEZ
Ms. Sanchez. How does the Air Force plan to manage this competition
to ensure a level playing field? How should ULA's launch prices best be
compared to those of SpaceX?
General Shelton. The Air Force is committed to pursuing the
benefits of competition in the EELV program as soon as possible. We
will compete portions of the launch manifest each year in 2015, 2016,
and 2017 allowing all certified New Entrants to compete (the
certification process includes successful completion of launches and
reviews of manufacturing and launch processing methodologies, as
spelled out in the New Entrant Certification Guide).
All offerors will be required to submit proposals in accordance
with the instructions in the Request for Proposal (RFP), and the Air
Force will evaluate them in accordance with the criteria stated in the
RFP. We will seek Industry's inputs to the final instructions and
criteria by providing a draft RFP for their review. The Defense
Acquisition Executive will approve the final RFP.
Ms. Sanchez. Given the risk of future additional launch slips
beyond the changes that reduced the opportunities for new competitors
in FY15-17, how is the Air Force planning to ensure opportunities for
competition?
General Shelton. The current launch procurement forecast is the
result of programmatic decisions during the development of the FY15
budget request affecting launch planning in general, not just
competitive opportunities, and was driven both by satellite operational
needs and declining budgets.
The Air Force is aggressively taking steps to support competition
while ensuring our responsibility to deploy National Security Space
payloads into their orbits safely and under acceptable levels of risk.
We are working early with declared New Entrants to certify their
systems as soon as possible. We have a Cooperative Research and
Development Agreement with SpaceX and we have recently added more
government team resources to accelerate review of certification
products, data and other supporting information throughout the
certification process. The AF awarded SpaceX early integration
contracts in March and April 2014 to support timely GPS III and SBIRS-
GEO integration requirements. NROL-79 is the remaining competitive
mission in FY15. The AF delayed release of the RFP from January 2014 to
June 2014 to provide additional time for new entrants to prepare.
Ms. Sanchez. What is the requirement for maintaining the ELC line?
Given the growing competitive environment in launch, should the
government continue to pay for ULA's annual launch infrastructure in
the longer-term or should the government work toward buying launch
vehicles like satellites--as fully cost burdened items?
General Shelton. We continue to fund EELV Launch Capability (ELC)
to perform launch operations, maintain launch infrastructure (systems
and expertise) and to provide the operational flexibility and cost
predictability required to launch National Security Space (NSS)
satellites. There is still only one launch provider in the U.S. who can
lift the heavier satellites in the NSS manifest, such as Wideband
Global SATCOM, AEHF, MUOS, and many classified payloads. Launch
capability provides us the flexibility to meet mission requirements
without continual requests for equitable adjustments (REAs) or schedule
penalties driven by satellite vehicle (SV) acquisition/development
issues, integration delays, range delays, and SV build delays. In
short, the ELC portion of the launch business ensures we are
continually prepared to launch national security payloads.
Ms. Sanchez. EELV launch costs have steadily risen over the last
decade. DOD and ULA have recently cited gains in efficiencies. How has
the potential for competition affected prices?
General Shelton. The FY15 budget request includes $1.2B in Air
Force savings between FY14 PB and FY15 PB in the EELV program, and
reflects the final portion of $4.4B savings for the DOD since the FY12
PB high water mark for the program. This is a direct result of economic
order quantity purchasing (36 cores over a 5 year period) while
leveraging the benefit of competition with the incumbent. This FY15
request demonstrates hard-fought gains in controlling launch costs.
Ms. Sanchez. What role do you see commercial industry having in
satellite architectures of the future?
General Shelton. The commercial industry has a critical role in
helping to define future satellite architectures through the
introduction of business approaches, concepts for communication
services, and internally developed technologies. That role continues in
response to the ongoing conversations in support of future commercial
satellite communications pathfinding risk mitigation. In partnership
with commercial industry, the Department recognizes there are
opportunities to develop and procure more affordable, resilient future
satellite architectures.
Unified S-Band (USB) and hosted payloads are two areas that the
Space and Missile Systems Center is actively pursuing to take advantage
of new developments in the commercial industry. Transitioning to USB
will allow our satellites to take advantage of existing commercial
satellite control networks and reduce the Air Force Satellite Control
Network footprint. This will result in substantial cost savings, as
well as development of dual band command capability, which will provide
additional satellite control flexibility and resilience. And the Hosted
Payload Office, established in 2011, is working to complete source
selection for the Hosted Payload Solutions contract in June 2014. This
contract will enable demonstrations and pilots for commercial hosting
opportunities, the goal being to complement and supplement dedicated
platforms while potentially providing significant cost savings and
improved resilience across most mission architectures.
Ms. Sanchez. Are NNSA requirements for nuclear detection being met
in terms of integrating this requirement on GPS III and what is the
deadline for resolving what the nuclear detection payload on the next
GPS III vehicles will be? What challenges remain?
General Shelton. NNSA is coordinating closely with the Air Force to
ensure successful integration of their Global Burst Detectors (GBDs)
onto GPS III SVs 01-08. The GPS program office is currently working
acquisition strategies for GPS III SV 9 and beyond.
Air Force Space Command is working with NNSA to firm up plans for
the GPS III SV 9+ era. Interface definitions will be defined and
coordinated over the next year.
Ms. Sanchez. Given the risk of future additional launch slips
beyond the changes that reduced the opportunities for new competitors
in FY15-17, how is the Air Force planning to ensure opportunities for
competition?
Mr. Klinger. All launches over and above the 36 cores being sole-
sourced from ULA will be available for competition to all certified
providers.
The Department will continue to work to ensure the maximum number
of competitive opportunities are available to all certified providers.
The Air Force is working with prospective new entrants to gain
certification, without imposing potential design or cost impacts on
existing new entrant launch vehicles, and by providing the launch
infrastructure necessary to meet National Security Space (NSS) launch
requirements. The Air Force is partnering with our civil space
agencies, NASA and NOAA, to identify launch opportunities which will
demonstrate capabilities equal to those needed for NSS. The funding for
these opportunities has been provided by our civil space partners.
The Air Force has also recognized that new entrants will have
different approaches to meeting some requirements. The Air Force is
updating these requirements to specify vertical integration, and
maintaining the requirement for minimum 20,000lb lift to Low Earth
Orbit for new entrant providers, in order to maintain predictable
requirements for new entrants.
Ms. Sanchez. How does the Air Force plan to manage this competition
to ensure a level playing field? How should ULA's launch prices best be
compared to those of SpaceX?
Mr. Klinger. The Department is working aggressively to ensure all
future competitions will allow certified offerors the opportunity to
compete on a full and open basis. For the Phase 1a competition the
offers will be evaluated based on specific criteria developed for each
mission. The Air Force will ensure a level playing field by having a
readiness meeting with each contractor prior to RFP release.
The new acquisition strategy, designed to introduce competition as
soon as a new competitor is certified and in a manner to maintain
mission assurance requirements, requires any competitor: to fly our
most critical payloads to all required orbits; provide those
capabilities from launch locations on both coasts; provide heavy lift
launches; and meet the security and mission unique requirements of the
National Security Space launch process for the EELV Phase II follow-on
competition. Any price comparison between competitors must account for
all of these requirements, as stipulated in the Acquisition Strategy.
Ms. Sanchez. What is the requirement for maintaining the ELC line?
Given the growing competitive environment in launch, should the
government continue to pay for ULA's annual launch infrastructure in
the longer-term or should the government work toward buying launch
vehicles like satellites--as fully cost burdened items?
Mr. Klinger. ELC provides the government with the flexibility to
meet all current national security space launch needs. The EELV Phase 1
Contract awarded to ULA on 18 December 2013 includes both a firm fixed
price line item for the actual Atlas V and Delta IV launch vehicle, and
a Cost Plus Incentive Fee line item for the majority of the Launch
Capability support, i.e., the associated launch infrastructure
readiness. This includes Systems Engineering and Program Management,
Mission Integration, Base and Range Support, Maintenance Commodities
and launch pad depreciation (the only Firm Fixed Price portion). This
contract arrangement ensures that the government, in good faith, will
make every reasonable attempt to lock in prices for the launch cores
over the 5 year ordering period.
The future acquisition strategy and contract structure that fully
incorporates new entrants for future EELV procurements is still in
development. The government will evaluate the competitive environment
that exists when the future procurement occurs and determine the
appropriate contracting approach. At this point the Department is
evaluating plans that will take the costs currently funded in the ELC
line and directly allocate them with individual launch service thus
allowing the Department to phase out the ELC line on future EELV
procurements.
Ms. Sanchez. EELV launch costs have steadily risen over the last
decade. DOD and ULA have recently cited gains in efficiencies. How has
the potential for competition affected prices?
Mr. Klinger. The Department recognized the rising EELV launch costs
and directed the AF to develop a new acquisition strategy that
reintroduced competition into the program with the hopes of realizing
the benefits of competition in the form of reduced costs. The AF
developed a dual track acquisition approach that encourages competition
and also provides cost reduction by providing the incumbent contractor,
United Launch Alliance (ULA), with a 5 year requirements contract that
allows ULA to strike long term deals with their vendor base. This
longer term contract has the added benefit of helping to stabilize an
atrophying space industrial base.
The combination of those two approaches has significantly reduced
the cost of launch to the U.S. government, with program improvements
that result in a $3Billion decrease in the new Acquisition Program
Baseline, which includes extending the EELV program by 10 years (from
2020 to 2030) and increasing the launch service quantity by 60 from 92
to 152. It also takes advantage of a steady production rate to minimize
costs adding stability and predictability for both Solid Rocket Motors
and Liquid Rocket Engines.
Ms. Sanchez. What role do you see commercial industry having in
satellite architectures of the future?
Mr. Klinger. The Department sees the commercial industry's role
becoming more prominent in the years to come. We are currently at a
point in time where all of our major space capabilities are on the cusp
of re-capitalization decisions and we have the opportunity to pursue a
more significant role for commercial capabilities. The options to
implement this include partnerships that add real value e.g. improved
resilience, to our National Security Space architectures. A renewed
focus on resilience offers an opportunity and a virtual requirement
that considers these systems as a fundamental feature of our space
architectures. Their consideration as elemental to our architecture
should address not only their capacity contribution, but also their
ability to bolster deterrence and complicate the decision calculus of
our adversaries. Over the years we have demonstrated the value of
commercial contributions in areas such as remote sensing for our
warfighters, Coalition partners, disaster relief and many other civil
applications. We now have the opportunity to expand use of commercial
capability, as called for in the National Space Policy.
Ms. Sanchez. EELV launch costs have steadily risen over the last
decade. DOD and ULA have recently cited gains in efficiencies. How has
the potential for competition affected prices?
Mr. Loverro. It is my opinion that competitive forces have been an
important element of DOD's overall strategy to curb cost growth and,
hopefully, eventually lower launch costs.
More importantly, a well-managed, commercially competitive U.S.
launch industry brings secondary benefits for DOD through
competitively-inspired improvements in launch technology, range
scheduling process, and a host of other areas, not to mention the
overall national benefit of bringing commercial launch back to the
United States. These are some of the primary reasons DOD is interested
in facilitating new entrants into the space launch business and
certifying those new entrants as quickly as possible.
Ms. Sanchez. Are NNSA requirements for nuclear detection being met
in terms of integrating this requirement on GPS III and what is the
deadline for resolving what the nuclear detection payload on the next
GPS III vehicles will be? What challenges remain?
Mr. Loverro. Yes, the National Nuclear Security Administration
(NNSA) is coordinating closely with the Nuclear Detection (NUDET)
Detection System (NDS) and Global Positioning System (GPS) III Air
Force teams to ensure successful integration of the Global Burst
Detectors (GBDs) onto next-generation GPS III Satellite Vehicles (SV).
There is no issue with SV 1-8, as NNSA will provide the payload on time
to meet the integration schedule for these SVs as originally planned.
If, as expected, the Air Force extends the contract and buys additional
satellites, SV 9 & 10 will not have GBDs, but these are not needed to
have a healthy system. NNSA has begun research and development to
develop a new/modified GBD to use on SV11 and thereafter.
According to the approved GPS Enterprise Schedule, the SV-11
Available For Launch date is in the second quarter of Fiscal Year 2022;
therefore, the NDS payload would be required in the second quarter of
Fiscal Year 2020. NNSA development is on schedule to meet these
deadlines. NNSA, Department of Energy laboratories, and Air Force NDS
and GPS Space Vehicle teams are working successfully together with the
SV contractor to determine NDS payload space allocation on the next-
generation GPS III SV. No other known challenges remain.
______

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. PETERS
Mr. Peters. What progress has the Department made to establish its
Space Acquisition Strategy for commercial satellite services as
required in the final conference report of the fiscal year 2014
National Defense Authorization Act (NDAA)? A recent DISA report shows
that military satellite communications bandwidth demand is increasing
at a rate of 35% per year. It was surprising to learn that to meet 2012
military bandwidth needs it takes 21 legacy satellites versus one
modern commercial high capacity satellite. As the Department continues
to develop its Space Acquisition Strategy, is the Department aware of
the new technology that is available for high capacity satellites? How
does the Department plan to incorporate the procurement of the best
available commercial satellite services into the overall acquisition
strategy that is being developed?
General Shelton. A Space Acquisition Strategy for commercial
satellite services is currently in work to answer the requirement of
the FY14 NDAA.
The Department is actively engaged with commercial partners
regarding new technology available for high capacity satellites.
Beginning in FY11, the Space and Missile Systems Center (SMC) has
conducted several Broad Agency Announcements (BAAs) with the goal of
better understanding these technologies and integrating them into our
plans for more affordable and resilient future satellite architectures.
SMC is executing a pathfinder beginning later this year to procure
transponders on a highly inclined commercial satellite to meet a
validated warfighter need over USAFRICOM. This cost-efficient
pathfinder will satisfy specific mission requirements and inform future
commercial satellite communications procurement approaches.
The pathfinder planned for later this year is the first of several
additional pathfinders intended to incrementally build via a ``crawl,
walk, run'' approach toward a more efficient commercial acquisition
process and optimized balance between Military and Commercial SATCOM
procurement. The ultimate goal of these efforts is to increase
affordability, efficiency and resiliency.

[all]
