- [H.A.S.C. No. 113-111] THE MAY 31, 2014, TRANSFER OF FIVE SENIOR TALIBAN DETAINEES

[House Hearing, 113 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

[H.A.S.C. No. 113-111]

THE MAY 31, 2014, TRANSFER OF FIVE SENIOR TALIBAN DETAINEES

__________

COMMITTEE ON ARMED SERVICES

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED THIRTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

HEARING HELD

JUNE 11, 2014

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

88-456                         WASHINGTON : 2015
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800;
DC area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104 Mail: Stop IDCC,
Washington, DC 20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON ARMED SERVICES
One Hundred Thirteenth Congress

HOWARD P. ``BUCK'' McKEON, California, Chairman

MAC THORNBERRY, Texas                ADAM SMITH, Washington
WALTER B. JONES, North Carolina      LORETTA SANCHEZ, California
J. RANDY FORBES, Virginia            MIKE McINTYRE, North Carolina
JEFF MILLER, Florida                 ROBERT A. BRADY, Pennsylvania
JOE WILSON, South Carolina           SUSAN A. DAVIS, California
FRANK A. LoBIONDO, New Jersey        JAMES R. LANGEVIN, Rhode Island
ROB BISHOP, Utah                     RICK LARSEN, Washington
MICHAEL R. TURNER, Ohio              JIM COOPER, Tennessee
JOHN KLINE, Minnesota                MADELEINE Z. BORDALLO, Guam
MIKE ROGERS, Alabama                 JOE COURTNEY, Connecticut
TRENT FRANKS, Arizona                DAVID LOEBSACK, Iowa
BILL SHUSTER, Pennsylvania           NIKI TSONGAS, Massachusetts
K. MICHAEL CONAWAY, Texas            JOHN GARAMENDI, California
DOUG LAMBORN, Colorado               HENRY C. ``HANK'' JOHNSON, Jr.,
ROBERT J. WITTMAN, Virginia              Georgia
DUNCAN HUNTER, California            COLLEEN W. HANABUSA, Hawaii
JOHN FLEMING, Louisiana              JACKIE SPEIER, California
MIKE COFFMAN, Colorado               RON BARBER, Arizona
E. SCOTT RIGELL, Virginia            ANDREE CARSON, Indiana
CHRISTOPHER P. GIBSON, New York      CAROL SHEA-PORTER, New Hampshire
VICKY HARTZLER, Missouri             DANIEL B. MAFFEI, New York
JOSEPH J. HECK, Nevada               DEREK KILMER, Washington
JON RUNYAN, New Jersey               JOAQUIN CASTRO, Texas
AUSTIN SCOTT, Georgia                TAMMY DUCKWORTH, Illinois
STEVEN M. PALAZZO, Mississippi       SCOTT H. PETERS, California
MO BROOKS, Alabama                   WILLIAM L. ENYART, Illinois
RICHARD B. NUGENT, Florida           PETE P. GALLEGO, Texas
KRISTI L. NOEM, South Dakota         MARC A. VEASEY, Texas
PAUL COOK, California                TULSI GABBARD, Hawaii
JIM BRIDENSTINE, Oklahoma
BRAD R. WENSTRUP, Ohio
JACKIE WALORSKI, Indiana
BRADLEY BYRNE, Alabama

Robert L. Simmons II, Staff Director
Catherine McElroy, General Counsel
Paul Arcangeli, Minority Staff Director
Aaron Falk, Clerk

C O N T E N T S

----------

CHRONOLOGICAL LIST OF HEARINGS
2014

Page

Hearing:

Wednesday, June 11, 2014, The May 31, 2014, Transfer of Five
Senior Taliban Detainees.......................................     1

Appendix:

Wednesday, June 11, 2014.........................................    89
----------

WEDNESDAY, JUNE 11, 2014
THE MAY 31, 2014, TRANSFER OF FIVE SENIOR TALIBAN DETAINEES
STATEMENTS PRESENTED BY MEMBERS OF CONGRESS

McKeon, Hon. Howard P. ``Buck,'' a Representative from
California, Chairman, Committee on Armed Services..............     1
Smith, Hon. Adam, a Representative from Washington, Ranking
Member, Committee on Armed Services............................     3

WITNESSES

Hagel, Hon. Chuck, Secretary of Defense, U.S. Department of
Defense; accompanied by Hon. Stephen Preston, General Counsel,
U.S. Department of Defense.....................................     6

APPENDIX

Prepared Statements:

Hagel, Hon. Chuck............................................    97
McKeon, Hon. Howard P. ``Buck''..............................    93
Smith, Hon. Adam.............................................    95

Documents Submitted for the Record:

[There were no Documents submitted.]

Witness Responses to Questions Asked During the Hearing:

Mr. Courtney.................................................   108
Mr. Jones....................................................   107
Mr. McKeon...................................................   107
Mr. Scott....................................................   108
Ms. Speier...................................................   107
Mr. Turner...................................................   107

Questions Submitted by Members Post Hearing:

Mr. Palazzo..................................................   111

THE MAY 31, 2014, TRANSFER OF FIVE SENIOR TALIBAN DETAINEES

----------

House of Representatives,
Committee on Armed Services,
Washington, DC, Wednesday, June 11, 2014.
The committee met, pursuant to call, at 10:03 a.m., in room
2118, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Howard P. ``Buck''
McKeon (chairman of the committee) presiding.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. HOWARD P. ``BUCK'' MCKEON, A
REPRESENTATIVE FROM CALIFORNIA, CHAIRMAN, COMMITTEE ON ARMED
SERVICES

The Chairman. The committee will come to order. Please hold
as we seat the public.
At the start of this hearing, I am pleased to welcome
members of the public who have such an interest in these
proceedings.
We intend to conduct this hearing in an orderly and
efficient manner to ensure all the Members have an opportunity
to ask questions and our witnesses have an opportunity to be
heard. To that end, please be advised I will not tolerate
disturbances of these proceedings, including verbal
disruptions, photography, standing, or holding signs. And I
thank you all for your cooperation.
I want to thank Secretary Hagel and Mr. Preston for
testifying before the committee today on the May 31st transfer
of five senior Taliban detainees from detention at Guantanamo
Bay to the Government of Qatar.
The matter before us is deeply troubling. The committee has
begun a full investigation into the administration's decision,
its unprecedented negotiations with terrorists, the national
security implications of releasing these dangerous individuals
from U.S. custody, and the violation of national security law.
We hope for and expect the Department's full cooperation.
Let me be clear upfront on the focus of today's hearing. It
is not my intention to dive into the circumstances of the
disappearance of Sergeant Bergdahl from his base in 2009. There
will be a time and a process for that. I also do not intend to
use this hearing to weigh the merits of returning an American
soldier to the United States. Everyone who wears the uniform
should be returned home.
However, the detainee transfer raises numerous national
security policy and legal questions. The explanations we
received from the White House officials at a House-wide
briefing earlier this week were misleading and at times
blatantly false.
This transfer sets a dangerous precedent in negotiating
with terrorists. It reverses longstanding U.S. policy and could
incentivize other terrorist organizations, including Al Qaeda,
to increase their use of kidnappings of U.S. personnel.
It increases risk to our military and civilian personnel
serving in Afghanistan and elsewhere. As the President,
yourself, and other administration officials have acknowledged,
these five terrorists still pose a threat to Americans and
Afghans alike, and in 1 year they will be free to return to
Afghanistan or anywhere else.
What is more, although there will be fewer U.S. personnel
in Afghanistan in 2015, the return of these five Taliban
leaders directly threatens the gains of our men and women who
have fought and died--the gains that our men and women have
fought and died for.
The transfer is a clear violation of section 1035 of the
National Defense Authorization Act of 2014. There is no
compelling reason why the Department could not provide a
notification to Congress 30 days before the transfer,
especially when it has complied with the notification
requirement for all previous GTMO [Guantanamo Bay Naval Base]
detainee transfers since enactment of the law.
The statute is more than a notification; it requires
detailed national security information, including detailed
consideration of risk and risk mitigation that the Congress and
American people would expect any administration to consider
before a decision is made to transfer GTMO detainees. It was
designed and approved by a bipartisan majority in Congress due
to real concerns that dangerous terrorists were being released
in a manner that allowed them to return to the battlefield.
We are also seeing the consequences of the President's
hasty Afghanistan withdrawal strategy. Afghanistan is at a
critical juncture. At the same time we are focused on the first
democratic transition of government and supporting security and
stability within the country, this negotiation has legitimized
the Taliban, the organization that safeguarded the 9/11 Al
Qaeda perpetrators and ruled Afghanistan through atrocities.
Lastly, this transfer sets dangerous precedent for how the
President intends to clear out GTMO. The remaining detainees,
by the Obama administration's own analysis, include the most
dangerous against U.S. forces and national security interests.
In the President's rush to close GTMO, are other deals in the
works to release these dangerous individuals?
Mr. Secretary, I don't envy the position you have been put
in. We understand the responsibility you bear for signing these
transfer agreements, but we are also aware of the immense
pressure the White House has put on you to transfer these
detainees so it can claim victory for closing GTMO.
Nevertheless, we expect the Department to abide by the law and
to provide its candid assessment of national security impacts
of the President's decisions.
This is a bipartisan committee. Last month, we passed our
authorization act out of committee unanimously and off the
floor with well over 300 votes. That kind of bipartisanship is
based on trust. Members on this committee trust each other to
live up to our word. And when we work with the Department and
the White House to pass legislation the President will sign, we
have to trust that he will follow those laws. The President has
broken a bipartisan law and put our troops at greater risk, and
I am eager to find out why.
Mr. Smith.
[The prepared statement of Mr. McKeon can be found in the
Appendix on page 93.]

STATEMENT OF HON. ADAM SMITH, A REPRESENTATIVE FROM WASHINGTON,
RANKING MEMBER, COMMITTEE ON ARMED SERVICES

Mr. Smith. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you for
holding this hearing.
Thank you to our witnesses for being here.
I think this is a very appropriate issue for Congress to
exercise oversight on. And there are a lot of questions that
need to be answered, and I am pleased the administration is
here today to attempt to answer those questions.
I also want to agree upfront with the chairman that one
thing we shouldn't talk about today is the circumstances of
Sergeant Bergdahl's--sorry--of Mr. Bergdahl's capture. And I am
happy about that. Regrettably, at the briefing we had on
Monday, that issue did come up. There, you know, simply is no
proof, no evidence. I think the way Mr. Bergdahl has been
slandered has been scandalous, you know. And I hope we will
take a step back and do what Admiral Winnefeld said, which is
we will bring him home, we will get him healthy, then we will
figure out what happened, and due process will be exercised. So
that should not be discussed today.
What should be discussed today are the circumstances of
this deal. And I think the chairman raised a number of
appropriate questions.
And I have enormous sympathy for the President and for you,
Mr. Secretary, of the very difficult decision that had to be
made here in terms of figuring out whether or not this was an
exchange that was in the best interests of the United States.
Ultimately, I will tell you, I think it was. We do our level-
best to bring our service men and women home if we possibly
can.
Not under any circumstances. The issue was raised, you
know, would we have traded Khalid Sheikh Mohammed for him.
Absolutely not. Totally different situation. But when you are
talking about these five members of the Taliban, it is a
different equation.
And that really raises the issues that the chairman came up
with. Who were we negotiating with? He says we were negotiating
with terrorists. But Sergeant Bergdahl was captured on the
battlefield in a war zone. The Taliban were, until just a few
months before that, the legitimate Government of Afghanistan.
The current Afghan Government has said over and over again
that they want to negotiate with the Taliban. Any sensible
person who looks at the situation in Afghanistan right now
understands that there is no ultimate peaceful solution if at
some point you don't negotiate with some of the Taliban. Which
ones, we don't know.
So to simply dismiss this as one terrorist group and
negotiating with terrorists I think totally misstates the
situation. This was on the battlefield, in a war zone, a
soldier who was captured by a group of people that were the
legitimate Government of Afghanistan mere months before.
I don't know the full implications of that. And I
completely agree with the chairman that we need to be very,
very careful about setting any precedent that we would
negotiate with terrorists. But I think this raises an entirely
different set of questions that need to be answered and
addressed. And I would be very interested, Secretary Hagel, in
your viewpoint on that. What does that mean going forward?
But understand: The idea that under no circumstances will
we negotiate with the Taliban is one that has been rejected by
virtually everyone. We, the Afghan Government, if we are going
to get any sort of peaceful solution in Afghanistan, are going
to have to negotiate with at least some elements of the
Taliban. Which ones, we don't know. But that has certainly been
the position of the Afghan Government. So this is an entirely
different situation than saying we simply negotiated with
terrorists.
The second troubling question this raises is the situation
in Guantanamo. And I will disagree with the chairman on one key
point. The President is not pursuing this out of some naked
political goal; he wants to close Guantanamo just because
politically he would like to. That is not the situation.
We have over 150 people held in Guantanamo, many of them in
very murky status. Is it the plan of the United States of
America to hold these people forever without charge and without
trial? What would that do to our values, to precedents that we
have set in a different way if we do that?
Now, there is no easy way out of this. But to simply
dismiss it and say any effort to try to close Guantanamo is
purely political overlooks the fact that we are in a very
difficult situation, in large part because a lot of these
people were captured in the first place without a clear
understanding of how or why, without a plan to try them, and
now we have them. And it is not the United States of America
that I believe in that says, look, we are just going to grab
people and hold them forever without charge, without trial,
without process. How are we going to handle that?
Now, one of the interesting questions that has been raised,
it has been argued that these five that were captured would
have had to have been released at the end of hostilities with
Afghanistan. It is not my understanding that that is actually
the status that we have given them. They are not being treated,
clearly, as prisoners of war. As a matter of fact, I believe
the phrase was ``unlawful enemy combatants,'' has been the
phrase that has been used for them.
So if they weren't being held as prisoners of war, is it
the administration's position that at the end of our full
involvement in Afghanistan we would have to release them? I
don't believe that it is. That has been alluded to. That really
needs to be clarified, first of all, with regard to these five,
but, second of all, how many more inmates are there in
Afghanistan that might be put into that category, that at the
end of 2014 we would feel like we would have to release?
Again, it is my understanding that it is none of them, that
we didn't put them in that law-of-war category, prisoner-of-war
category, where they would have to be released at the end of
hostilities. But the category they are in is very murky and
very confusing and something that we have to answer if we are
going to live up to our own constitutional values.
Now, the final issue that I think is worth exploring and
where I am in more substantial agreement with the chairman is
on the congressional consultation issue. And there are two
pieces of this.
First of all, it is very important, I believe, for the
White House to engage with Congress just as a way for us to
work together to advance the right policies, to consult us on
key issues. And I think it is wrong that months before when--
well, it is wrong that when you knew that you were thinking
about doing this deal, you didn't take it to the top leadership
in Congress and talk about it.
Now, I know the concern. The concern was that it would have
been leaked. But as has been mentioned, Congress has been
trusted with many, many other things, including the location of
Osama bin Laden, and not leaked it. I think that type of
consultation would have helped the process, not hurt it.
And the second piece that I am concerned about is the 30-
day requirement. Now, I know the President put a signing
statement when he signed the law that had that 30-day
requirement in it, saying that he was concerned about the
constitutionality about it. But the law is the law. The way you
challenge constitutionality is you go to court, and you would
figure out whether or not the courts say it is constitutional
or not. And until the courts rule on that, it is the law.
When President Bush was in the White House, he had, gosh,
hundreds of signing statements, and there was, I believe, a
correct amount of outrage amongst many that those signing
statements were put out there as a way to simply avoid the law.
If it wasn't right for President Bush to do it, it is not right
for President Obama to do it. So I would be very curious to
understand the argument for why that 30-day requirement wasn't
in place.
And, again, I will come back to the fact that there was no
reason that that 30 days' notice couldn't have been given to
the leadership of Congress. We can, in fact, keep a secret. Or,
I would say, we are no worse at it than the administration if
you go back through history in terms of how things get out. So
I think better consultation with Congress is something we will
definitely need going forward.
With that, I look forward to your testimony.
I thank the chairman for this hearing.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Smith can be found in the
Appendix on page 95.]
The Chairman. I ask unanimous consent that non-committee-
members, if any, be allowed to participate in today's hearing
after all committee members have had an opportunity to ask
questions. Is there objection?
Without objection, non-committee-members will be recognized
at the appropriate time.
Mr. Secretary, the time is yours.

STATEMENT OF HON. CHUCK HAGEL, SECRETARY OF DEFENSE, U.S.
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE; ACCOMPANIED BY HON. STEPHEN PRESTON,
GENERAL COUNSEL, U.S. DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE

Secretary Hagel. Mr. Chairman, thank you. Ranking Member
Smith, thank you. And to the members of this committee, I
appreciate an opportunity to discuss the recovery of Sergeant
Bowe Bergdahl and the transfer of five detainees from
Guantanamo Bay to Qatar.
And I appreciate having the Department of Defense's general
counsel, Steve Preston, here with me this morning. Mr. Preston
was one of our negotiators throughout this process in Qatar and
signed on behalf of the United States the memorandum of
understanding between the Governments of Qatar and United
States.
Also here, representing the Joint Chiefs of Staff, sitting
behind me, is Brigadier General Pat White, who is the Director
of the Joint Staff's Pakistan/Afghanistan Coordination Cell.
General White helped coordinate the Bergdahl recovery on behalf
of the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, General Dempsey.
The Vice Chairman of the Joint Chiefs, Admiral Winnefeld,
who the chairman has noted, will join us later this morning in
the classified, closed portion of the hearing.
And, as you know, General Dempsey and Admiral Winnefeld
played critical roles in the meetings at the National Security
Council leading up to Sergeant Bergdahl's release and supported
the decision to move forward with this prisoner exchange.
In my statement today, I will address the issues of
Chairman McKeon and Mr. Smith, the issues they raised when the
chairman asked me to testify and explain why it was so urgent
to pursue Sergeant Bergdahl's release, why we decided to move
forward with the detainee transfer, and why it was fully
consistent with U.S. law, our Nation's interests, and our
military's core values.
Mr. Chairman and members of this committee, I want to make
one fundamental point. I would never sign any document or make
any agreement, agree to any decision that I did not feel was in
the best interests of this country, nor would the President of
the United States, who made the final decision with the full
support of his national security team.
I recognize that the speed with which we moved in this case
has caused great frustration, legitimate questions, and
concern. We could have done a better job, could have done a
better job of keeping you informed.
But I urge you to remember two things. This was an
extraordinary situation. First, we weren't certain that we
would transfer those detainees out of Guantanamo until we had
Sergeant Bergdahl in hand. And, second, we had Sergeant
Bergdahl in hand only a few hours after making the final
arrangements.
There are legitimate questions about this prisoner
exchange. And Congress, obviously, has an important
constitutional role and right and responsibility to play in all
of our military and intelligence matters. As a former member,
Mr. Chairman, of the Senate Select Committee on Intelligence
and the Council on Foreign Relations, I appreciate the vital
role Congress plays in our national security.
And I will present to this committee, within the limits of
an open, unclassified hearing and in more detail in the
classified hearing, everything I can to answer your questions
and assure you, this committee, the American people, that this
prisoner exchange was done legally, it was substantial
mitigation of risk to our country, and in the national
interests of this country.
Let's start with Sergeant Bergdahl's status as a member of
the United States Army. He was held captive by the Taliban and
the Haqqani Network for almost 5 years. He was officially
listed as ``missing-captured.'' No charges were ever brought
against Sergeant Bergdahl, and there are no charges pending
now.
Our entire national security apparatus--the military, the
intelligence community, and the State Department--pursued every
avenue to recover Sergeant Bergdahl, just as the American
people and this Congress and the Congresses before you expected
us to do. In fact, this committee--this committee knows there
were a number of congressional resolutions introduced and
referred to this committee directing the President of the
United States to do everything he could to get Sergeant
Bergdahl released from captivity. We never stopped trying to
get him back, as the Congress knows that, because he is a
soldier in the United States Army.
Questions about Sergeant Bergdahl's capture, as Mr. Smith
noted and you, Mr. Chairman, are separate from our effort to
recover him, because we do whatever it takes to recover any and
every U.S. service member held in captivity. This pledge is
woven into the fabric of our Nation and our military. As former
Central Command Commander Marine General Jim Mattis recently
put it, quote, ``The bottom line is we don't leave people
behind. That is the beginning and that is the end of what we
stand for. We keep faith with the guys who sign on, and that is
all there is to it,'' end of quote.
As for the circumstances surrounding his captivity, as
Secretary of the Army McHugh and Army Chief of Staff Odierno
will review later and they have said clearly last week that the
Army will review--they will review this exchange, circumstance,
captivity of Sergeant Bergdahl in a comprehensive, coordinated
effort that will include speaking with Sergeant Bergdahl.
And I think I need not remind anyone on this committee,
like any American, Sergeant Bergdahl has rights. And his
conduct will be judged on the facts, not political hearsay,
posturing charges, or innuendo. We do owe that to any American
and especially those who are members of our military and their
families.
Like most Americans, I have been offended and disappointed
in how the Bergdahl family has been treated by some in this
country. No family deserves this. I hope there will be some
sober reflection on people's conduct regarding this issue and
how it relates to the Bergdahl family.
In 2011, the Obama administration conducted talks with the
Taliban on a detainee exchange involving the same five Taliban
detainees that were ultimately transferred after the release of
Sergeant Bergdahl--2011. These talks, which Congress was
briefed on--some of you in this room were in those briefings, I
understand--which Congress was briefed on in November of 2011
and in January of 2012, were broken off by the Taliban in March
of 2012. We have not had direct talks with the Taliban since
this time.
In September of 2013, the Government of Qatar offered to
serve as an intermediary. And in November of last year, we
requested that the Taliban provide a new proof-of-life video of
Sergeant Bergdahl.
In January of this year, we received that video, and it was
disturbing. Some of you may have seen the video. It showed a
deterioration in his physical appearance and mental state
compared to previous videos. Our entire intelligence community
carefully analyzed every part of it and concluded that Sergeant
Bergdahl's health was poor and possibly declining. This gave us
growing urgency to act.
In April of this year, after briefly suspending engagement
with us, the Taliban again signaled interest in indirect talks
on an exchange. At that point, we intensified our discussions
with the Qatar Government about security assistance and
assurances, particularly security assurances.
On May 12th, we signed a memorandum of understanding [MOU]
with Qatar detailing the specific security measures that would
be undertaken and enforced--and enforced by them if any Taliban
detainees were transferred to their custody. Steve Preston, as
I noted earlier, signed that memorandum of understanding on
behalf of the United States Government and was included in
those negotiations.
Included in this MOU were specific risk-mitigation measures
and commitments from the Government of Qatar, like travel
restrictions, monitoring, information-sharing, and limitations
on activities, as well as other significant measures which we
will detail in the closed portion of this hearing. They were
described, as you know, Mr. Chairman, in the classified
documentation and notification letter I sent to this committee
last week.
That memorandum of understanding has been sent to the
Congress, to the leadership, to the committees. And every
Member of Congress has an opportunity to review that memorandum
of understanding in a closed setting.
U.S. officials received a warning--we received a warning
from the Qatari intermediaries that, as we proceeded, time was
not on our side. And we will go into more detail in a
classified hearing on those warnings. This indicated that the
risks to Sergeant Bergdahl's safety were growing.
We moved forward with indirect negotiations on how to carry
out that exchange of five detainees and agreed to the mechanics
of the exchange on the morning of May 27th following 3 days of
intensive talks.
That same day, President Obama received a personal
commitment and a personal telephone call from the Emir of Qatar
to uphold and enforce the security arrangements, and the final
decision was made to move forward with that exchange on that
day.
As the opportunity to obtain Sergeant Bergdahl's release
became clear, we grew increasingly concerned that any delay or
any leaks could derail the deal and further endanger Sergeant
Bergdahl. We were told by the Qataris that a leak--any kind of
a leak would end the negotiation for Bergdahl's release.
We also knew that he would be extremely vulnerable during
any movement and our military personnel conducting the handoff
would be exposed to the possible ambush or other deadly
scenarios in very dangerous territory that we did not control.
And we had been given no information on where the handoff would
occur.
For all of these reasons and more, the exchange needed to
take place quickly, efficiently, and quietly. We believe this
exchange was our last, best opportunity to free him.
After the exchange was set in motion, only 96 hours passed
before Sergeant Bergdahl was in our hands.
Throughout this period, there was great uncertainty--great
uncertainty about whether the deal would go forward. We did not
know the general area of the handoff until 24 hours before. We
did not know the precise location until 1 hour before. And we
did not know until the moment Sergeant Bergdahl was handed over
safely to U.S. Special Operations Forces that the Taliban would
hold up their end of the deal.
So it wasn't until we recovered Sergeant Bergdahl on May
31st that we moved ahead with the transfer of the five
Guantanamo detainees.
The President's decision to move forward with the transfer
of these detainees was a tough call. I supported it. I stand by
it.
As Secretary of Defense, I have the authority and the
responsibility, as has been noted here, to determine whether
detainees--any detainees, but these specific detainees at
Guantanamo Bay--can be transferred to the custody of another
country. I take that responsibility, Mr. Chairman, members of
this committee, damn seriously--damn seriously, as I do any
responsibility I have in this job.
Neither I nor any member of the President's National
Security Council were under any illusions about these five
detainees. They were members of the Taliban, which controlled
much of Afghanistan prior, all the territory, to America's
invasion and overthrow of that regime. They were enemy
belligerents detained under the law of war and taken to
Guantanamo in late 2001 and 2002. They had been in the U.S.
custody at Guantanamo since then--12, 13 years.
But they have not been implicated in any attacks against
the United States, and we had no basis to prosecute them in a
Federal court or military commission. It was appropriate to
continue to consider them for an exchange, as we had been over
the last few years, as Congress had been told that we were. And
if any of these detainees ever try to rejoin the fight, they
would be doing so at their own peril.
There is also always--always some risk associated with the
transfer of detainees from Guantanamo. This is not a risk-free
business. We get that.
The U.S. Government has transferred 620 detainees--620
detainees from Guantanamo since May 2002, with 532 transfers
occurring during the Bush administration and 88 transfers
occurring during the Obama administration.
In the case of these five detainees, the security measures
Qatar put in place led me, as Secretary of Defense, to
determine, consistent with the National Defense Authorization
Act, that the risks they posed to the United States, our
citizens, and our interests were substantially mitigated.
I consulted with all of the members of the President's
national security team and asked them as they reviewed all of
the details, they reviewed the draft of my notification letter,
the specific line-by-line, word-by-word details of that letter,
I asked for their complete reviews, the risks associated, and I
asked, either concur or object to the transfer.
The Secretary of State, the Attorney General, the Secretary
of Homeland Security, Director of National Intelligence, and
the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff all supported this
transfer, all put their names on it. There was complete
unanimity on this decision, Mr. Chairman.
The President and I would not have moved forward unless we
had complete confidence that we were acting lawfully, in the
national interest, and in the best traditions of our country.
Our operation to save Sergeant Bergdahl's life was fully
consistent with U.S. laws and our national security interests
in at least five ways:
First, we complied with the National Defense Authorization
Act of 2014 by determining that the risk the detainees posed to
the United States, American citizens, and our interests was
substantially mitigated and that the transfer was in the
national security interests of the United States.
Second, we fulfilled our commitment to recover all military
personnel held captive.
Third, we followed the precedent of past wartime prisoner
exchanges, a practice in our country that dates back to the
Revolutionary War and has occurred in most wars that we have
fought.
Fourth, because Sergeant Bergdahl was a detained combatant
being held by an enemy force and not a hostage, it was fully
consistent with our longstanding policy not to offer
concessions to hostage-takers. The Taliban is our enemy, and we
are engaged in an armed conflict with them.
Fifth, we did what was consistent with previous
congressional briefings this administration had provided, as I
have already noted, in late 2011 and early 2012 reflecting our
intent to conduct a transfer of this nature with these
particular five individuals.
Mr. Chairman, I fully understand and appreciate the
concerns, the questions, about our decision to transfer these
five detainees to Qatar without providing 30 days' notice to
Congress. But under these exceptional circumstances, a fleeting
opportunity to protect the life of an American service member
held captive and in danger for almost 5 years, the national
security team and the President of the United States agreed
that we needed to act swiftly.
We were mindful that this was not simply a detainee
transfer but a military operation with very high and
complicated risks in a very short window of opportunity that we
didn't want to jeopardize, both for the sake of Sergeant
Bergdahl and our operators in the field who put themselves at
great risk to secure his return. In consultation with the
Department of Justice, the administration concluded that a
transfer of the five could lawfully proceed.
The options available to us to recover Sergeant Bergdahl
were very few and far from perfect, but they often are in
wartime, Mr. Chairman, and especially in a complicated war like
we have been fighting in Afghanistan for 13 years. Wars are
messy, and they are full of imperfect choices.
I saw this firsthand during my service in Vietnam in 1968.
In 1968, this committee may recall, we sent home nearly 17,000
of our war dead in 1 year. I see it as the Secretary of
Defense. A few of you on this committee--a few of you on this
committee have experienced war, and you have seen it up close.
You know there is always suffering from war. There is no glory
in war. War is always about human beings; it is not about
machines. War is a dirty business. And we don't like to deal
with those realities. But realities they are, and we must deal
with them.
Those of us charged with protecting the national security
interests of this country are called upon every day to make the
hard, tough, imperfect, and sometimes unpleasant choices based
on the best information we have and within the limits of our
laws and always based on America's interests.
War, every part of war, like prisoner exchanges, is not
some abstraction or theoretical exercise. The hard choices and
options don't fit neatly into clearly defined instructions in
how-to manuals. All of these decisions are part of the brutal,
imperfect realities we all deal with in war.
In the decision to rescue Sergeant Bergdahl, we complied
with the law and we did what we believed was in the best
interest of our country, our military, and Sergeant Bergdahl.
The President has constitutional responsibilities and
constitutional authorities to protect American citizens and
members of our Armed Forces. That is what he did. America does
not leave its soldiers behind. We made the right decision, and
we did it for the right reasons: to bring home one of our own
people.
As all of you know, I value the Defense Department's
partnership with this Congress and the trust we have developed
over the years. I know that trust has been broken. I know you
have questions about that.
But I will tell you something else. I have always been
straightforward, completely transparent with this committee
since I have been Secretary of Defense. I will continue to do
that. I will do that always, with all my relationships and
associations and responsibilities to the Congress.
That is what I always demanded, Mr. Chairman, of any
administration when I was a Member of the United States Senate.
I have been on your side of this equation; I understand it.
That is what I have done this morning with this statement I
have made. And I made the decision I did, and I have explained
that in general terms. The circumstances surrounding my
decisions were imperfect, and these decisions that have to lead
to some kind of judgment always are. The President is in the
same position, but you have to make a choice, you have to make
a decision.
The day after the Bergdahl operation at Bagram Air Base in
Afghanistan, I met with the team of special operators that
recovered Sergeant Bergdahl. They are the best of the best,
people who didn't hesitate to put themselves at incredible
personal risk to recover one of their own. And I know we all
thank them. I know this committee thanks them, and we
appreciate everything that they do. And we thank all of our men
and women in Afghanistan who make the difficult sacrifices
every day for this country.
Earlier this week, we were reminded of the heavy cost of
war--the heavy cost of war, when we lost five American service
men in Afghanistan. I know our thoughts and our prayers are
with their families. We are grateful for their service, and we
are grateful for the service of all our men and women in
uniform around the world.
As I conclude, Mr. Chairman, I want to again thank this
committee--this committee for what you do every day to support
our men and women around the world.
Mr. Chairman, I appreciate the opportunity to make this
statement, and I look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Secretary Hagel can be found in
the Appendix on page 97.]
The Chairman. Thank you very much, Mr. Secretary.
In your statement, you indicated that the President had
made the final decision on this operation. I appreciate you
clarifying that. We had a briefing just a couple of days ago,
and the last question asked by a Member of Congress of the
briefers was, who made the final decision? And one of the
briefers stated that you had made the final decision.
I think all of us understand how this place works, and a
decision of this nature is always made by the Commander in
Chief. And I think that you clarified that, and I appreciate
that.
Mr. Secretary, one of the things that has bothered me the
most about this is the fact that we did pass a law last year
that stated that Congress should be notified 30 days before any
transfer of detainees from Guantanamo.
Just a little history. We were briefed, some of us, some of
the leadership on this committee and other pertinent committees
in Congress, starting in November of 2011, that there was
negotiations--that we were entering into negotiations with the
Taliban, looking towards reconciliation at some point. Along
with that, in that meeting, there was also mention about a
potential transfer of detainees, as you mentioned, for the
release of Sergeant Bergdahl.
That was followed up with another briefing in January, and
then the Taliban set up a headquarters in Qatar. President
Karzai learned of that, everything hit the fan, and we were
briefed again, saying that all of those negotiations have come
to a halt; if we start those negotiations again, we will inform
you. We never heard another briefing on that matter.
And so, when we passed that law, we felt that we did it for
a good reason. The law didn't just state that we would be given
a notice; it required that the Department provide numerous
pieces of critical information, including how the risk posed by
the detainee had been substantially mitigated, how the transfer
is in the national security interests of the United States, an
assessment of the capacity, willingness, and past practices of
the receiving country, along with the notice, along with
several other pieces of information.
And previous NDAAs [National Defense Authorization Acts]
had also required that same thing. In fact, our language that
we had passed in this committee and through this body was
softened some by language from the Senate that we worked out in
conference, which was the final language that was passed last
year.
You know, Mr. Secretary, I think you have just made a very
strong case for the position taken by the President and the
administration. You just left one thing out: These
negotiations, as we were told in a briefing last week, started
in January of this year, with the tape and with the other
things that went forth. And I have been told in a couple of
different briefings now that somewhere--I think the final
number given to us a couple days ago was somewhere between 80
and 90 people in the Department of Justice, the State
Department, the Homeland Security I guess was one of them, and
the Department of Defense knew about this--80 to 90 people. The
only one I know of that was elected was the President and
perhaps the Vice President. We don't know who those 80 or 90
people were.
Yet, in all that time, the leadership of the House that has
the responsibility, a co-leadership, according to the
Constitution, with the President of the United States, was not
informed, not told of any of this.
If you had--or somebody--I think you have the most
credibility, but if you had been able to meet with the
responsible people in the Congress and give them the same story
you just now gave us, the law would have been complied with. We
didn't need to know the operational details. We didn't need to
know anything of that, other than the things that I have
mentioned that the law states, and full compliance with the law
would have been met. And I don't think we would have pushed
back at all.
And yet, when the law is ignored and--you know, we all
have--we all feel keenly the responsibilities that we have,
sometimes more than others. This is one of those times where
this is a very important principle. And I wish that you or
somebody had sat down with the leadership of the Congress,
including the Senate, and told us the same things that you have
just told us in your briefing here.
I think it would have gone--would have been very helpful in
reestablishing, or establishing, or keeping the trust that we
should have between the Congress, the President of the United
States, the Supreme Court, all of us trying to work together to
the satisfaction of the Constitution and the American people
that we are all sent here to serve.
Let me just ask one question, Secretary Hagel. Will the
Department fully cooperate with this committee's inquiry going
forward with the detainee exchange, including the recent
request that I sent a couple of days ago for documents?
Secretary Hagel. Absolutely. Yes.
[The information referred to can be found in the Appendix
on page 107.]
The Chairman. Thank you very much.
And thank you for your service in the military in uniform,
in the Senate, and now in this very tough job that you hold.
Secretary Hagel. Thank you.
The Chairman. Mr. Smith.
Mr. Smith. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I think, two very important parts to this. And one is one
the chairman just mentioned, which I will get to in a second.
But the first is this whole notion that we have somehow broken
precedent, that this negotiation, we negotiated with terrorists
in exchange for this and, you know, went against a longstanding
U.S. policy. And I think that has been the central criticism;
it was the criticism from the Speaker yesterday. And I think it
is just absolutely wrong, given the situation that we were in,
as you described it.
We went to war in Afghanistan. Sergeant Bergdahl was
fighting in that war. And we were fighting directly against the
Taliban. You know, for the first couple of months, they were
the Government. They were knocked out, and they kept fighting
as an insurgent force.
Could you walk us through--and maybe, Mr. Preston, as the
lawyer, you can sort of get into this--how you view this and
whether or not this is unprecedented? Because it certainly
doesn't seem to be. I mean, there are exchanges, as you have
mentioned, in just about every war we have fought, of
prisoners. And whatever one may think of the Taliban, we were
fighting a war with them. It was in a battle zone. It was not,
you know, a diplomat or a civilian, it was a member of the
Armed Forces who was captured in that battle.
So do you think that we have set some precedent here for
negotiating with terrorists? Or is this clearly, as it is in my
mind, in a different legal category?
Secretary Hagel. Congressman Smith, thank you.
I, as you noted, alluded to some of this in general terms
in my statement. Two general comments to respond, and then I
will ask Mr. Preston for, as you have suggested, his thoughts.
One, this was an extraordinary situation, for the reasons I
had mentioned, I think, in the classified briefings that some
of you have attended or heard. We will get more into the
extraordinary dynamics when we close this hearing down and go
into classified. It was a very unique set of dynamics that we
were dealing with. That is number one.
On the precedent-setting side of this, I am not the legal
person here, but I do occasionally read, and I don't think
there were any precedents set by this, as far as I know from
past wars and how we have always gotten our prisoners back, or
attempted to get them back, time of war or after war. We can
get into all of the appropriate categorizations of who are
combatants and who we are at war with and who are terrorists.
We have legal definitions for all of those.
But I said something at the beginning of my testimony here.
I know it is imperfect, but I do think it plays into the larger
scope of what we were dealing with--what we are dealing with,
still dealing with, and will be dealing with, not just in
Afghanistan. I mean, you look at Yemen, what is going on all
over the world. What is unprecedented today is the threats and
what we are up against around the world: organized,
sophisticated terrorist groups.
Now, have we declared war on any of them? Or how will we
define them, other than some as terrorist groups? But these are
different dynamics and unprecedented situations that this
country has never had to deal with before.
I will make one last comment and then ask Mr. Preston for
his legal opinion on your question.
You all have major responsibilities. We each in government
have major responsibilities. I have the responsibility of
getting up every morning--I have one responsibility, and that
is the security of this country. That is what I am charged
with. That is what the President asked me to do. The Senate
confirmed me to do that. I agreed to do it.
I took an oath of office. We all take the same oath of
office, and that is to the Constitution and security of this
country. That is my primary focus every day. You all have your
focuses, not too dissimilar from mine, either, on some of these
things. I just happen to have a more narrow gauge in what I do.
The President of the United States has the ultimate
responsibility for the security of this country.
So I just remind us of all of this. It is imperfect, I
know, and it might sound like an excuse, but it is not an
excuse; it is reality.
And I will ask Mr. Preston.
Mr. Preston. Thank you.
There is, of course, a good deal of detail, technical legal
detail, on what constitutes a POW per se versus a detained
combatant or a privileged or unprivileged belligerent. I don't
think we need to get into that to answer your question.
What we had here were detained combatants held by opposing
forces in the same armed conflict. And, as such, this exchange
falls within the tradition of prisoner exchanges between
opposing forces in time of war.
Now, it is true that the Taliban is not the conventional
nation-state that has been party to conventional armed conflict
of the past. But it is not the character of the holding party,
it is the character of the detainee that inspires and motivates
our commitment to the recovery of service members held abroad.
We don't see this as setting a particular precedent, both
because it does fall within that tradition of prisoner
exchanges and there have been in the past occasions where the
United States has dealt with non-state actors who were holding
a service member in order to achieve their recovery.
Mr. Smith. Can you give us a specific example of that?
Mr. Preston. The one example I am aware of is the
helicopter pilot, Michael Durant, in Somalia, who was held
captive by the warlord Mohamed Aidid. And there was a quiet, as
I understand it, arrangement whereby the United States regained
Durant's freedom and functionally in exchange for individuals
that were captured in the same operation.
Mr. Smith. Yeah.
And I just want to say again, I think any characterization
of this as negotiating with terrorists totally misses the fact
that we were and are at war, and Sergeant Bergdahl was a member
of our military fighting that war.
On the GTMO piece, is it your opinion that at the end, you
know, let's say 2014--we consider that to be the end of
hostilities, which is an interesting argument because we still
are going to have 10,000 troops there--but assuming at some
point there was an end of hostilities, that these five would
have had to have been released at the end of hostilities. Is
that the Department's opinion? Are they undecided? Or do they
feel the opposite?
Mr. Preston. Sir, the way I would answer that is to say
that we believe we have, under domestic law, specifically the
AUMF [Authorization for Use of Military Force], and under
international law, principles of the law of armed conflict,
that we have authority to hold and had the authority to hold
these five at Guantanamo as enemy belligerents.
Mr. Smith. Even after the war would have ended?
Mr. Preston. Well, I will speak to that.
Mr. Smith. Okay.
Mr. Preston. There will come a point in time where the
armed conflicts we are engaged in with the Taliban and Al Qaeda
and their associates come to an end. And, at that point, the
law-of-war rationale for continuing to hold these unprivileged
belligerents would end unless there were some other basis for
continuing to hold them----
Mr. Smith. But that is----
Mr. Preston [continuing]. Such as prosecution.
Mr. Smith. Not just the war in Afghanistan.
Mr. Preston. That is right.
Mr. Smith. I mean, it is the broader battle as defined
under the AUMF.
Mr. Preston. And the further point I would make is that I
am not aware of any determination as yet that, with the
cessation of the current combat mission at the end of this
year, that the armed conflicts are determined to be over such
that it would trigger the consequences that we have been
discussing.
Mr. Smith. Right. Thank you.
And the last thing I will say, and no need to respond to
this, but I will just reemphasize a point the chairman has
made, a point I made in my opening statement. It would be, oh,
so more helpful--let me just say, the Department of Defense, in
my experience, has been very good about consulting with us and
about working with this body. So it is not really about that.
The White House, on the other hand, has not been very good
about keeping in touch with Congress, working with us,
consulting with us on major policy issues. It is sort of hit-
or-miss. And if we could do better at that, it would make my
job a whole lot easier. If we could just trust Congress a
little bit and have those consultations before policy decisions
are finalized, I think it would make this entire town work
better than it is right now.
I yield back.
The Chairman. The gentleman yields back.
There are two things I need clarified.
Did you, Mr. Preston, say that at some point conflict would
end and then we would release these people or we would have to
release them, there would be no reason to hold them, and that
that conflict is ending in December of this year?
Mr. Preston. Sir, the point was, when the armed conflict
ends, the international-law basis for continuing to hold people
who are being held on the basis of their membership in a----
Mr. Smith. I am sorry, Mr. Preston, but you really have to
point out which armed conflict you are talking about. Your
answer was not the armed conflict in Afghanistan. It was the
one as defined under the AUMF.
In other words, as long as we are fighting Al Qaeda and as
long as we are fighting their associated forces, that is the
armed conflict that you were talking about being over, not
Afghanistan. I believe that is the point of the chairman's
question.
Mr. Preston. The point is we are currently in armed
conflict with the Taliban and with Al Qaeda. At some point, the
armed conflict with the Taliban ends. And, at that point, for
those detainees that are being held as enemy belligerents
against our enemy, the Taliban, unless there is an additional
basis for holding them, then we would no longer have that
international-law basis for holding them.
Now, it has been suggested that Taliban may also be
candidates to be held as associates of Al Qaeda as the conflict
with Al Qaeda continues.
The Chairman. The point that Mr. Smith made is that this
conflict may not end in December just because the majority of
our troops are pulled out. Is that your understanding?
Mr. Preston. That is my understanding, as well, sir.
The Chairman. I mean, we see--we thought the conflict was
over in Iraq, and we see that it is not, that it continues to
go on.
Now, a second thing. I may have left the wrong impression
when I was talking to the Secretary, saying that if you had
given the same report, that that probably would have just
solved everything. We still have big concerns about the five.
And I didn't mention that when we were briefed in November of
2011 and January of 2012 that there was real concerns of
Members of Congress that those five would be released. In fact,
there was real opposition to it.
And that is why we are very concerned that we weren't told
other than, if we reenter those negotiations, you would be
told, and then we weren't. So those are things that we really
need to have clarified and work through.
Mr. Thornberry.
Mr. Thornberry. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Secretary, I would like to just begin with a brief
additional observation on the notification issue.
For the past several years, this committee has worked on a
bipartisan basis to establish an oversight structure for cyber
operations, for terrorism operations, and for sensitive
military operations, and an oversight structure that allows the
Department to have the flexibility it needs to operate in a
volatile, rapidly changing world and still give us the ability
to exercise our duties under the Constitution.
Now, the basis for all of those, in all three of those
areas, is that we get timely, accurate information from the
Department. And this failure, even if it was ordered by the
White House, undermines the ability to have that sort of
oversight structure.
I have been a member of the Intelligence Committee for 10
years. Our work depends on getting accurate, timely information
from the intelligence community. If the President can violate
the law and say, ``No, in this case, we are not going to give
you the information,'' it undermines the oversight process that
we have with the intelligence community.
So my point to you is it is not just about this incident;
it is not just about somebody having their feelings hurt. This
decision undermines a lot of the working relationship in all
these areas of national security. And I think it is important
that the whole administration understands some of the
ramifications of this.
Let me ask a specific question. Press reports indicate that
Sergeant Bergdahl was captured by a Haqqani Network commander
and was held by the Haqqani Network. Is that true?
Secretary Hagel. What I would prefer is, as I noted, in the
classified session that we get into the specifics of that 15-6
commander's evaluation report that was done on the
circumstances at the time of Sergeant Bergdahl's capture. I
believe that was done in August of 2009. That has been sent up
here unredacted, was sent up here yesterday. And I would just
as soon get into that in a classified briefing.
Mr. Thornberry. Well, I am not----
Secretary Hagel. But I would say this, though. I would say
this. He was--in that report that the Army did, he was
classified as missing-slash-captive. So----
Mr. Thornberry. Yeah. I wasn't really----
Secretary Hagel. And he was not charged with anything.
Mr. Thornberry [continuing]. Focused on him. I am trying to
just verify. As I understand it, administration people have
said clearly it was the Haqqani Network that kept him.
Secretary Hagel. Well, the Haqqani Network did have him
through periods of time. This was another complication. Over a
5-year period, he was moved around. We had difficulty finding
him and knowing where he was. Different groups held him. So the
complication of the Haqqanis being part of this, that is right.
Mr. Thornberry. Okay. And it is also true the Haqqani
Network is listed by the State Department as a foreign
terrorist organization.
Secretary Hagel. That is right.
Mr. Thornberry. Okay.
Secretary Hagel. That is right.
Mr. Thornberry. Let me just turn----
Secretary Hagel. But we didn't negotiate with Haqqani.
Mr. Thornberry. Okay. I think that is a subject we will
want to discuss more, if we must, in the classified session.
But I think who----
Secretary Hagel. Well, I want to make sure the record is
clear on that. We engaged the Qataris, and they engaged the
Taliban.
Now, if the Haqqanis were subcontracting to the Taliban, or
whatever that relationship is--you know there is the Pakistan
Taliban and the Afghan Taliban. There is a difference there. So
we get back into definitions of who has responsibility for
whom.
But I just want to make sure that that is clear on the
record, and we can go into a lot more detail----
Mr. Thornberry. Okay. Well, I think that you just pointed
out some of the difficulty in making categorical statements
that we don't negotiate with terrorists, when, at least for
some period, the Haqqanis were the ones who had him.
Let me just ask about one other thing, and that is the five
detainees that were released. You said that there is always
some risk associated with releasing someone from Guantanamo,
but you also said that they have not been implicated in any
attacks on the United States.
I have some unclassified summary of evidence before the
combatant status review tribunals. For example, for Mr. Fazl,
it says, ``The detainee engaged in hostilities against the
United States or its coalition partners.'' Maybe there is a
difference between us and our partners. For Mr. Wasiq, it says,
``The detainee participated in military operations against the
coalition.''
So, at least at some point, there was evidence that they
were involved in hostilities, military operations against the
coalition, weren't there?
Secretary Hagel. Yes. They were mid- to high-ranking
members of the Taliban government--of the Taliban. So, yes,
they were part of planning. But what my point was, we have no
direct evidence of any direct involvement in their direct
attacks on the United States or any of our troops.
They were part of the Taliban at the time some were given
to us. We picked two of them up, captured two. But, yes, they
were combatants.
Mr. Thornberry. Your point was they didn't pull the
trigger. But they were senior commanders of the Taliban
military who directed operations against the United States and
its coalition partners. Would that be----
Secretary Hagel. That is right.
Mr. Thornberry [continuing]. A better way do it?
Secretary Hagel. That is right.
Mr. Thornberry. Okay.
Secretary Hagel. Now, as I said in my statement,
Congressman, they were combatants. We were at war with the
Taliban. I mean, there is no getting around that. And I had
made that point, I thought, pretty clearly.
Mr. Thornberry. Thank you.
The Chairman. Just like bin Laden didn't pull a trigger but
we went after him because he is the one that caused the 9/11.
Ms. Davis.
Mrs. Davis. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And thank you both for being here.
Mr. Secretary, I do think that your presentation did
provide us, I think, additional ways of really looking at the
discussion.
I do understand how people feel, in terms of notice, but I
wanted to have an opportunity to just look at that issue and
whether or not the circumstances under which he was captured or
the fact that regardless of whether or not his life was in
danger would have made any difference in terms of the 30-day
notice. You know, it is difficult for me to imagine that
Members would have included that within the language of that
bill.
To what extent were those situations weighing on the
decision of whether or not to engage in that discussion during
the imminent-danger period?
Secretary Hagel. Well, all of those were factors that we
had to consider as we were thinking through this: his
deteriorating health, which was clear to us from the last
proof-of-life video we had; the uncertainty of where he was,
who exactly held him.
Again, I remind everybody, this service member was held in
pretty difficult circumstances for almost 5 years. And we don't
know the facts of all of that until he gets back and we are
able to get the facts.
The urgency of getting him, the fleeting opportunity that
was made clear to us by the Qataris in our engagements and
negotiations. Mr. Preston was there through those. All these
were factors. The concern about leaks we were warned about.
Every one of these different dimensions we had to think
through. And we did believe, as I said--and we had information
to support this--that this effort might be the last real effort
that we had to get him back. There were too many things
floating around that we didn't control, that we didn't know
enough about. So we had to factor in all of those.
Mrs. Davis. Did you have any other--did you, I guess,
entertain other approaches to his rescue that you were looking
at at that particular time? And why were any of those not
followed?
Secretary Hagel. Well, Congresswoman, we were. As I said in
my statement, since the time he went missing, we were looking
at different ways to get him back. Our combatant commanders
were always looking at plans, possibilities, options, rescue
missions, and so on.
But, as I said in my remarks, we had to factor in the risk
to our other forces to go get him. And if he was in Pakistan--
we know he was moved in and out across the border--that would
also affect some different dimensions.
But, yes, we looked at all the options, had all the
possibilities. But up until this last time when we got him, in
our opinion, our intelligence community's opinion, our
military, everyone who was involved, this was the best
possibility that we had to get him out, and we were concerned
we might lose it.
And, as I gave you some dimension of the timeframe, we
didn't even know where we were going to pick him up.
Mrs. Davis. Yeah.
Secretary Hagel. It was less than an hour. We knew the
general area.
Mrs. Davis. And the detainees, were there--was it always
this five or were there others?
Secretary Hagel. Well, it actually started with six, as
some of you may recall.
Mrs. Davis. Right. One of them----
Secretary Hagel. One of them died. And there had been back-
and-forth. They wanted all the Taliban detainees at one point,
and we said no.
And so this was part of the whole engagement of what we
need to do and where we draw a line saying, no, we are not
going to do this. So, yes, there were different variations of
that engagement over the years.
Mrs. Davis. All right. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Secretary.
The Chairman. Mr. Jones.
Mr. Jones. Mr. Chairman, thank you very much.
Secretary Hagel, Mr. Preston, it is good to see both of
you. Thank you for being here today.
Mr. Secretary, on June 1, you were on ``Meet the Press,''
and you expressed hope that the release of Sergeant Bergdahl
would lead to direct U.S. talks with the Taliban.
Mr. Secretary, the Taliban have stated there will be no
peace with the Afghan Government, with the United States, or
any foreign presence as long as troops remain in Afghanistan
and prisoners are detained at Guantanamo Bay. They have
repeated these statements time and time again and have proven
they do not desire peace with the United States or its allies.
With this known, why did you at that point on ``Meet the
Press'' express hope--and we can all have hope--that the
release of the sergeant would lead to some type of direct
negotiations with the United States? And do you today feel that
that is still a real possibility?
And maybe there is something you want to say in the
classified setting that you can't say here today. But this, to
me--your statement was received by many of the people that I
represent in the Third District of North Carolina that maybe
there was, in this negotiation about the sergeant, that maybe
there were some signals sent to you, sir, or to the
administration that there might be an opportunity for direct
negotiations with the Taliban.
Knowing the history of the Taliban, knowing how they fought
the Russians, Alexander the Great, the Brits, and then fighting
the Americans, I would hope that maybe you do know something
that you can share with us, if not in a public setting but in a
private setting.
Can you comment, sir?
Secretary Hagel. Congressman Jones, thank you. And good to
see you again.
Mr. Jones. Thank you.
Secretary Hagel. Thank you.
First, as you know, the position of the United States
Government regarding the Taliban has always been that we
support a reconciliation between the Afghan Government and the
Taliban. That has been a general position, as you know.
As to the specific answer I gave on ``Meet the Press,'' it
was to a specific question when we were talking about Sergeant
Bergdahl's release. And I don't recall exactly the question,
but if I can piece it together enough to respond, I think the
question was set up, ``Well, could this lead to talks with the
Taliban or reconciliation?'' And, as you quoted me, I said,
well, I hope, or maybe, whatever. But, no, that wasn't any
direct hint or wink or possibility that I know something that
that is going to happen.
But I would also remind us again, too, that, if you
recall--some of you do, because you were in some of these
meetings, briefings--in the 2011-2012 timeframe, I wasn't in
this job at the time, but I have looked at the files on this, I
have seen it all, there was a larger scope and framework of a
larger reconciliation which included Bergdahl's release. But
the current situation that we were in was a straight ``get
Bergdahl.''
Now, that doesn't dismiss, Congressman, the hope that there
can be some possibility of the Afghan Government and the
Taliban finding a reconciliation somehow, some way. But in no
way did I--was I intending to imply in that answer that there
is something else going on out here.
Mr. Jones. Well, my interest was simply that the Taliban's
history does not seem that they want to see a foreign presence
that is going to influence the future of their country. And I
was hopeful that maybe, in the negotiations for the sergeant,
that maybe there had been some signal sent with the
intermediary that maybe had been shared.
And, again, if there has been, maybe you could, through
your staff or maybe in the classified setting, let me know that
there are some possibilities. Because my Marines down in Camp
Lejeune, quite frankly, are tired of going to Afghanistan and
getting their legs blown off.
So thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
[The information referred to can be found in the Appendix
on page 107.]
Secretary Hagel. Thank you.
The Chairman. Thank you.
Secretary Hagel. And we will, Congressman Jones.
The Chairman. Mr. Langevin.
Mr. Langevin. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Secretary and Mr. Preston, I want to thank you for
being here today and for your testimony.
As we were reminded just yesterday, with the loss of five
American special operating forces, Afghanistan obviously
remains a very dangerous battlefield for our voluntary
military. And I join many of my colleagues, of course, in
expressing gratitude for the return of the American prisoner of
war. And the return of any U.S. service member from enemy
captivity should be a priority for his or her fellow soldiers
and, of course, for our country. And Sergeant Bergdahl is an
American soldier, and we are certainly grateful that he has
been freed.
That said, this whole situation raises many troubling
concerns. And among them, of course, this committee has a
significant oversight role, and there are legitimate questions
regarding both congressional notification as well as the long-
term incentives for the Taliban and Al Qaeda. Certainly,
significant personnel and other resources have been expended to
conduct what could result in very dangerous and disturbing
incentives on the battlefields. As one Taliban commander said,
and I quote, ``It has encouraged our people. Now everybody will
work hard to capture such an important bird,'' end quote.
So, Mr. Secretary, how do you anticipate this transfer will
impact the incentives and the behavior for the Taliban and Al
Qaeda? Are we prepared to counter any new behavior?
Secretary Hagel. Congressman, I would answer this way.
First, I think everyone on this committee knows, some more than
others, who served in war, that war is a dangerous business.
And so a soldier is always--always at risk. That is number one.
Two, you probably know that the Taliban has standing orders
to capture American service members, and that has been a
standing order for 12 years. So there is nothing new here about
where the Taliban have been and where they continue to be.
But I would say this also. Now that we have our last
prisoner back, this very much gives us more flexibility, quite
frankly, to free up resources that every day we were thinking
about, our commanders on the ground in that area, if we have
the opportunity, how can we get Bergdahl. Now that he is back,
that frees up that obligation. I think that actually
strengthens the point.
And the last point I would make, I mentioned this in my
comments, and, again, those who have served in uniform on this
committee know this, pretty basic to military, and I expressed
it in different ways by quoting different senior members of our
military and retired: that to have our men and women in uniform
all over the world, who some are more at risk than others every
day, to have them be reassured that this country will come get
them or will make every effort to go get them has got to be
pretty significant. And I was told that by all of our
commanders.
Now, there can be issues on the specifics of Sergeant
Bergdahl, but that is irrelevant, quite frankly. He was a
member of our Armed Forces, and we went and we got him back
after 5 years. I think that is pretty significant. And I think
it also falls into the category of your question, answering
that question.
Thank you.
Mr. Langevin. Mr. Secretary, thank you for that answer.
As the chairman and the ranking member have mentioned in
their opening statements, the questions about Sergeant
Bergdahl's conduct should be addressed with due process at the
appropriate time and such. But could you settle one conflicting
report, at least, in terms of regarding the number of the loss
of soldiers who may have been involved in searches for Sergeant
Bergdahl?
Secretary Hagel. First, any loss of any soldier is a
terrible loss to their family and to our country. And I think
we should note that first.
Second, your question has been asked a number of times. I
have personally gone back and asked that question inside the
Pentagon, in the Army, in all of our reports. I have seen no
evidence that directly links any American combat death to the
rescue or finding or search of Sergeant Bergdahl. And I have
asked the question. We have all asked the question. I have seen
no evidence, no facts presented to me when I asked that
question.
The Chairman. Mr. Secretary, you did say there is nothing
new here, that the Taliban is always out to try to capture us.
But isn't it true that there is one thing new, that we have now
made a trade for a hostage?
Secretary Hagel. No. He was not a hostage. He was a
prisoner of war. That is not new.
The Chairman. Have we made other trades with the Taliban?
Secretary Hagel. With the Taliban, I don't know. I don't
think so. I don't think so.
The Chairman. Thank you.
Mr. Forbes.
Mr. Forbes. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Secretary, thank you for being here and for mentioning
the need for transparency. And as you talked about our
inability to prosecute the individuals that were released, this
administration has not exactly had a stellar record on
prosecution of people at GTMO. When you look at the fact that
the lead prosecutor for the 9/11 terrorists had specifically
said that he would have had a guilty plea out of all of them
within 6 months, and this administration came in, shut down his
prosecution, destroyed all of his pretrial work, and we have
been 5 years and still haven't brought them to trial.
Secondly, I don't think even you would argue that the
conversations that took place in 2011 complied with the law.
And, basically, what we are trying to get across is that we are
a nation of laws. You can't pick and choose, just because they
are convenient or not convenient, which ones we are going to
enforce and which ones we aren't.
But the third thing is, and you said this, that there are
limits to trades that we would make and some where we draw the
line, and I want to talk about where we drew the line. The
individuals we released were essentially equivalent to
releasing a deputy secretary of defense, a deputy secretary of
intelligence, a deputy secretary of interior, a governor, and a
commander.
And when the President was asked if there was a possibility
of them returning to activities that are detrimental to the
U.S., his answer was, ``Absolutely.'' Our Deputy Director of
National Intelligence was even harsher. He said the latest
community-wide U.S. intelligence assessment on these five
terrorists said he expected four out of the five Taliban
leaders would return to the battlefield. And this assessment
was in accord with the 2008 Pentagon dossier that said that all
five of the individuals released were considered to be a high
risk to launch attacks against the United States and its allies
if they were liberated.
Now, you state in your testimony that if any of these
detainees ever try to rejoin the fight, they would be doing so
at their own peril. So my first question to you is, does this
mean you would put American lives at risk to go after them?
Secretary Hagel. Well, Congressman, we have American lives
at risk every day----
Mr. Forbes. But not----
Secretary Hagel [continuing]. In parts of the world----
Mr. Forbes [continuing]. For individuals that we have
released----
Secretary Hagel [continuing]. That go after people who have
tried to kill us.
Mr. Forbes [continuing]. And put back out there. So my
question is, would we put American lives at risk to go after
them if they rejoined the fight?
Secretary Hagel. Well, depending on the threat.
But, also, let me remind you of the other pieces that you
didn't mention in our analysis of these five. The intelligence
community has said clearly that these five are not a threat to
the homeland.
Mr. Forbes. Mr. Secretary, you have said in here that if
they rejoin the fight, they do it at their own peril.
Secretary Hagel. In Afghanistan.
Mr. Forbes. My question is a pretty simple one. Would we
put American lives at risk to go after them?
Secretary Hagel. We have American----
Mr. Forbes. Yes or no?
Secretary Hagel. We have American lives put at risk every
day to go after people trying to kill us.
Mr. Forbes. I understand that, Mr. Secretary. My question
is, will we put American lives at risk to go after these
individuals if they rejoin the fight?
Secretary Hagel. Well, yes, because----
Mr. Forbes. Okay. If that is the case--let me ask you just
two other questions.
Secretary Hagel. You could use the same argument,
Congressman, on Yemen or anywhere else.
Mr. Forbes. I could do that, but not because of individuals
we released.
And the second question I would ask you is two parts. In
the calculus that you made for releasing these individuals,
were you asked or did you make an assessment of the number of
American lives that were lost or put at risk in capturing these
individuals in the first place? And did you make an assessment
of the number of American lives that may be put at risk if we
have to go recapture them again?
Secretary Hagel. Again, I saw no evidence, no facts--I
asked the question about how these five found their way to
Guantanamo. And I have in front of me the facts on the five.
Two of them were detained by U.S. forces.
Mr. Forbes. Mr. Secretary, I understand that.
Secretary Hagel. And so, no.
Mr. Forbes. And I understand--we are running out the clock.
I only have 50-some seconds left.
Secretary Hagel. The answer is ``no.''
Mr. Forbes. So you didn't even make a calculus as to how
many----
Secretary Hagel. No, I said I did. And I said the answer
is--you asked if there were lives lost in capturing these.
Mr. Forbes. And you said ``no.''
Secretary Hagel. I have no direct evidence that there
were----
Mr. Forbes. Did you make an assessment----
Secretary Hagel [continuing]. Any American lives lost in
capturing them.
Mr. Forbes. Did you make an assessment of how many American
lives may be put at risk if they have to be recaptured?
Secretary Hagel. No.
Mr. Forbes. Okay.
Secretary Hagel. But there is risk that we have to our
country, threats to our country every day, everywhere.
And the other point I would make on this, we determined
that there was a substantial mitigation of risk for this
country, for our interests, for our citizens and our service
members when we made this decision.
Mr. Forbes. And that just flies in----
Secretary Hagel. Partly the MOU, partly--and we were
satisfied that we could make that determination.
Mr. Forbes. It just flies in the face of all the other
evidence we have.
And, with that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
The Chairman. Ms. Bordallo.
Ms. Bordallo. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Secretary Hagel and Mr. Preston, thank you for appearing
today and providing us with your testimony.
Secretary Hagel, I appreciate the detailed information that
you had in your statement, and I support your position. I do
appreciate also your continued commitment to our men and women
in uniform and your steadfast leadership during these
challenging times.
My first question is for you, Mr. Secretary. What impact
would Sergeant Bergdahl's continued imprisonment if we had not
engaged in his exchange have had on the security situation in
Afghanistan as we draw down forces? Did his continued
imprisonment create a heightened security threat to our men and
women in uniform?
Secretary Hagel. Well, in a sense, Congresswoman, as I
answered in a previous question about putting at risk American
lives to capture him--I mean, not to capture him, but to get
him back, and to do that, if it would have taken another course
of action or if we would have taken another option, that would
have put our men and women at risk. Our men and women were at
risk----
Ms. Bordallo. Every day.
Secretary Hagel [continuing]. In fact, carrying out this
one mission. But, fortunately, it was done the right way.
And I don't think, again, that effort has gotten enough
attention. This was all done in less than 60 seconds. Not one
death, not one issue, not one problem. And I have seen very
little recognition of that given to our forces by anybody. I
mean, that was a significant effort by our Armed Forces,
knowing as little as they did but planning it as well as they
did and having the outcome as positive as it was. So thank you.
Ms. Bordallo. I agree.
My next question is for Mr. Preston.
With the heightened media attention, how will you ensure
Sergeant Bergdahl receives a fair investigation?
Mr. Preston. Thank you.
We will pursue our usual policies and practices with
respect to investigations and follow-on actions.
A key element of that is avoiding what is referred to as
unlawful or undue command influence. So you will see that the
leadership, military and civilian, at the Department have been
entirely neutral in their discussion of this and focused on
ensuring due process without prejudging what the outcome should
be one way or the other.
Those dealing with Sergeant Bergdahl more directly, and the
Army more generally, are, I believe, sensitive to ensuring
that, in the process of bringing him home, restoring him to
health, debriefing him for intelligence purposes, and then
ultimately reviewing the circumstances of his capture, that
fairness be preserved and that his rights be preserved.
Ms. Bordallo. Thank you. Thank you.
And my final question is for Secretary Hagel.
Prior to securing the recovery of Sergeant Bergdahl, had
you received correspondence from Members of Congress requesting
that you take action to obtain Sergeant Bergdahl's release?
Secretary Hagel. Yes.
Ms. Bordallo. Thank you.
The Chairman. Thank you.
Mr. Miller.
Mr. Miller. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, Mr. Secretary, for being here.
I am looking at your testimony, and on the first--third
page, excuse me, it says that ``we complied with the National
Defense Authorization Act of 2014.''
Did you or did you not notify Congress within the 30-day
timeframe, yes or no?
Secretary Hagel. No.
Mr. Miller. Okay.
Secretary Hagel. What I----
Mr. Miller. No, sir. Yes or no?
Secretary Hagel. All right. No.
Mr. Miller. Does the administration intend to violate the
notice requirements of section 1035 of the NDAA and section
8111 of the DOD Appropriations Act in future transfers?
Secretary Hagel. Not unless there--not unless there is an
extraordinary set of circumstances like this one would we be in
a position to make a call like that.
Mr. Miller. Will you assure this committee that the
Department will not proceed with future detainee transfers
without notifying Congress, consistent with the law?
Secretary Hagel. We have, I believe, before my time in
every circumstance except this one. And we intend to continue
to do that.
Mr. Miller. You were part of the legislative branch, as a
Member of the United States Senate. We make the laws. You are
part of the executive branch now, which the responsibility is
to enforce the law. Whose responsibility is it to interpret the
law? Is it the President's responsibility or is it the courts'?
Secretary Hagel. The courts'.
Mr. Miller. Then why did the President make the decision or
you make the decision not to notify Congress?
Secretary Hagel. We believed, and the Justice Department
Office of Legal Counsel----
Mr. Miller. Part of the executive branch.
Secretary Hagel [continuing]. Told the President that he
had the constitutional authority to do that, that he had under
his constitutional powers the authority to make the decision
that he did.
Mr. Miller. You said that you would put American lives at
risk if the Taliban prisoners that were swapped in the secret
deal would rejoin the fight--if they rejoin the fight in
Afghanistan. What if they rejoined it from somewhere else? They
don't have to necessarily be on the battlefield in Afghanistan.
Certainly we would pursue them wherever they are.
Secretary Hagel. We would do everything we needed to do to,
as we have said, to deal with that threat, as we are doing
today.
Mr. Miller. Your testimony is we are doing everything that
we can----
Secretary Hagel. To deal with the threats to the United
States of America, whether they are in Afghanistan, whether
they are in Yemen, whether they are in homeland defense. It
isn't just limited to Afghanistan, the threats that face this
country.
Mr. Miller. Mr. Secretary, you keep saying we can't get the
facts from Sergeant Bergdahl until he returns home. Have you
ever thought about going to Landstuhl and talking to him there?
Secretary Hagel. Well, I don't know how much medical
training you had, Congressman. I haven't had much. And what we
are doing is we are allowing----
Mr. Miller. I tell you what, Mr. Secretary----
Secretary Hagel [continuing]. The doctors--the doctors will
make the decision.
Mr. Miller. No, Mr. Secretary. Wait a minute. Wait a
minute. Why hasn't he been returned to the United States? We
have seriously wounded soldiers that are returned to the United
States almost immediately after they are stabilized. How long
did Jessica Lynch wait before she was returned to the United
States? You are trying to tell me that he is being held at
Landstuhl, Germany, because of his medical condition?
Secretary Hagel. Congressman, I hope you are not implying
anything other than that. The fact is----
Mr. Miller. I am just asking the question, Mr. Secretary.
Secretary Hagel. I am going to give you an answer, too.
Mr. Miller. Well, answer it.
Secretary Hagel. And I don't like the implication of the
question.
Mr. Miller. Answer it. Answer it.
Secretary Hagel. He is being held there because our medical
professionals don't believe he is ready until they believe he
is ready to take the next----
Mr. Miller. Have you----
Secretary Hagel [continuing]. Step, which is
rehabilitation.
Mr. Miller. Have you ever seen a traumatically injured
service member brought to the United States immediately upon
being stabilized at Landstuhl? We do it all the time.
Secretary Hagel. This isn't just about a physical
situation, Congressman. This guy was held for almost 5 years in
God knows what kind of conditions. We do know some of the
conditions from our intelligence community, not from, by the
way, Bergdahl. This is not just about can he get on his feet
and walk and get to a plane. These are----
Mr. Miller. So you are telling me he cannot be questioned
because of his condition.
Secretary Hagel. I am telling you that the medical
professionals that we rely on their judgment for his health,
which I assume everybody respects, have made the determination
and will make the determination that when he is ready to move
and move to the next step, which will most likely be in San
Antonio, then we can proceed. That is what I am saying.
Mr. Miller. Yeah.
One other question. Why is the Army just now reviewing the
circumstances of Sergeant Bergdahl's capture?
Secretary Hagel. They are not. I said in my testimony and I
said in my comments they did it back after he went missing in
2009. That 15-6 report was filed, completed by General
Scaparrotti, who now is our commanding general in Korea, in
August of 2009.
That 15-6 report, review, complete, not redacted, was sent
up to the Hill yesterday to the committees----
Mr. Miller. Thank you, Mr. Secretary.
Secretary Hagel [continuing]. And you are welcome to read
it.
Mr. Miller. Thank you.
The Chairman. And that will be made available to all the
Members in the proper setting to review.
Mr. Courtney.
Mr. Courtney. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I want to thank the witnesses for being here today and,
Secretary Hagel, for your powerful testimony, which again laid
out the fact that this is--not every choice in your position is
always black and white. You have to weigh a lot of factors.
And one of the factors which I just want to, kind of, maybe
reemphasize is that, in terms of when you were deciding this
back on May 27th, I mean, it wasn't like you had a lot of other
options. I mean, there was no plan B or plan C that was sitting
on your desk, in terms of how to get this American soldier back
in our jurisdiction. Isn't that correct?
Secretary Hagel. That is exactly correct. There was no
option.
Mr. Courtney. Because there are Members who have been on
some of the shows saying that, you know, well, we should have
sent Special Forces in to get him. I mean, we actually were not
totally clear about where he was even.
Secretary Hagel. That is right.
Mr. Courtney. And so there really wasn't even a place to
send Special Forces to recover him.
You also, again--and this has been alluded to earlier, is
that in terms of the risk mitigation of the five transferees,
Taliban transferees, that if they do get back into the
conflict, they do so at their own peril.
Secretary Kerry, I think in some public setting, also made
the comment that it is not like we are totally without options
to, you know, raise their risks in terms of getting back
involved in the fight. Again, they don't always involve the use
of military personnel. I mean, we have all been on the CODELs
[congressional delegations] over to Afghanistan, most of us,
and have seen the availability of unmanned assets that we have
to take out targets that, again, have been identified through
the chain of command. Isn't that correct?
Secretary Hagel. That is correct.
Mr. Courtney. And, certainly, that would be available to
us, again, if a situation arose that would not put soldiers or
airmen or anyone necessarily at risk.
Secretary Hagel. That is right.
Mr. Courtney. Mr. Preston, you know, we have been sort of
talking about the legal sort of consultation that was going on
with your office and the Department of Justice [DOJ] during
that 5- or 6-day period when the decisions were being made. Did
DOJ address, in terms of the legal opinions that you were
given, the question of consultation with Congress, the 30-day
requirement?
Mr. Preston. Yes, sir. The administration sought the
guidance from the Department of Justice on the applicability
and impact of the 30-day notice requirement under these
circumstances and received guidance from the Department of
Justice.
Mr. Courtney. And was that in writing?
Mr. Preston. It was not by means of a formal memorandum
opinion but, rather, by email exchange principally.
Mr. Courtney. Okay. And I know the chairman mentioned that
he has, you know, got requests from the committee for
documents, which it sounds like are going to be forthcoming. I
mean, is that--I assume that is one of the requests in terms of
making any sort of legal analysis that you requested and
received or offered from DOJ, that that would be one of the
documents that you would share with us. I hope you would.
Mr. Preston. We will certainly take that back. I am sure--
we appreciate that there is interest, and we certainly want to
make sure that interested Members fully understand the legal
basis on which the administration acted. As to the disposition
of the document, we will take that back.
Mr. Courtney. Thank you. Again, and I will follow up with
the chairman, because I think it is important, that if the
Department was claiming a constitutional authorities, which the
Secretary mentioned, in terms of that issue, I think we would
like to see that analysis.
And, with that, I would yield back, Mr. Chairman.
[The information referred to can be found in the Appendix
on page 108.]
The Chairman. The gentleman yields back.
Mr. Preston, when did you consult the DOJ on the 30-day
notification? On what date was that?
Mr. Preston. Mr. Chairman, I don't remember the precise
date, but it was in the timeframe in which we had completed our
discussions with the Qataris over the MOU but before it was
signed.
We anticipated that these issues would arise, and I engaged
with my counterpart at the National Security Council [NSC],
who, in turn, engaged with the Department of Justice to ask
them to consider the legal and constitutional implications in
this setting.
The Chairman. Do you recall last week, when you and other
members of the administration were briefing the staff--I
attended and Mr. Thornberry attended that briefing--and I asked
the question if at any time since the January discussion
started you had talked about the 30-day requirement, and nobody
said at that time that there ever was a discussion about it?
Mr. Preston. I don't recall that exchange, sir, but I can
assure you that the 30-day requirement was discussed. The part
of the lawyers in this and my part was, in working with my
counterpart at the NSC, to solicit the Department of Justice's
guidance. That guidance was then provided to the
decisionmakers, who made the judgment about whether the
circumstances would--the particular circumstances in this case
would permit the 30-day--the formal 30-day notice.
The Chairman. This is one of the things that has bothered
me about reports we hear in the press and some of the briefings
that we have had over a period of time, that we get different
answers from one time to another. And we will go back and check
our notes from that meeting, but when I asked that specific
question, it was--nobody responded. And you were in that--were
you one of the briefers.
Mr. Preston. I, frankly, don't know whether the question
was directed to me or whether it was properly understood. I can
tell you----
The Chairman. I asked all of the briefers, I said, at any
time in any of these meetings, did you discuss the law that
pertained to the 30-day notice to Congress? And----
Mr. Preston. Well, I can only say in no uncertain terms
that we set in motion an effort to get authoritative guidance
from the Department of Justice on the legal issues and that
that guidance was part of and provided to decisionmakers who
addressed what the administration was going to do vis-a-vis
congressional notification.
The Chairman. So you had time to discuss this with the
Department of Justice. You probably could have used that same
time to talk to Congress about it.
Mr. Preston. I can just speak for my part of it, which is,
we foresaw the possibility that these issues would arise and
wanted to have----
The Chairman. What I was trying to determine when I asked
the question last week was if you had just forgotten the law or
if you had purposely decided not to address it. It sounds like
what you are saying right now is that you thought about it, you
were aware of it, and you had a discussion about it and decided
that the law didn't apply.
Mr. Preston. We certainly thought about it. We did not
ignore the law. And we solicited legal guidance on the legal
issues that would apply in application in this extraordinary
set of circumstances in which the President was seeking to
repatriate a service member who was in captivity and in peril.
Whether in these extraordinary circumstances and----
The Chairman. So if the circumstances are extraordinary,
you don't have to follow the law.
Mr. Preston. No. The way I would put it is that the
Constitution vests in the President certain authorities and
responsibilities, to include protecting----
The Chairman. As it does to the Congress.
Mr. Preston [continuing]. It does, indeed--protecting
Americans abroad and protecting service members in particular.
And to the extent that the application of the 30-day notice in
this application would interfere with or undermine the
President's efforts to secure the recovery of this service
member, then, in the exercise of his constitutional authority,
the statutory notice provision----
The Chairman. That was your interpretation. I think
somebody talked earlier about the interpretation should be made
by the courts, not by a couple of attorneys talking about the
law.
Mr. Preston. The courts certainly have a role, but the
President has a responsibility to execute his----
The Chairman. Thank you. Thank you very much.
Mr. Preston [continuing]. Authority, and he seeks the
counsel of the Department of Justice.
The Chairman. Mr. Wilson.
Mr. Wilson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for your strong
efforts to uncover the truth of what is occurring before us
today.
Mr. Secretary, I appreciate your being here today.
Yesterday, I had the opportunity to stand in front of
polling locations during a primary, where hundreds of concerned
citizens of both political parties expressed to me their shock
and outrage that the President would release five terrorists
who they believe will have a background of having been
facilitators of the attacks of September the 11th, 2001.
We know the Taliban allowed the Al Qaeda to operate from
safe havens in Afghanistan to attack the United States. And for
the top leadership of this terrorist regime, for the President
to release them is just incredible to the people I represent.
Because they know that the terrorists have a goal in mind, and
the goal is very clear: Death to America, death to Israel. And
the thought that people like this would be released was just
inconceivable to the people that I spoke with yesterday.
Additionally, putting this in the context of this week, Al
Qaeda or Taliban terrorists have attacked Karachi twice. Dozens
of citizens have been murdered by the Taliban. It is not just
Americans at risk. Additionally, in Baghdad, there have been
car bombings with, again, dozens of people being murdered. This
week, we had the circumstance of Mosul now possibly coming
under Al Qaeda control, again creating a safe haven which will
affect American families in the homeland, because the safe
havens will be used for attacks on America.
The safe havens are growing across North Africa, Middle
East, Central Asia. I believe it is dangerous to provide more
terrorist leadership as this is occurring. The President was
wrong. Last year, he announced that terrorism was being
diminished around the world. In fact, it is growing, and it is
growing exponentially.
And, with that in mind, on June the 5th, Time magazine, of
all people, reported an interview that they conducted with the
Taliban commander in Afghanistan, where the reporter asked him
if this deal had inspired he and others to attempt to capture
other American military personnel. The Taliban commander
replied, quote, ``Definitely. It is better to kidnap one person
like Bergdahl than capturing or kidnapping hundreds of useless
people,'' end of quote. And the quote continued, ``It has
encouraged our people. Now everybody will work hard to capture
such an important bird,'' end of quote.
Can you now recognize that there is an increased risk to
our service members because of this outrageous deal?
Secretary Hagel. First, let me note again: Taliban policy
for 12 years has been to do exactly what that Taliban
representative told Time magazine, and that is to capture
American service men. So that is not--that is not new.
I go back again to the factors that we all looked at to be
able to substantially mitigate the risk to this country, to our
allies, to our interests. And we believed, the analysis of the
intelligence community, all who had a role in this, that we
could substantially mitigate the risks through the 12-month
memorandum of understanding that Qatar provided the enforcement
of the security there. The other follow-on dynamics and threats
and realities, which we factored in, we believed were mitigated
enough.
These are five individuals who have been off the
battlefield for 12, 13 years. Doesn't mean they won't go back.
This is a different world--a different world for us, as well.
So I would give you those answers again. I know that you
don't agree with them. But I would also remind all of us, there
is risk to all of this. This is not a perfect situation. I know
that; we all know that. And that is why we spent an awful lot
of time----
Mr. Wilson. But we really should look at what our enemies
say.
In the Augusta Chronicle, on Tuesday, June the 3rd,
reported that one of the five, Mullah Mohammad Fazl, a leader
infamous for his exceptional cruelty, according to Taliban
commander Mullah Salim Khan, Fazl's return ``is like pouring
10,000 Taliban fighters into the battle on the side of jihad,''
end of quote.
Mr. Secretary, our country is at risk. You identified the
homeland as if it was far away. It is not. The safe havens are
being created to attack the American people here, and action
should be taken. And that would not include releasing terrorist
leaders.
Thank you.
Secretary Hagel. Congressman, I can assure you there is
nobody more aware of that than this Secretary of Defense, and
there is no one doing more to----
Mr. Wilson. Well, please act that way, my goodness.
Secretary Hagel. Thank you.
The Chairman. Ms. Tsongas.
Ms. Tsongas. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And welcome, Secretary Hagel and Mr. Preston. It is great
to have you here today. I think the issues we have been talking
about today really do merit the serious discussion that we have
been having here.
But I would like to begin by reiterating the point that we,
as a Nation, have a solemn responsibility to bring home every
service man or woman who volunteers to put on the uniform and
places themselves in harm's way on behalf of the values our
Nation holds dear and on behalf of each and every one of us. It
is the abiding promise we make, and it was the underlying
motivator in the actions that our President has taken, with
your guidance and advice and consent.
I would just briefly like to address the issue of notice
that has received so much discussion. It is clear that, as we
look at the actions that took place in 2011-2012 in the context
of a possible reconciliation process, there was indeed
generalized notice. I think that Member of Congress knew that
there might be five Taliban who would be exchanged for Sergeant
Bergdahl in an effort to bring him home. So, on that front, I
don't think there is deep surprise that this has actually--
would possibly take place.
But a lot of the concern has been on the issue of specific
notice. And I think it troubles all of us, given the 2014 NDAA.
On the other hand, I do think the exigent circumstances that
you have described, the quick turn of events that necessitated
quick action, made the 30 days' notice a tough one. But I do
think a little heads-up, maybe a couple-hours call to the
leaders of Congress might have served you all very well.
And that being said, I would also note that what you have
said, this was not a simple transfer but a military action, and
conducted very well by our military, who was put in harm's way.
And I commend those soldiers for pulling this off, as they did,
without incident.
But I would actually like to address another aspect of
section 1035 of the NDAA, and that is the need to put in place
mitigating circumstances that do have a level of comfort that
these released detainees will be held as promised and not
quickly put back in the battle place.
Can you talk about that a bit? I know some of it you will
revisit or visit in a classified setting, but I would like to
hear as much as you can talk about in this context.
Secretary Hagel. Congresswoman, thank you.
As you note, I mentioned about four general areas that are
included in the specifics of the memorandum of understanding on
the enforcement commitments made by the Government of Qatar,
personally made in a telephone conversation with President
Obama.
I can't get into the specifics until we get into this
closed session on the real most significant parts of that MOU
assurance, which we all assessed, every agency in the
government who signed off on this decision all agreed that
those were strong enforcement mechanisms that would give us
some significant reassurance that those five individuals would
be kept in Qatar and all the other assurances as to their
activity. And, again, we can go into the specifics of that.
Through that----
Ms. Tsongas. The track record, though--the track record
hasn't been great. So what do you have, you know, up your
sleeve that you feel comfortable will allow you to carefully
monitor the situation?
Secretary Hagel. Well, recognizing what you just said, the
dimensions now that we are looking at, too, that have changed a
bit in Qatar. You have a new leader in Qatar, a new Emir, over
the last year. We have a significant United States force
presence in Qatar. Many of you have visited our base there. We
have thousands of people there. We have some significant
relationship with the Government of Qatar.
They have had difficulties with their neighbors. I think
the geopolitical arrangements that they would like to see
change--I can't speak for them, but you asked me some of my
thoughts--I think put a different face on this, as well. And
there are some other assurances that I don't want to address
here in an open session.
But suffice it to say, they are all strong enough to get
the commitments that we each individually, each leader of each
agency, came to the same conclusion, as ultimately did the
President, that it, in fact, was in the interest of our country
and, in fact, did substantially mitigate the risk.
Ms. Tsongas. Thank you. This is a legitimate and real
concern of, I know, my constituents.
Secretary Hagel. Well, it is a concern of ours.
The Chairman. And the memo of understanding will be made
available. Again, it got to us last evening. And that will be
made available to all members of the committee in the proper
setting.
Mr. Turner.
Mr. Turner. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Secretary, we have had very important issues to discuss
here: obviously, one, the issue of notice to Congress; two, the
issue of judgment, was this a good idea; a third issue, the
policy of whether or not this is a shift from our policy of not
negotiating with terrorists.
We had a briefing on Monday from Mr. Tony Blinken, Deputy
National Security Advisor to the President; Ambassador Dobbins,
Department of State; Mr. Work, Department of Defense; Admiral
Winnefeld, Joint Chiefs Vice Chairman; and Robert Cardillo,
Deputy Director for Intelligence, on Monday. I asked them this
question: Can you cite any precedent for this nature of a swap,
where we have swapped with a non-nation-state, in the last 40
years?
And, Mr. Preston, you were asked this same question by our
ranking member, and you cited the exchange, the securing the
release of helicopter pilot Michael Durant from warlord
Mohammed Farah Aidid. You used the words, it was a--
functionally exchanged.
Now, the five briefers, of course, said that they had--when
I asked them that question, that there was no precedent, that
we had not done any exchange with nonsovereign states within
the last 40 years.
Now, Mr. Preston, I want to point out to you that when
helicopter pilot Michael Durant was released in Somalia,
Mohammad Aidid said that he did so, he released Durant, as a
result of a gesture of goodwill. And President Clinton
immediately called a press conference. President Clinton stated
that, ``I want to emphasize that we made no deals to secure the
release of Chief Warrant Officer Durant,'' Clinton said at his
press conference. ``We had strong resolve. We showed that we
are willing to support the resumption of the peace process.''
And he goes on.
And then he said, Clinton said, that it will be a U.N.
decision whether to release the 32 Aidid aides captured by
United Nations forces. Their release was demanded by Aidid, but
Clinton says that there were absolutely no deals to secure his
release.
Now, you have said that Mr. Durant's release was a result
of a functional exchange. And the five that we had, briefers,
on Monday said there was no precedent of a nonsovereign state.
Mr. Preston, was President Clinton lying at his press
conference, or would you like to retract your testimony that
Durant's release was secured as a result of an exchange by the
United States Government of prisoners?
Mr. Preston. Sir, I certainly wouldn't want to suggest that
the former President lied, and I don't think I need to recant
my statement. I was trying to be responsive.
Mr. Turner. Okay, well, I only have 5 minutes, so, Mr.
Preston, in your response then I would like you in writing to
provide additional information as to the exchange that occurred
to secure Mr. Durant, because there is no public evidence or
discussion of anything of that nature. In fact, there are
disclaimers, including by the President of the United States,
Mr. Clinton. It doesn't appear that on the record, this would
be precedent for this Taliban swap, and I would like you to
explain that and that we can release it to the public so they
can understand the true nature of Durant's release.
Mr. Preston. It certainly wouldn't be on all fours, but it
would be an example of----
Mr. Turner. Mr. Preston, you cited that in this hearing. I
would like the details of that exchange in writing provided to
this committee.
Mr. Preston. I understand.
[The information referred to can be found in the Appendix
on page 107.]
Mr. Turner. Thank you, Mr. Preston.
Now, Mr. Secretary, the confusion in this, is because of
the issue of the policy of we don't negotiate with terrorists.
Now, you said that you don't want to talk about who held Mr.
Bergdahl, whether or not it was Haqqani. And unless we are in a
classified session, which I can understand you--your preference
to being that. However, the Haqqani Network say that they were
the ones holding him. Time Magazine says they were the one
holding him. The Washington Post says that they were the ones
holding him. It is reported openly in the Washington Free
Beacon, The Daily Beast, Newsmax, all say that it was Haqqani.
Now, the State Department lists the Haqqani Network as an
international terrorist organization.
Mr. Secretary, do you disagree with the State Department's
designation of the Haqqani Network as a terrorist organization?
Secretary Hagel. No, I acknowledged that earlier this
morning.
Mr. Turner. Excellent. Next question, Mr. Secretary, do you
agree that it has been the standing policy of the United States
that we do not negotiate with terrorists?
Secretary Hagel. Yes, I agree.
Mr. Turner. Mr. Secretary, would you please explain to me
how then that we could have been in negotiations that included
the Haqqani Network because they certainly were involved in the
capture, holding, and release of Sergeant Bergdahl, how is it
the United States could have been in negotiations with the
Haqqani Network, a listed terrorist organization, and it not
conflict with our policy that we do not negotiate with
terrorists?
Secretary Hagel. We dealt directly with the Government of
Qatar.
Mr. Turner. Oh, that is our footnote now. So now the new
policy of this administration is, we don't negotiate with
terrorists directly.
Secretary Hagel. Well, Congressman, you didn't let me
finish.
Mr. Turner. Mr. Secretary, that is what you said.
Secretary Hagel. I did say it, but you cut me off before I
could say the other party that we were dealing with, the
Taliban. Now, I actually--I actually dealt with this question
earlier this morning about the Haqqani Network holding at
different times.
Mr. Turner. Actually, you deferred and said we would talk
in classified session. But it is well-known, well-known----
Secretary Hagel. But I also said that the Haqqani Network
was holding him at different times. We don't know----
Mr. Turner [continuing]. As long as it is not direct, that
we will negotiate with terrorists.
Secretary Hagel. We didn't negotiate with terrorists,
Congressman.
The Chairman. Mr. Cooper.
Mr. Cooper. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And thanks to our distinguished witnesses.
I wish that this committee would not be so prosecutorial in
its tone. I think it is very important that this not become a
political football. I don't know if my friend on the other side
of the aisle is already running for majority leader or not, but
it sounds like the tone here is way too political. I think, at
least for the audience back home, people need to understand in
case some people have forgotten that our Secretary of Defense
is a distinguished former United States Senator of the
Republican Party with a distinguished war record in Vietnam.
So, hopefully, this committee will not cast aspersions on
anyone and certainly not impugn their patriotism.
The chairman tried to narrow the scope of this hearing with
his opening statement, and I think he essentially wanted to
confine it to the 30-day notice requirement that this Congress
perhaps should have received on this prisoner transfer. I think
that if the committee hearing were, in fact, narrowed to that
point, it would not be the near media circus that it has
become. Not only would not many members of the press have shown
up, but many members of this committee would not have shown up.
So let's try to de-escalate the tensions here. Let's try to
focus on the substance. Let's try to be fair to each other, and
hopefully bipartisan, because as the chairman correctly noted,
this committee is noted for its bipartisanship and its
fairness. It was a great triumph for the chairman and the Buck
McKeon Defense Authorization Bill, for it to be passed out of
this committee unanimously and overwhelmingly on the floor.
That is the way our Nation should approach its national
defense. In unity, there is strength. So, hopefully, my
colleagues will focus on what is really important here. There
has been a lot of discussion about precedent, and no one wants
to set a bad precedent for us, the greatest country in the
history of the world, but I think that if there is any
precedential effect of this decision, it is a vitally important
principle that so many of our generals and admirals and others
have reiterated, leave no man behind. That is the message of
this possibly politically unpopular decision, that is leave no
man behind.
We can investigate what he did or didn't do once he is
safely back in our custody, once he has been presumed innocent,
and the regular course of justice can take its place. But I am
shocked, really, that this has become such a political
football, and such unfairness, as the Secretary of Defense
quite rightly pointed out, not only toward our men in uniform,
but towards his family. You know, I don't know the particulars,
but justice will take its course. That is the nature of this
country. That is the nature of our constitutional guarantees,
and as the Secretary of Defense also pointed out, not only is
this person a U.S. citizen, he is a person who volunteered to
wear the uniform. So he should be given the benefit of the
doubt. Let justice take its course.
I would like to ask Mr. Preston in a much less
prosecutorial tone than some of the earlier questions, do you
think that the 30-day notice requirement for Congress that was
in the last NDAA was in fact a constitutional provision? Does
the Commander in Chief, any Commander in Chief of either party,
have the right to take action, you know, when time requires it,
to protect the life of a service man, to perhaps circumvent 30-
day notice requirements to this body. And it was my impression
also that the Senate Majority Leader, Mr. Reid, said that he
had in fact been notified. I don't know the extent of
notification.
Mr. Preston. Thank you for the question. Sir, we believe
the provision is constitutional. The question was the
constitutional implications of its application in the
particular circumstances here. And the administration
determined that it was necessary to forego the full 30-day
formal notice to the eight committees under the constellation
of circumstances presented in this situation in which the
President was seeking to free a service member in captivity and
in peril. And the circumstance can be described in terms of the
fragility of the negotiations and concerns about delay and
leaks and the impact in premature ending of the negotiation,
the circumstance of a fleeting opportunity to effectuate the
exchange. The Secretary mentioned that from the time it was
decided to do an exchange to the actual execution was something
on the order of 96 hours. The potential harm to Sergeant
Bergdahl if the deal became public, all of this in the context
and backdrop of uncertainty as to his physical condition, and
the realization that this might be our last best chance to get
him. It was in that circumstance, Mr. Chairman, if I could just
finish, it was in that circumstance, that with the deal coming
together, and the prospect of having a decision to transfer,
the concern was that delaying at that point for 30 days to
effectuate notice of the transfer would scuttle the deal and
could possibly further endanger Sergeant Bergdahl.
Mr. Cooper. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I see my time is
expired.
The Chairman. You know, we can hammer on this and hammer on
it, but the point is, those negotiations started last January.
You had talked to us about it in November of 2011. Neither of
you were in your jobs then, so when I say you, I mean the
Department, had talked to us in November of 2011. When those
negotiations blew up in February of 2012, you came to us and
said, if we start the negotiations again, we will come back to
you. That didn't happen, and so I understand, when you are down
to the final days and you have got--you are planning the
operation itself, and putting those things together, yeah, that
is real crunch time, when you are down to a few days. But that
was the end of May. What about January, February, March, April?
There was plenty of time. You had time to talk to the
Department of Justice; 80 or 90 people were informed and knew
about this, but Congress was not informed. And I guess the
reason I think they weren't informed is because when you
originally brought it up back in November of 2011 and
February--January and February of 2012 because you had real
pushback from Congress. They didn't want those five guys
released. And so then this time you just decided we will bypass
Congress and deal with it after.
Mr. Preston. Let me address that.
The Chairman. That is the problem I have with all of this.
Mr. Preston. If I could address that with reference to the
30-day notice requirements, specifically. That is key to a
transfer. And in this instance, there was no decision to
transfer and could be no decision to transfer.
The Chairman. There was, when you started the negotiations
in January and February as a result of the tape that you saw of
Sergeant Bergdahl, you entered into a negotiation just as you
had been a few years before it was transferring five detainees
for the one prisoner, or hostage, or whatever we are going to
call him. That didn't change. All that changed was you got
closer to an actual deal.
Mr. Preston. We did not have a decision to transfer and
could not have a decision to transfer until we had security
assurances in place, which was May 12, and until there was an
agreement to exchange, which was May 27th--excuse me, sir.
The Chairman. Then why didn't you talk to us about it in
November of 2011?
Mr. Preston. I understand that there is a serious issue
here, which the Secretary has addressed about the relationship
and communication. What I am trying to focus on is what would
trigger the statutory 30-day notice requirement. And that would
be a transfer. We did not have a decision to transfer until--
until that last week.
The Chairman. You don't need an exact date of transfer to
begin the 30 days' notice.
Mr. Preston. It is notice of the transfer. That means there
has to have been a decision to transfer.
The Chairman. Okay, we are probably not going to agree on
this.
Mr. Kline.
Mr. Kline. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, gentlemen, for being here.
I was somewhat amused by the gentleman from Tennessee's
admonition of my colleagues for taking a prosecutorial
approach. I am amused because I remember very well a few years
ago, when the gentleman would hold up a newspaper headline and
address representatives of the Republican administration in
what one could see as a prosecutorial manner.
Nevertheless, Mr. Secretary, let me ask you a question that
we have been around all morning. Who specifically selected the
particular detainees that were transferred?
Secretary Hagel. The five detainees that were transferred
have been the subject of conversation, negotiation over a
period of time. They just didn't appear on anybody's scope.
These are individuals that we have been talking about as the
chairman noted and I mentioned. I wasn't there at the time in
2011, as you note, in 2012, but I am aware that Members that
were briefed on these five individuals, Members of the
Congress, disagreed with these five individuals. Where those
five individuals initially came from, I have--I don't know all
of the history to that, Congressman.
Mr. Kline. Okay, I thank you for that, but let me--somebody
made the decision that these five were going to be transferred
at the end. Now, there could have been discussions for going on
for months, but somebody made that decision. Who was it, in
May?
Secretary Hagel. The decision to transfer, if that is your
question----
Mr. Kline. To transfer specifically these five.
Secretary Hagel. Well, those decisions were made ultimately
by the President. But we all in the National Security Council
agreed once we had all of the assurances in place, the things
that Steve Preston has talked about, if that is your question.
Mr. Kline. I guess we are going to talk past each other
here, because at some point, somebody decided that it would be
specifically these five, and I am just trying to figure out who
that was.
You said in response or in a conversation with Ms. Davis
earlier, they wanted all of the Taliban detainees. Who is
``they''?
Secretary Hagel. The Taliban.
Mr. Kline. The Taliban.
Secretary Hagel. At one point in these discussions, this is
before my time, by the way.
Mr. Kline. Right, so you can see why there is--I hope you
can see why there is a lot of confusion here, because you have
been very careful to say on more than one occasion that you
were not negotiating with terrorists. You have even said you
weren't negotiating with the Taliban because you were
negotiating with the Emir of Qatar. And so we have had some
pretty tortuous, I would say, tortuous legal responses to
questions that we are trying to get at when we are just trying
to find out the basics. And Mr. Preston, of course, he is a
lawyer, but he has come back with--in response to the chairman
and others, well, we didn't know because we didn't have a
decision date. I think that was the answer that was just right
here, and therefore, the 30 days didn't start because we
specifically hadn't made a decision.
And Mr. Secretary, I am sorry, but these responses are
very, very tortuous, as we are try to weave around here
legalities. And I understand there a lot of lawyers and
probably a lot of them here on the committee. But
fundamentally, I am just trying to understand who made the
decision when it was made to do the transfer, and who made the
decision on the notification and why?
And so we are just walking around here. And I will just
close, because my time is rapidly running out, by saying that
this confusion leads to this belief that was expressed by Mr.
Turner and others, that, in fact, the United States did set a
precedent, did break the policy of negotiating with terrorists,
because despite the maneuvering of the little pieces about
well, I can't really say if it is Haqqani, who is a designated
terrorist network, it was real Taliban, but we really weren't
talking to Taliban either, because we were talking to Qatar, I
am sorry, I think all of that just adds to the confusion and to
the perception.
I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Secretary Hagel. May I just quickly respond? I notice the
Congressman has 20 seconds, just a general response.
Mr. Kline. Sure.
Secretary Hagel. I am taking care of your time for you.
Mr. Kline. Seventeen seconds left.
Secretary Hagel. Yes, there was confusion. I have said
that. This was imperfect, imprecise. Just to go back to a
timeline, we didn't even engage here in Qatar until April. Yes,
just exactly what the general counsel has said, what I have
said; sure there was confusion. There was imprecision. We
didn't know from day to day what we had, what we didn't have.
The questions over here about the Taliban not having a good
track record on keeping their word. They are in; they are out.
We had to have assurances, what Steve has talked about, what I
have talked about, absolutely. Absolutely there was a lot of
confusion. But through that, we had to stay focused on what the
objective was. And that was getting an American POW back with
the reassurances that we needed to be able to say it would
substantially mitigate the risk and it was in the interest of
our country. That was the objective, and that is what we tried
to do. And I know there are differences. I know there are
questions. I get it. But we did get him back. And we don't have
any more POWs.
The Chairman. Mr. Smith.
Mr. Smith. Yeah, Mr. Chairman, if I could, just on the
point of who we negotiated with. To clarify this, originally
this was all worked through the Qataris, and they were talking
with the Taliban. Originally, we had the connection. So there
is no evidence whatsoever, that we, or even the Qataris for
that matter, negotiated with the Haqqani Network. It was always
the Taliban; the Taliban reaching out to Doha and then reaching
out to us. So it is pretty straightforward that the people we
were negotiating with were the Taliban. Who held him where,
when, whatever, but the people we were talking about his
release, the people who apparently controlled his release was
the, you know, the former Taliban government, now the
insurgents, is that not correct?
Secretary Hagel. That is correct.
Mr. Preston. Yeah, my only gloss on that would be my
understanding is in the very early going, there were direct
talks between the U.S. Government and the Taliban, and then it
later became indirect with the Qataris. But there was never a
point in time where, either directly or through the Qataris, we
were negotiating with Haqqani. There were no demands made or
concessions made by or to the Haqqanis as far as I am aware of,
period.
The Chairman. I was going to use an example earlier when--
but Mr. Runyan had to leave, a professional football player. He
probably had an agent. The agent probably negotiated for him.
The owner probably has somebody, a general manager or somebody
negotiates for him. But at the end of the day, it is the
football team negotiating with the player, even though the
player and the football team aren't there; it is other people
negotiating that. So is the Haqqani part of the Taliban? What
is the relationship between the Haqqani and the Taliban?
Mr. Preston. I, to tell you the truth, you are out of my
area, and this is something the intelligence community folks
could address better.
The Chairman. Mine, too. And I am not an attorney, I am
just asking the questions.
Mr. Johnson.
Mr. Johnson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I want to commend you, Mr. Chairman, for your effort to set
the scope and the tone of this hearing, which I think most
Members have adhered to.
And I want to thank you for that. And I think this is the
way that--this is the tone that we should have in this hearing,
because this is a legitimate issue of legislative oversight.
And Secretary Hagel, I am apologetic to you for not having
been able to repeat your first answer to the question about
whether or not we negotiated with terrorists. It is clear that
we did not do so.
And I want to ask you some questions, Mr. Preston. You are
the attorney, so you are familiar with the Constitution and the
separation of powers, and the power of the Executive, insofar
as being the Commander in Chief, and those duties and
obligations are not specifically set forth in the Constitution
or limited in any way. Would you agree with me that section
1035 of the Defense Authorization Act for fiscal year 2014
restricted the transfer of GTMO detainees by the Commander in
Chief without giving 30 days' notice? Would you agree that that
restriction is on the power of the Commander in Chief?
Mr. Preston. I would agree with that, sir.
Mr. Johnson. And would you also agree that the purpose of
that provision was to, in effect, require congressional
approval before the President could utilize the power of
Commander in Chief to transfer a detainee without giving 30
days' notice to Congress? Would you agree?
Mr. Preston. I understand that to be the general intent.
Mr. Johnson. And would you further agree with the signing
statement that President Obama issued in signing the National
Defense Authorization Act, that this was an unnecessary
limitation or an unwarranted limitation, let me put it like
that--not unnecessary, but he said unwarranted limitation and
violates the constitutional power--constitutional separation of
powers principle?
Mr. Preston. Yes, sir. I understand that the signing
statement, you know, served to--the President to make clear his
view that these restrictions in application could impinge upon
his constitutional authority.
Mr. Johnson. Yes, and isn't it a fact also that section
1035 of that National Defense Authorization Act does not make
any provisions for a time-sensitive prisoner exchange
negotiation of the sort that we have with Mr. Bergdahl? Would
you agree that the NDAA does not provide for that circumstance?
Mr. Preston. Not by its expressed terms. Yes, I agree.
Mr. Johnson. What would be the effect on the Nation, on the
institution of the Presidency if the President were to comply
with this undue restriction and seek 30-day approval from
Congress before dealing with an emerging--an emergent
situation?
Mr. Preston. Well, let me first point out that the
Executive has consistently adhered to these provisions in all
previous transfers. And I wouldn't want this transfer in
connection with the Bergdahl exchange to be interpreted as an
exception to the statute whenever there are emergent
situations. You could imagine any number of emergent
situations. This was driven by the particular collection of
circumstances involved here in which the concern was that if,
look, the--in the process of finalizing this deal and executing
on the exchange there had to be a delay for formal notice, that
it would stand to scuttle the deal and quite possibly endanger
the individual.
Mr. Johnson. Thank you, sir.
I yield back.
The Chairman. Just for the record, it probably doesn't
matter whether we would agree that that is a restriction or an
unnecessary restriction. It was the law. It was passed out of
this committee. It was passed on the floor of the House. It was
passed on the Senate and the House in a final form and signed
by the President. Granted, he did write a note that he didn't
think it was constitutional, but until the Supreme Court acts
and says it is not constitutional, it is, as Mr. Smith said
earlier, the law.
Mr. Franks.
Mr. Franks. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank both
of you for being here.
Mr. Secretary, I believe, as I know you do, that one of
America's greatest and most sacred treasures is the men and
women in uniform who risk and sometimes sacrifice their lives
for the cause of American freedom and, further, that as a
Nation, we do indeed owe it to each one of them to carry them
from the battlefield and back to their home and families. And
it is also my belief that these heroes, down to the last
person, would reject gaining their release through an
unprecedented negotiation with jihadist terrorists that would
categorically break American law, that would return five high-
value terrorists, that would diminish the security of the
United States, and that would place a bounty on all of our men
and women in uniform and ultimately, essentially, weaken
America's hold on this priceless freedom for which generations
have fought and died.
Mr. Secretary, I also agree with you that every one of our
military personnel should know that if they are captured by the
enemy that we will come and get them. But that isn't what
happened here. What happened here is that the Obama
administration has now telegraphed to terrorists the world
over, that all they have to do is to kidnap or capture an
American soldier or citizen and that the United States will
capitulate and free some of their most dangerous terrorist
leaders.
Now, Mr. Secretary, I want to say this the right way, but
for the last 5 years, the American people and terrorists
themselves have watched in astonishment and disbelief as this
administration has handed back blood-bought gains to our
enemies. And I believe the result is that somewhere in this
world, this moment, that there are terrorists watching this
hearing in complete jubilation. And so my question is, do you
believe that this, what I believe to be an illegal trade, is
going to intensify the terrorist policy that you have mentioned
and their efforts to kidnap American citizens and personnel of
our military forces across the world that would afford them the
obvious leverage that they have gained here in this case?
Secretary Hagel. Congressman, as I have said before, our
military is always at risk, especially in war. Afghanistan is
one such place, so those men and women are at risk and have
been.
Mr. Franks. But has this intensified the terrorists'
efforts here and their policy? Has this been----
Secretary Hagel. If I believed that that would have been
the case, I would have never signed off on this. As I said
earlier, the Taliban's position on trying to capture American
service men and women have been very clear for 12 years.
Mr. Franks. But certainly this deal has undergirded that
policy. Certainly, this seems to be one of those things that
would encourage them to focus on it more.
Secretary Hagel. I don't know how that would be after, for
12 years, it has been----
Mr. Franks. Well, the fact that they have got the entire
American people focused on this debate, that they brought us
into this kind of chaos, that they have gained these gains,
certainly, would tell me that they see that there is great
value in doing that.
Secretary Hagel. Well, you know, one issue that has not
been mentioned here this morning is the tremendous progress the
Afghan Government has made and particularly the military. And I
think that is rather measurable. Looking at the elections, we
have got another election, the final next week. They are doing
all of the combat missions themselves. Yes, they have a ways to
go. But the reason I mention that, Congressman, is because this
is a different world than it was 5 years ago in Afghanistan or
3 years ago. And the increased strength of the Afghan army and
all of the institutions of Afghanistan is a significant part of
this. If I believed that it was going to increase the risk to
our soldiers, I would have never ever signed off on it.
Mr. Franks. Well, I don't doubt your sincerity in that
regard, sir. I do profoundly, in all due respect, doubt your
judgment on that front.
Secretary Hagel. Well, that is fair.
Mr. Franks. So let me finally ask you: Can you clarify for
us, I didn't get it clear a moment ago, what is the connection
or the relationship between the Haqqani Network and the
Taliban?
Secretary Hagel. I don't know exactly the relationship. And
by the way, I said in my statement, the Haqqani Network was
holding Bergdahl. We know that there is an affiliation. There
is an association. We don't know if the Taliban had
subcontracted to the Haqqanis to hold Bergdahl. We, again, can
get down deeper in this in a classified hearing.
Mr. Franks. Well, I think that would be important for the
record at some point.
Secretary Hagel. We don't know all of the pieces.
Mr. Franks. Well, I am out of time, Mr. Secretary. Thank
you for your answers.
And Mr. Chairman, I do believe that this effort has
ultimately weakened America's freedom in the world.
The Chairman. Ms. Speier.
Ms. Speier. Mr. Chairman, thank you.
And thank you for the balanced way that you have handled
this hearing. Let me just say at the outset to my colleagues, I
was somewhat stunned by one of the earlier questioners about
Bowe Bergdahl, and I would just ask us to think for a moment
how we would be responding if Bowe Bergdahl was our son. I
really fear for his return to this country with the kind of
rhetoric that is being spewed in this very room.
To you, Secretary Hagel, thank you for your very persuasive
presentation this morning and for your leadership. I would like
to ask kind of a fundamental question. In hindsight, which is
always 20/20, do you think it would have been appropriate for
you to have informed the leadership of both Houses?
Secretary Hagel. Well, Congresswoman, in hindsight, I
suppose any of us in our own lives in every decision we have
ever made, can we do it better? I mentioned that in my opening
statement. Yes, we could have done this better. But I also said
that we thought we had one shot here, and we were told by
people that we were engaged with--this gentleman right here was
on the ground in Qatar. We can go into more of the details--
that any risk of any leak in anything, any security operations
break would jeopardize the deal. We didn't know what kind of
health Bergdahl was in, for sure. All we had was a 6-month
video. We did know that he had been transferred back and forth
quite a bit. We were not sure where he was; 5 years in that
captivity. And I don't think anybody on this committee would
think that that was a walk in the park. And we will find out
more and more about it. But we do have some intelligence that
is clear on this, on some of the conditions he was held in.
So you factor it all in, and we were told that this may be
your last shot at this. It was a judgment. That is right. Could
we have done it better? Could we have done it smarter? And I
would just add this: Does anybody on this committee really
believe that I would want to come up to this committee, the
President of the United States would want to take the criticism
that he has taken on this issue, intentionally if there wasn't
a good reason?
Ms. Speier. All right, let's move on. Thank you.
Secretary Hagel. I mean, come on, you can question our
judgment on it. That is fair, but we did this because we were
concerned enough, with the fleeting opportunity we might miss
it, and we just didn't want to risk any further security of
operations. That is all.
Ms. Speier. In open hearing, can you provide us with
information about how these five detainees were held? Were they
subject to waterboarding, torture or anything else when they
were at GTMO?
Secretary Hagel. Let me ask our counsel on this, because I
am not aware of any kind of torture or--I don't know. I
wasn't--I haven't been around for the 12 years they were down
there. I am not aware of any situation that would have put them
through any of that, but I don't know. I will ask the general
counsel.
Mr. Preston. I am not either, but I have not reviewed for
that purpose.
Ms. Speier. Would you do that for us and report back to us?
Secretary Hagel. Yeah, we will.
[The information referred to can be found in the Appendix
on page 107.]
Ms. Speier. In terms of their movement in Qatar, the first
reports were that they were going to be housed in some secure
location, and then word came out that, no, they were going to
be able to freely move throughout Qatar. If in fact they are
freely moving throughout Qatar, do we have ankle bracelets on
them? How are we in a position to know precisely where they are
at every moment?
Secretary Hagel. Well, this is a--we will get into this,
and I will answer your question, but this really needs to be in
a classified setting. Short answer is, yes, we have the kind of
assurances we think are meaningful and enforceable, and we
believe the Qatar Government will enforce them. But we need to
take this up in a classified hearing.
Ms. Speier. All right, my time is expired.
Thank you.
The Chairman. Thank you. Mr. Conaway.
Mr. Conaway. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Secretary Hagel, trust is a fragile concept, and you said
toward the end of your conversation that you broke trust with
the committee and with Congress. And I would agree with that.
Secretary Hagel. I didn't say I broke trust with them. I
think I said something different.
Mr. Conaway. Yeah, well, we can get the transcript out, and
we will read it back to you. Over, and over, and over, you and
Mr. Preston both have said, ``We don't trust Congress. We don't
trust Congress.'' It is insulting. It is disrespectful. And I
get it. And so our system of trying to deal with you and deal
with us demands trust. You made a self-laudatory comment that
you would never sign anything that was not in the national
interest of our country, et cetera, et cetera. I have to trust
that based on your word. I now cannot do that. And so you put a
rift in the entire system by choosing to not obey the spirit.
Mr. Preston, it was very offensive that you tried to strain
out a gnat on whenever that 30-day notification triggered, but,
Mr. Hagel, under the NDAA, it is your responsibility to notify
Congress. It is not the President's responsibility. You are to
make that notification. Did you personally decide on your own
to not do that?
Secretary Hagel. I decided in consultation with the
interagency. The President was aware of it.
Mr. Conaway. So it was your call to not notify Congress. As
a Senator, can you----
Secretary Hagel. I notified Congress.
Mr. Conaway. No, you didn't.
Secretary Hagel [continuing]. But I notified Congress when
we had Bergdahl.
Mr. Conaway. That was not even within the spirit of the 30
days. Even if you had done it on May 12, whenever the MOU was
signed, you would not hear this pushback from us, but you did
it.
Secretary Hagel. Congressman, I explained why the
notification was handled the way it was.
Mr. Conaway. All right. Yeah, I know, and over, and over--
--
Secretary Hagel. By the way, I never said that I don't
trust Congress. That is your word.
Mr. Conaway. Yes, you did. Yes you have, over and over.
Secretary Hagel. I never said I don't trust Congress. You
ought to check your transcript, Congressman.
Mr. Conaway. Mr. Secretary, were any of the detainees aware
of the negotiation for their release?
Secretary Hagel. Let me ask the general counsel. I don't
know.
Mr. Preston. To the best of my knowledge, no.
Mr. Conaway. So if we were to get the visitor logs and the
flight manifests at GTMO, it would not show that these guys
were conferred with as a part of this process? All right, I
take that blank answer to----
Secretary Hagel. I don't think so. But Congressman, I am
sure with the investigation, we are going to turn over
everything we have. So----
Mr. Conaway. And we would need to be able to trust you.
Secretary Hagel. I get that.
Mr. Conaway. But we don't.
Secretary Hagel. But I never said I don't trust the
Congress. Those are your words.
Mr. Conaway. Your actions--no, no, your actions said that.
Secretary Hagel. No, I didn't say. You said I said it.
Mr. Conaway. Your actions demonstrate, Mr. Secretary, that
you do not trust Congress because you wouldn't tell the
chairman and the ranking member something like this. Your
actions say you don't trust Congress. I get it.
With respect to the release of these five and the overall
impact it has on the ability of the Taliban to work their
mischief in Afghanistan, would you agree or disagree that a
weakened Taliban would be better for Afghanistan than a
stronger Taliban?
Secretary Hagel. Yes.
Mr. Conaway. Would you agree that the return of these five
individuals, once they serve their halfway house nonsense in
Qatar and get back into Afghanistan will strengthen the Taliban
and their efforts to do whatever it is they wanted to do in
Afghanistan?
Secretary Hagel. Maybe. Do you know that?
Mr. Conaway. Maybe.
Secretary Hagel. We don't know. We do know enough.
Mr. Conaway. We have already had one of them say so in the
open press that that is in fact what he will do.
Secretary Hagel. Well, what is a fact? Somebody is
projecting 12 months down the road and that is a fact?
Mr. Conaway. So you think that 12 months in this halfway
house is going to somehow cure them of their hatred of America,
and their ability to want to not take back----
Secretary Hagel. That is not what I said, and that is not
what we meant. But to take it as fact when something that
hasn't happened and won't happen for 12 months----
Mr. Conaway. Mr. Secretary, the notification concept under
the January of 2012 had some broad parameters that said, here
is what we will do in the terms of negotiating with the
Taliban--classified at this point, but there is a long list.
The phrase we won't--nothing is agreed to until everything is
agreed to. Somewhere between January 2012 and May 27 of 2014,
that changed the deal that you notified Congress that you are
trying to cling to that you are--that you in fact notified
Congress that this was going on. When did that change occur,
and were you a part of that decision? Because the way I
understand it, all we got was Sergeant Bergdahl, as important
and wonderful as that is, that is it. We got no other
agreements that were in those broad kind of conversations that
you had with us, or the administration had with us in January
of 2012. None of that appears to have been a part of this deal
whatsoever. When did we abandon that criteria, and why weren't
we notified that that change was made?
Secretary Hagel. When did we abandon that criteria? What
criteria?
Mr. Conaway. The criteria from January of 2012.
Secretary Hagel. But what criteria are you talking about?
Mr. Conaway. I can't tell you that. It is open session.
Secretary Hagel. Well, we will take it up in closed session
then. I don't know--I can't answer a question that you can't
give me the question to.
Mr. Conaway. I will remember the next time we try--never
mind, Mr. Secretary, I yield back.
The Chairman. Mr. Barber.
Mr. Barber. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, Mr. Secretary and Mr. Preston, for being here
today. Last week during our recess, I was home in district like
I think all of us were, and I met with many veterans. I was in
Sierra Vista, which is home to Fort Huachuca, and I had about
70 people come to my ``Congress on Your Corner'' event that
weekend, and over and over again--virtually every one of them
was a veteran--they said to me, What is going on? We agree that
we should never leave one of our Armed Forces behind. And I
agree with that, too. But they wanted me to know if it was
appropriate that we released these detainees from Guantanamo in
exchange for Sergeant Bergdahl. They asked, ``Couldn't we have
gotten a better deal?''
And in your statement, Mr. Secretary, you say that this
transfer was a tough call--and I am sure it was--and that these
detainees were enemy belligerents. One of the five detainees
was the deputy minister of intelligence, and another was the
deputy minister of defense for the Taliban. And yet you also
stated that these detainees were appropriate in exchange
because they had not been implicated in any attacks against the
United States and that you have no basis, we have no basis to
prosecute them in Federal Court. I actually find these
statements very difficult to accept, Mr. Secretary, given the
status that these particular individuals had before they were
captured.
It is hard to believe that these individuals in these
positions within the Taliban government had no role in attacks
on Americans. So could you, Mr. Secretary, speak to this issue
and explain to the people I represent and to this committee and
those of us who are all across this country asking these
questions, why you believe the release of these men was
appropriate and that it does not pose a threat to our national
security?
Secretary Hagel. Congressman, I mean, I think I have
answered the question, and I think I address what you quoted
from my testimony, but let me start again. We recognize, as I
said in my testimony, and I think the answers I have given this
morning, that there are risks. There are always risks. There
are going to be risks in a deal like this. We had to factor in
every circumstance that we could factor in. Our intelligence,
where these guys came from, what facts we had on them, as you
noted from my testimony, how big a risk would they be? How
substantial could we mitigate those risks for our country, for
our allies, for our citizens, our service members? We think we
have done that.
We think we have done it through a 12-month pretty tight
enforcement of the memorandum of understanding. We know that
after 12 months, that is another deal. But factoring everything
in, we all felt, everyone was secure on this, in the National
Security Council signing off on this, our number one and our
number two uniformed military, General Dempsey, Admiral
Winnefeld, that in fact, we had substantially mitigated the
risk to this country.
And I believe that. I would not have signed it. The
President wouldn't have signed it.
Mr. Barber. Well, thank you, Mr. Secretary.
Let me move to a second aspect of this issue, and I
understand that this is hard to predict, but we, as you know,
of course, have not been able to secure a bilateral security
agreement with the Afghan Government. President Karzai is on
again, off again. He has been off signing that agreement for
some time. I was in Afghanistan a couple of months ago, and I
was wanting to find out how our troops were reacting to this
situation and particularly to the attacks, verbal attacks, that
President Karzai has made on our troops and our country. Of
course, we have an election coming up in just a few days, but
my question is, do you have any sense of how the release of
these detainees will impact on the ability for us to secure a
bilateral security agreement with the new administration,
whoever that might be, because clearly, we have seen a lot of
anger in Afghanistan over the release, and we wonder,
obviously, how that might affect future agreements with the new
Afghan president?
Secretary Hagel. Congressman, as you know, the two
finalists, one will be presumably the next president of
Afghanistan, either Abdullah Abdullah, or Ghani, have both said
and both reaffirmed that, if elected president, one of the
first things they would do is sign that bilateral security
agreement. I have seen nothing to change that. We have heard
nothing to change that. I believe that commitment is firm, from
either one of them, from both of them, and they have made that
commitment.
Mr. Barber. Thank you, Mr. Secretary.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
The Chairman. Mr. Lamborn.
Mr. Lamborn. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Hagel, prisoner exchanges in the past, for instance,
after the Korean War and the Vietnam War, were done after a
peace deal had been hammered out. The President recently said
about the Bergdahl deal, ``This is what happens at the end of
wars,'' quote-unquote. How is what is happening in Afghanistan
the end of a war other than the President has made a unilateral
decision to remove our forces next year no matter what the
facts on the ground are? In other words, have we negotiated
some type of peace with the Taliban making this an end to the
war?
Secretary Hagel. Well, the first part of the question,
Congressman, I don't think anyone would have wanted us to wait
if we had a chance to get Bergdahl until the so-called war is
over. We had an opportunity to get him. It was a fleeting
opportunity. We did it.
Mr. Lamborn. So the President was wrong when he said ``This
is what happens at the end of wars''?
Secretary Hagel. No, that is the first part, if you will
let me finish. This decision the President made, this wasn't a
new decision. You go back to the Lisbon NATO [North Atlantic
Treaty Organization] conference of 2010, it was established by
the ISAF [International Security Assistance Force] partners in
NATO in 2010 that combat missions would come to an end at the
end of 2014 for the United States and our ISAF partners. The
only questions that remained up until about a month ago, is how
many forces would the President decide to leave behind in their
missions to train, assist, advise if there was any terrorism.
So that is not new. It wasn't any arbitrary----
Mr. Lamborn. Okay, the administration's position isn't new,
but I don't understand how his unilateral decisions bring in
the Taliban and make them a negotiating partner.
Secretary Hagel. Well, I am not sure he said that. What you
just said, I am not sure what you mean.
Mr. Lamborn. After Vietnam, after the Korean War, the
Korean War, prisoner exchanges were done when a peace agreement
was signed. This is unprecedented to have a release like this
before there is even a peace agreement. All that has happened
is the President said we are withdrawing forces and the Taliban
are not a party to the negotiation--the Afghan Government was
not brought in on this, were they?
Secretary Hagel. This was a prisoner exchange, and again, I
don't think the American people would have wanted us to wait.
If we had a chance to get our POW----
Mr. Lamborn. But you keep saying that this is a prisoner
release. It is not a deal with terrorists releasing a hostage.
This is a negotiated prisoner release with a legitimate type of
government. I don't see where the Taliban----
Secretary Hagel. Well, I am not sure I get your point
though, Congressman.
Mr. Lamborn. You are saying this was not a deal with
terrorists, is that correct?
Secretary Hagel. That is right.
Mr. Lamborn. You said that this--the alternative is that
this is a deal with a legitimate government of some kind, with
a legitimate military that we are in the process of hammering
out a peace agreement. None of those things are happening.
Secretary Hagel. The President didn't say we are in the
process of hammering out a peace agreement. This was a prisoner
exchange. I mentioned this morning in one of the--in answer to
one of the questions about you go back to the 2012, 2011 days,
there was the larger scope of reference of reconciliation, and
maybe the Taliban and Afghan Government getting to a peace
agreement. That is what we were talking about in 2011, 2012.
Taliban shut all of that off, so this was a straight, let's-
get-our-prisoners, prisoner exchange.
Mr. Lamborn. Was the Afghan Government brought into the
loop on this decision during the negotiation?
Secretary Hagel. No.
Mr. Lamborn. But you said earlier that this was an attempt
to, among other things, reconcile the Afghan Government and the
Taliban.
Secretary Hagel. No, I didn't say that.
Mr. Lamborn. You didn't say that?
Secretary Hagel. I just said the opposite. I said this was
not. I said, in 2011 and 2012, there was a broad framework of
reconciliation. That was 2011, 2012. That has changed.
Mr. Lamborn. I am just trying to understand how this is not
a deal with terrorists holding a hostage. You cast this as a
legitimate prisoner swap, and yet, they are a terrorist
organization. We are not.
Secretary Hagel. The Taliban have never been designated by
us as a terrorist organization.
Mr. Lamborn. The Treasury Department says the Pakistan
Taliban is a terrorist organization.
Secretary Hagel. The Pakistan Taliban.
Mr. Lamborn. And the State Department says the Haqqani
Network is a terrorist organization.
Secretary Hagel. Yeah, we are talking about the Afghani
Taliban. These are bad guys. I mean, there is no question that
they are bad guys. Of course, they are. And I have laid that
out, and I have said that today. But again, I go back to all of
the considerations that we put into play to substantially
mitigate the risk to this country to get our POW back.
Mr. Lamborn. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. Thank you.
Ms. Shea-Porter.
Ms. Shea-Porter. Thank you, and Secretary Hagel, thank you
very much for being here under obviously challenging
circumstances. And I want to thank you for your service and say
that you probably more than most people in this room know what
it is like to be in combat and could imagine what it feels like
to be left behind. So I want to thank you for that very
principled stand because we do have that policy and we tell our
men and women that we will not leave them behind.
So I want to thank you for that. I do have some concerns,
though. And one of the concerns is, obviously, you know, the
trade. And I am particularly concerned about why five? Is that
the minimum number that they would accept because, you know,
looking at that, we got one; they got five; and we know that
they are bad guys, like you said. And so I have some concerns
about the number to begin with. And then I am also--would like
to comment, and I will let you wrap up with this, but I would
like you to comment about the reintegration process. One of my
colleagues suggested that there was something going on that you
didn't just quickly bring him back. But I do remember watching
our POWs from Vietnam coming back, and we learned a lot of
lessons about dropping them right into American culture after
having been isolated for so many years. And so my understanding
is there is a reintegration process, and there is three stages
and that we have to allow the former prisoner to work his or
her way through these stages.
So I would like you to address that, and also, why five?
And I would like to put my comment in that I do believe that
Congress should have been notified. I probably split the
difference here between my colleagues in that I understand why
you might not tell all of Congress because of the sensitivity
and the timing and the risk. But certainly, I do believe the
leadership of Congress should have been told. So anything else
you would like to add to that I still have 3 minutes, and
please tell me why there is five, and a little bit about the
reintegration process, and any other comments you would like to
add. Thank you.
Secretary Hagel. Congresswoman, thank you on the
reintegration process. I think everyone agrees that the
principal focus now, on Sergeant Bergdahl, should be his
health. Maybe someone disagrees with that, I don't know. But
for us, for the military, that is, getting him healthy enough,
his body, mind, spirit, and that is the point of a
reintegration process. You know your point about what we have
learned since POWs came back from Vietnam, is an important
point. We have learned a lot, our doctors have, our health care
specialists have, everybody is different to start with. Every
situation is different to start with. So that is the focus.
Let's get him healthy, mind, body, spirit, and then we will get
on with the rest of it. The United States Armed Forces and his
family agrees with this, incidentally. We let the medical
professionals make those calls.
Ms. Shea-Porter. And let me add, this doesn't mean that he
won't have to answer questions. They are important questions
that need to be answered. We are just waiting for him to be
well enough.
Secretary Hagel. That is right. As I said in my testimony,
both the Secretary of the Army, and the Chief of Staff of the
Army, has already said there will be a comprehensive review----
Ms. Shea-Porter. Right, and there should be.
Secretary Hagel [continuing]. Of all of the circumstances
surrounding his disappearance, every element.
Ms. Shea-Porter. And I thank you for that. Now why five?
Secretary Hagel. There is just one other--and I will get to
that. One other point on that, I remind you, again, you will
have an opportunity to look at the so-called form 15-6, which
does give a review at the time of his disappearance. It was
signed off, I believe, in August of 2009. That is up here at
the committee.
Now, the five. Okay. General counsel has asked----
Mr. Preston. I just, before the Secretary addresses----
Ms. Shea-Porter. Well, I am sorry, we won't be able to,
because my time is running out. I really would like the answer
from the Secretary.
Mr. Preston. Okay, very well.
Ms. Shea-Porter. We can talk about that in closed meeting.
Secretary Hagel. I give shorter answers. Why five? Well,
first, I have addressed this in other questions about how did
that all come about. It was originally six, and then we went
back and forth over the years. They wanted all the Taliban
prisoners, the Taliban did, wanted all in Guantanamo.
Ms. Shea-Porter. Right.
Secretary Hagel. And it settled at around five. The sixth
detainee died. So that is part. But I think there is a bigger
issue here, too. The American people, the American society, our
Armed Forces, has never seen life exchange of just one for one.
We put a value on our American lives as the most important
thing--not that other societies don't. I can't speak for any
other society, and I wouldn't try. But our society is every
human being is important. So why wasn't it 20? Why wasn't it
three? The five started to be what the Taliban insisted on.
They wanted more. It had been six. Then they wanted everything.
So I don't think there is any magic to it. It just--that is the
way it developed. But again, we don't--we don't put a one-for-
one deal on our----
Ms. Shea-Porter. Well, thank you. And I just want to
reiterate that you can trust Congress to handle this.
The Chairman. Time has expired.
Ms. Shea-Porter. Thank you. I yield back.
The Chairman. Mr. Wittman.
Mr. Wittman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Secretary Hagel, Mr. Preston, thank you so much for joining
us today.
Secretary Hagel, let me go to the administration's own
Guantanamo task force report, where they reviewed the files of
these five detainees that were transferred and unanimously
recommended in 2010 they continue to be held by the United
States based on the specifics of their cases. The task force
also said that it was conceivable, with adequate security
measures, the five could be sent elsewhere eventually.
In light of those recommendations that these detainees
continue to be kept and that recommendation taking place when
it did, can you tell us what extraordinary security measures
can Qatar offer today to allow for this transfer?
Secretary Hagel. Well, again, that is the essence of much
of our mitigating dimension that--why we signed off on the
deal, those assurances the first year.
Congressman, again, I will say, when we close this place
down and go into the classified, we will go into every one of
those specifics. But I would tell you this. You may have
already read the MOU, which we sent up here yesterday.
Mr. Wittman. Yes.
Secretary Hagel. And we will be glad to take you down into
the subparagraph 6 of each one of those to get to your
question. But to go beyond my testimony here, I don't want to
do that, and if it is okay, we will wait until----
Mr. Wittman. Let me go back historically, then, and look at
the history of Qatar and what they have done in receiving
detainees. As you know, the first transfer to Qatar was in
2008. And was that one considered a successful test case?
Secretary Hagel. I believe--and I just asked our general
counsel if we just had one transfer.
Is that right? To Qatar?
Mr. Preston. To my knowledge.
Secretary Hagel. So we have had one.
Mr. Wittman. Okay.
Secretary Hagel. I don't know all the history of that
transfer, although my understanding is it wasn't particularly
good.
Mr. Wittman. Uh-huh.
Secretary Hagel. And generally--so what has changed? I,
again, addressed this here this morning, but, first of all, you
have a new Emir. We have more presence, assets there. Their
relationship with the area and with us is significantly
changing.
Now, are these absolute guarantees? No. I mean, there are
very few absolute guarantees in life, as we all know. But I
think a number of things have changed enough, significantly
changed, to be able to have confidence in the enforcement that
the Emir told the President of the United States that he would
personally see to that, as well as the government.
And, if you follow down, as you did through your reading of
the those MOU requirements--and then we will get into the
details--we felt confident that that MOU covered enough that
the enforcement was good enough.
Mr. Wittman. You did acknowledge, though, that there was an
additional risk there in Qatar taking those detainees,
especially based on their past performance. So are you
comfortable with that risk?
And does this willingness for the U.S. to accept that risk,
does that now set the stage for the U.S. transferring detainees
to other nations who have not met obligations under previous
agreements in accepting these detainees from Guantanamo?
Secretary Hagel. Well, you said the right word, ``risk,''
and that is the essence of what we are always dealing with
here. And the analysis that we made, the decision I made, as
well as the National Security Council and ultimately the
President, again, I say, we believe that all of this together
could substantially mitigate the risk.
Mr. Wittman. Uh-huh.
Let me ask this. There is some concern, too, that of those
considerations given for the Qatari Government and what they
will do to keep up with these detainees, is there an
opportunity for these detainees to go to the Qatari legal
system to have these travel restrictions lifted so that under
legal means they could actually have free rein to travel
throughout Qatar or elsewhere?
Secretary Hagel. Well, I will ask the general counsel. He
signed the MOU. And I am going to ask him to handle that in
particular, that question, because he negotiated and signed it.
Thank you.
Mr. Preston. I think the question is best answered in the
closed session----
Mr. Wittman. Okay.
Mr. Preston [continuing]. If you would indulge us in that
respect.
Mr. Wittman. Let me close by asking this, then. What
happens to these detainees after a year?
Mr. Preston. As has been said, the restrictions of the MOU
are for a 1-year period. That includes the restriction on their
travel outside of Qatar. So, after 1 year----
Mr. Wittman. So, after 1 year, no restrictions?
Mr. Preston. Except under circumstances that we would
discuss in the closed session.
The Chairman. The gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. Wittman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. Mr. Maffei.
Mr. Maffei. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you very much, Mr. Secretary and Mr. Preston. I
appreciate very much your service.
Mr. Secretary, you said in your testimony that this was a--
well, first of all, let me just say that I think a lot of
people have had very, you know, emotional reactions to this and
what they have seen about this with incomplete information. And
I certainly think that is understandable, but these are
difficult circumstances to judge. And we, as elected officials,
and you, as appointed officials, have to put aside our emotions
and political expediency in order to best use our professional
judgment. And, obviously, what will be said in secret session
also pertains to this.
But what I am concerned about now is the law and the
notification of Congress. And you said in your testimony, I
believe you actually used the word ``unique circumstances.'' I
am a little concerned that this isn't unique. It might be rare
but not all that unique.
And do you believe that Congress hadn't thought this was
the sort of issue that could come up when they passed the law?
Should we amend this law if indeed these kind of, you know,
very rapidly evolving situations occur where you would want to
have the authority to do a prisoner transfer?
First the Secretary, and then if Mr. Preston--or either one
of you.
Secretary Hagel. Well, here is the way I would answer your
question.
First, it was an extraordinary situation. And maybe
everyone doesn't agree with that. I absolutely believe it, the
President believed it, the National Security Council leaders
believed it, for the reasons we have discussed here the last 3
hours and actually more. So I think we are on pretty solid
ground in saying that this was an extraordinary situation.
I think it also gets into the constitutional issues that we
have discussed here this morning, the responsibilities of the
President given to him through Article II of the Constitution.
What are his authorities under that article? That doesn't
discount what the Congress passes as laws.
And, by the way, this is not the first challenge to a law
by a President. As has been noted here this morning, President
Bush, George W. Bush, probably signed as many signing
statements as anybody. Executive, legislative differences exist
since probably the beginning of the Republic.
So I answer your question that way, too. And then if you
want to hear from the general counsel----
Mr. Maffei. Well, actually, let me just stick with--I think
you answered it fine, Mr. Secretary.
I am concerned, though, that there was an opportunity to
notify the Congress. I have heard some reports that 80 or 90
people in our administration knew. I don't know if you can
confirm that or not. But, sort of, the answer that goes back to
2011, 2012, I agree with the chairman on that; that was a
different set of circumstances. It was also, by the way, a
different Congress. I wasn't in that Congress. And it does
concern me that that many people knew and there wasn't some
sort of a notification of Congress, particularly given that,
obviously, the Qatari officials knew.
How are we to avoid the perception that this administration
trusts Qatari officials more than it trusts leaders in
Congress?
Secretary Hagel. Well, you may see it that way as a
Congressman, and I wouldn't question your perspective, but I
would just say this. The Qataris had to be part of it because
they were part of it; they were doing the deal. We signed the
memorandum of understanding with them. There would have been no
prisoner exchange without the Qataris.
So--not everybody, by the way, in the Qatari Government was
aware of this. And, again, Preston was there.
So I don't think it is a matter of we trust the Qataris but
we don't trust our own Congress. I have already addressed this,
too, as you know, Congressman, in my opening statement. Could
we have done it better, smarter? Yes.
Mr. Maffei. Yeah. I mean, I think my concern--and I am not
sure if this would rest in your office or not. My concern is,
okay, I understand the circumstances under which the Department
was not able to obey the letter of the law. My concern is
whether the Department even tried to obey the spirit of the
law, certainly not informing myself, a rank-and-file Member,
but at least the leadership of the relevant committees that
this was happening.
Secretary Hagel. Well, again, I will say, and I know
members of this committee don't agree with this, but in
explanation as to why we did what we did--and, again, I will
say one sentence--we were very, very concerned about the risk.
We had a fleeting opportunity here. We were told there was a
risk. The more people who knew about it, the more risk. I get
that. I get, well, why do you trust some in the White House and
not here? I get all that.
But your overall question about who knew and who didn't, I
don't know about the 80 or 90 number. I can tell you, from my
responsibility at DOD, very, very few people knew about this at
DOD.
The Chairman. The gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. Hunter.
Mr. Hunter. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Secretary, good to see you.
I guess you have said that there were better ways to do
this, there were more precise ways to do it. I guess my first
question would be, is that because DOD was not in charge of
this the entire time?
Secretary Hagel. Congressman Hunter, I am sorry. I just
read a note. I apologize. If you----
Mr. Hunter. Okay. If you could add 20 seconds back on.
Secretary Hagel. Take it out of my time.
Would you repeat the question? I am sorry.
Mr. Hunter. Was DOD in on this the whole time?
You have said before that this could have been done better,
and I am guessing that means that if you were doing this from
the beginning, this prisoner exchange, it would have been done
better.
Secretary Hagel. Well, I appreciate the comment. But, yes,
was DOD involved in this right from the beginning, yes, we
were.
Mr. Hunter. Let me interject there then. We talked in
February, and I said--because the State Department had this
option on the table and they had preapproval from the Executive
to go ahead with this prisoner exchange--this was months ago--
you appointed Mr. Lumpkin as the OSD [Office of the Secretary
of Defense] representative--this was just a few months ago--to
the Bergdahl case.
Secretary Hagel. Yes.
Mr. Hunter. Which makes me think that you weren't heavily
vested in this from the very beginning but that you did get
vested in it a few months ago.
Secretary Hagel. No, that is--that is not true. You are
right, let's pick up February. And you are right, we had the
conversation. You know; you had written me about this. I did
appoint Lumpkin, who actually was the guy who oversaw the whole
operation, as you know, from DOD, Mike Lumpkin.
Congressman, this was so fast-moving. Everything you said
here is right. There was a break, and I have the chronology
right here----
Mr. Hunter. Well, I don't need that from you. What I am
asking was--okay, let me put it this way. Did you have other
options that you looked at for approval or at least
consideration, nonkinetic options--nonkinetic options that you
looked at for at least consideration?
Secretary Hagel. You mean DOD?
Mr. Hunter. You. Yes, sir.
Secretary Hagel. Yes. No, actually. This was the one option
that we had.
Mr. Hunter. This was the only option that you considered,
the only nonkinetic option you considered?
Secretary Hagel. We consider everything, and we are. But
where we were in the timeframe you are talking about in the
scope of the reality here, this was the one option that we were
all working toward that looked like the best. That is what
Lumpkin did when I--that is why I appointed him to get into it.
You are exactly right in your----
Mr. Hunter. Let me ask again, did you have other nonkinetic
options that you have looked at for approval or at least
consideration?
Secretary Hagel. Not anything that was serious. I mean, we
look at all kinds of things all the time----
Mr. Hunter. Well, let me ask you, then, so you didn't pass
any other courses of action besides this one for the
President's consideration from the Department of Defense?
Secretary Hagel. If you are talking about this specific
deal with Qatar and the----
Mr. Hunter. I am talking about getting Bergdahl back. Just
getting Bergdahl back.
Secretary Hagel. No. This was the one that was on the table
that was the most realistic, viable. And, no, we didn't
present, that I am aware of, anybody in DOD, present any
other----
Mr. Hunter. Okay. Well, let me ask this, then. Why would
the President approve, or you approve, only one course of
action after seeing, now self-admittedly, no other courses of
action?
I have never heard that, where you only say, ``This is the
one thing that we have chosen to do, and we are not going to
consider any other courses of action besides this one.'' And
that means that the President didn't even have any other
options, nonkinetic options, from the Department of Defense
that you recommended to him. Because you just said that you
recommended no other options but this one.
Secretary Hagel. Well, Congressman, we weren't holding all
the cards here, as you know. If the Taliban wasn't ready to
engage----
Mr. Hunter. No, I--forget about the Taliban. I am not
asking that. What I am asking is----
Secretary Hagel. But they----
Mr. Hunter [continuing]. You have different courses of
action. If I want to enter this room, I can come in through
that door, that door, or the door over there. What you are
saying is you didn't look at any other doors except that one,
you didn't consider any other options besides this prisoner
exchange, and you only recommended to the President this one
pathway to get Bergdahl back.
Secretary Hagel. Congressman, this was the only pathway
that was emerging that was available. There was no other
pathway, unless you are aware----
Mr. Hunter. Well, here is what I----
Secretary Hagel [continuing]. Of something.
Mr. Hunter. I am aware, actually.
Secretary Hagel. Okay.
Mr. Hunter. And these are not from special briefings, so I
can probably mention a few of them.
Secretary Hagel. Yeah.
Mr. Hunter. But you had DOD, your department, working
concurrent options with Pakistan to get Bergdahl's release. You
had other options that we know that at least people in your
department had looked at.
Secretary Hagel. Well----
Mr. Hunter. And we won't go into those nonkinetic options.
But it just astounds me that for something this large that you
wouldn't recommend to the President any other course of action
but this one and that the President of the United States would
not have looked at other courses of action besides this one
before he made the decision to approve this.
Secretary Hagel. Well, two issues here.
One is, do we always look at other courses of actions? Yes,
we do.
Second issue, recommending to the President. This was the
most viable, best pathway we could find, we knew that was
active. The Taliban were coming back; the Qataris were telling
us they were coming back. So we pursued that as the most
immediate, viable, and possible option we had to get him back.
Mr. Hunter. Well, here is--in closing, I would think that
there were better options. And I think that the President
should have been better briefed by folks in your department
that knew what those options were. And I hope that the DOD and
Mr. Lumpkin take a stronger role in trying to get the rest of
the Americans back that were forgotten via this exchange in
Afghanistan.
I yield back.
The Chairman. Ms. Duckworth.
Ms. Duckworth. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Secretary, it is good to see you again. And I just want
to say how great it is to see a member of the NCO
[noncommissioned officer] corps, the backbone of our military,
at the head of the DOD. I served in Iraq with a Vietnam veteran
E-7 who went back over at 59 years old. Didn't make it home.
And he probably is smiling and cussing at me right now and
telling me I better treat you right.
I think your background and the background of all of us who
have worn a uniform and, as you said, been in combat informs
how we feel about the release of Sergeant Bergdahl, as well as
how we feel about someone who abandons their post and exposes
their buddies to attack by the enemy.
However, it has never been the practice of the United
States to leave one of our own behind on the battlefield,
regardless of the circumstances of their disappearance. We do
everything we can to bring them home. You don't leave them to
be dealt with by the enemy. It is not who we are as a country,
and it is not who we are as a military.
Now, that doesn't mean that there are not questions that
need to be answered about the circumstances around his
departure from his post, and I would hope that the military
will take appropriate action to review the circumstances again.
And I have full faith in the leadership of the United States
Army and the Uniform Code of Military Justice to conduct a
thorough investigation and to carry out any justice that the
result of a subsequent investigation may warrant.
That said, I wanted to ask you two specific questions.
First, are there any plans by the DOD or the Department of the
Army to go back and review the circumstances of his
disappearance? And then, if it is found that he did abandon his
post, he did desert, that there will be an investigation and
perhaps prosecution?
Secretary Hagel. Congresswoman, yes.
And thank you for your service. And to the other members of
this committee who I didn't by name acknowledge but I
referenced, as you noticed, in my testimony, thank you for your
service.
Yes. As I noted in my testimony and a couple of the answers
I have given this morning, the Secretary of the Army and the
Chief of Staff of the Army have both indicated, did last week,
that they intended a full, comprehensive review of all the
circumstances involved in the disappearance of Sergeant
Bergdahl.
The results of those reviews will determine if any action
would be required based on conduct and based on the review.
They feel strongly, and I do, but I am not going to get
involved in trying to influence that. That is a United States
Army decision, as you know how this works.
Ms. Duckworth. Uh-huh.
Secretary Hagel. They are open to get the facts. And
wherever the facts lead them, they will get them and they will
respond appropriately.
Ms. Duckworth. Thank you.
Secretary Hagel. Thank you.
Mr. Enyart. Would the gentlelady yield, please?
Ms. Duckworth. Yes.
I would like to yield the balance of my time to the
gentleman from Illinois, Mr. Enyart.
Mr. Enyart. Thank you.
Mr. Secretary, you have a tremendous perspective, as Ms.
Duckworth has alluded to, with your background as a combat
infantryman. Now, I am sure that you weighed every pro and con
in this decisionmaking process and your decision was made in
the best interests of this Nation based on the facts you had as
a whole, I am sure. And it is really unfortunate that the
toughest decision that many of your critics have been making on
this is as to whether or not they should run for reelection.
Now, have you received a single or heard a single sound
suggestion from any of these Monday morning quarterbacks as to
a better course of action that you might have taken in this
decision?
Secretary Hagel. The cupboard has been rather bare on that
account. We have a lot of experts, in this town especially. But
as I said--and I appreciate your service, sir. I am well aware
of it.
In this town, it is pretty easy, or anywhere else, to give
analysis, usually uninformed, and criticize every decision.
That is okay. That is the role everybody has. The country is
built that way. Everybody's opinion matters and counts.
Everybody has one.
But, in the end, as I said in my testimony, some of us are
dealing with the responsibilities of having to make the tough
choices. You make them up here in your votes, and I make them.
And that is the way it is, and that will always be that way. So
I just deal with it, and I do the best I can and I do what I
think is right for my country. And I don't have any problem
sleeping.
Mr. Enyart. Thank you, Mr. Secretary.
I yield back.
The Chairman. The gentlelady's time has expired.
They have called the votes. About 6 minutes left, but about
394 haven't voted yet. So I want to thank the Secretary. We
have gone over what we thought we would--it would take, but it
is a very important issue. And this is the largest committee in
Congress, and everybody wanted to have their questions
answered.
The Secretary has agreed we will take one more question.
Then we will break for votes. I would encourage all who have
not had an opportunity to ask questions that want to return;
the Secretary said he will stay for that. And then we will
reschedule at a later time the closed-session part.
Dr. Fleming.
Dr. Fleming. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Secretary Hagel, we have talked about this 30-day notice.
Yesterday, the chairman told us that he received notification
after Sergeant Bergdahl had actually been transferred. I am
sure his Senate counterpart received that notice at the same
time. It was really a notice after the fact.
And I listened carefully through all the questions, all the
legalese, the technical, the spin, everything. It is clear to
me that really what happened here--and this goes back to the
question from the previous gentleman as to what else could have
been done, has there been any other offers. My understanding is
that, back in 2011 and in 2012, when this issue was first
brought forward, that Secretary Clinton opposed it without
additional measures and protections, and I believe also Mr.
Clapper and others as well. Congress, on a bipartisan basis,
pushed back on this.
And so it really suggests to me that when this erupted
again this past January that the President decided he didn't
want to hear ``no.'' All he wanted to do was to move forward,
get it done, and whatever thing he could do here in terms of
lawyering or end-runs around Congress or whatever. I mean, it
has been reported by many different agencies that at least 90
people in the executive branch knew about this, but yet the
chairman of House Armed Services did not know about it.
So, I mean, isn't this really just an attempt by the
President to do an end-run around Congress, to not take ``no''
for an answer, or not get some pushback and maybe a little bit
of wisdom from people who have been around here a long time and
have been elected?
Secretary Hagel. Congressman, the President of the United
States, like every President of the United States, as you know,
has not just constitutional responsibilities but moral
responsibilities on behalf of every American. And his first
responsibility is the security of this country. And I have
never seen, in the time I have known him--and I have known him
since he has been in the Senate, and I have been in this job
about 15 months--ever a time he flinched on that. Now, you may
disagree with decisions he has made, but----
Dr. Fleming. Well, I appreciate that.
Secretary Hagel [continuing]. There was no political
decision here.
Now, on Clinton and Clapper. The Director of National
Intelligence [DNI] has already made a statement on his
agreement with this----
Dr. Fleming. Right, but he had first opposed it, is my
understanding.
Secretary Hagel. He did, but he explained why he has
changed his position----
Dr. Fleming. All right. Let me move on.
Secretary Hagel [continuing]. As did, by the way--Secretary
Clinton's situation was the same. It was a different world in
2011-2012 for all----
Dr. Fleming. Right.
Secretary Hagel [continuing]. The reasons we have talked
about.
Dr. Fleming. All I am saying is there is a benefit to more
heads, more wisdom in this. And I think the President really
didn't want to hear ``no.'' He wanted to do this no matter
what.
Let's go to number two here. The other----
Secretary Hagel. He wanted to make sure we could get our
POW back, but not no matter what.
Dr. Fleming. I understand.
Secretary Hagel. I mean, you all were driving this, as the
American people----
Dr. Fleming. Well, I didn't say ``no matter what.'' That
wasn't my statement.
Now, as far as who had control of Sergeant Bergdahl, we
keep hearing about the Taliban, but the reports have all been
it was the Haqqani Network. You yourself, I think, suggested
that.
Secretary Hagel. Uh-huh.
Dr. Fleming. We know the Haqqani Network is a terrorist--an
international terrorist organization. We all agree with that.
And so, ultimately, just because we have a surrogate, in this
case Qatar, who is going between, who is acting as an agent,
how is that not negotiating with terrorists?
Secretary Hagel. Well, first, let's look at the objective
here. It is to get our prisoner of war back, who is a prisoner
of war. It was a prisoner exchange----
Dr. Fleming. I get that. But, I mean--but, again----
Secretary Hagel [continuing]. Between the Taliban----
Dr. Fleming [continuing]. Aren't we violating a commitment,
a doctrine that we have had for decades by doing that?
Secretary Hagel. No. No.
Dr. Fleming. How is that not negotiating with terrorists?
Simply because we put someone in between, how is that any
better than direct negotiations?
Secretary Hagel. We engaged with the Government of Qatar.
At the----
Dr. Fleming. But wouldn't the outcome be the same?
Secretary Hagel [continuing]. Other end of it was the
Taliban, a combatant against us in war and----
Dr. Fleming. But still surrogates----
Secretary Hagel [continuing]. Was, in fact, the de facto
government of----
Dr. Fleming. So would the outcome have been any differently
if we talked directly with the Haqqani----
Secretary Hagel. Well, I mean, you and I disagree on that,
and----
Dr. Fleming. I don't think it would, and I don't hear you
saying it would be any different. But anyway----
Secretary Hagel. You didn't hear me say what?
Dr. Fleming. I didn't hear you say that it would be any
different. You are saying you didn't know. And I think it would
be.
Secretary Hagel. I am saying I didn't know what? What are
you saying?
Dr. Fleming. That the outcome would be any different
whether we talked with----
Secretary Hagel. I didn't say that.
Dr. Fleming [continuing]. Haqqani Network directly.
Secretary Hagel. I didn't say that. Not at all. We were
very clear who we were talking to and why and following the
law. That is what I said in my testimony, and I have said it
all morning.
Dr. Fleming. Okay. I yield back. Thank you.
The Chairman. The gentleman's time has expired.
Okay. We will recess for the two votes. I would encourage
that Members return as soon as possible so we can finish up the
questioning.
The committee is in recess.
[Recess.]
The Chairman. The committee will come to order. We will
reconvene. Thank you for your patience.
Mr. Rigell.
Mr. Rigell. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And, Mr. Secretary, I thank you so much for being here
today. Your patience in this entire process, I respect that.
I want you to know that I hold you in high regard. My
limited military service, I was never activated out of the
Reserves, never shot at. And so I thank you for your service to
our country, both in uniform, in public office, and as
Secretary of Defense.
And my respect for you will be undiminished, though we are
going to work through a couple of tough topics here in the few
minutes that I have with you.
It would be helpful to me if you would review, as concisely
as you could, the number of people who, at least within the
Department of Defense, were aware of the impending release, up
to and until the moment that Sergeant Bergdahl, in fact, was
released, and then--or transferred rather, and that the five
detainees were then given over to the representatives from
Qatar.
Secretary Hagel. Congressman, thank you. I appreciate your
comments, and thank you for your service.
First, I don't have the exact number of individuals within
DOD who knew about the operation, but here is what I would say.
As I have said here this morning, and I mentioned specifically
DOD, this was ongoing as the days--as you know the timelines
here. You start with--essentially, I start with about the 21st
and then go down, then 27th and so on. Each day, there had to
be some more people brought in for----
Mr. Rigell. If you could, just out of--my time is so
limited. If you had to just estimate that amount, how many,
approximately?
Secretary Hagel. I just don't know, and----
Mr. Rigell. That is okay.
Secretary Hagel [continuing]. It would be wrong. But----
Mr. Rigell. The numbers that I have seen----
Secretary Hagel. We will get it, but----
Mr. Rigell. Okay. I appreciate that.
Secretary Hagel [continuing]. I just don't know. But,
again, just suffice it to say, we kept it a very, very small
number.
Mr. Rigell. I appreciate that.
What is largely in the public domain has made it clear to
me that a number of people, certainly more than 25 or 30, I am
very safe with that, certainly on the DOD side. Perhaps if you
are--when you come back and tell us in a definitive way how
many.
But the point of it is this: is that if we look at the 30-
day requirement, which is the law of the land, even if one sets
aside a strict interpretation of the 30-day requirement, even
if one gives every benefit of the doubt to the testimony that
you provided here today and what other administration officials
have provided in public statements, I remain convinced that
really no effort whatsoever was made to comply not only with
the letter of the law but even the spirit of the law.
And I do not understand why no effort was made whatsoever
to pick up the phone and to call a committee chairman, either
on the House or the Senate side. To me, it seems like a
repudiation and really a slap in the face to this institution
and this equal branch of government. And I do not understand,
even though I have listened carefully to your testimony and
that by other officials, what compelled you to move without
picking up the phone.
Secretary Hagel. Well, as I have said this morning a number
of times, we felt that the fleeting opportunity to get this
done required an absolute minimum in people who knew.
I have also said that if we had an opportunity to come back
around and do this again, we didn't handle some of this right.
So I get that. And I have taken exactly what you said.
But the reason we didn't let anybody know right up until
the end is because of what I said. We were concerned. We
thought we were--we really did believe that the risk was so
great, just one thing getting out.
And I understand your point of view, so that----
Mr. Rigell. Mr. Secretary, I was and remain convinced that
you exercised your best judgment. I don't question that.
I do believe that damage has been done to the governance
aspect of this, to whatever trust and confidence there may have
been in the administration's commitment to complying with a
law, a statutory requirement. And I think it might yield and
result in something, you know, from this institution that I
think there ought to be some formal condemnation of it,
frankly.
But I appreciate your service to our country. Indeed, I do.
And I yield back the remainder of my time.
Secretary Hagel. Thank you.
The Chairman. Thank you.
Ranking Member Smith.
Mr. Smith. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I want to revisit the issue of the threat that these five
Taliban present. And I think you have been very straightforward
in saying, without question, you knew there were risks. And, as
always, if you simply look at one side of a deal, it is not
going to look good. But the issue was, can you get Sergeant
Bergdahl back, and how do you balance the risk of that?
And I think this committee needs to be careful about acting
like we got nothing out of this. We brought home one of our
soldiers, who, you know, based on what I have seen, was in
very, very poor health, was in a very dangerous situation, and
we met that obligation. So we got something for this.
That is not to say that releasing these five Taliban came
with no risk. Of course it came with risk. But I think that
risk has been greatly exaggerated. I think at one point one
Member said, you know, it was like releasing 10,000 fighters,
which is the type of exaggeration that isn't particularly
helpful.
These five guys, as I understand it, were mid-level
commanders, mid- to high-level commanders in the Taliban. They
have been out of the loop for 12 years. Presumably, in that
timeframe, the Taliban have replaced them frequently.
Now, this is five more that, you know, probably after a
year will go back and help the Taliban. But how, out of the
thousands of Taliban that are actively working against the
Afghan Government in Afghanistan--and, also, you know, there is
no real evidence that these five were part of attacks against
the U.S. homeland. They were part of the Taliban government;
they are interested in toppling the Afghan Government. But
where is the evidence that they are interested in plotting
attacks against the U.S.?
So can you revisit a little bit how much is that risk?
Admittedly, without question, that you released these five
guys, there is risk, but how much risk, in your assessment?
Secretary Hagel. Congressman, thank you.
I asked the DNI, General Clapper, to give me an
intelligence community assessment of that question that you
asked me, to come back to me with the best assessment they
could give me, recognizing, first, we start with there is risk.
We get that.
And I am going to read to you three sentences of what I got
back. And this is, I think, unclassified, so I think we are
fine. And then there is more classified.
But this is one observation. This is our intelligence
community, total. Threat if returned to Afghanistan or
Pakistan:
One, should these five detainees return and reintegrate
with the Taliban, their focus would almost certainly be on
Taliban efforts inside Afghanistan, not the homeland of the
United States.
Second, a few new Taliban leaders, no matter how senior,
will not appreciably change the threat to the Afghan people, to
the Afghan Army, but most importantly for us, to our forces.
And I would just again go back and note, ``will not appreciably
change the threat.'' This is the intelligence community's
latest report to me.
Then it is a point--third point they make is a point I made
this morning, in pointing out the significant progress the
Afghan military, the Army, has made over the last few years.
And they say the same thing. ``Afghanistan's future will depend
more upon accepted outcome to the second round of Presidential
elections, how Afghan security forces perform against the
Taliban over the next 18 months, and continued external donor
support that would allow Kabul to fund civil and security
functions.''
So does that say there is no threat? No. But we have never
said that. But this is the best, most recent assessment from
our intelligence community.
Mr. Smith. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. Ms. Hartzler.
Mrs. Hartzler. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Hello.
During the 2011-2012 consultations with Congress regarding
a larger deal with the Taliban, the Secretary of State then,
Secretary Clinton, told the national security chairman in
writing and verbally that if detainees at GTMO were
transferred, this was not an, quote, ``exchange, but rather
these Taliban detainees would only be released as part of a
larger diplomatic process.''
She identified a number of prerequisites to this deal over
and above the security assurances from Qatar. So, Mr.
Secretary, in addition to the release of Sergeant Bergdahl,
which of those other prerequisites were met?
Secretary Hagel. Well, first, I start with--and this is
really the answer to the General Clapper issue, which he had
the same position, as you know, as Secretary Clinton in that
year. But because things have changed, General Clapper has
supported, signed off on this deal.
One, the whole dimension of Afghanistan today, where the
Afghan Army is, where the Afghan Government is, that is first.
Second, the assurances, written assurances, that we have from
the Qatari Government, particularly the Emir's specific
personal commitment to the President of the United States. A
change in leadership in Qatar. These are all differences that
were not present in 2011 and 2012.
Also, the framework--and I have read the letter, by the
way, that the Secretary sent. The framework, as you recall, in
that letter, as I mentioned earlier this morning, was a larger
reconciliation piece. Not that Bergdahl was incidental to that,
but Bergdahl was not the core of it. This time, Bergdahl is the
core of it.
So those are some of the differences and the changes that
are pretty dramatic and, in fact, why General Clapper signed
off on this and supports this decision.
Mrs. Hartzler. Uh-huh. What I would like to know is, what
else did we get for this deal? And I am not minimizing the
impact of the sergeant himself.
Secretary Hagel. Well, we got--we will start with the
sergeant.
Mrs. Hartzler. Well----
Secretary Hagel. But what else? I mean, you mean----
Mrs. Hartzler. There was other assurances talked about in
that letter that was hoped to be secured as part of an overall
deal.
Secretary Hagel. Well, an overall deal, but this was not an
overall deal.
Mrs. Hartzler. Right.
Secretary Hagel. This was a prisoner exchange----
Mrs. Hartzler. Uh-huh.
Secretary Hagel [continuing]. Versus 2011 and 2012, where
the framework was of what the intent was, what the objectives
were. Those objectives were far broader and wider, is your
point. And we didn't have those objectives.
Mrs. Hartzler. At the briefing on Monday, the question was
asked whether any money was exchanged with Qatar or with other
people for this deal. And the answer was no money was
exchanged, but it wasn't clarified with who and if there was
anything additional. The question wasn't answered whether there
was anything besides, perhaps, money discussed in this.
So did the Taliban or any of the individuals involved
receive anything from our government----
Secretary Hagel. No.
Mrs. Hartzler [continuing]. Other than----
Secretary Hagel. No.
Mrs. Hartzler. No. Okay.
At the House-wide Member briefing, the same briefing Monday
night, Deputy National Security Advisor Tony Blinken was asked
if this agreement makes American men and women in uniform and
other officials stationed abroad safer. And I recall his
response to be that the agreement wouldn't make Americans safer
but that the law didn't require the administration to assess
that.
So do you believe that our military service members around
the world, not just in Afghanistan, are safer because of this
deal?
Secretary Hagel. The way I would answer it is this way.
First of all, the objective was to get our POW back. That was
the objective, and we did. Mitigating risks and so on, which
you have heard this all morning.
But to your specific question, when you look at, first, now
we have no POW, that means there are more resources that we can
apply in other areas, in Afghanistan in particular.
I think for our military--and I mentioned this this
morning--for our military to know that we will come get them if
they are captured, regardless of the circumstances, it may not
translate into direct safety but I think that is pretty
significant.
Plus, giving our forces more of their own capacity to deal
with what they are doing in Afghanistan without, quite frankly,
some restrictions that did inhibit some because we knew every
day we were trying to find ways to get our POW back.
So, I mean, I think, again, when you add all that up, that
is pretty significant.
Mrs. Hartzler. Thank you.
Secretary Hagel. Thank you.
The Chairman. The gentlelady's time has expired.
Mr. Secretary, I believe that these are likely already
included in the letter that I wrote to you, but a couple of
documents have been mentioned here today. And I would like to
specifically request, if I didn't already, copies of those: the
DOJ guidance to the NDAA that Mr. Preston was talking about;
and the ODNI [Office of the Director of National Intelligence]
assessment that you requested, that you just were referring to,
on the threat posed by the five detainees. Please, if they are
not on that list, if you could add them.
Secretary Hagel. We will include them.
[The information referred to can be found in the Appendix
on page 107.]
The Chairman. Thank you.
Mr. Enyart.
Mr. Enyart. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Good afternoon again, Mr. Secretary.
Mr. Secretary, Retired Marine General James Mattis, who is,
of course, the former chief of U.S. Central Command, said on
Sunday that the prisoner swap for Sergeant Bergdahl will give
the United States military more freedom to carry out missions
against the Taliban and the Haqqani Network.
He went on to say that U.S. commanders in Afghanistan
always lived with the concern that Bergdahl would be killed in
retaliation for a U.S. offensive against the Taliban. And I am
quoting here. Quote, ``We no longer have that concern they have
this pawn they can play against us. It is also a military
vulnerability the Haqqanis now face, the Taliban now faces,
because they no longer hold a U.S. soldier in captivity,'' end
quote.
Now, to me, as a veteran of just over 35 years' service,
that means to me that the United States military has increased
its operational effectiveness.
Mr. Secretary, would you agree with General Mattis's
assessment? And would you agree with the assessment that this,
in fact, has increased our operational effectiveness and
thereby effectively rendered U.S. military personnel safer
worldwide?
Secretary Hagel. Well, those of you who know General Mattis
know that you run a risk if you disagree with him. I have the
greatest respect for General Mattis, and I agree with his
analysis, everything that you laid out.
And I am glad he said those things on Sunday because they
are not things that have been said throughout this 10 days or
less and they are important factors as to how they affect our
military, and I believe they are real. And I think his specific
points not only are accurate but they come from someone who
knows a little something about this business.
Thank you.
Mr. Enyart. And he is not a member of the administration.
He is now retired; is that correct? So he is an independent----
Secretary Hagel. He is retired, fishing and hunting now
somewhere.
Mr. Enyart. That is a wonderful thing. I look forward to
that day, Mr. Secretary, as I am sure you do.
Secretary Hagel. Thank you.
Mr. Enyart. Mr. Secretary, I have seen the proof-of-life
video of Sergeant Bergdahl, as I am sure you have. It is
currently classified. And my question to you is, sir, after
having viewed that video, is there any doubt in your mind that
his health and mental state was in very, very serious
condition?
Secretary Hagel. There is no doubt in my mind. I render
that analysis not as anyone who has any medical expertise but I
listened carefully to what our health experts did say, our
intelligence people. And then just the--just looking at the
past videos of him versus that video, it was pretty clear to me
that his health was deteriorating.
Thank you.
Mr. Enyart. Mr. Secretary, there has been some previous
questioning about the risk, future risk, potential future risk,
to American service members if they were to have to recapture
these five individuals who were swapped in the prisoner-of-war
exchange.
Is there any evidence whatsoever that any future risk for
those five is any greater than the 532 folks who have
previously been released by the Bush administration or, for
that matter, the 88 who have been previously released by the
Obama administration, a total of 620 previously released GTMO
prisoners?
Secretary Hagel. According to our intelligence community,
the answer is ``no.''
Mr. Enyart. And one final question for you, Mr. Secretary.
Now, Sergeant Bergdahl, when he was captured, was a private
first-class, correct? And for those who are not familiar, that
would be an E-3. And today he is a sergeant, or an E-5. So he
has been promoted twice by the Army during his period of
captivity; isn't that correct?
Secretary Hagel. That is correct.
Mr. Enyart. All right. And were there overwhelming evidence
or any evidence whatsoever that he had done something wrong,
would those promotions have taken effect?
Secretary Hagel. No. As I said in my testimony, there was
never any charge brought against--by the United States Army
against Sergeant Bergdahl.
Mr. Enyart. So it is clearly a rush to judgment against
this young man.
Secretary Hagel. Well, I think it is. As we all know and I
have said, the United States Army is going to conduct a
complete review of all the circumstances once Sergeant Bergdahl
is back and he can speak for himself. And that is appropriate,
and that will happen.
Thank you.
Mr. Enyart. Thank you, Mr. Secretary.
I yield back.
Dr. Heck [presiding]. Thank you.
Mr. Secretary, I know that one of the issues that has been
addressed or that you have addressed in regarding the lack of
notification to this body was the concern about potential leaks
and the impact it may have on the operation.
Can you tell me, was that concern over leaks so great that
it would also prevent limited notification, as is allowed, to
the Gang of Eight, the leadership of both the majority and
minority party in both Chambers as well as the chairman and
ranking member of the relevant committees?
Secretary Hagel. Yes.
Dr. Heck. So--and I know you weren't Secretary of Defense
at the time, but was there any less concern over--and I know
you mentioned that part of it was the potential for an adverse
effect on the safety of the operators who were going to execute
the operation.
But was there any less concern over the safety of the
operational personnel who were actually known to be going into
a kinetic operation in the Osama bin Laden caper? Would there
be any less concern about leaks and their safety?
Secretary Hagel. No, there were--I wasn't there, but you
are right, there were, I know, concerns about that. And it is
equally risk--risky, both operations.
But this one was different, though. We had some--much more
control, quite frankly, over the Osama bin Laden exercise, and
that operation was more within our control. This one was not.
As I said, we didn't even know where we were going to--where he
was going to be.
Dr. Heck. Well, I understand that. I understand that, Mr.
Secretary. But in the Osama bin Laden raid, the Gang of Eight
was notified and there was no leak of information.
Secretary Hagel. I know. I know. But, again, what I am
saying, Congressman, is there was actually more risk in this
because we had far less control over this in case something
leaked out.
Dr. Heck. And moving on to another--and I appreciate your
answer. Thank you.
Moving on to another question. Obviously, this issue of the
exchange was brought to a sufficient level that it was
addressed with Members of Congress back in the 2011-2012
timeframe. And during testimony today, you have said that there
was a growing urgency to act, a need to act swiftly, and that
was the reason--one of the reasons, coupled with the leaks, why
we weren't necessarily notified.
But had the issue concerning leaks not necessarily been an
issue, would you not agree that after you received the January
video, proof-of-life video that escalated reentering
negotiations, that that might have been a time where perhaps
Congress could have been informed?
Secretary Hagel. Yes, that might have been.
Dr. Heck. Or when----
Secretary Hagel. As I have already said, if we had a chance
to redo this, Congressman, probably----
Dr. Heck. Well, I understand, Mr. Secretary, but that seems
to be an apparent pattern in this administration, is always
coming back after something has happened to say, if we had a
chance to do it all over again, we would have done it
differently.
Secretary Hagel. Well, I can only answer to this one, so--
--
Dr. Heck. I appreciate that.
Secretary Hagel. Yeah.
Dr. Heck. Likewise, I would say that after you received the
Qatari warning that the window may be closing would have been
an opportunity, and that was in early May, to come and notify
at least the Gang of Eight.
Secretary Hagel. Well, I have been over this before. I
mean, again, if we go back and replay everything. But, again, I
say the risk, we felt, was so great that any leak--we were told
this by the people we were negotiating with, and we were warned
about this.
And so, yes, it was a judgment call. We might do it
differently again, but I don't know. But the risk was still, no
matter what, overwhelming for us, because we thought we had--
and we were told--probably one shot at getting Bergdahl back.
And it was a rapidly evolving opportunity that could close, as
well.
Dr. Heck. Well, and I would just close by making the
statement, or asking--and I am not sure of--were you familiar,
or have you seen the letter from various chairmen of
jurisdiction to Secretary of State Clinton and her response
back in 2011-2012?
Secretary Hagel. Yes, I did.
Dr. Heck. Okay. So, you know, obviously, in that 2011
letter to then-Secretary of State Clinton there was significant
nonconcurrence----
Secretary Hagel. Yes.
Dr. Heck [continuing]. With the thing.
So my concern is, how much of that letter and the potential
for pushback from this organization actually influenced the
actions not to provide timely notification, for fear of being
able to ask for forgiveness rather than permission and come
back after the fact to say, if we had a chance to do it all
over again, we would perhaps do it differently?
Secretary Hagel. I am not sure what you mean by pushback in
this institution----
Dr. Heck. Well, you know that, in 2011, when this was first
contemplated, the ranking members and the chairmen of the
appropriate committees did not concur with the swap. But yet,
understanding that the environment has changed, perhaps there
was a concern by the administration of coming to notify for
fear that that same----
Secretary Hagel. Oh, I see. Uh-huh.
Dr. Heck [continuing]. Pushback would have been put
forward.
Secretary Hagel. I understand what you are saying. Well--
and I just answered as you heard probably my answer here to Ms.
Hartzler on this. Complete change in environment, dynamics,
realities, objectives from 2011 to 2012, but I can tell you,
from my perspective and what I know--and I know a lot about
it--I was involved in only on this deal. I can't answer to 2011
or 2012, but it wasn't because we were concerned that somehow
the Congress wouldn't go along with it. I have given you the
reasons why we made the decisions we did.
Dr. Heck. Thank you. Thank you.
Ms. Gabbard.
Ms. Gabbard. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Secretary Hagel, Mr. Preston, thank you very much for being
here.
Secretary, thank you for your service, both in uniform,
here in Congress, and as you continue your service now to our
country.
Secretary Hagel. Thank you.
Ms. Gabbard. Like you, I am a soldier, and understand at
the core of my being that principle of leaving no man behind.
Along with that principle goes another, which is, I will always
place the mission first. And that mission of national security
and the context that that provides to this whole conversation
is really where I would like to focus and where I have the most
concern. You have mentioned earlier about the assurance to
service members that, regardless of circumstances, your words,
regardless of circumstances, they will not be left behind.
And I think that that is--that is an issue to call into
question because there are varying circumstances. We were told,
I think, possibly today, but in a briefing yesterday--on
Monday, rather, that if this were a deal to be done exchanged
with the release of Khalid Sheikh Mohammed, the deal would not
have been done. So the circumstances do play a role in this,
based on that mission of national security.
So with regards to the five Taliban detainees who were
released, your statements from DNI Director Jim Clapper, I
would like to address that directly because we have had some
issues with statements from Jim Clapper before Congress
previously on a different topic with regards to his statement
that the NSA does not collect data on Americans, which he later
admitted to be in his words, the least untruthful answer. It
was not a truthful answer.
So I would like to point to the Guantanamo review task
force that was done where it was stated that these five
individuals, specifically, in quotes, ``pose a high level of
threat that cannot be mitigated sufficiently except through
continued detention.''
And I am wondering what has changed from the time that this
assessment was made by this President's appointed task force of
military officers, Federal prosecutors, FBI agents, intel
analysts, and civil litigators that has changed?
Secretary Hagel. Well, Congresswoman, thank you for your
service, first.
Ms. Gabbard. Thank you.
Secretary Hagel. A couple of things. One, obviously, is the
reassurance that we got from Qatar, which we have gone over in
some detail.
Second, more to the point of I think that----
Ms. Gabbard. I am sorry, Qatar is not detaining them
though. They are not continuing to----
Secretary Hagel. The reassurance from Qatar that 1 year,
and I don't know if you have had a chance to look at the MOU on
this on the things that they would enforce, so that these five
transfer detainees not leave the country, so on, and so on, and
so on----
Ms. Gabbard. Right.
Secretary Hagel [continuing]. Which we have covered a lot
this morning. That is one big thing that has changed to give us
some assurance in the United States, that these five detainees,
we would have some control over them.
Second, to the point that you made about the commission's
recommendations--and I think that commission started in 2009--3
years has passed. We looked at comments made by Guantanamo
guards, others. I am not saying or implying that these five
individuals all of a sudden transformed into St. Frances. That
is not the point. But the circumstances changed in many ways.
And we felt, again, as I have said here this morning, that when
you take the totality of all of the new dimensions, the
environment, the reassurances, so on and so on, and what I
just--I don't know if you were here when I just answered
Congressman Smith's question about the insurance or the
Intelligence Committee's reassurance and their evaluation of
how dangerous these five detainees would be if they went back
to Afghanistan and joined the Taliban. That has changed
considerably.
Ms. Gabbard. Thank you very much.
Before my time runs out I want to just make one quick point
that the discussion of them returning to the battlefield seems
to imply that return would put them as foot soldiers with boots
on ground. We are talking about the five most senior Taliban
leaders----
Secretary Hagel. Well, they weren't the most senior.
Ms. Gabbard [continuing]. Who were detained. They can
become operational without having boots on ground in
Afghanistan. We will have troops on the ground for the next
couple of years, according to the President's plan, and that is
really where my concern lies. Thank you very much.
Secretary Hagel. And thank you, Congresswoman, and we have
the same concerns.
Dr. Heck. Mr. Scott.
Mr. Scott. Thank you Mr. Chairman.
Secretary Hagel, at the start of the committee, you made a
statement that said, the Justice Department said the President
had the constitutional authority to essentially do this deal
and ignore the 30-day requirement in the law in this case. Is
that--did I hear that correctly?
Secretary Hagel. Someone asked the question I think on what
basis the President made a decision and what authority he had,
and I think my response was----
Mr. Scott. Very similar to that.
Secretary Hagel. Yes, yes.
Mr. Scott. Could we get a copy of the letter from the
Justice Department that says that the President had that
authority?
Mr. Preston. Sir, we have received a request for that, and
we are taking that back. It is not entirely within our control.
Mr. Scott. Thank you. And I look forward to seeing that.
[The information referred to can be found in the Appendix
on page 108.]
Mr. Scott. And Mr. Preston, you are an attorney from Yale
and Harvard. Which provision of the Constitution would allow
the President to ignore the law?
Mr. Preston. The President has authority under Article II.
Mr. Scott. Yes, sir.
Mr. Preston. And has a duty and responsibility to exercise
that authority. It is not a matter of ignoring the law. It is
where the exercise of his constitutional authority is in
tension with the statute; where, in this case, his duty and
authority to protect service members, to protect U.S. citizens
abroad, where the application of this particular provision in
this particular set of circumstances would interfere with the
exercise of authority, then the statute yields to the
constitutional authority either as a matter of interpretation
or through the application of separation of powers principles.
Mr. Scott. So is it Article II, Section 2, then that the
Justice Department is using to justify saying that he does not
have to comply with the law?
Mr. Preston. It is his authority as Commander in Chief and
Chief Executive.
Mr. Scott. So it is Article II, Section 2?
Mr. Preston. I believe that is right.
Mr. Scott. Under what other circumstances would the Justice
Department, potentially Eric Holder, simply tell the President
that he did not have to comply with the law?
Mr. Preston. I wouldn't really be in a position to answer
that question.
Mr. Scott. I think that is the key concern here for most of
us on the committee, is that if the Attorney General can simply
give the President of the United States, who appointed the
Attorney General, a letter that says, Mr. President, you don't
have to comply with the law, or the Constitution gives you the
authority to ignore the law, then that is the law of the land
and under which the President operates; seems to be in clear
violation of what our forefathers gave us and the system of our
democracy, where you have a House, and a Senate, and a
President. The House and the Senate both passed pieces of
legislation. The President signed that law, signed that, making
it the law, and now he can get a letter from an appointee of
his that says, Mr. President, you don't have to comply with
this, which leads me to a bigger concern in what you said at
the start, which was that today this country has had and has
the authority to hold detainees. That would potentially change
in the future, but it would not necessarily change at the end
of 2014, when we essentially declare we are no longer engaged
in hostilities in Afghanistan, but that that would continue as
long as we were in a conflict with the Taliban and Al Qaeda.
And I guess my question is, that is your opinion, correct?
Mr. Preston. That is my understanding of how the
international law principles apply.
Mr. Scott. Yes, sir, and I agree with you. But if we follow
this same train of thought and action which they used to
determine they did not have to give the 30-day notice, the
Attorney General could simply give the President a letter and
say, you don't have to do this. And he could release everybody.
And that is where--that is why we are here. The law required 30
days' notice. And the idea that Eric Holder or somebody at the
Justice Department can just give the President a letter and say
you don't have to comply with the law, that is simply
ridiculous.
Mr. Preston. Well, let me just say in general, the role of
the Department of Justice, among them, is to advise the
President on the law. I wouldn't be in a position to talk about
the content and I can't agree with your characterization, but
that is normal process for the executive branch for the
President to receive advice on the law in the execution of his
constitutional and statutory responsibilities.
Mr. Scott. This law is extremely clear. The law requires 30
days' notice. And the idea that Eric Holder can give him a
letter saying, you don't have to comply with the law and then
that becomes the law of the land, it is a clear violation,
separation of powers.
Dr. Heck. Mr. Smith.
Mr. Smith. Just following up on that just really quickly.
Under the Bush administration, you know, there was warrantless
wiretapping authorized. There was indefinite detention. Post 9/
11, there was a whole host of things that were clearly against
a wide variety of laws. And the President and Vice President's
justification at that time was that the Constitution gave them
those powers given the circumstances. I don't recall any
outrage on the right. I recall a great deal of outrage on the
left. I recall a number of folks on the left, including one
memorable gentleman who wouldn't let me go at the gym about the
fact that I was unwilling to impeach the President over this.
But this was not even remotely unprecedented. And I just
wanted you to comment on that from the legal standpoint. The
Constitution is a law. And now, I disagree, at first glance
with the interpretation that you made here, but it is not
unprecedented. And walk through a little bit what, you know,
President Bush did. I mean, he justified an endless array of
things that were clearly contrary to U.S. law based on his
interpretation of the Constitution. And on a much smaller, more
narrow scale, isn't that exactly what you guys are doing? I
mean, I don't agree with it, but it is far, far from
unprecedented.
Mr. Preston. Congressman, I wouldn't be in a position to
comment on what the previous administration did, but I think
your point is a good one that in the exercise of the
President's Article II powers, he is called upon to make
judgments about the extent of those powers, and that is
precisely what he does. And there will be occasions where the
statutory law is intentioned with the constitutional
provisions, and there are canons of interpretation that call
for interpreting the statute so as to avoid a conflict, but
where the conflict can't be avoided, then the Constitution
reigns. And it is not uncommon and has happened in the history
of Presidency.
Mr. Smith. Just----
Mr. Scott. If I may, if that interpretation had been
handled by----
Dr. Heck. The gentleman's time is expired----
Mr. Scott [continuing]. Disagreed with it but would have
been more accepting of it than an individual Presidential
appointee.
Dr. Heck. Mr. McIntyre.
Mr. McIntyre. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And thank you Mr. Secretary for your strong commitment and
service to our country. In light of these recent questions, and
I know it has been a long hearing, I just want to clarify for
the record, again, as we are coming toward the end of this
hearing. On page 4 of your testimony, you say, and I quote,
``Consistent with previous congressional briefings this
administration provided in late 2011 and early 2012 reflecting
our intent to conduct a transfer of this nature with these
particular five individuals.''
So, now, in that quote, it sounds like you are saying that
this met--or it is implying that it met the requirements of
notifying, quote, ``as the law says the appropriate committees
of Congress at least 30 days before the transfer, release of
Guantanamo detainees.''
Yet, in the next paragraph, again, quoting your testimony,
you state that ``I fully understand and appreciate concerns
about our decision to transfer the five detainees without
providing 30 days' advance notice to Congress.'' So in that,
are you stating and admitting that the 30 days' advance notice
was not met?
Secretary Hagel. No. That wasn't the point of why I put
that in my statement. The point was to give some frame of
reference of the history of this issue and in particular, the
five Taliban detainees that had been discussed. But it wasn't
anything more than that. And if I was unclear, then I am glad
you cleared it up.
Mr. McIntyre. Okay, so you are just saying you understand
and appreciate the concern, but you are not stating that, in
fact, you did not meet that 30-day advanced notice, is that
correct?
Secretary Hagel. Well, we didn't meet the 30 days' notice.
Yeah, yeah.
Mr. McIntyre. Right. Okay. That was my point. You stated
that you did not meet that.
Secretary Hagel. Right.
Mr. McIntyre. All right, then, I want to clarify that you
are saying ``exceptional circumstances'' and that was the
phrase used in your testimony, ``allowed you to construe that
it was not necessarily to follow the law as stated by the
National Security Council spokesman Caitlin Hayden on June 3rd
and, I quote from Caitlin Hayden, that ``notification
requirement should not be construed to apply to this unique set
of circumstances.'' And that has been your strong opinion
today, correct?
Secretary Hagel. Well, I agree. And I think that was
probably the core of this conversation and exchange between
Congressman Scott and Mr. Preston on the authority the
President had, and I agree with that.
Mr. McIntyre. All right, and that is why I am just trying
to clarify this, and then for future reference, is it your
opinion that the administration would have this same liberty to
disregard or to construe that it is not necessary to follow the
30 days' notice in future similar situations?
Secretary Hagel. Well, the way I answered and I actually
answered it again this morning, maybe once or twice, is that,
first, the constitutional responsibilities and authorities the
President has, which I happen to--even though when I was in the
Senate, I would challenge the administration at the time on
some of this, but I think that, in my opinion, the Constitution
is clear on that. And when there are extraordinary
circumstances and situations regarding the security of the
American people or a service member or a citizen, I think the
President has the authority to act.
Mr. McIntyre. All right, so it would--this decision then in
future situations that may be similar, you believe then would
always be subject to the administration's interpretation of the
situation on an ad hoc basis, actually?
Secretary Hagel. Well, I think that is probably right, but
I don't think, Congressman, anyone wants to ever tie the hands
of the Commander in Chief, the President of the United States,
on an extraordinary situation. I mean, I don't think that is
what was intended. I am not a lawyer, but just the practicality
of the responsibilities the President has, regardless of the
party.
Mr. McIntyre. Right. No, no, and I understand that.
Secretary Hagel. Yeah.
Mr. McIntyre. I am just simply trying to again clarify for
the record. So, in a similar situation in the future then, in
light of your statement you just made----
Secretary Hagel. We would intend to continue to comply, as
we have in almost every circumstance, with that 30-day
notification in the future on any future transfers. But again,
I think the--any President has to have that power, that
authority, which I do think is in the Constitution, to deal
with extraordinary cases.
Mr. McIntyre. All right, that was the clarification I
wanted. Thank you very much.
And thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Dr. Heck. Mr. Nugent.
Mr. Nugent. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And Secretary Hagel, I want to thank you for your service,
having a brother in Vietnam right around the same time you
were, and so I appreciate what you have done.
You have mentioned a couple of things today and I will get
to in just a second, but does the Department of Defense
consider Taliban detainees at GTMO prisoners of war?
Secretary Hagel. Let me ask the general counsel to give you
the specific answer because that was the basis of what we had
the prisoners exchange on.
Mr. Nugent. So tell me, are they classified as prisoners of
war?
Mr. Preston. They are not--pardon me. They are not
technically prisoners of war. They are detained--what we would
call unprivileged belligerents, and as such, they are entitled
to the basic entitlements under common article 3 of the Geneva
Conventions, but they do not enjoy full-up POW status, and all
of the protections of the Third Geneva Convention. It is a
little technical, but they are detainees in armed conflict.
Mr. Nugent. But they are not classified as a prisoner of
war.
Mr. Preston. They are not--they don't meet the legal
definition for a prisoner of war.
Mr. Nugent. And Mr. Preston, you know, I think the
administration has referred to this as a prisoner exchange, but
the administration never classified Sergeant Bergdahl as a
prisoner of war.
Mr. Preston. That is, as I understand it, for two reasons.
And again, they tend to be technical. One is, the term,
``prisoner of war,'' relates to a combatant detained in the
context of an international armed conflict, whereas armed
conflict with a Taliban is characterized as a non-international
armed conflict. The other thing is a prisoner of war under the
law governing prisoners of war is someone who is lawfully held
and, in our view, very strong view, is that Bergdahl was not
lawfully held. But again, he is a detained combatant in the
context of an armed conflict--was.
Mr. Nugent. So really, to any--prisoner exchange is
probably not the correct term the administration should have
used, but regardless, you have heard a lot here, obviously, and
I certainly don't want to second-guess you in regards to the
recovery of Sergeant Bergdahl. But I do have concerns about the
administration, any administration, basically going to an
attorney and giving me opinion that allows me to operate
outside the law.
Now, this was passed specifically because of concerns that
Congress had in regards to prior notifications about these
five. And I know Ms. Gabbard brought up about, you know, these
are--these weren't just trigger pullers. These were planners
and organizers, and while they may have been out of the mix for
12 years, what they do bring, and I think you will agree with
this, they do bring some level of expertise, particularly in
regards to the fact that they are highly revered amongst the
Taliban. So you have just increased their operational, at
least, morale. Would you agree with that?
Mr. Preston. Well, I would say that the Department of
Justice provides to the Executive its legal guidance. The
decision is made by the policymakers and the decisionmakers.
Mr. Nugent. Secretary Hagel, you mentioned this, that if
you had to do this all over again, there are some things that
you would do differently. What would you do differently?
Secretary Hagel. Well, I haven't spent a lot of time
thinking about it, Congressman, quite frankly, Congressman.
Mr. Nugent. But you have mentioned it a number of times.
Secretary Hagel. No. Here is the way I said it. I responded
and I said in my testimony, like anything. I don't know if I
have ever done anything, made any big decision on anything,
where I wouldn't go back maybe and say, well, maybe I could
have done that better.
Congressman, I haven't spent a lot of time on inventorying
what I would do differently because we have got all of the
things coming at us. But what I am saying is, sure, if we had
an opportunity to go back, maybe we could have handled this
differently, should have handled it differently.
Mr. Nugent. I mean, you could have notified Congress.
Secretary Hagel. Well, there is a lot of pieces.
Mr. Nugent. Because otherwise, what you are saying is you
don't trust Congress, and I am sure that is not what you are
saying.
Secretary Hagel. I had a little exchange on that earlier
this morning.
Mr. Nugent. I am sorry I missed that.
Secretary Hagel. Well, I was told by one of your members
that I said that, that I don't trust Congress.
Mr. Nugent. And I am not saying that you don't.
Secretary Hagel. I didn't say that, which I would never say
that. But----
Mr. Nugent. But the actions would look as if the
administration does not----
Secretary Hagel. I explained it. I get it. I understand it.
I have said it, and I told you. You may not agree, but why the
decision was made the way it was. But I understand exactly what
you are saying.
Mr. Nugent. Thank you, I yield back.
Dr. Heck. Dr. Wenstrup.
Dr. Wenstrup. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Secretary, and Mr. Preston, you know, we are charged with
the responsibility of providing security and defense for this
country as well as you. And we take that oath.
You said earlier, I know the trust has been broken, and I
appreciate that you recognize that that has happened. It is
really disturbing to me. I have a track record of being trusted
by my government. I served in Iraq. I had secret clearance. I
knew what battles were coming up so that as a surgeon running a
cache, I could prepare for what may be coming our way. It
bothers me that I am not trusted now that I am here. It bothers
me that you are afraid that I would provide a leak with my
record of service. And I think that stands for many others
here. And if that is not even considered, it is really
bothersome and should be to the American people. But I am glad
that when I was in uniform, that I was trusted to carry out my
mission as opposed to here by this administration, apparently.
And you had mentioned that everyone was unanimous on the
plan and I wonder if they were unanimous on the premise itself
for this exchange because there is a difference between being
in favor of what we are doing and approving the plan once it is
decided that we are doing it. So I would be curious to know
about that. But during the course of this, I wonder, did we
promise any retaliation if our soldier was harmed in any way?
Did we let our enemy know that if this soldier was harmed in
any way, that there would be retaliation of some sort?
Secretary Hagel. If the Taliban, the Haqqani----
Dr. Wenstrup. In the negotiations, if--I will call him by
name, Sergeant Bergdahl, if harm came to him under their care,
would there be any retaliation from the United States of
America?
Secretary Hagel. Well, let me ask Steve Preston. He was
there during the negotiations, so----
Mr. Preston. I would say, sir, that in the discussions of
the exchange, the focus was specifically on the logistics.
Dr. Wenstrup. So no is the answer. We did not say, if you
harm him in any way----
Mr. Preston [continuing]. Was to engineer it so as to
minimize the chance of harm to our----
Dr. Wenstrup. I understand that, okay, but obviously, we
didn't say that there would be some retaliation if he was
harmed.
Now, Secretary, you before said that he was a POW. You said
that here today, that he was a POW. And now we are hearing it
is a different name. But regardless, so do we know, did his
captors adhere to the Geneva Conventions like we do?
Secretary Hagel. Wait a minute. Let me just respond. First,
when I referenced him as a POW, he was a prisoner of war. He
was a prisoner of war.
Dr. Wenstrup. Okay. I am okay with that.
Secretary Hagel. And the technicality of what the general
counsel is talking about, that is why I asked the general
counsel to make sure the technical concept----
Dr. Wenstrup. Going to my question, do they adhere to the
Geneva Conventions as we do?
Mr. Preston. I think it remains to be seen how he was
treated, but there is a serious question of that----
Dr. Wenstrup. Sure.
Mr. Preston [continuing]. To say the least.
Dr. Wenstrup. I appreciate that. And are you familiar with
our policy for compassionate release of detainees, either of
you? Because if you are not, I can inform you because I served
as a surgeon at Abu Ghraib prison in 2005 and 2006. We had a
program for some of our worst enemies, if they were to be
fatally ill, we release them to their families. It is called a
compassionate release. This is a policy of the United States.
Did we ask them for a compassionate release if, indeed, our
soldier was so sick that we had to move so quickly? Did we ask
them for a compassionate release in the manner that we perform
as the United States of America?
Mr. Preston. Not to my knowledge.
Dr. Wenstrup. Thank you. So we do it----
Secretary Hagel. I might add, though, Congressman----
Dr. Wenstrup. Yes, sir.
Secretary Hagel. The Taliban, as you know, you have some
experience, for which I thank you for that service. They don't
play by the same rules.
Dr. Wenstrup. That is my point. That is exactly my point,
Mr. Secretary, and I thank you for verifying the case I am
trying to make. We play by a set of rules as a decent people.
And we are not dealing with decent people here, yet we acted as
though we were. And we acted as though we were releasing decent
people, and we are not. And I would ask you, does anyone here
really think that the world is a safer place after we have made
this trade? And I want to ask one other question. We had five
American casualties yesterday. What if one of those was
captured by the Taliban? Would we be back in Qatar at the
negotiation table?
Secretary Hagel. Well, you know, you served. You heard it
all morning. We don't leave anybody behind. We do what we have
to.
Dr. Wenstrup. There are several ways of not leaving someone
behind.
Secretary Hagel. Well, that is right, but you don't send
them chocolates and say, send him over. Tough business. Tough
business.
Dr. Wenstrup. I agree, and I yield back.
Dr. Heck. Ms. Walorski.
Mrs. Walorski. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Secretary, is the administration considering the
transfer or release of other Afghan or Taliban detainees,
including those that have been previously assessed as not a
candidate for release?
Secretary Hagel. We are always assessing possible detainee
transfers.
Mrs. Walorski. Right, but I have a New York Times article
right here that talks about six that are being considered right
now to go Uruguay. So you are then considering additional
transports and transfers of these of the detainees in
Guantanamo?
Secretary Hagel. Well, we are always looking at this. It is
not new, I mean. You know----
Mrs. Walorski. I know. I am very aware.
Secretary Hagel [continuing]. The Bush administration
transferred far more than the Obama administration.
Mrs. Walorski. Are you looking at Afghan, or----
Secretary Hagel. I am not going to get into the security
arrangements here.
Mrs. Walorski. Let me just ask you this, hypothetically, if
you are releasing any more Afghan detainees, are they going
directly back to Afghanistan after the international law
expires and we no longer have, as Mr. Preston was saying in a
year when the international law expires that we are holding
those detainees under, then do they go right back to
Afghanistan, conceivably? Could they?
Secretary Hagel. I am not going to respond to any specific
actions, but counsel may want to.
Mr. Preston. I may have been misunderstood. I did not--I
don't believe I said that the conflict would expire at the end
of the year. So just with that clarification.
Mrs. Walorski. You made a comment about the international
law that they are being held under by which we are actually
detaining them.
Mr. Preston. Right, as belligerents in an armed conflict.
Mrs. Walorski. And that goes on, if we are completely
pulled out of the conflict and we are no longer involved,
except for minimal troop level, or, in 2016, when we are
completely pulled out----
Mr. Preston. There will come a point in time where the
conflict ends, and if there is not an alternative basis for
which to hold them, the law of war basis would no longer be
available to us.
Mrs. Walorski. Right. What is that point in time? Is that
point in time when we pull out our--on the drop date the
President made and say, hey, by the end of 2015, 2016, we are
going to be completely pulled out. They are going to be on
their own.
Mr. Preston. When an armed conflict comes to an end is a
rather complex question. You can--one could answer it, as my
predecessor did, in terms of the degradation of the enemy. This
was in reference to Al Qaeda to the point where they no longer
present a threat. Our view and I think, as reflected in the
President's NDU [National Defense University] speech, is that
this is--our government works best, our country is strongest
when both the political branches----
Mrs. Walorski. Right.
Mr. Preston [continuing]. Focus on issues such as the end
of a conflict.
Mrs. Walorski. Yeah. My concern is, is that we are getting
ourselves in the position because we have made an exception to
a law that we are getting potentially ourselves into a corner
where we could conceivably be releasing Afghans from Guantanamo
and, by whatever means or for whatever measure, sending them
right back into Afghanistan. Is Afghanistan a list--is
Afghanistan on the list of potential countries that can even
receive GTMO prisoners?
Mr. Preston. I think you described a--whatever the
arrangement, it would have to meet the statutory requirements
of 1035(b), which is to say the risk is properly mitigated.
Mrs. Walorski. Yeah, I understand that. I understand the
list. So, right now, based upon that list and you guys are
considering and looking at and evaluating all the time, and you
are looking at this list of potential countries. Obviously,
Qatar is a country that says we are going to be able to receive
and further detain these people. Is Afghanistan on there, or
when the drawdown continues to happen, is there going to be a
point where Afghanistan is going to be free and clear because
we are pulling our troops out, they are on their own, they are
handling themselves? Are they on that list now to be able to
receive prisoners, or is there going to come a time when they
are on the list to receive their people?
Secretary Hagel. I don't know. I mean, we have had--
detainees have gone to, I think, over 15 countries. And----
Mrs. Walorski. I mean, I have seen the list. You certainly
have the list of potential countries that are available. We
have had conversations in other hearings about, for example----
Secretary Hagel. Well, you asked in the future and so on,
but you have to understand----
Mrs. Walorski. Right now is Afghanistan on the list now
where they can receive people back from GTMO?
Mr. Preston. Ma'am, I am not familiar with the list, per
se. But----
Mrs. Walorski. Well, is Afghanistan a country that can be
considered a country that meets the parameters?
Mr. Preston. Afghanistan could be a candidate to receive
detainees.
Mrs. Walorski. But it is not now. Is it currently a country
that we say meets the parameters and we could take Afghans from
GTMO and send them back to Afghanistan if they met the
criteria, and we are saying that Afghanistan does meet the
criteria. Does Afghanistan meet the criteria today? For
example, there is obviously a list of six that are going to
Uruguay or potentially being looked at to go to Uruguay, so
Uruguay qualifies as a country. I am just asking if Afghanistan
in its current situation----
Mr. Preston. As far as I know, Afghanistan would be a
potential recipient country.
Mrs. Walorski. Okay, thank you very much. I yield back my
time.
Mr. Gibson [presiding]. The gentlelady yields back.
Mr. Bridenstine.
Mr. Bridenstine. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Secretary, did I hear correctly earlier you mentioned
that when you were making the decision to release the five
members of the Taliban, that you did not take into
consideration whether or not they would return to the field of
battle?
Secretary Hagel. No, I didn't say that. We took that into
consideration. We took everything into consideration, yes.
Mr. Bridenstine. And was your assessment the best
assessment from the people who advised you? Was that assessment
that they would or would not return to the field of battle?
Secretary Hagel. The assessment was, at first, we looked at
the threat, whether they would or not. We can't predict,
obviously.
Mr. Bridenstine. You can make an assessment and I am sure
somebody gave you an assessment.
Secretary Hagel. I will read you what I just read this
committee a little bit ago, and I don't think you were here, on
the latest intelligence community assessment on the threats. I
asked for this from General Clapper. This is the most recent
intelligence community [IC] assessment. Threat if returned to
Afghanistan, Pakistan after they--after the 1 year in Qatar. It
says, Should they return and reintegrate with the Taliban,
their focus would almost certainly be on Taliban efforts inside
of Afghanistan, not a threat to the homeland.
Mr. Bridenstine. Will we have troops in Afghanistan at that
time?
Secretary Hagel. Well, this is 12 months from May 31st, so,
yes, we will have troops.
Mr. Bridenstine. So they would pose a threat to American
troops?
Secretary Hagel. Well, that is--let me finish this.
Mr. Bridenstine. Hold on. Let me move to Mr. Preston. I
have only got 3 minutes left.
Secretary Hagel. Well, I am giving you what the--if you
want information, I am giving you what the IC says to answer
your question.
Mr. Bridenstine. I understand that. I think I got the
answer I was looking for.
Secretary Hagel. Well, it is in here.
Mr. Bridenstine. Mr. Preston, my understanding, I am a Navy
pilot. I flew combat in Iraq and Afghanistan. My understanding
is that there are really two types of law. There is a law of
war, a law of armed conflict, if you will, which is
international law, and then there is a law of peace, which is
how we handle things domestically. And under the law of war,
correct me if I am wrong, but we don't detain people for
rehabilitation and we don't detain people for purposes of, you
know, punishing them. We detain them to keep them off the field
of battle. Is that correct under the laws of international
conflict?
Mr. Preston. As I understand it, when they are held under
those laws, it is for that purpose.
Mr. Bridenstine. It is to keep them off the field of battle
so if there is a judgment that there is a chance that these
folks could go back into the field of battle, and we still have
an authorization for use of military force indicating that we
still are at war, the judgment, whether these people are going
to go back and harm our troops is pretty important, is that
correct?
Mr. Preston. The way I would answer that is to say that it
is clear that we have and had the authority to detain these
people. The judgment to transfer them to the custody of another
country is one that is governed in substantial measure by the
NDAA provision and a judgment by the President.
Secretary Hagel. I might just add, Congressman, in the
second sentence of this intelligence community report to answer
your question, it says, ``A few new Taliban leaders,'' these
five, ``if they would return to the Taliban in Afghanistan, no
matter how senior, will not appreciably change the threat to
American forces, the Afghan people, or the Afghan Army.''
Mr. Bridenstine. Is that in a physical sense or in a morale
sense? Because if you look at what the Taliban is putting out
right now, they are declaring victory on this. Are you aware of
this?
Secretary Hagel. Well, I am aware a lot of what the Taliban
says. I can't control what the Taliban says.
Mr. Bridenstine. Yes, you can. Because you didn't have to
release these five people, and by releasing them, you have
created, in essence, a victory for the Taliban. It is being
used as propaganda against this country. And ultimately, I
think you are aware that these people are likely to return to
the field of battle, and our troops are going to be in harm's
way because of it.
Secretary Hagel. Congressman, I just gave you the best
intelligence community assessment we have, what they say about
that. This is an imperfect business. If we want our prisoner of
war back, we have to make some accommodations to that. We did
it with a substantial mitigation of risk. We thought this was
the smartest, wisest, most responsible thing that we could do
to protect our people, get our prisoner back.
Mr. Bridenstine. And the Taliban feels the same way.
Secretary Hagel. There is nothing I can do about that. They
are going to be predictable, I suspect, and try to use this.
But you ask whether that is physical, or is it a morale boost?
Well, I think the first thing we ought to look at, is this a
physical threat that they represent and you just heard what
the----
Mr. Bridenstine. You know, the morale boost turns into a
physical threat.
Secretary Hagel. Well, it is an imperfect world,
Congressman, and you know that.
Mr. Gibson. The gentleman's time is expired.
Mr. Byrne.
Mr. Byrne. Thank you, Mr. Secretary. I have been watching
you as you have been asking--answering questions about the
consultation with Congress, and I know that you are sensitive
to that. And I was wondering if at any time during this process
did you, yourself, recommend or suggest to anyone in the White
House, the NSC, any of the parties, any of the people involved
that they should consult or notify the Congress prior to May
31st?
Secretary Hagel. Congressman, through this process, which I
have in front of me, the deputies meetings at the White House,
principals meeting, which I am a principal, all of these things
were discussed; notification, the risks which we have talked
about today. I support the decision that was made on
notification. I didn't particularly like it. I think a lot of
people didn't, but we felt in the interest of not risking any
further Bowe Bergdahl and the opportunity to get him back, and
maybe even his life, this was--this was the smartest way to do
it.
Mr. Byrne. Well, I understand it was discussed, but did you
yourself suggest or recommend that some notification, or
consultation be made prior to May 31st?
Secretary Hagel. We all made different suggestions,
recommendations as to at least exploring what happens if we
don't, should we, what is the downside of that, what is the
downside if we do? So all of these things were----
Mr. Byrne. So you did it.
Secretary Hagel. Well, we all talked about it. It wasn't
just a recommendation. It was, we went around the table. We
talked about it, all of us.
Mr. Byrne. So you suggested, maybe we should talk to
Congress or give some notification?
Secretary Hagel. Everybody suggested that. We talk about
this. We look at it, go up and down. No formal recommendation
was made by me. At the end, we discussed it. We all came out in
the same place, that the risk was just too great. We didn't
want to take the risk.
Mr. Byrne. Mr. Preston, let me ask you a question. I was
interested in the colloquy you have had with several people
over this constitutional issue. Is it your position, is it the
position of the Obama administration that after the President
of the United States signs a law and it becomes law, that he
can on his own, after consultation with legal counsel, the
Justice Department, whoever, say I don't have to comply with a
particular provision of that law without going to court first?
Mr. Preston. I can only speak for myself, but I think that
the President may act in the exercise of his constitutional
authority as he understands it and as circumstances demand,
without necessarily going to court.
Mr. Byrne. How is that different from the position that
people in the Nixon administration took during Watergate that
if the President does it, it is legal. How is that different?
Mr. Preston. Now, I wouldn't even know where to begin to
answer that. I think it is----
Mr. Byrne. Well, begin with the beginning. Can the
President of the United States decide he can do whatever he
wants to do because he thinks he has got some constitutional
protection, despite a clear provision in the law to the
contrary? Can he do that?
Mr. Preston. Well, the way I would answer that is, this
President faced a service member in peril and in captivity and
exercised a constitutional duty and authority to recover that
service member. In circumstances in which it was the judgment
of the policy, the leading policymakers of this country, that
the circumstances were not going to permit the 30-day
notification. That is a very concrete response to what--a very
compelling situation, so----
Mr. Byrne. Well, I understand that you are saying that
under these particular circumstances, you are not saying that
it is a blanket thing, but you think under certain
circumstances, the President of the United States after he has
signed a law and it has become law, can decide that certain
parts of it he doesn't have to comply with without going to a
court and getting a determination about his constitutional
basis for doing so?
Mr. Preston. There are circumstances and this was one.
Mr. Byrne. One final question for you, Secretary Hagel.
Could you please provide us assurance that there will be no
unlawful command influence related to the case of Sergeant
Bergdahl?
Secretary Hagel. Absolutely, and I have said it here in
answer to a couple of questions before.
Mr. Byrne. Thank you, sir, I yield back.
Mr. Gibson. The gentleman yields back.
I will recognize myself for 5 minutes, and just want to
echo the remarks. I appreciate the panelists for being here
today and your leadership in the DOD.
And Mr. Secretary, thank you for your courageous and
honorable service in Vietnam. And as a former soldier myself, I
will start by saying that the ethos that we will leave no
soldier behind I think is very important to the Profession of
Arms.
I still have deep concerns about the judgment in this
particular case, and I want to associate myself with the
remarks of Ms. Gabbard earlier.
First, some context. I must say that I respectfully
disagree with the administration's decision to keep troops in
Afghanistan for 2 more years. I think that we have largely
accomplished what we set out to do, decimating Al Qaeda and
preventing them from having a safe haven in Afghanistan. I
certainly would stipulate that we have an enduring national
security interest to make sure that that remains the case. I
don't think that we need to leave troops on the ground to do
that. I believe we can do that from over the horizon with
special operations troops, Arabian Sea or Indian Ocean, and
evidently, the administration agrees because the administration
is talking about departing in 2 years. And you know, if the
administration believes that we have an interest in continuing
to train the Afghanistan forces, I don't see why we can't bring
them to the United States of America and train them here. And
by the way, the Afghanistan people should pay for that.
But you know, we are where we are today and that is that
the administration wants to keep troops, U.S. troops there for
2 more years, and you know, and given that, I question the
judgment of this particular decision, and I know we have been
over--I am not going to ask us to rehash a lot of the ground
that we have been on, but I do want to ask this point, that at
any point in the negotiations, sir, did it come up that we
would want to keep these five detainees in Qatar until the last
American troop comes home?
Mr. Preston. Congressman, that was not the nature of the
discussion. It was with reference to the period of time for
which the security assurances would be in place.
Mr. Gibson. Well, listen, and I certainly caught the
earlier remark that said, you know, we weren't holding the best
cards, I get that. It doesn't appear we were holding any cards.
I am not sure that our negotiating position, we gave up very
high-level commanders. It doesn't appear to us that, you know,
we had any kind of leverage. And I just refuse to accept that
we had no leverage at all. They evidently had been wanting to
get these five leaders back. And I think at the very minimum,
we would have pressed for the point that these five commanders
would not return to Afghanistan until the last American troop
had returned back to our soil.
Let me say this, that I am interested to know in the best
military judgment of our commanders, our ground commander in
Afghanistan, the CENTCOM commander, and the Chairman of the
Joint Chiefs, and I guess I am curious why the chairman is not
with us today, but I am interested in their assessment and
their go/no-go recommendation.
Secretary Hagel. Thank you, Congressman, and thank you for
your distinguished service. I know about it. And we appreciate
it.
Chairman Dempsey is in London. He is convening a group of
chief military defense officers, counterparts of his from NATO.
This was a conference that was planned months and months ago.
He considered not going. Since Chairman McKeon asked not to
have any uniformed military at the table for this hearing, I
told General Dempsey not to come back because he was not
invited to sit here.
As to his role, I said in my testimony, as well as the Vice
Chairman who has been very active on this, Admiral Winnefeld,
in fact, I think has been in every briefing for the House and
the Senate last 2 weeks. They have been very intricately
involved in all of the meetings, all of the counseling, all of
the steps, signed off, supported. They have not been left out
in any dimension of this and the Vice Chairman, as I said, has
actually been at all of the meetings.
Mr. Gibson. And so I am understanding that both the Vice
Chairman and the Chairman recommended ``go'' on this mission?
Secretary Hagel. Yes.
Mr. Gibson. And what about the ground commander and the
CENTCOM commander?
Secretary Hagel. They were notified on the 27th of May,
General Dunford, General Austin. Their awareness of something
going on was there, but again, to keep this as close as we
could, they were not informed until 4 days before the specific
operational plans and decisions, until 4 days before the
operation. I believe that I am right on those days.
Mr. Gibson. I thank the gentleman.
I will now move to Chairman McCaul.
Mr. McCaul. I thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, Mr. Secretary, Mr. Preston. I chair the Homeland
Security Committee, so I look at that from that vantage point.
I do have concerns that this move, this swap empowers and
emboldens our enemies. One only look at what Mullah Omari is
saying about this when he celebrates. This is a huge triumph in
his words, a colossal victory. For the first time, we have
negotiated with the Taliban as equals. And we gave them
everything they asked for, the dream team. These are the heads
of intelligence, military, with long ties to Osama bin Laden.
When I was in Iraq last month, I met with General Dunford and
Ambassador Cunningham. As we were standing up the Afghans at
this critical point in time, I am concerned about the influence
these five could have on the process, and as the Ambassador
told me, as we withdraw, his biggest fear is there will be a
vacuum and then we will get hit again.
Mr. Secretary, can you tell me how this move is in our best
interest in terms of our security?
Secretary Hagel. Well, to start with, as I have covered
this ground this morning, we got our one remaining prisoner
back. I don't think that is an incidental accomplishment.
Second, as has been quoted here a couple of hours ago, the
former Central Command Commander, Marine General Jim Mattis,
what he said this Sunday, last Sunday about one of the
significant features of this return was it frees up our forces
in Afghanistan to not be concerned and not have any adjustments
or realities or limitations, to always be mindful of trying to
get our prisoner back. And I think, again, I don't think this
is anything to be diminished either, as noted by the
Congressman, the fact is, our military men and women know that
we will go after them. We won't leave them behind.
Mr. McCaul. My time is limited, but, you know, one of these
five, they have already come out publicly, Mr. Noori, and said,
I want to go to Afghanistan and kill Americans. That concerns
me. And these guys are over there, reviving the movement, if
you will, filling the vacuum, and then hitting the homeland
again, as we saw pre-9/11. There is an old axiom in foreign
policy and you, sir, have been in the Senate Foreign Affairs
Committee, Armed Services, for a long time, that we don't
negotiate with terrorists. The Haqqani Network, as I understand
it, were responsible for holding the sergeant captive. Isn't it
true that the Haqqani Network is designated a foreign terrorist
organization?
Secretary Hagel. They are designated a foreign terrorist.
Mr. McCaul. And if so, did we just not negotiate with a
terrorist?
Secretary Hagel. No, we negotiated with the Government of
Qatar. The Taliban made the deal. The Haqqani Network is, as
far as we can tell, a subcontractor to--and they do it not just
with the Taliban, but they do it with different groups.
Mr. McCaul. I mean, let's be--I mean, let's be clear. Okay,
so we negotiate with a middle man, the Qataris government, with
the Haqqani Network, who held him captive, held the sergeant
captive, and the Haqqani Network has been designated----
Secretary Hagel. It was the Taliban that were represented.
Mr. McCaul. But ultimately, it is with the Haqqani Network,
which is a foreign terrorist organization.
Secretary Hagel. Well, as I said, yes, they are associated
in different ways. We know that. And as I said, I think the
best way I can describe it is essentially a subcontractor.
Mr. McCaul. Well, the Haqqani Network, as I understand it,
is the most lethal force over there right now.
Secretary Hagel. It is.
Mr. McCaul. It is the biggest threat that is coming into
Afghanistan after we withdraw and fill in the vacuum and then
from a Homeland Security standpoint, potentially hitting
Americans.
Secretary Hagel. The Haqqani Network didn't have any role
in this deal.
Mr. McCaul. But they held him captive.
Secretary Hagel. Preston can give you the specifics of
this.
Mr. McCaul. In my limited time, there is a New York Times
story about--you read about a memo from Guantanamo transfers to
you from National Security Advisor Susan Rice. What role does
the White House play in your determination regarding the
release of detainees from Guantanamo?
Secretary Hagel. I have the authority and the
responsibility to make the decisions and to notify Congress on
whether they are going to be transferred or not.
Mr. McCaul. Does it stop with you, or does it go to the
White House?
Secretary Hagel. Well, the President signs off as well. But
you asked what role they play. My assessments are made based
on, yes, the National Security Council, because the
subcommittee that you chair, the Secretary of Homeland Security
is part of that, an integral, important part of that for
obvious reasons; so is Secretary of State; so is the National
Director of Intelligence; so is the Chairman of the Joint
Chiefs of Staff; so is the President's National Security
Advisor. Sure, I want all of that. And they all signed off on
this decision, by the way. I have got to have all of that,
because all of them have different pieces along with our own
internal DOD pieces.
Mr. McCaul. And I understand that. I see my time is
expired. Thank you so much for being here today.
Secretary Hagel. Thank you.
Mr. Gibson. All time is expired. We thank the gentlemen.
They have been very gracious with their time this morning and
this afternoon, and we thank you for your service, and this
meeting is adjourned.
Secretary Hagel. Thank you, Congressman.
[Whereupon, at 3:13 p.m., the committee was adjourned.]

=======================================================================

A P P E N D I X

June 11, 2014

=======================================================================

PREPARED STATEMENTS SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD

June 11, 2014

=======================================================================

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

=======================================================================

WITNESS RESPONSES TO QUESTIONS ASKED DURING

THE HEARING

June 11, 2014

=======================================================================

RESPONSE TO QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. MCKEON

Secretary Hagel. The Department is working to provide the Committee
the documents responsive to the Chairman's document request of June 9,
2014.   [See page 13.]
Secretary Hagel. The Department is working to provide the Committee
the documents responsive to the Chairman's document request of June 9,
2014.   [See page 67.]
______

RESPONSE TO QUESTION SUBMITTED BY MR. JONES
Secretary Hagel. The transfers of the five detainees were decided
in the context of the security transition in Afghanistan, as we
approach the end of combat operations. We remain committed to an
Afghan-led peace process and it is our hope that the events leading to
Sgt. Bergdahl's return could potentially open the door for broader
discussions among Afghans about the future of their country by building
confidence that it is possible for all sides to find common ground.
[See page 22.]
______

RESPONSE TO QUESTION SUBMITTED BY MR. TURNER
Mr. Preston. Thank you for your letter of June 18, 2014, to the
Secretary of Defense, in which you express your concerns regarding the
exchange off five Taliban detainees for Sergeant Bowe Bergdahl and
comments I made at a House Armed Services Committee hearing on June 11,
2014, with reference to the release of Chief Warrant Officer (CWO)
Michael Durant from Somali militants in October 1993. I have been asked
to respond to your letter on behalf of Secretary Hagel.
Sergeant Bergdahl is a member of the U.S. military who was detained
in the course of an armed conflict, and he was released in an exchange
of detained combatants between parties to the armed conflict. Although
there are differences between the current conflict and America's past
wars, of course, this exchange was consistent with historical wartime
prisoner exchanges and within the tradition of securing the safe return
of captive U.S. service members through such exchanges.
My comments about the release of CWO Durant sought to provide a
previous example of functionally similar engagement with a non-state
actor resulting in the release of a U.S. service member. In that
instance, the discussions between the U.S. Government and the Somali
militants' representatives were followed by the release of CWO Durant,
which was followed some time later by the release of detained
militants. As you note, however, there are differences between the two
situations. Although it is possible that there was an expectation on
the part of the Somali militants that the detained militants would be
released once CWO Durant was released, as I understand it, there was no
promise or agreement by the U.S. Government to effect release of the
detained militants if CWO Durant were released.
The Department is committed to recovering each and every U.S.
service member held in enemy captivity. In this case, there was a
fleeting opportunity to protect the life of a U.S. soldier held captive
and in danger for almost five years. As Secretary Hagel testified
during the June 11 hearing, the decision to transfer the five detainees
in exchange for Sergeant Bergdahl was a difficult one, but it was a
decision that he believed to be in the national security interest of
the United States.
Please know that the Department is fully cooperating with the
ongoing House Armed Services Committee inquiry into the detainee
transfer and continues to provide documents in response to the
Committee's requests. Thank you for your continued support of our
service men and women deployed in harm's way.   [See page 36.]
______

RESPONSE TO QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MS. SPEIER
Mr. Preston. Those detainees were held in a manner that reflects
the best practices for detention in non-international armed conflict
and complies with all applicable U.S. law and policy, including Common
Article 3 of the Geneva Conventions of 1949 and the Detainee Treatment
Act of 2005. Indeed, a review by Admiral Walsh, as requested by
President Obama in January 2009, confirmed that conditions of detention
at the Guantanamo Bay detention facility not only met, but frequently
exceeded, Common Article 3 standards.   [See page 45.]
______

RESPONSE TO QUESTION SUBMITTED BY MR. COURTNEY
Mr. Preston. The Department is working to provide the Committee the
documents responsive to the Chairman's document request of June 9,
2014.   [See page 30.]
______

RESPONSE TO QUESTION SUBMITTED BY MR. SCOTT
Mr. Preston. The Department is working to provide the Committee the
documents responsive to the Chairman's document request of June 9,
2014.   [See page 72.]

=======================================================================

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MEMBERS POST HEARING

June 11, 2014

=======================================================================

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. PALAZZO

Mr. Palazzo. Mr. Secretary, I turned 21 in the desert, and I still
serve as an NCO with the MS National Guard. Like you, I know the
sacrifices that our soldiers make. We just celebrated Memorial Day and
honored the 1.3 million Americans that have paid the ultimate sacrifice
in service to our country. I believe in the military ethos of no
soldier left behind. That doesn't mean I agree with the events that we
are here to discuss today.
I believe that the messages we send matter. The messages we send to
our soldiers, the messages we send to the rest of the world. And the
messages that we send to the American people. Mr. Secretary, I'm
extremely concerned that we're not sending the right messages. More and
more, it seems: Our friends don't trust us, and our enemies don't fear
us. And the American people are tired of being ignored. I recently met
with individuals from my district who do business every day with our
allies overseas and in the Middle East, and I can tell you that they
are concerned. Our allies and partners are upset. These individuals
have faced harsh criticism because of the actions of our President and
this administration.
What kind of message, sir, does it send that we are now negotiating
with terrorists?
Secretary Hagel. In the decision to rescue Sergeant Bergdahl, the
Administration complied with the law and did what we believed was in
the best interests of our country, our military, and Sergeant Bergdahl.
The United States will take reasonable steps to recover any and
every U.S. servicemember held in captivity. Sergeant Bergdahl is a
member of the military who was detained during the course of an armed
conflict and held captive and in danger for almost five years. We have
been clear that we would pursue every avenue to recover Sergeant
Bergdahl, just as the American people and the Congress expected us to
do.
The United States acted upon what we believed was our last, best
opportunity to protect Sergeant Bergdahl's life. The exchange of the
five Taliban detainees for Sergeant Bergdahl is fully consistent with
U.S. law and our nation's interests, as well as our military's core
values. The Secretary of Defense, in coordination with the President's
national security team, determined that the transfer was in the
national security interest of the United States and that the threat
posed by the detainees to the United States or U.S. persons or
interests would be substantially mitigated.
Mr. Palazzo. What kind of message does the release of five senior
Taliban officials send to all our men in women in uniform?
Secretary Hagel. The United States will take reasonable steps to
recover any and every U.S. servicemember held in captivity. Sergeant
Bowe Bergdahl is a member of the military who was detained during the
course of an armed conflict and held captive and in danger for almost
five years. We remain steadfast in our commitment to our men and women
in uniform that America does not leave its servicemembers behind.
We have been clear that we would pursue every avenue to recover
Sergeant Bergdahl, in line with the expectations of the American people
and Congress. By exchanging the five Taliban detainees for Sergeant
Bergdahl, we acted upon what we believed was our last, best opportunity
to protect Sergeant Bergdahl's life.
The five individuals transferred from Guantanamo Bay were members
of the Taliban, which controlled much of Afghanistan's territory prior
to the U.S. invasion and overthrow of that regime. The United States
detained these individuals in 2001 and 2002 and held them at Guantanamo
Bay as unprivileged enemy belligerents. They have not been implicated
in any attacks against the United States, and we had no basis to
prosecute them in a federal court or military commission.
Mr. Palazzo. What kind of message is this administration sending to
the American people? As members of Congress and as members of this
committee, we are the elected representatives sent here to reflect the
voices and views of hundreds of millions of Americans. What kind of
message should we take away, that the law was blatantly ignored because
the President thought it was best?
Secretary Hagel. The exchange of the five Taliban detainees for
Sergeant Bergdahl is fully consistent with U.S. law and our nation's
interests, as well as our military's core values. The United States
will take reasonable steps to recover any and every U.S. servicemember
held in captivity.

[all]
