- A LEVEL PLAYING FIELD: COLLEGE ATHLETES' RIGHTS TO THEIR NAME, IMAGE, AND LIKENESS

[House Hearing, 117 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

A LEVEL PLAYING FIELD: COLLEGE ATHLETES' RIGHTS TO THEIR NAME, IMAGE,
AND LIKENESS

=======================================================================

HYBRID HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON CONSUMER PROTECTION AND COMMERCE

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED SEVENTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

SEPTEMBER 30, 2021

__________

Serial No. 117-50

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Published for the use of the Committee on Energy and Commerce

govinfo.gov/committee/house-energy
energycommerce.house.gov

______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
53-737PDF             WASHINGTON : 2023

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE

FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey
Chairman
BOBBY L. RUSH, Illinois              CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington
ANNA G. ESHOO, California              Ranking Member
DIANA DeGETTE, Colorado              FRED UPTON, Michigan
MIKE DOYLE, Pennsylvania             MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas
JAN SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois             STEVE SCALISE, Louisiana
G. K. BUTTERFIELD, North Carolina    ROBERT E. LATTA, Ohio
DORIS O. MATSUI, California          BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky
KATHY CASTOR, Florida                DAVID B. McKINLEY, West Virginia
JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland           ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois
JERRY McNERNEY, California           H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia
PETER WELCH, Vermont                 GUS M. BILIRAKIS, Florida
PAUL TONKO, New York                 BILL JOHNSON, Ohio
YVETTE D. CLARKE, New York           BILLY LONG, Missouri
KURT SCHRADER, Oregon                LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana
TONY CARDENAS, California            MARKWAYNE MULLIN, Oklahoma
RAUL RUIZ, California                RICHARD HUDSON, North Carolina
SCOTT H. PETERS, California          TIM WALBERG, Michigan
DEBBIE DINGELL, Michigan             EARL L. ``BUDDY'' CARTER, Georgia
MARC A. VEASEY, Texas                JEFF DUNCAN, South Carolina
ANN M. KUSTER, New Hampshire         GARY J. PALMER, Alabama
ROBIN L. KELLY, Illinois, Vice       NEAL P. DUNN, Florida
Chair                            JOHN R. CURTIS, Utah
NANETTE DIAZ BARRAGAN, California    DEBBBIE LESKO, Arizona
A. DONALD McEACHIN, Virginia         GREG PENCE, Indiana
LISA BLUNT ROCHESTER, Delaware       DAN CRENSHAW, Texas
DARREN SOTO, Florida                 JOHN JOYCE, Pennsylvania
TOM O'HALLERAN, Arizona              KELLY ARMSTRONG, North Dakota
KATHLEEN M. RICE, New York
ANGIE CRAIG, Minnesota
KIM SCHRIER, Washington
LORI TRAHAN, Massachusetts
LIZZIE FLETCHER, Texas
------

Professional Staff

TIFFANY GUARASCIO, Staff Director
WAVERLY GORDON, Deputy Staff Director
NATE HODSON, Minority Staff Director
Subcommittee on Consumer Protection and Commerce

JAN SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois
Chair
BOBBY L. RUSH, Illinois              GUS M. BILIRAKIS, Florida
KATHY CASTOR, Florida                  Ranking Member
LORI TRAHAN, Massachusetts           FRED UPTON, Michigan
JERRY McNERNEY, California           ROBERT E. LATTA, Ohio
YVETTE D. CLARKE, New York           BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky
TONY CARDENAS, California, Vice      LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana
Chair                            NEAL P. DUNN, Florida
DEBBIE DINGELL, Michigan             GREG PENCE, Indiana
ROBIN L. KELLY, Illinois             DEBBIE LESKO, Arizona
DARREN SOTO, Florida                 KELLY ARMSTRONG, North Dakota
KATHLEEN M. RICE, New York           CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington
ANGIE CRAIG, Minnesota                   (ex officio)
LIZZIE FLETCHER, Texas
FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey (ex
officio)
C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hon. Jan Schakowsky, a Representative in Congress from the State
of Illinois, opening statement.................................     2
Prepared statement...........................................     3
Hon. Gus M. Bilirakis, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Florida, opening statement............................     4
Prepared statement...........................................     5
Hon. Frank Pallone, Jr., a Representative in Congress from the
State of New Jersey, opening statement.........................     6
Prepared statement...........................................     7
Hon. Cathy McMorris Rodgers, a Representative in Congress from
the State of Washington, opening statement.....................     9
Prepared statement...........................................    10

Witnesses

Cami March, Captain, Women's Golf, Washington State University...    11
Prepared statement...........................................    14
Mark Emmert, Ph.D., President, National Collegiate Athletic
Association....................................................    18
Prepared statement...........................................    21
Answers to submitted questions...............................   108
Ramogi Huma, Executive Director, National College Players
Association....................................................    25
Prepared statement...........................................    27
Answers to submitted questions \1\
Linda Livingstone, Ph.D., President, Baylor University...........    54
Prepared statement...........................................    56
Answers to submitted questions...............................   115
Jacqie D. McWilliams, Commissioner, Central Intercollegiate
Athletic Association...........................................    60
Prepared statement...........................................    62
Answers to submitted questions...............................   117

Submitted Material

Letter of September 30, 2021, from Representatives Emanuel
Cleaver and Colin Z. Allred to Ms. Schakowsky, et al.,
submitted by Ms. Schakowsky....................................   101
Statement of Representative Anthony Gonzalez, September 30, 2021,
submitted by Mr. Bilirakis.....................................   103
Letter of September 23, 2021, from Evan Conley, University of
Louisville, et al., to Mr. Bilirakis, submitted by Mr.
Bilirakis......................................................   105

----------

\1\ Mr. Huma's reply to submitted questions has been retained in
committee files and is available at https://docs.house.gov/meetings/IF/
IF17/20210930/114076/HHRG-117-IF17-Wstate-HumaR-20210930-SD001.pdf.

A LEVEL PLAYING FIELD: COLLEGE ATHLETES' RIGHTS TO THEIR NAME, IMAGE,
AND LIKENESS

----------

THURSDAY, SEPTEMBER 30, 2021

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Consumer Protection and Commerce,
Committee on Energy and Commerce,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 10:34 a.m., in
the John D. Dingell Room 2123, Rayburn House Office Building,
and remotely via Cisco Webex online video conferencing, Hon.
Jan Schakowsky (chair of the subcommittee) presiding.
Members present: Representatives Schakowsky, Rush, Castor,
Trahan, McNerney, Clarke, Cardenas, Dingell, Kelly, Soto,
Pallone (ex officio), Bilirakis (subcommittee ranking member),
Upton, Latta, Guthrie, Bucshon, Dunn, Pence, Armstrong, and
Rodgers (ex officio).
Also present: Representatives Schrier, Carter, and Duncan.
Staff present: Katherine Durkin, Policy Coordinator; Lisa
Goldman, Senior Counsel; Waverly Gordon, Deputy Staff Director
and General Counsel; Daniel Greene, Professional Staff Member;
Tiffany Guarascio, Staff Director; Perry Hamilton, Clerk; Ed
Kaczmarski, Policy Analyst; Zach Kahan, Deputy Director,
Outreach and Member Service; Mackenzie Kuhl, Digital Assistant;
Kaitlyn Peel, Digital Director; Tim Robinson, Chief Counsel;
Chloe Rodriguez, Clerk; Andrew Souvall, Director of
Communications, Outreach, and Member Services; Caroline Wood,
Staff Assistant; C.J. Young, Deputy Communications Director;
Sarah Burke, Minority Deputy Staff Director; Michael Cameron,
Minority Policy Analyst, Consumer Protection and Commerce,
Energy, Environment; Tim Kurth, Minority Chief Counsel,
Consumer Protection and Commerce; Brannon Rains, Minority
Professional Staff Member, Consumer Protection and Commerce;
and Michael Taggart, Minority Policy Director.
Ms. Schakowsky. The Subcommittee on Consumer Protection and
Commerce will now come to order.
Today, we will be holding a hearing entitled ``A Level
Playing Field: College Athletes' Rights to Their Name, Image,
and Likeness.''
Due to the COVID-19 public health emergency, Members can
participate today in the hearing either in person, or remotely
via online video, via video--video conferencing. Members who
are not vaccinated----
Mr. Rush. Madam Chair, you are muted. Madam Chair, you are
muted.
Ms. Schakowsky [continuing]. And participating in person
must wear a mask and be socially distant. Such Members may
remove their mask when they are under recognition and speaking
from a microphone.
Staff and press who are not vaccinated and present in the
committee room must wear a mask at all times and be socially
distanced.
For Members participating remotely, your microphone will be
set on mute for the purpose of eliminating inadvertent
background noise. Members participating remotely will need to
unmute your microphone each time you wish to speak.
Please note that, once you have unmuted your microphone,
anything that is said in Webex will be heard over the
loudspeaker in the committee room and subject to be heard by
the livestream.
Since Members are participating from different locations at
today's hearing, all recognition of Members, such as for
questions, will be in the order of seniority on the
subcommittee--subcommittee seniority.
Documents for the record can be sent to Ed Kaczmarski at
the email address that was provided to your staff. All
documents will be entered into the record at the conclusion of
the hearing.
At this point, the Chair now recognizes herself for 5
minutes.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. JAN SCHAKOWSKY, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF ILLINOIS

College sports bring joy to Americans in every State, in
every congressional district, and can provide life-changing
opportunities and friendships for college athletes. I know our
colleagues--for example, Congresswoman Trahan--and others of
you who participated in college athletics have personally
experienced this.
College sports have also created enormous wealth to the
tune of $14.4 billion per year for colleges and universities,
but, unfortunately, that wealth has not been equitably
distributed for decades and led to systemic exploitation of
athletes in service of the amateurism mythology.
This exploitation has denied those who most are responsible
for the creation of this wealth--that would be the players--
from their fair share of the pie. And, if that were not bad
enough, we have seen athletes saddled with contracts our
subcommittee would clearly identify as unfair and deceptive.
Such contracts have in the past included restrictions on
transferring to another school and loss of scholarships in the
case of injury, which for too many means halting their
education entirely.
In 2015, Northwestern football players, who I have the
privilege of representing in my district, actually began a
union drive. And I was proud to stand with those courageous
athletes fighting for their rights. Regrettably, Northwestern
employed classic union-busting tactics, and the effort failed.
Since then, we have recognized--I would say finally--
pervasive, systemic inequality--inequities in the ways that the
NCAA manages, funds, and treats male versus female athletes. In
August, an independent investigation concluded what many
already knew, that the NCAA has not lived up to its standard
commitment to, quote, ``diversity, inclusion, and gender
equity--and gender equality--among its student athletes,''
unquote.
For years, Congress was told by the NCAA and others to let
them govern themselves. However, in the wake of the
proliferation of name-image-likeness laws in States around the
country that--and not to mention also Supreme Court cases,
today, they are coming, asking us to intervene.
And the Energy and Commerce Committee is where many of
these debates are going to take place, and we are ready to have
those debates on fair contracting; health and safety; name,
image, likeness; recruiting practices; and labor rights. But I
can assure you that we will only move forward in a way that
puts players first.
That said, I look forward to engaging with Ranking Member
Bilirakis, Members on both sides of the aisle on our
subcommittee, and all key stakeholders as we correct past
injustices and move forward in an equitable way that does put
players first.
I want to thank our witnesses for attending today.
And, with that, I yield back my time.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Schakowsky follows:]

Prepared Statement of Hon. Jan Schakowsky

On any given fall Saturday on college campuses all over
this nation, students, alumna, and others gather College sports
bring joy to Americans in every state, in every Congressional
district, and can provide lifechanging opportunity and
friendships for college athletes. I know our colleague
Congresswoman Trahan, and others of you who were college
athletes, have personally experienced this.
College sports have also created enormous wealth, to the
tune of $14.4 billion for colleges and university, but
unfortunately that wealth has not been equitably distributed
for decades and led to systemic exploitation of athletes.
This exploitation has denied those most responsible for the
creation of this wealth, the players, from their fair share of
the pie. And if that weren't bad enough, we have seen athletes
saddled with contracts this subcommittee would clearly identify
as unfair and deceptive in service of the amateurism mythology.
Such contracts have in the past included restrictions on
transferring to another school and loss of scholarship in the
case of injury, which for many meant halting their education.
In 2015, when Northwestern football players, who I have had
the privilege of representing in my district, began a union
drive. I was proud to stand with those courageous athletes,
fighting for their rights. Regrettably, Northwestern employed
classic union-busting tactics, and the effort failed.
Since then, we have recognized pervasive systemic
inequities in the way the NCAA manages, funds, and treats male
versus female athletes. In August, an independent investigation
concluded what many already knew: the NCAA has not lived up to
its stated commitment to ``diversity, inclusion, and gender
equity among its student-athletes.''
For years, Congress was told by the NCAA and others to let
them govern themselves. However, in the wake of the
proliferation of Name-Image-Likeness laws on the state level,
not to mention a Supreme Court case, today they come to us
asking us to intervene. The Energy and Commerce Committee is
where many of these debates are going to take place, and we are
ready to have those debates on fair contracts, health and
safety, Name-Image-Likeness, recruiting practices, and labor
rights, but I can assure you we will only move forward in a way
that puts players first.
That said, I look forward to engaging with Ranking Member
Bilirakis, Members on both sides of the aisle of this
subcommittee, and all key stakeholders as we correct past
injustices and move forward in an equitable way that puts
players first.
I thank the witnesses for attending and recognize for 5
minutes the Ranking Member, Mr. Bilirakis.

Ms. Schakowsky. And now the Chair--I am honored to
recognize Mr. Bilirakis, the ranking member of the Subcommittee
on Consumer Protection and Commerce, for 5 minutes for his
opening statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. GUS M. BILIRAKIS, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF FLORIDA

Mr. Bilirakis. Thank you so very much, Madam Chair. I
appreciate it.
Good morning to everyone, and welcome to the subcommittee
hearing.
Thank you, Madam Chair, again, for holding this hearing,
and thank you to our witnesses for your testimony on this very
important matter. I am eager to hear each of your perspectives.
I also want to thank Congressman Anthony Gonzalez for his
tireless bipartisan effort to give student athletes the
opportunity to receive compensation for their name, image, and
likeness, or NIL.
It is not too often a Florida Gator and a Ohio State
Buckeye can come together in the name of amateur sports, but I
am glad to be working with him on this and remaining very
hopeful we can get bipartisan legislation to the end zone this
Congress.
Now, of course, we have other sports besides football that
we are going to discuss.
Madam Chair, I would also like to ask unanimous consent
that a statement from, again, Congressman Anthony Gonzalez be
entered into the record, and I have that right here, Madam
Chair.
Ms. Schakowsky. Without objection.
[The statement appears at the conclusion of the hearing.]
Mr. Bilirakis. Thank you.
To that end, I think we need to have realistic expectations
for what our committee should focus on when legislating to
allow collegiate athletes the opportunity to capitalize on
their NIL. It is the only way we can get this done for
students, and I--we all agree, Madam Chair, on the NIL. And I
have it in my statement, but it is so very necessary that we
have preemptive legislation here.
Currently, 30 States across the country have their own laws
allowing college athletes to monetize off their NIL, including
my home State of Florida. Unfortunately, this is not the first
time a patchwork of State laws has caused potential confusion
and crippling--crippled fair competition.
We are currently seeing this same scenario play out with
consumer privacy laws, so I am hopeful this hearing highlights
the need for Congress to establish a national preemptive
framework for NIL and create a true level playing field for all
students and educational institutions across the Nation.
If Congress fails to enact legislation preventing a
patchwork of State laws, we will likely see States competing
with one another to create the best incentives for students to
come to their schools, and you know that is going to happen.
Again, while I know young people want to come to the great
State of Florida, preferably University of Florida, we must be
fair to the hundreds of other universities and colleges across
the country that may be a better fit for student athletes. We
have a lot of Members here on both sides of the aisle who
represent different schools and different conferences.
To be clear, what I am suggesting is not an approach to
side upon the NCAA and various conferences but, rather, by
collegiate athletes themselves.
I recently received a letter from 15 collegiate athletes
from the ACC that emphasized this point, and I want to quote
these students if that is OK, Madam Chair.
Ms. Schakowsky. Sure.
Mr. Bilirakis. ``It is clear we need a Federal baseline,''
is what they say, ``that re-levels the playing field, and we
need one soon.''
The students also explained the most important factor in
legislating on NIL is to protect all collegiate athletes,
especially those outside the big revenue-generating sports like
football and basketball, stating, and I quote again: ``Congress
would do a disservice to student athletes, sports culture, and
American society in general if it passes a bill that diminishes
educational opportunities that leave schools no choice but to
reduce scholarships or cut programs due to budget
reallocation.''
I couldn't agree more.
Madam Chair, I ask unanimous consent that I enter this
particular letter from the ACC college athletes.
Ms. Schakowsky. Without objection.
[The letter appears at the conclusion of the hearing.]
Mr. Bilirakis. Thank you very much.
So I think these students know what they want. I really do,
Madam Chair. And, again, if you read--I am not going to read
the names of the schools because I don't have time, but these
are very, very credible universities that represent these--and,
again, these athletes represent those universities. If we
exceed the focus of this debate as well as go far outside the
bounds of our committee's jurisdiction, I feel we will end up
hurting the college athletes and their chances of succeeding on
and off the field.
I also want to point out that these students didn't ask for
healthcare mandates or guaranteed scholarships or for private
rights of action. The risk of such factors will result in
cutting the very sports programs we are working on to protect.
After all, there is a difference between being a representative
of a school and being a full-time employee of a school.
I agree wholeheartedly with these students. College
students should be able to compete and work hard to receive NIL
benefits, and that is what our committee should focus on.
And I really look forward to hearing the witnesses and
getting more input.
So thank you very much, Madam Chair, for giving me the
opportunity. I yield back.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Bilirakis follows:]

Prepared Statement of Hon. Gus M. Bilirakis

Good morning everyone and welcome to today's Subcommittee
hearing.
Thank you, Madam Chair, for holding this hearing, and thank
you to our witnesses for your testimony on this important
matter. I am eager to hear each of your perspectives.
I also want to thank Congressman Gonzalez for your tireless
bipartisan efforts to give student athletes the opportunity to
receive compensation for their name, image, and likeness, or
NIL. It's not too often a Florida Gator and an Ohio State
Buckeye can come together in the name of amateur sports, but
I'm glad to be working with you on this and remain very hopeful
we can get bipartisan legislation into the endzone this
Congress.
To that end, I think we need to have realistic expectations
for what our Committee should focus on when legislating to
allow collegiate athletes the opportunity to capitalize on
their NIL. It is the only way we can get this done for
students.
Currently, 30 states across the country have their own laws
allowing college athletes to monetize off their NIL, including
my home state of Florida. Unfortunately, this is not the first
time a patchwork of state laws has caused potential confusion
and crippled fair competition. We are currently seeing this
same scenario play out with consumer privacy laws, so I am
hopeful this hearing highlights the need for Congress to
establish a national preemptive framework for NIL and create a
true level playing field for all students and educational
institutions across the nation.
If Congress fails to enact legislation preventing a
patchwork of state laws, we will likely see states competing
with one another to create the best incentives for students to
come to their schools. While I know young people want to come
to my great state of Florida, we must be fair to the hundreds
of other universities and colleges across the country that may
be a better fit for student athletes.
To be clear, what I am suggesting is not an approach
decided upon by the NCAA and various conferences but rather by
collegiate athletes themselves. I recently received a letter
from 15 collegiate athletes from the Atlantic Coast Conference
that emphasized this point. The students say, ``It's clear we
need a federal baseline that re-levels the playing field--and
we need one soon.''
The students also explain the most important factor in
legislating on NIL is to protect all collegiate athletics,
especially those outside of the big revenue generating sports
like football and basketball, stating, ``Congress would do a
disservice to student-athletes, sports culture, and American
society in general if it passes a bill that diminishes
educational opportunities that leave schools no choice but to
reduce scholarships or cut programs due to budget
reallocations.''
Madam Chair, I ask for unanimous consent that this letter
be entered into the record.
I think these students know what they want. If we exceed
the focus of this debate as well as go far outside the bounds
of our Committee's jurisdiction, I fear we will end up hurting
the college athletes and their chances of succeeding on and off
the field. I also want to point out that these students didn't
ask for healthcare mandates, or guaranteed scholarships, or for
private rights of action. The risk of such factors will result
in cutting the very sports programs we are working to protect.
After all, there is a difference between being a representative
of a school and being a full-time employee of a school.
I agree wholeheartedly with these students: College
students should be able to compete and work hard to receive NIL
benefits, and that's what our Committee should focus on.
Thank you again, Madam Chair, and to our witnesses for
being here, and I yield back.

Ms. Schakowsky. The gentleman yields back.
The Chair now recognizes Mr. Pallone, chair of the full
committee, for his 5 minutes for an opening statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. FRANK PALLONE, Jr., A REPRESENTATIVE
IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF NEW JERSEY

Mr. Pallone. Thank you, Chairwoman Schakowsky.
The devotion, sacrifice, and efforts of college athletes
has helped make college sports one of the most popular and
lucrative brands in sports entertainment in the country. These
athletes deserve a system that protects their interests and
well-being.
For years and despite criticism and many court challenges,
the National Collegiate Athletic Association, its member
schools, TV networks, athletic-wear companies, and others have
earned massive revenues. At the same time, the college athletes
have been stuck in strict amateur status that prohibited them
from earning compensation on their name, image, and likeness.
It wasn't until the Supreme Court's decision this summer
finding the NCAA in violation of antitrust law that the NCAA
finally felt enough pressure to begin making changes to this
unfair system.
For far too long, collegiate athletes missed out on
opportunities that other students have been able to take
advantage of. The rules prevented things like swimmers, tennis
players, and golfers from using their names and pictures to
advertise lessons in their sports to make extra money. After
the rule change, young athletes are already capitalizing on
many of the opportunities that were previously not available to
them. But, while this rule change is a step in the right
direction, collegiate athletes continue to face additional
hurdles that other students do not.
With fewer than 2 percent of collegiate athletes reaching
the pros in their sports, education is vital to success after
graduation, yet many college athletes are forced to dedicate
more than 40 hours per week to practices and other training,
leaving little time for study. Collegiate athletes have a
graduation rate 18 percent lower than nonathletes. And, more
starkly for Black athletes, the graduation rate is between 20
and 30 percent lower than their peers.
So today's hearing is focused on name, image, and likeness
rights, but we cannot ignore other issues that face college
athletes, issues such as gender equity for college athletes,
short- and long-term safety and healthcare are just as
important. And just yesterday the National Labor Relations
Board announced that certain college athletes must be treated
as employees, rightfully giving them protections that come with
that classification.
So I thank you for having this hearing, Madam Chair, and I
look forward to hearing the testimony of all the witnesses and
the unique perspectives you all provide, but I would like to
yield the remainder of my time to Congresswoman Trahan.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Pallone follows:]

Prepared Statement of Hon. Frank Pallone, Jr.

The devotion, sacrifice, and effort of college athletes has
helped make college sports one of the most popular and
lucrative brands of sports entertainment in the country. These
athletes deserve a system that protects their interests and
well-being.
For years, and despite criticism and many court challenges,
the National Collegiate Athletic Association (NCAA), its member
schools, television networks, athletic wear companies, and
others have earned massive revenues. At the same time, the
college athletes had been stuck in a strict amateur status that
prohibited them from earning compensation on their name, image,
and likeness. It wasn't until the Supreme Court's decision this
summer, finding the NCAA in violation of antitrust law, that
the NCAA finally felt enough pressure to begin making changes
to this unfair system.
For far too long collegiate athletes missed out on
opportunities that other students have been able to take
advantage of. This is not just about big sponsorship or
endorsement deals for big-name football and basketball players.
The rules also prevented things like swimmers, tennis players,
and golfers from using their names and pictures to advertise
lessons in their sports to make some extra money.
After the rule change, young athletes are already
capitalizing on many of the opportunities that were previously
not available to them. But while this rule change is a step in
the right direction, collegiate athletes continue to face
additional hurdles that other students do not.
With fewer than two percent of collegiate athletes reaching
the pros in their sports, education is vital to success after
graduation. Yet, many college athletes are forced to dedicate
more than 40 hours per week to practices and other training,
leaving little time for study. Collegiate athletes have a
graduation rate 18 percent lower than non-athletes. More
starkly, for Black athletes, the graduation rate is between 20
and 30 percent lower than their peers.
Today's hearing is focused on name, image, and likeness
rights, but we cannot ignore other issues that face college
athletes. Issues such as gender equity for college athletes,
short and long-term safety and health care are just as
important. And just yesterday, the National Labor Relations
Board announced that certain college athletes must be treated
as employees, rightfully giving them protections that come with
that classification.
Thank you for having this hearing, Madam Chair, and I look
forward to hearing the testimony of all of the witnesses and
the unique perspectives you all provide. Thank you for being
here today.
I yield the remainder of my time to Congresswoman Trahan.

Mrs. Trahan. Well, thank you for yielding, Mr. Chairman.
And I am grateful to you and Chairwoman Schakowsky for
calling this important hearing. As a former Division I
volleyball player, this issue hits home. Like many former
college athletes, I wouldn't be where I am today without that
scholarship.
My family didn't have a lot of money. My dad was a union
ironworker, and my mom picked up jobs where she could. They
worked hard to give my sisters and me every opportunity to
succeed, but there is just no way we could have afforded that
tuition at Georgetown without the volleyball scholarship.
I am the first person in my family to graduate from
college, and I am forever grateful for the opportunity and the
doors that were opened for me after graduation. However, it is
through that experience that I became familiar with how the
NCAA conferences and colleges used amateurism, or at least the
guise of it, to build a multibillion-dollar industry on the
backs of dedicated, talented, and often poor college athletes.
When I was in school, I couldn't coach a summer camp for
young girls in my hometown of Lowell because it would have
jeopardized my amateur status. That was wrong then, and it has
been wrong for every athlete after me who was forced to
navigate complex rules designed to keep us amateurs while
coaches and executives pocketed millions.
The association's recent NIL policy change is long overdue,
and I believe yesterday's NLRB memorandum on college athletes'
employment rights is as well. For the purposes of today's
hearing, it is clear that years of reluctance to embrace the
inevitable shift on NIL means athletes are now operating in a
patchwork of State laws governing their rights.
Any Federal action we take to deliver for the people who
have always been what matters most in college sports--and that
is the athletes--that means guaranteeing them the maximum
freedom possible to be compensated for the use of their name,
image, and likeness in the way they choose, whether it is
teaching the next generation of athletes, entering a group
licensing agreement, or something else.
So I look forward to continuing our work to achieve that
goal and certainly the discussion today.
Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Pallone. And I yield back as well, Madam Chair.
Ms. Schakowsky. The gentleman yields back, and the Chair
now recognizes Mrs. Rodgers, the ranking member of the full
committee, for 5 minutes for her opening statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, A
REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF WASHINGTON

Mrs. Rodgers. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Chairman Pallone, for bringing us all together
today on this important subject.
I appreciated Congressman Anthony Gonzalez'--what is going
on, buddy? It is Cougs. Go Cougs. OK. OK. I appreciated the
Congressman--Congressman Anthony Gonzalez when he testified
before our Member Day on the topic of name, image, and
likeness. And it was an important reminder, I think, to this
subcommittee that we need to address this issue, and it needs
to be done in a bipartisan fashion.
I know today's hearing is not on a specific legislative
effort, but I certainly appreciate the legislative commitment
that Congressman Gonzalez, Congressman Cleaver have made here,
as well as the efforts of Congresswoman Trahan and our
subcommittee chair, Jan Schakowsky.
The Supreme Court has been clear on its rulings. They have
made clear on the fact that the NCAA, as well as other schools
and their respective conferences, were overly restrictive on
the ability of their athletes to seek compensation for their
name, image, and likeness. We should now work towards a
national standard so the rules are clear or athletes, schools,
and all other parties involved in the ecosystem of amateur
athletics.
There is a lot of consensus on how these athletes may seek
their rewards for their commitment to excellence. Take, for
instance, the case of Cameron, Cami March--I am pleased that
Cami is testifying here today as part of the esteemed panel. Go
Cougs.
Cami is a student at Washington State University, captain
of the golf team, and an app developer. And her ability to
compete would be in jeopardy if overall restrictive NIL rules
were in place.
That said, she and other young people still need a clear
set of rules and understandable guidelines. This will ensure
that her entrepreneurial spirit is rewarded and her passion to
market the app she developed is not hindered by a lack of
uniform rules as she works to lead the Cougars to a successful
golf season.
Now, I know there are many commendable topics that may not
deal directly with NIL per se, but considering the pressure
placed on these young athletes, it is important that we
consider their ability to seek counseling on financial and
mental well-being. We have seen where athletes and students can
be taken advantage of, and there is extraordinary pressures
that they are under in this super-connected world.
However, an overly proscriptive solution to this dilemma
can have a detrimental impact on these student athletes,
smaller schools with fewer resources, and those schools that
are not generating revenue for the institutions. These are also
important considerations to take into account so female
athletes aren't disadvantaged or treated unfairly.
In fact, I could see small schools dropping programs
altogether, which means that many scholarships would disappear,
and so will the chance for a first-generation, unless
privileged, students receive a college education. Every one of
us takes great pride in the universities and colleges in our
home States. Our positions have provided us the opportunity of
getting to know these athletes, and I am sure that brings
immense pride to all of you, as it does me.
Let's not take that pride lightly as we consider solutions
to give clear standards to colleges and universities. We should
give these amateur athletes every chance to succeed in life and
in sports, to help them win the future. I urge this committee
not to get riddled with issues that have stalled other efforts
that we have worked on, like privacy.
Again, thank you for the witnesses for appearing before us
today. I am very much looking forward to this discussion in how
we take the next steps in legislating a set of rules that works
for everyone.
I yield back.
[The prepared statement of Mrs. Rodgers follows:]

Prepared Statement of Hon. Cathy McMorris Rodgers

Thank you, Madam Chair and for Chairman Pallone's interest
in this subject as well. I appreciated when Congressman Anthony
Gonzalez testified before us on the topic of ``Name Image
Likeness'' at the Member Day hearing. It was an important
reminder this is an action this subcommittee can work together
on.
I know today's hearing is not on any specific legislative
efforts, but I certainly appreciate the legislative commitment
that Congressman Gonzalez and Congressman Cleaver have made
here, as well as the efforts of Congresswoman Trahan and our
subcommittee Chair Schakowsky. The Supreme Court has been clear
on its rulings.
They've been clear on the fact that the NCAA, as well as
the schools and their respective conferences, were overly
restrictive on the ability of their athletes to seek
compensation for their Name, Image, and Likeness. We should now
work toward a national standard so the rules are clear for
athletes, schools, and all those parties involved in that
ecosystem of amateur athletics.
There's a lot of consensus on how these athletes may seek
the rewards for their commitment to excellence. Take for
instance the case of Cameron ``Cami'' March. I'm so pleased
that Cami is testifying here today as part of this esteemed
panel. Go Cougs!
Cami is a student at Washington State University, captain
of the golf team, and an app developer. Her ability to compete
would be in jeopardy if overly restrictive NIL rules were in
place. That said, she and other young people still need a clear
set of rules and understandable guidelines. This will ensure
that her entrepreneurial spirit is rewarded and her passion to
market the app she developed is not hindered by a lack of
uniform rules as she works to lead the Cougars to a successful
golf season.
Now I know there are many commendable topics that may not
deal directly with NIL per se but considering the pressure
placed on these young student athletes, it is important that we
consider their ability to seek counseling on financial and
mental well-being. We have seen where athletes and students can
be taken advantage of, and the extraordinary pressures they are
under in this super connected world.
However, an overly prescriptive solution to this dilemma
can have a detrimental impact on the athletes themselves,
smaller schools with fewer resources, and those sports that are
not generating revenue for their institutions. These are also
important considerations to take into account so female
athletes aren't disadvantaged or treated unfairly.
In fact, I could see small schools dropping programs
altogether, which means that many of the scholarships will
disappear, and so will the chance for first-generation and less
privileged students to receive a college education. Every one
of us takes great pride in the universities and colleges in our
home states.
Our positions have provided us the opportunity of getting
to know these athletes, and I'm sure that brings immense pride
to all of you as it does to me. Let's not take that pride
lightly as we consider solutions to give clear standards to
colleges and universities. We should give amateur athletes
every chance to succeed in life and in sports.
To help them win the future, I urge this committee not to
get riddled with issues that have stalled our other efforts we
have worked on--like privacy. Again, thank you to the witnesses
for appearing before us today. I am very much looking forward
to this discussion and how we take the next steps in
legislating a set of rules that works for everyone. I yield
back.

Ms. Schakowsky. The gentlelady yields back.
The Chair would like to remind Members that, pursuant to
committee rules, all Members' written opening statements shall
be made part of the record.
And I now would like to introduce our witnesses for the
first panel--for the panel at today's hearing.
Cameron March, the college athletic--athlete in women's
golf at Washington State University; Dr. Mark Emmert, president
of the National Collegiate Athletic Association; Ramogi Huma,
the executive director of the National College Players
Association; and Dr. Linda Livingstone, who is president of
Baylor University; and--one more--and Jacqie McWilliams, the
commissioner of the Central Intercollegiate Athletic
Association.
At this time, the Chair will recognize each witness for 5
minutes to provide their opening statements.
Before I do, I just want to make sure that I can explain
the lighting system. In front of our witnesses is a series of
lights. The lights will initially be green. The light will turn
yellow when you have 1 minute remaining. Please begin to wrap
up at that point. And the light will turn red when your time is
up.
And, for those remotely, there is also a clock. You should
be able to see the clock for those who are remotely presenting.
So I want to thank you, Dr.--nope. I am wrong. OK. Let me
begin, then, with Ms. March.
You are now recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENTS OF CAMI MARCH, CAPTAIN, WOMEN'S GOLF, WASHINGTON
STATE UNIVERSITY; MARK EMMERT, Ph.D., PRESIDENT, NATIONAL
COLLEGIATE ATHLETIC ASSOCIATION; RAMOGI HUMA, EXECUTIVE
DIRECTOR, NATIONAL COLLEGE PLAYERS ASSOCIATION; LINDA
LIVINGSTONE, Ph.D., PRESIDENT, BAYLOR UNIVERSITY; AND JACQIE D.
McWILLIAMS, COMMISSIONER, CENTRAL INTERCOLLEGIATE ATHLETIC
ASSOCIATION

STATEMENT OF CAMI MARCH

Ms. March. Good morning, and thank you, Chairman Pallone,
Ranking Member McMorris Rodgers, Chairwoman Schakowsky, and
Ranking Member Bilirakis. My name is Cami March. I am a senior
at Washington State University located in Pullman, Washington,
working to complete my bachelor of science degree in digital
technology and culture in 2022.
Thank you for the opportunity to represent my fellow
student athletes at WSU before the House Energy and Commerce
Committee Consumer Protection and Commerce Subcommittee today
regarding the ability of student athletes to utilize our name,
image, and likeness.
This designation of student athlete is presented to
prospective students as something that is of benefit to them,
an opportunity to pursue both their academic and athletic
aspirations on a dual track that gives them stability and
community. However, through my process of developing my app, I
have found that, because of the NCAA's regulations, this title
sometimes acts in hindrance to a student's aspirations that
don't fall so squarely in the distinction of student or
athlete.
I found myself at a disadvantage to nonathletes on campus
who had similar entrepreneurial pursuits because their
developments were allowed to exist outside of the context of
what they contribute to the school.
I understand that this is a nuanced conversation and that
there might be a concern for how the loosening of these
regulations could cause corruption, dishonesty, and an unfair
advantage for colleges who can offer more immediate incentives
than others. However, I urge those on this committee today to
not view the pursuits made by the name, image, and likeness
bill as a final victory for student athletes, but, instead,
view it as a jumping-off point towards a larger goal of
protecting and fostering them.
In tandem with the financial policies that are implemented,
it is important to discuss how to support all athletes within
whatever new system exists. In much of the discourse I have
heard about the changing landscape of name, image, and
likeness, both the public perception and political questions
seem to be centering around the stars of the collegiate sports
world--namely, football players, basketball players, and mostly
men. The concern here is that the lesser lucrative sports are
getting lost in the conversation, and, by extension, so are the
players.
Our unique perspectives, opportunities for sport
participation, and passions outside of the sport are just as
relevant and important as our counterparts in the typical
revenue-generating sports. I know this too well as a female
athlete of color currently playing women's golf, a sport that
isn't the most lucrative or visible.
This is why I feel as though it would be wishful thinking
to believe that someone like me would ever be on an equal
financial playing field as a star quarterback. That is why it
is important to view the evolution of this conversation on a
parallel path with the supplementary support and development of
the student athletes' business acumen.
One of the only ways someone like me can equal the playing
field is by marketing myself, essentially building the
uniqueness of my circumstances as a female golfer of color into
a valuable brand. I also think that the student portion of a
student athlete's identity should be better catered to with
more of an emphasis on business, financial, and economic
literacy so they are better prepared to make decisions and
advocate on their own behalf.
Washington State has been so helpful in this area by
providing resources in student athlete development, personal
branding, financial literacy, and even offering a for-credit
entrepreneurship course catered to the elements of name, image,
and likeness. But it is important that this is something that
is required on a more universal level so that every athlete,
regardless of circumstances, can receive the support that they
need.
In closing, I share my experience today in the hopes that
you will appreciate that the opportunities afforded student
athletes with the use of our name, image, and likeness impacts
all student athletes, whether we are entrepreneurs creating
apps or the starting quarterback.
Having a standard that will support all student athletes is
important, and I hope that today I can provide a unique
perspective as I experienced the new NIL opportunities from an
athletic and entrepreneurial vantage point.
Thank you for the opportunity to share my story.
[The prepared statement of Ms. March follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Ms. Schakowsky. Thank you, Ms. March.
And, Dr. Emmert, you are recognized now for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF MARK EMMERT, Ph.D.

Dr. Emmert. Well, thank you, Madam Chair.
And, before I begin my formal remarks, I do have to comment
that, while my attention is usually focused on younger and
perhaps slightly more athletic athletes than took the field
last night, I wanted to congratulate you all on a very
successful game last night. I----
Ms. Schakowsky. Oh, come on.
Dr. Emmert. It was reported to me that there were no
ambulance calls or any emergencies. It was--it actually was a
very exciting game for all of you. A lot of scoring, a lot of
offense. Defense could use some work, but it was--it was
terrific.
And I think the most important point is that, in a moment
of high tension in Congress and in the Nation, in order to
relax for a moment and enjoy each other, you took to a baseball
field. You played a sport. You competed with each other and had
a good time. And I think that, in so many ways, is the essence
of what college sport is all about and what we aim to
successfully together support going forward.
Having said that, Chairwoman Schakowsky, Ranking Member
Bilirakis, and distinguished members of the subcommittee, thank
you for this opportunity today to talk with you about the
issues around name, image, and likeness, or NIL.
I want to be very clear about one thing upfront, and that
is that the NCAA and its schools fully support the right of
every college athlete to benefit from the use of their name,
image, and likeness, and we firmly believe that there is an
urgent need for Congress to enact a Federal framework that
supports national NIL legislation for all of our college
athletes. This framework needs to put college athletes first.
On that, we all agree.
While it has been exciting for me and others to see college
athletes exploring new financial options in the recent months,
we are also seeing many challenges and concerning trends. These
concerns, if not addressed soon, may be very difficult to
reverse.
They include a lack of a uniform protection for college
athletes across the country around these deals, an increasingly
uneven playing field for athletes exercising their NIL
opportunities, and a lack of transparency around NIL agreements
that can negatively impact both the present and future
prospects for college athletes.
Protections, such as education on the basics of contract
law and financial counseling, vary across the patchwork of
State laws today. Not every college athlete will be approached
by professional service providers and third parties with good
intentions. Without a uniform standard to educate or protect
them from bad actors or exploitative agreements, many athletes
will sign deals that are clearly one-sided and perhaps even
harmful.
Additionally, some athletes are unlikely to be aware of the
tax potential implications of these arrangements and may find
themselves saddled with unanticipated tax bills that they may
be unable to pay. Other students who receive Pell grants or
other student financial aid tied to financial need could
unknowingly lose their eligibility for aid due to the income
they receive from NIL deals. We want every college athlete to
have baseline protections and uniform educational information
at their disposal so they can make informed NIL decisions.
The patchwork of State laws has left college athletes
subject to different standards than their peers in neighboring
States. As of today, 35 States have passed laws, introduced
legislation, or issued executive orders to govern name, image,
and likeness. These statutes and proposed policies have
disparate provisions.
In some cases, they attempt to legislate well beyond the
issue of NIL and turn college athletes into paid professionals
of the school. Even those laws that appear to have similar
intent are written differently and can be interpreted and
enforced differentially depending upon the State.
In these early months, we have seen no effort to structure
or enforce the laws that are in place to guide others in one
direction, leading college athletes to navigate an unequal
playing field depending on where they go to school. While some
NIL-related deals have been disclosed by third-party providers,
there is not a single entity that has a complete picture of the
NIL deals and the parameters that they have been made around.
Similarly, because no mechanism exists to allow for a
transparent disclosure of transactions, there is no way to know
if the arrangement is legitimate or simply a pay-for-play
scheme disguised as NIL.
Further, campus authority and decisionmaking seem to be
shifting away from compliance administrators and others in
athletic departments, making disclosure and monitoring even
more difficult at the local level.
Because we are not seeing the transparency and enforcement
promised by many State laws, these worrisome trends may be
difficult, if not impossible, to reverse without quick
congressional action. A Federal framework must include a
transparent clearinghouse mechanism, not the NCAA, to disclose
NIL transactions while ensuring student privacy as well as the
integrity of the college sports model.
We share the committee's interest in providing all college
athletes with an equal chance to benefit from these
opportunities, if they choose to do so. But we worry that, the
longer this patchwork of laws becomes rooted in college sports,
the more difficult, if not impossible, it is to establish a
national framework that ensures equal treatment of college
athletes regardless of what they play or where they go to
school.
Because of the current legal environment and multiplicity
of State laws, the NCAA alone cannot address this. We need to
do it together.
Thank you for this opportunity to share my perspectives on
this critical issue. We remain very, very proud of the
opportunities that college sports provide to our student
athletes.
To reiterate, as we move forward, we seek three fundamental
notions. One, we need a Federal solution that sets the baseline
of protections for college athletes. Two, we need a law that
provides national uniformity so that schools and students know
what the rules----
Ms. Schakowsky. Your time is way over, so please quickly--
--
Dr. Emmert. I beg your pardon, ma'am.
And we want to ensure transparency that preserves the
integrity of college sports.
I apologize for being over.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Emmert follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Ms. Schakowsky. OK. The gentleman yields back.
And now I want to recognize Mr. Huma for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF RAMOGI HUMA

Mr. Huma. Chairwoman Schakowsky, Ranking Member Bilirakis,
and members of the subcommittee, thank you for inviting me to
testify today. My name is Ramogi Huma. I am a former UCLA
football player and the executive director of the NCPA, the
National College Players Association.
The NCPA was a cosponsor of the California NIL law that was
a catalyst for NIL changes nationwide and has served as the
primary advocate in support of NIL laws in over a dozen States.
And, Chairwoman Schakowsky, I would like to thank you for your
continued support for college athletes' rights and for
introducing broad-based reforms, including the College Athletes
Bill of Rights last year.
College athletes nationwide now have NIL freedoms, so there
is not a need for Congress to act on this issue, but it is
imperative that any Federal law include broad-based reforms,
and the NIL portion of such legislation should not reduce
athletes' NIL freedoms in pursuit of a level playing field that
has never existed.
Federal courts have concluded multiple times that a level
playing field did not exist under NCAA rules that banned NIL
pay. Colleges with the most revenues and wealthiest boosters
have the largest recruiting budgets, hire the best coaches,
build the best of facilities. And, in turn, they land the best
recruits, win the most games, and score the richest TV deals,
allowing them to continue their dominance.
Instead of reducing athletes' NIL freedoms so the NCAA can
pretend competitive equity exists, Congress' NIL efforts should
focus on establishing an entity responsible for the national
certification of athlete representation, preventing conflicts
of interest by restricting colleges from representing their
athletes or arranging NIL deals, and informing college athletes
about issues surrounding NIL.
And any reasonable restraint of trade, like prohibiting NIL
deals from being used to recruit prospective college athletes,
should be done directly by Congress rather than putting the
NCAA above the law with an antitrust exemption.
And, as hard as the NCPA has fought for decades to ensure
college athletes' NIL freedoms, NIL pay is of little importance
compared to other pressing issues. The Energy and Commerce
Committee has jurisdiction in matters of public health and
should act to protect college athletes.
In 2002, I testified before this subcommittee to sound the
alarm about the lack of NCAA enforcement of health and safety
standards after the 2001 deaths of college football players
from Northwestern, Florida, and Florida State. The NCPA asked
Congress and NCAA to protect college athletes, but they didn't.
Between 2000 and 2018, 85 college athletes have died from
college sports activities. In the following years, NCAA and
athletic trainer surveys found 50 percent of Division I
athletic trainers have admitted to returning players with
concussions to the same game and said they were pressured by
coaches to do so.
There have been devastating accounts of suicides among
college athletes who were later determined to have chronic
traumatic encephalopathy, or CTE. It is still not against NCAA
rules to force an athlete with a concussion into the same game.
And, shamefully, it is not against NCAA rules for athletic
personnel to sexually abuse a college athlete.
What I didn't know at the time of my 2002 testimony was
that hundreds upon hundreds of college athletes were being
sexually abused by trainers and doctors at Ohio State,
Michigan, Michigan State, and other schools. College
administrators covered it up, and the athletes had nowhere to
go.
College athletes still have nowhere to go. Just last week,
the U.S. DOJ reported that a team trainer from San Jose State
sexually abused 23 female college athletes over the course of
years.
This Congress must prioritize college athletes' health and
safety. Inaction on this issue would guarantee a lifetime of
paying for too many college athletes abused by sexual predators
and will be a death sentence for others. Just ask Mark McNair,
whose son, Jordan McNair, died during a football workout in
2018 that the University of Maryland president admitted was
negligent.
In addition to the lack of physical and mental health
protections, NCAA sports blatantly discriminates against female
athletes. The NCAA has been exposed for denying female athletes
equal health and safety provisions, nutrition, and training
facilities, among other things. And, despite the enactment of
title IX almost 50 years ago, there are 18,000 more male
athletes in Division I than female athletes.
The $7 billion revenue boom in Division I over the last 16
years was a great opportunity to add female sports. Instead,
athlete participation increased by only two athletes, while the
number of coaches exploded by 1,577. This discrimination
against female athletes in NCAA sports must not be ignored or
allowed to persist.
And, unfortunately, college athletes are too often stuck
with sports-related medical bills, while Black athletes, who
make up the majority of athletes in sports that make up the
most revenue, suffer the lowest graduation rates. Yes, college
sports is in crisis, but it is not because athletes are given
NIL freedoms.
If Congress moves Federal NIL legislation, the NCPA is
asking they not ignore abused, broken, and dead bodies, the
discrimination against female athletes, and other important
matters.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Huma follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Ms. Schakowsky. Thank you, Mr. Huma. The gentleman yields
back.
And now I would like to welcome Dr. Livingstone for your
presentation.

STATEMENT OF LINDA LIVINGSTONE, Ph.D.

Dr. Livingstone. Thank you very much.
I am sorry. I didn't turn on my mike.
Thank you, Chair Schakowsky, Ranking Member Bilirakis, and
members of the subcommittee, for the opportunity to testify on
the issue of name, image, and likeness rights for student
athletes.
As the president of Baylor University, a former Division I
student athlete myself--I am married to a former Division I
student athlete, the mother of a former volleyball player, much
like Ms. Trahan--and who is now a coach at the college level, I
have a--I am deeply invested in making sure the college
athletic experience is a positive one for all student athletes.
At Baylor, we are deeply committed to prioritizing our
student athletes as students first across all 19 of our sports.
We have over 500 student athletes achieving remarkable success
on and off the field, winning national and conference
championships, and consistently leading the Big 12 Conference
in graduation rates. As an institution, we invest over $80,000
per fully scholarshipped student athlete in the form of
tuition, room, nutrition, medical care, and training services.
We also have implemented health and safety protocols that
prioritize our student athletes and a 4-year program to help
them with financial literacy, business education, career
planning, personal branding, leadership, and social
responsibility.
I believe this is a critical time for college athletics as
we are having to rethink the status quo of recent decades due
to numerous changes and challenges, including the Supreme Court
decision in the Alston case, conference realignment, and
changes in State laws.
The current patchwork system of 30-plus State laws is very
confusing for institutions and students and is not transparent.
It will raise conflict of law issues and create risks for
student athletes and institutions who suffer as a result of the
disparity. Such a legal landscape should not be permanent.
I am eager to engage at the NCAA and conference level
regarding these issues, including as a member of the NCAA
Constitution Committee and vice chair of the board of the Big
12 Conference. Now is the time to recommit and reshape college
athletics to better serve the future needs of our students and
our institutions.
Congress has an important role in shaping the future of
college athletics and should establish a uniform national
standard to address the many challenges becoming evident around
NIL legislation.
In our discussion today, I will consistently go back to
three principles that I believe should be the foundation to any
Federal NIL legislation.
The first is that all laws governing NIL for student
athletes should treat them as students first and foremost. More
than 98 percent of student athletes will not compete
professionally, and we must remember we are talking about more
than high-visibility sports like football and basketball.
The second principle is that Federal legislation should
support the current mission of broad sport offerings for a
diverse group of student athletes made possible by revenue
shared from higher-visibility sports and avoid the creation of
inequities in the treatment of men and women under an
employment model.
The third principle is to ensure each institution's mission
is preserved and unique circumstances are recognized,
appreciating that different schools have different resource
levels. For example, we know Baylor athletics is vastly
different than those of hundreds of smaller institutions.
I appreciate the interest of the committee that is giving
this timely issue. As Congress contemplates Federal
legislation, I encourage you to seek a national standard that
includes the following priorities.
First, Federal legislation should preempt all current and
future NIL State laws, which would guarantee that all student
athletes have the same NIL rights regardless of where they live
or study.
Next, the legislation should include clear definitions of
NIL as commercial activity between student athletes and third
parties, not between student athletes and universities. It
should prohibit pay-for-play models operating solely as an
incentive to enroll or remain at an institution as a student
athlete.
Also, Federal legislation should seek to enhance the
student athlete experience and preserve diversity in sport
offerings for men and women and ensure student athletes can
seek qualified advice about the use of their NIL.
Finally, the legislation should include a narrow safe
harbor for entities that comply with the law. Otherwise,
institutions at risk of endless--are at risk of endless
litigation that could threaten our core missions.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify before the
subcommittee today. I look forward to working with you on this
important issue.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Livingstone follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Ms. Schakowsky. Thank you, Dr. Livingston.
And now, Ms. McWilliams, you are now recognized for 5
minutes.

STATEMENT OF JACQIE McWILLIAMS

Ms. McWilliams. Thank you.
Good morning, Chairwoman Schakowsky and Ranking Member
Bilirakis, and members of the subcommittee.
My name is Jacqie McWilliams, and I am in my 10th season as
the commissioner for the CIAA, one of four HBCU conferences,
with the first and oldest conference founded right there in DC
in 1912 and four--in Hampton, Virginia Union, Shaw University,
and Lincoln, PA. We are one of 23 NCAA Division II conferences
comprised of 12 HBCU full-time members, six private, six
public, one associate member headquartered here in North
Carolina.
The CIAA plays a significant role historically and
holistically in this country. They are the third-largest
basketball tournament event in the country that values a rich
legacy of our past, provides leadership in our communities to
bridge the gap in our communities through our championships, in
which our resources support 90 percent of Black and Brown
athletes that tend to be first-generation students who love
their institutions and the CIAA.
I appreciate this invitation to testify today about a topic
that has consumed our industry at all levels. All of us are
benefactors of what we see and don't see weekly on national TV
and platforms. Athletic programs help define our institutions'
culture, reputation, visibility, and revenue potential from
donors and sponsors.
The success and failures of athletic programs impact our
ability to build and sustain without compromising the academic
programs which are primary to the foundation, particularly for
HBCUs, where sports have been the avenue to an education for a
majority of our Black and Brown students.
My concerns today as a former female student athlete and
professional for almost 30 years in this industry is a loss of
the innocence of sports being compromised by revenue that is
not the reality of a majority. This is a transformative moment
in college history where our students can use their NIL as
athletes.
I spent 9.5 years as a member of NCAA championship staff
serving all three divisions. I worked in the membership at both
Division I and II levels and part of the association serving on
several committees, to include the Board of Governors for NIL
and currently the NCAA Gender Equity Task Force.
I can assure you that our challenges of--are diverse--of a
diverse membership is a task by itself, so I understand the
concerns, the public scrutiny, and the challenges we have as
leaders to protect the integrity of college sports.
Currently, the CIAA has students who reside in five
different States with different NIL laws. Although the doors
are wide open for these athletes to explore the market, the
laws are inconsistent, with no uniform guidelines to regulate,
enforce, or support the interests of our students.
I want to ensure you that 3,000 young people--I want to
ensure that 3,000 young people I serve every day, 12 presidents
I report to, and coaches who have committed their lives to
young adults, and administrators who are doing their best to
give these athletes lifetime memories at their institutions are
more concerned about the athletic achievement, health and
safety, and academic opportunities afforded and less concerned
about the inequities that are presented because of the
inconsistencies of laws we cannot control.
Our students' visibility may be different than what you see
weekly, but the aches, pains, desire to win, mental health
concerns, academic goals, and dreams to be leaders and
entrepreneurs are the same.
So I ask that we pause just a moment to understand the
differences of who we are amongst our institutions and
conferences, that the CIAA and majority of us do not have the
same level of resources. I agree that the enormous revenue and
high financial gains for the most high-profile and visible
institutions and their benefactors are concerning. Those
scenarios are not the reality in most of our conferences and
institutions.
I believe that is why we are in this position. Resource
disparities already exist amongst our institutions. Thus, any
Federal bills that attempt to legislate on financial resources
outside of NIL will negatively impact Division II. And,
honestly, any additional financial constraints could
potentially eliminate our athletic programs and our
conferences.
I support giving our students the best opportunity to use
their talent. I wish I had the same opportunity as a student
athlete. So let me be clear: Most of us have no interest in
mandates that hinder the opportunities, but only a framework
that provides a level playing field to support their
intercollegiate experience and to give our coaches and
administrators a fair advantage to recruit, educate, address
title IX implications, and to support their educational and
entrepreneurial experience, which is the foundation to who we
are specifically at HBCUs.
I pray, in the continued dialogue, we don't compromise the
beauty of why I chose to work in this industry, why I love to
work for the CIAA. We thrive best with fair rules and
guidelines, and, in this case for college sports, we need to
prohibit pay-for-play, guardrails for collegiate recruiting,
and protections for standards of higher education and title IX.
It is quite disappointing that we are in this place of not
being able to legislate and govern ourselves as an
organization, but now here we are. I hope that the concerns I
have shared leading a smaller conference with HBCU institutions
will create opportunities that will be in the best interests
for all and not just for a few.
As a Division II conference, we need a level playing field
so we are not behind once again.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Ms. McWilliams follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Ms. Schakowsky. Thank you, Ms. McWilliams.
We have now concluded with the witness opening statements.
At this time, we will move to Member questions. Each Member
will have 5 minutes to ask questions of the witnesses, and that
includes their answers.
And I will start by recognizing myself for 5 minutes. I
want to begin with--I have a bunch of questions, so, if you
could keep your answers somewhat brief, I would appreciate it.
But, Mr. Huma, I want to ask--I think I know your ultimate
answer, but I would like you to discuss, is there a fundamental
power imbalance between the collegiate athletes and the
universities, conferences, and athletic institutions that may
make players vulnerable to exploitation?
Mr. Huma. Thank you for that question.
Absolutely. And I think that is why we are all here at the
end of the day. Those people--those constituents you have
mentioned, the stakeholders, have basically colluded, used
their monopoly power, cartel power to leverage themselves in a
way that denies those athletes freedoms and rights under the
law. And that notion was upheld by the Supreme Court 9-0. So,
at the core, much of the exploitation is--are antitrust
violations that were made possible by the illegal collusion
amongst the conferences and the schools and the NCAA.
Ms. Schakowsky. Let me also ask you, beyond limitations on
entering into name, image, and likeness, NIL, agreements, how
has this power imbalance--how has this power imbalance affected
college athletes?
Mr. Huma. Even down to their health and safety. You know,
the power imbalance is a lot of--is caused in a lot of ways--
for so many athletes who are being abused over years and years
who don't have a way to speak up, there has been no viable way
for them to get justice as well as actual compensation.
You know, I think the general counsel at NLRB made very
clear that college athletes have not been permitted by the
school and have been handled by the school in the way they
direct them away from their labor rights under labor law,
which, you know, the laws of the country designed to give
people a voice in the workplace--and college athletes--the
combination of the collusion, the money interests that are
there, the conflicts of interest, and the lack of labor rights
have kind of created these problems.
So, absolutely, the college athletes need intervention.
Congress can do that, and we want to make sure that they
don't--Congress does not look past the more critical issues.
Ms. Schakowsky. Thank you. I want to--I have another one
for you that--in your testimony, you suggested that Congress
should look beyond focusing only on NIL issues legislation. So
what other protections should we be considering for college
athletes?
Mr. Huma. Well, I know there is a lot of disagreement on
some of the financial issues, but I think that everyone in
Congress should agree that college athletes should not be
subject to harm.
So we need real health and safety enforcement in college
sports from a third party. We need to make sure that college
athletes aren't being stuck with sports-related medical
expenses. We need to make sure that female athletes finally
achieve equality in college sports. We need to protect
scholarships as far as academics.
As I mentioned, $7 billion pledged into a system: Why isn't
some of that money being redirected to make sure college
athletes actually complete their degrees and have health and
safety enforcement and scholarship protections?
You still have a situation in NCAA sports where a player
can lose their scholarship if they are permanently injured. A
school can choose to not renew that scholarship.
So there are a number of issues that strike at the core of
NCAA sports that should not be ignored.
Ms. Schakowsky. OK. Thank you so much.
Dr. Livingstone, we all know about title X that prohibits
discrimination. Will the NIL deals have an effect on equity in
college athletics when it comes to men and women?
Dr. Livingstone. I do think that there are some real risks
and impact potentially on women in college athletics depending
on how this plays out.
In some ways, the way NIL is playing out now for women
athletes is more like it is really intended to be. We know
women oftentimes are actually more active on social media than
male students, both the student athletes and regular students.
And so they are really benefiting in the ways that we intend,
as you heard Cami talking about in her conversation.
Where we are seeing those that are questionable, pay-for-
play, are really with football and basketball, the more high-
profile sports.
I think, over time, where you also will see the greater
impact and a greater potential negative impact on women
athletes is if we move to more of an employment model. And, if
you start moving resources to those individuals that generate
the revenue, that revenue in those high-revenue sports is what
supports our women's sports. It supports our nonrevenue male
sports as well.
And so, if we reallocated resources away from those--to
those two sports that generate the most, we will run the risk
of seeing cuts in those sports or reductions in the number of
both men's nonrevenue sports and then, ultimately, potentially
women's sports, and I think a move to potentially offer fewer
sports if we start talking about reallocating revenue in
certain ways, even far beyond the impact on NIL.
Ms. Schakowsky. That is worth a conversation.
And my time has expired, and now I recognize Mr. Bilirakis,
the subcommittee vice chair--excuse me, I always do that--I
always want to make him----
Mr. Bilirakis. I am just the ranking member.
Ms. Schakowsky. Yes, yes. The ranking member for 5 minutes
of questions.
Mr. Bilirakis. Thank you, Madam Chair. I appreciate that.
Yes, this is really good testimony. Thank you all for your
testimony today.
I am concerned the longer Congress continues to stall, the
integrity of college athletes will diminish. And I am really
concerned about that. And student athletes will end up being
hurt by the lack of clear standards. I think everyone,
basically, testified to that. We all agree on that. So, you
know, we need to pass a bill as soon as possible, in my
opinion.
But, Dr. Emmert, do you believe the current patchwork of
State laws with inconsistent NIL reporting and disclosure
requirements threaten the viability and integrity of college
athletics?
Dr. Emmert. Well, thank you, Ranking Member. Yes, I believe
it most certainly does predominantly because of the issues that
were described earlier around the potential for the--several
things to occur. First, that students are being treated
differentially right now across the landscape. They don't know
what the rules of engagement are, they don't know what their
rights and opportunities are.
Secondly, we know that because there is not any enforcement
mechanism or clear definitions, some of the arrangements that
are being made appear to be moving over toward more of a pay-
for-play model aimed solely at recruitment of athletes from one
institution to another. That leaves both individual athletes at
schools in a disadvantaged state and it also competitively
advantages or disadvantages other schools based upon their
geography and a variety of other factors.
And then the last piece is that, as these arrangements move
more and more toward institutionally based rather than third-
party based, they do in fact run the risk of converting student
athletes into employees. And all three of those things are very
serious threats to college sport.
Mr. Bilirakis. Thank you very much.
Next question is for Ms. McWilliams. As a former college
athlete yourself, you have the unique understanding on how
student athletes want clearer standards and want to maintain
the current integrity of collegiate athletics, I believe,
especially for nonrevenue-generating sports. If Congress
legislates in a manner that changes the current college
athletics model, will this impact certain athletes more than
others? And do you have thoughts you would want to share on the
important distinction between being an employee of a school
versus a representative of the school?
Ms. McWilliams, please.
Ms. McWilliams. Yes. Thank you for the question.
Absolutely. I think there will be impact on nonrevenue sports.
I mean, if you think about the 1,100 schools that exist in the
NCAA, only 25 are revenues. Most of our schools, Division II
and Division III, we are not even exceeding our expenses each
year. So there are concerns.
We need to make sure that whatever is put in place, that it
is in alignment with our budgets and the resources that we have
at our institutions. I am concerned that if we don't, you know,
our schools won't be able to handle and manage the expectations
of covering additional healthcare or covering additional pay
and covering all those other things, that that is just not what
we were designed to do.
I also believe that our institution's revenue allows for
championships and all the things that we do, football and
basketball that you see and heard our President Livingstone
say, that those resources support all of our other sports that
are [inaudible].
And so the distinction between, you know, the employee and
the representative--I was given access to an education and I
don't believe that is commonly defined as employment as a
student athlete. I think going to college is a choice and an
opportunity that we have, but I think as administrators we have
a responsibility to give the best access and opportunity to
succeed. An NLI is a great opportunity for our students to use
their name, image, and likeness, and to build upon that. And as
administrators and leaders, we need to give them the right
framework and the opportunity to be successful.
We are asking 18-year-olds to manage, to be entrepreneurs,
asking them to do things and create deals for themselves with
no guidelines. And so I think pay-for-play is a concern for us,
but I definitely think the opportunity to help these young
people to be successful as student athletes and not employees
is in the best interest for college athletics.
Mr. Bilirakis. Thank you very much.
Dr. Livingstone, as more and more college athletes are
approached to receive compensation for their NIL--I know this
is already a feature of Florida's law--but do you think
universities should provide educational tools or classes to
help students understand the dynamics of signing contracts and
what that means for their future? And can you give us a sense
of what you are providing to your student athletes?
Dr. Livingstone. Absolutely. It is really critical, because
this is putting another level of pressure on our student
athletes that many of them are not prepared for. In the State
law in Texas, it does require 5 hours of financial literacy
training, and schools are required to provide that for our
student athletes. At Baylor, we have a very comprehensive
program in place. Even prior to NIL, we had a program we called
Baylor Built that had principles related to career development,
leadership development, community service, and we have been
added to that now that we have these NIL responsibilities.
So we kind of have three pillars in that program. The first
one is really a monitoring system in helping students report to
us. The Texas law also requires that students report to us what
they are doing, and we want to make sure that, as they do it,
it is in compliance with the State law, with Federal law, and
make sure that they stay eligible to participate at the NCAA
level. So we have to educate on that level.
We also have to help them navigate the financial aspects of
it and give them back kind of an education, that personal
branding, how do you position yourself well. We have got a
wonderful program that helps student athletes know how to build
their personal profile on social media to actually enhance
their value.
And then we do a lot of work on financial literacy. We have
a program that combines work from our law school, our business
school, our entrepreneurship program, where we help students
understand what they need to do to get the right legal advice,
the right financial advice, and so on to be successful.
So we already had a framework for that, and then we have
built upon that for NIL. But there are a lot of institutions in
this country that do not have the resources to build out that
kind of program. I do think it is an opportunity also for there
to be--if there is a national NIL law that provides some
consistency in what is expected, then there could also be sort
of national educational programs that would be accessible to
all institutions, regardless of your resource level, and it
wouldn't rely as much on the actual resources an individual
school had to be able to provide that support.
Mr. Bilirakis. Well, thank you very much for that. I
appreciate it. Very informative. Thank you.
Ms. Schakowsky. The ranking member of the subcommittee
yields back.
And now I recognize the chairman of the full committee, Mr.
Pallone, for 5 minutes of questions.
Mr. Pallone. Thank you, Chairwoman Schakowsky.
The blood, sweat, and tears of college athletes, along with
their commitment and quests for greatness, has fueled college
sports into becoming one of the most watched and profitable
sports industries in the country, but until now, the athletes
have been excluded from profiting from their efforts.
So I want to begin by asking each of the witnesses a just
yes-or-no question. Do you believe that Congress should
establish a Federal framework granting college athletes the
right to earn compensation for the use of their name, image,
and likeness?
Just yes or no, and I will just start with Ms. March and go
through the list.
Ms. March?
Ms. March. Yes.
Mr. Pallone. Thank you.
And then, Ramogi Huma?
Mr. Huma. And I am sorry it is a little longer, but yes, if
it is attached to broad-based reform.
Mr. Pallone. Thank you.
Dr. Emmert?
Dr. Emmert. Yes, I do.
Mr. Pallone. Dr. Livingstone?
Dr. Livingstone. Yes.
Mr. Pallone. And I didn't get to Jacqie McWilliams.
Ms. McWilliams. Yes.
Mr. Pallone. All right. I think that was everybody. Well,
thank you.
Then let me go to Ms. McWilliams. College athletes are also
supposed to be college students. How do we open financial doors
for athletes but also ensure they get a meaningful education
that will equip them for careers, which for most will be
outside of professional sports?
Ms. McWilliams. That is a great question. I think that is a
role that we play in intercollegiate athletics anyway,
particularly in our conference or most of our conference, is to
make sure that we are setting up our students, not just as
athletes, but we are setting them up to be prepared beyond
that.
You know, as a former coach and also administrator on
campus, you recruit students because you want to give them the
best opportunities to succeed and to play the game that they
love. I think about myself as a former student athlete. I chose
to go to Hampton for that same opportunity, but during the
whole entire way, I was guided and given resources to help
support the opportunity to be prepared to be in this seat right
here.
I have never paid for college, and that is a blessing not
to have to do that and put that burden on my family that
couldn't afford to do so. I often say that I used Hampton as
maybe people will say that Hampton, or colleges use our student
athletes and make money off of that for them. I think it is a
two-way street in how we look at this. And the blessing is that
I got prepared in the best way, career opportunity, connections
outside the community, community service, that we all want our
student athletes to be a part of. Opportunities for student
athletes are so grand and broad-based. Those stories are not
often told that you don't hear.
And so I hope that as we continue to lead in this industry,
that we provide these opportunities for our students to have
NLI, but we also give them the support they need so that they
can be successful entrepreneurs beyond playing the game.
Mr. Pallone. Thank you.
Mr. Huma, can you please share your thoughts? In
professional sports, there have been countless horror stories
of unsuspecting players entering unfavorable NIL deals or being
financially exploited by unscrupulous actors. You know, I just
was going to ask you to comment on that, if you would.
Mr. Huma. Sure. And that is one of the risks with the
freedoms that have been opened up, and they are risks that even
the pro athletes are not immune from. I think that when you
have freedoms like this, there is always going to be that risk.
Most States have in their laws that athlete agents have to
be certified by their State. So that is one protection. But,
again, if included with broad-based reform, I think the Federal
legislation would be positive to include standards for agent
representation and some representation contracts.
Mr. Pallone. Thank you.
And, Dr. Livingstone, are you concerned that college
athletes may be financially exploited by unscrupulous actors?
Dr. Livingstone. I think it is certainly a very likely risk
in this kind of a situation. You have young people, many of
them from backgrounds where they don't have that kind of
experience. They may not have families that have lawyers and
attorneys that they can turn to, and very likely there will be
people in the industry that want to take advantage of them.
One example I heard--and this might not even be
unscrupulous--but you could have a young female student athlete
that gets $5,000 for promoting some brand when she comes to
college. She ends up being an all-American volleyball player.
She has got this long-term agreement on her name, image, and
likeness that she didn't know any better to do when she moved
to college. And then when she graduates, she can play in the
Olympics, she could go play professionally in Europe, and her
name, image, and likeness might be worth a lot more money, but
she made a bad deal as a freshman in college and didn't get
good advice.
So I think we have to be very, very careful, and there
needs to be good guidance around how student athletes pick
agents or lawyers or accountants, attorneys, but also
protections that--maybe even some screening mechanisms for who
can even be working with these student athletes, that we know
that they are legitimate actors and are really looking out for
the best interest of their clients.
Mr. Pallone. Thank you. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Ms. Schakowsky. I now recognize the ranking member of the
full committee, Mrs. Rodgers, for 5 minutes.
Mrs. Rodgers. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Cami, I want to thank you again for sharing your
experiences with us. It is great to see you as a Washington
State student athlete finding success both on and off the golf
course. I want to just ask if you would elaborate a little bit
on the NIL rules and what a level playing field will mean to
you as far as helping you succeed as captain of Washington
State University's women's golf team, but also as an app
developer and your entrepreneurial aspirations.
Ms. March. Yes. Thank you so much, Mrs. McMorris Rodgers,
for your question. I think a level playing field is really
important. When I was going through my recruiting process,
there were a bunch of factors that I was thinking about,
whether it be location, who would give me the best education,
the best program for me to succeed at, and I think adding
another layer when it comes to NIL is just hard to navigate. A
lot of athletes are recruited before they are 18, so having to
make that type of decision so young is just so hard.
So I think a level playing field really will help students
navigate that process and choose the best institution for them
athletically and for their educational pursuits.
Mrs. Rodgers. Thank you. Would you just speak a little bit
more to just where we are today? Because now we are--you are
free to pursue these opportunities, but you were talking about
the importance of a set of rules to be beneficial to you and
your peers around the country as you think about pursuing your
passions to be entrepreneurial, but then not running afoul of
rules based upon what might be going on in a particular State.
Ms. March. I feel as though, when I was going through my
process of developing my app, there were a lot of hurdles that
I had to navigate compared to my other fellow students who had
the same entrepreneurial mindset. So there are waivers that I
had to go through with NCAA, a bunch of different things that I
felt like made my process a little bit more difficult. So I
think this standard and level playing field will really be
helpful to student athletes who have aspirations of doing
something entrepreneurial.
Mrs. Rodgers. Thank you. Very good.
Ms. McWilliams, I wanted to ask you, recognizing that over
half the States right now have some kind of NIL law or
executive order that has taken effect allowing college athletes
to have compensation for their NIL, I also note that there's
additional States that are working on NIL legislation in their
State legislatures. You bring a lifetime of perspective to this
issue, both as an athlete and then also in your current
position.
Would you speak to how you see this playing out for student
athletes when there's differing incentives for recruitment?
Ms. McWilliams. Yes. Thank you for that question and just
the acknowledgment of being in the industry. We are seeing it
now. We have three athletes currently in our conference that
have taken advantage or had the opportunity to sign a deal, two
in North Carolina and one in Virginia, and we are excited for
them. But what I can say is that I can see that there could be
some recruiting wars here with the different State laws and
accesses and opportunities based on the different laws in our
different States. It is in five States right now, and in the
five States, I think we have one of our States has not--their
legislature hasn't gone through yet, another State does not
have anything quite yet, and the other three do.
I think the inequities that this could cause and the
opportunities for recruitment and how student athletes will
seek the better opportunity to go to one State or another or
one school or another based on what is available for them to do
right now. And that is what we don't want to see. We already
see the inequity across all of our divisions. And there is
inequity just because we got small schools, large schools, but
we want to make sure that there is evidence-based law--baseline
laws that keep at least a level playing field in a way that our
students are not competing--or recruiting is not competing, and
they don't have to make choices because they think they are
going to have a better advantage and opportunity from one State
to another.
So, again, we applaud the opportunity for this to happen.
But there is some concern if there's no guardrails to protect
the recruiting and the integrity, but also the star student
athletes who need it as they are trying to build their own
entrepreneurship.
I hope I answered the question.
Mrs. Rodgers. Thank you. That was good. An important
insight, I think, especially for female and minority athletes,
if you wanted to add anything in particular?
Ms. McWilliams. Yes. I mean, I--again, you know, I serve
underserved institutions. We have less resources, but somehow
we still make access and opportunity available for our students
through our sponsors, through our championship. And to give
them access and opportunity on this front, I think is great. We
want our Black and Brown students at our HBCs and across the
world to do well. I think we have our own challenges, the most
difficult to compete with some of our majority institutes in
our States. And so whatever we can do to make, again, a level
playing field for women and for our men, that is important to
me.
Mrs. Rodgers. Thank you.
Thank you, everyone, for being here. I have more questions,
but I will save them for another time.
I yield back.
Ms. Schakowsky. I thank the gentlewoman for yielding back.
And now it is my pleasure to yield to my colleague from the
State of Illinois, Congressman Bobby Rush, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Rush. I really want to commend the witnesses--can you
hear me?
Ms. Schakowsky. You are on, but it is very soft, so speak
up.
Mr. Rush. I want to thank you, Madam Chairman. Can you hear
me?
Ms. Schakowsky. Yes.
Mr. Rush. All right. I want to thank you for this
outstanding hearing. And I want to commend the witnesses all
along for your extraordinary testimony.
Mr. Huma, your riveting testimony and your very, very
profound perspective is commendable. And I just want you to
address the issue of inducements to lure high school recruits
and college transfers to a particular university or
institution. What can we as Congress do to prevent NIL
agreements from being used as inducements at the high school
level and at the college transfer level?
Mr. Huma. Sure. And thank you for that question. And, you
know, following some of the pro models, it is kind of a
parallel with free agency, right? In the pro leagues, if there
is a free agent, teams have to compete, but they cannot arrange
name, image, or likeness deals or endorsement deals as a part
of an offer. So it is standard practice to not allow that to
happen, and it is also a restraint of trade to not allow that
to happen.
And in my testimony, I mentioned that that could be a
reasonable restraint of trade, and that if Congress wanted to
get involved, it can prohibit that directly as a matter of law
rather than give the NCAA an antitrust exemption to do so.
The NCAA should not operate above the law whatsoever. The
NCAA is a chronic antitrust violator and has been harming
college athletes over this issue for many years. It cannot be
trusted with powers like that to operate over the law. So
Congress can implement that. That is being done. And, actually,
I believe every single State that has passed a law or an
executive order, that is already in place on those States'
legislation.
Mr. Rush. I want to also ask you, can you elaborate on why
you feel as though the NIL doesn't really go far enough to
protect the health, safety, and welfare of student athletes? Do
you have any more to add? Can you elaborate on it?
Mr. Huma. Sure. NIL is an important economic milestone, and
I think it has helped bust through some of the cartel
practices, the illegal practices economically. But there is
going to be a relatively few percentage of athletes that
actually are able to capitalize that on any meaningful way, but
they deserve equal freedoms, you know. For all the advocacy we
have had, we have always said every athlete deserves equal
freedoms. It doesn't mean they are going to be guaranteed an
NIL deal.
But when you look at athletes--you know, the NCAA was
punishing athletes over these issues. You sign an autograph,
you get punished, you get suspended, you get demonized. But if
those same athletes were to die in a hazardous workout or be
sexually assaulted, we have gone--we have called on the NCAA
for decades to address it, and they have not.
Health and safety is a top priority. Chronic sports
injuries is a real thing. There's been surveys done. Over 50
percent of Division I athletes across all sports will have a
chronic college sports injury with no support. NCAA sports is
not helping pay for medical expenses for players who are broken
up down the line. There are many more pressing issues, and
these issues should not be ignored by Congress.
Mr. Rush. I certainly can attest to that. Back in 2010,
when I was the chairman of the subcommittee, we had a
roundtable, and we had an athlete from the University of
Oklahoma who was injured, lost his scholarship. His poor family
was saddled with the medical costs, and the university washed
its hand of the whole incident, and now the athlete and his
family are still suffering economic duress. So I really
appreciate your testimony.
Dr. Emmert, I want to ask you a question. I am concerned
about the impact of Eastwood on our Nation and our Nation's
sports future. Do you have any thoughts about how Eastwood
would impact the NCAA and college sport and organized sports in
general?
Ms. Schakowsky. So Mr. Rush is out of time, but if you
could quickly answer his question, I will let you go.
Dr. Emmert. Yes. I think if I understood your question,
Congressman, properly, I think one of the most important
elements of college sport than what we can provide for young
men and young women is indeed to prepare them for their future
life and their future professional careers. And we must make
sure, whether it is their physical and mental health and well-
being or their academic preparations, they are prepared for
that future.
Mr. Rush. Thank you. I yield back, Madam Chair.
Ms. Schakowsky. The gentleman yields back.
And now, Mr. Latta, I recognize you for 5 minutes.
Mr. Latta. Well, thank you very much, Madam Chair. And
thanks to our witnesses for being with us today. Really
appreciate it.
Modernized rules are needed to meet the reality facing
today's student athletes. The new media landscape has
transformed these students into social media influencers that
are seeking to utilize their name, image, and likeness in paid
advertising. While the United States, including my home State
of Ohio, has set up a framework of name, image, and likeness
rules, a Federal standard is necessary.
A patchwork of State laws creates the very real possibility
that student athletes in different States will be governed by
different rules that relate it to their NIL. This means that
colleges in certain States have advantages over their
counterparts across the Nation. All college athletes have and
should have an equal chance to benefit from these
opportunities, regardless of the size of their school or the
sport that they play. It is also vitally important that we
preserve the collegiate model and integrity of recruiting
process.
Dr. Livingstone, thanks again for being with us today. In
your testimony, you mentioned that NIL should not be used as an
incentive to attend one school over another, and as I
mentioned, especially when you think about from our very large
institutions to medium to small colleges and universities.
What guardrails would you suggest that should be put in
place around booster or other third-party activity when it
comes to recruitment?
Dr. Livingstone. I think where we have to think about the
guardrails is maybe less about who is doing it but what they
are paying student athletes to do. Because I think when you
start thinking about boosters, we certainly want to be careful
who is doing it and why they are doing it, but I think it is
more about what we are paying them to do.
And, you know, like Cami's app, that is a perfectly
appropriate activity. It is really unrelated in many ways to
her role as a student athlete, whereas in other circumstances
we are seeing situations where every member of a sports team is
getting paid X dollars just for being on that sports team.
Well, that looks very much like an inducement to actually play
sports at that institution, because if they leave that
institution, that name, image, and likeness payment will not
follow them. They only get it because they are at that
institution.
Now, does it matter that that payment came from a booster
versus it came from a nonbooster? Probably not. What matters
is, you know, the intent behind what they were doing. Now, that
is harder to legislate, I know, but I think it is something
that we have got to give some careful consideration to.
We have seen situations where, allegedly, a company was
paying for name, image, and likeness for a student athlete in a
smaller market at a smaller institution, and they are
encouraging that student athlete to transfer to a school in a
larger market so they will be more valuable to the person that
is paying them. Is that company a booster of that larger
institution? It might be, which would, you know, be
challenging. It might not be. It might just be for them----
Mr. Latta. Can I interrupt you just for a second because
what you just said there. So if you are transferring, let's
say, from a smaller institution to a--let's just say you are
going to a large Division I school, and this student has
already paid or has been paid for that NIL in a contract for
having been at the smaller school, but then what you are saying
then is that that larger institute--or are they going to go to
the large institution, whoever paid them for it, is going to
make a lot more money out of that likeness than earlier, as we
have heard from some of the other testimony before?
Dr. Livingstone. Potentially. And then maybe pay that
student athlete more if they move to the larger institution. So
there's some really clear incidents happening now that look
very much like pay-for-play that we need to find ways to put
parameters.
And then the other piece of it is the enforcement piece of
it. Because right now, many of the State laws do not have an
enforcement mechanism in them. So they say you can't do pay-
for-play, but there is no enforcement mechanism when these
kinds of issues arise to be able to look at them to see if they
actually violate pay-for-play. So that is the other reason a
national standard and some national enforcement mechanism would
be important, so that there is not just consistency in the
standards, but there is also consistency in the enforcement.
Mr. Latta. Thank you.
Dr. Emmert, now that these State laws have been implemented
and student athletes in all sports have entered into million-
dollar NIL contract agreements, you mentioned in your testimony
that these agreements have the ability to provide a long-term
positive impact on the students; however, it is important that
these students are given the tools to ensure they aren't taken
advantage of by these exploitive agreements.
Could you speak to some of the conversations you have had
to achieve that end?
Dr. Emmert. Yes. Thank you, Congressman. I think the most
important issues are those that Dr. Livingstone was just
talking about: that there is clarity about what the
relationship is, that there is education underneath--that
undergirds all of this so that students know what to look for
and not look for, what a model agreement should look like, what
they are committing themselves to, the time span of that
commitment, the flexibility of that commitment. We need to have
those policies in place so that they can be uniform across the
country rather than having to have different ones in each of
the various States.
Secondly, we need to make sure that there is sufficient
transparency, not a deal-by-deal arrangement, but transparency
so that there is an understanding of the kinds of arrangements
that are being made so that you can get at a better
understanding of who is doing what, when, and where to the
points that, again, Dr. Livingstone was just making.
If we have those two things in place, plus some
standardization of the structure that Congress could put in
place, it would go a long, long way to supporting young men and
young women in doing these deals.
Mr. Latta. Well, thank you.
Madam Chair, my time is expired, and I yield back.
Ms. Schakowsky. The gentleman yields back.
And now I recognize Congresswoman Castor for 5 minutes.
Ms. Castor. Well, thank you, Chair Schakowsky, for calling
this hearing. Thank you to all of our witnesses for appearing
today.
On July 1, the State of Florida's name, image, and likeness
law went into effect. It joined about 14 other States, and
there are many more on the way. Florida's law states that
compensation may not be provided in exchange for athletic
performance or attendance at a particular institution and may
only be provided by a third party unaffiliated with the school.
I want to see if you all think that is the right approach.
I am very interested in the discussion about abuses in
recruiting that Ms. McWilliams highlighted as recruiting wars
and in Representative Rush's question talking about
inducements, and Mr. Huma weighed in on that and, Dr.
Livingstone, your last explanation.
I would like to ask Ms. March, as a student athlete, what--
is that the right approach? And how do you think this could be
used to benefit students? But give us some advice on how to
avoid those recruiting abuses.
Ms. March. Yes. Thank you for your question. What I think
of the new NIL, I think of how now entities have access to us.
I have seen on my Instagram and various social media accounts
how people and different companies are asking me to post things
and be a part of their brand.
So, for me, my concern is more about access to the
students. They don't know how to navigate those conversations,
how they could potentially find themselves in a situation that
is less than ideal. So, hopefully, that answers.
Ms. Castor. Thank you.
And, Dr. Livingstone, how do we ensure that third parties
are truly unaffiliated?
Dr. Livingstone. Well, you would have to have a clear
definition of what it means to be affiliated. I know we talk
within the NCAA guidelines, we actually have definitions of who
a booster is. And it is very clear. You know, there is really
clear guidance about who a booster is and what they can and
can't do in association with dealing with student athletes, and
that is something we have to monitor and pay attention to.
So I think you would have to have--and I don't know whether
the Florida law provides any guidance on that. That portion of
the law sounds like the direction you would like to see
something go on a national level, but I think you would have to
have a clear affiliation on what it means to be affiliated.
Really, it goes back to the question earlier about is it OK for
boosters and supporters of an institution. I think you need to
understand what you think an affiliated organization is or an
individual, and then make it really clear what that is, and
then--so that student athletes and institutions know--and then
have the right enforcement mechanisms in place to help keep
everybody kind of within those guardrails.
Ms. Castor. That is back to who should enforce this.
Dr. Livingstone. Right.
Ms. Castor. And, Mr. Huma, you heard Dr. Livingstone say,
OK, we need some kind of national enforcement entity,
something. What is your view on that?
Mr. Huma. Again, I think as apparent, a broad-based reform,
including NIL, would be what we would support. And if there is
going to be--the type of enforcement that is needed would be
third party, not the NCAA, again. I think the legislation would
have to direct--guide directly.
But in terms of boosters, getting back to my opening
remarks. You're saying boosters are paying for the best
coaches, best facilities in order to win recruiting wars. There
is already a recruiting war. So, you know, that was my point.
They are already competing--or if it is an unlevel playing
field. You know, Florida International makes about $30 million,
$32 million in revenue. Well, the University of Florida has
about $140 million in revenue, and they are both in that FBS
division, and they are competing, but it is very lopsided. That
was long before NIL.
And the boosters can be a particular sort of revenue for
the athletes. The money is flowing in order to win recruits
anyways. That is what they have been doing. That is what they
are doing to boost the program. So to draw the line in the sand
and say, wait, we are not going to let athletes benefit because
of competitive level playing fields and competitive equities or
we are going to allow the boosters to go ahead and tip the
scales anyway by paying out, you know, the biggest coaches,
best coaches, and having the best facilities in order to
attract those recruits is something that I would advocate
against.
I worked very closely in Florida with Chip LaMarca. We
tried to get that out, but the legislature implemented that in
Texas----
Ms. Castor. Thank you.
I have one final quick question for Dr. Emmert. There are
many college athletes who are international students. They are
on F1 visas, but these visas prohibit student athletes from
NIL. Does the NCAA have a position on this?
Dr. Emmert. Well, we certainly--first of all, we recognize
the problem that that can create. If an F1 visa individual is
now being considered an employee rather than a student, does
that change their status? And one of the issues that would need
to be addressed in Federal legislation is clarification around
that.
From my own personal perspective, I would like to see a
model where those international students could participate in
NIL opportunities just like national students do, but they
would have to be very, very careful. That also is one of the
bits of confusion in all of this that needs to get fixed.
Ms. Castor. Thank you very much.
Ms. Schakowsky. The gentlelady yields back.
And now I recognize Mr. Guthrie for 5 minutes.
Mr. Guthrie. Thank you, Madam Chair. I really appreciate
it. And thanks for being here today.
And I know we are talking NIL, but, you know, I am glad
that we are doing the cost of attendance for players. If you
are an athlete, you can't work. A lot of students work to have
walking around or pocket money, and if you are an athlete, you
can't. And if you don't come from a family of means, I mean,
you can't even go home for other sides. So that was a good move
moving forward.
And I will tell you, the University of Kentucky, who makes
more money in football than they do in basketball, actually
uses--is now using athletic money to fund other academic
programs. So it is not just--when you say all this big money
going to athletics, it is not going for profit, it is going in
to spend other parts of the universities, and we have to
configure that.
And then Northwest University, I can tell you almost to the
penny, but I will tell you, it is north of $250,000 for a full
ride scholarship for 4 years. So, I mean, that is not small
change either. But NIL--and I want to--Dr. Emmert or Dr.
Livingstone, since you are here in front of me, but we are
talking about pay-for-play. Here is a scenario. Say I am Brett
Guthrie Barbecue in Bowling Green, Kentucky, and I want to hire
the five Western Kentucky basketball starters to come on Monday
night to talk about the week ahead or the week past and the
games. Coaches do that all the time and sign deals to do that.
They come to my restaurant. They get to come to my
restaurant because they are a starter for Western Kentucky
University. That is the value their name brings, and the value
they bring to my business is that they are the starters for
Western Kentucky University. They fill up my restaurant. So it
is absolutely name, likeness, and image in the purest sense of
form, but some people are going to say that is pay-for-play.
Because let's say I used to play for Western and want to go to
Lexington or UK, and I will say, ``Well, I don't have a
restaurant in Lexington, our contract is over with.'' I mean,
how do you define--I mean, we are having all these big
principles, and I know the NCAA all year was trying to put
something together and it gets to how do you define this stuff.
So how would you define pay-for-play? If your name,
likeness, and image is valuable because you are the starting
quarterback for Alabama so somebody wants to pay you a million
dollars for that, is that not pay-for-play? And is that wrong
because this young man can bring in a million bucks because he
is a great athlete and he is at the school that is valuable to
the brand? I mean, how do you police this?
Dr. Emmert. It is a very important question, Congressman. I
think there's two elements to it that can allow sensible
enforcement. The first is this notion of transparency,
understanding what that relationship is so that you know--you
don't need to know all the business details of it but you know
what that relationship is and whether it is the institution or
this third party that we have been talking about that Congress
could establish to do just that. That gives you, first of all,
some understanding of the transaction so that everybody----
Mr. Guthrie. But doesn't that just open you up to--let's
say Western Kentucky says, you know, ``I gave you $500,000 last
year, but I am going to hire these players so I am not going to
give you any money this year because I would rather spend it on
players.'' Because if I do, then I am subject to some kind of
transparency or litigation or something like that, even though
you are doing it all for the right reasons.
Dr. Emmert. Yes, I understand. And I agree with you. So it
could be, first of all, transparent. And then, secondly, to
what Dr. Livingstone was saying a bit earlier, it needs to be
clear what the relationship is. What is the student athlete
delivering? Are they legitimately delivering something of
value?
In the scenario you just described, I would not see that as
pay-for-play. I would see that as a student athlete providing a
perfectly good business utilization as you would with anybody
else who is promoting your particular product or restaurant,
and they are bringing in customers, and it is a straightforward
business deal. So I think you can differentiate there where it
is--where it is simply tied to an individual who you don't have
any relationship with there. They are someone who is not doing
anything for you; they are just playing ball for you and they
are getting that quarter million, half a million dollars. Then,
you would say, well, there is no transaction here, that was
just being paid to play that position.
Mr. Guthrie. So you know we now have a patchwork of laws.
Kentucky has an executive order. Florence, I think, Alabama had
a special set or something in legislature because they didn't
want to get behind on it.
So what have these States passed? Because we have to get to
the specifics of it. So what have you seen, the two of you or
anybody, that a State has passed that we should not have in a
Federal law? What should we preempt? I know we need preempting
because we need consistency, but what element do you think one
State did it and this is just bad? What is that?
Dr. Emmert. I think there's several elements. There is at
least one State that I know of that, in fact, allows and,
indeed, encourages the universities themselves to be the
broker, the person who arranges for these relationships, and
that, I think, is straightforward pay-for-play in that context.
So I think that is one problem.
I think the second problem is there is no requirement for
any form of transparency, no reporting requirement, no
understanding, even at the institutional level.
And then third, there is no enforcement mechanism or even
an attempt at trying to create some enforcement model around
those things. I think those are the core elements in some State
laws that are most challenging.
Mr. Guthrie. OK.
Dr. Livingstone. Could I add one item?
Mr. Guthrie. As long as she will let you, yes.
Ms. Schakowsky. His time has expired.
Mr. Guthrie. Chair, appreciate it.
Ms. Schakowsky. And now our student athlete, past student
athlete, Congresswoman Trahan, for 5 minutes.
Mrs. Trahan. Thank you, Madam Chair. And thank you to the
witnesses for testifying today.
Dr. Emmert, it is great to see you again, and not
surprisingly my questions are for you. I wish I could actually
aggregate all my colleagues' remaining time and just ask all my
questions. But I think it is fair to say that for a long time
the main argument against allowing college athletes to be
compensated for the use of their NIL was that it would
effectively end college athletics as we know it.
But based on what you have seen as president of the NCAA in
the past 3 months since the association's new NIL policy went
into effect, do you believe that college athletics are on the
verge of extinction?
Dr. Emmert. Thank you for the question, Congresswoman. I
think, first of all, the resistance among the schools--and it
is the schools, of course, that make all of the rules of the
NCAA. The resistance and concern of the schools were all those
issues that we are discussing here and all the potential for
this to go awry. If we can, in fact, have a framework that
creates the guardrails we are talking about here, I think quite
the opposite of being the end of college sports, I think it can
be a wonderful educational adjunct for students.
Mrs. Trahan. Yes. I agree. I mean, look, if deals started
to take the shape of resembling pay-for-play, which has been
discussed today, it just highlights what we have known for
years, and that is that there is a market for paying college
athletes. And while NIL is only part of the solution, it is why
we need to be really honest, that athletes do work for
universities and deserve the same rights as employees across
other industries, especially as it pertains to striking that
balance with academic experience versus athletics, their health
and safety, which has been raised, and certainly equity.
Dr. Emmert, you already stated for the record that a
national standard is necessary on NIL. Do you also agree that
the national standard should be as pro-athlete as possible?
Dr. Emmert. I am sorry?
Mrs. Trahan. The national standard should be as pro-athlete
as possible?
Dr. Emmert. I do. I think that, again, these are
opportunities, as we have just heard from Ms. March, that
students can take enormous advantage of, they can build
lifelong skills, they can generate some revenue, whether it is
modest or large. I think that is all very, very helpful and
healthy if we can do it in an appropriate fashion.
Mrs. Trahan. And so have you or the NCAA's legislative
bodies identified what you believe to be necessary restrictions
on athletes' NIL? I know some of them have been shared, but is
there any other outstanding that you would like to share with
the committee as we sort of think about this legislation?
Dr. Emmert. Well, we have, and, in fact, the membership of
the NCAA, the schools spent nearly 2 years trying to craft
specific legislation that was about to go into place when the
State laws were triggered. And so we would be happy to provide
the committee with the proposals that the membership was about
to agree on last June.
Mrs. Trahan. Terrific. We would love that. In fact,
typically, what happens, you know, when we, Congress, work on
large, long-overdue issues like this one, there is a temptation
and, frankly, it is pretty common for power brokers, you know,
like the NCAA, to withhold their priorities and work behind the
scenes against bills viewed not as in their favor. As you know,
Senator Murphy and I have legislation that is central around
protecting the value proposition for college athletes.
Would you commit to working with members of this committee
to craft a legislative fix that prioritizes college athletes?
And, if so, would you also pledge not to dispatch your
lobbyists to sink a package that has the support necessary for
that legislation to become law?
Dr. Emmert. Well, I most certainly will agree to work with
this committee or any other committee, and I have done so for a
good while now, especially around this issue. And I want very
much to make sure that legislation supports and protects our
student athletes and it works to their advantage.
I am a lifelong educator. I know most people know me as
president of the NCAA, but I was first a professor and the
university president for three decades. I have spent my life in
that cause, and so, of course, I would work to that end.
Mrs. Trahan. Well, I appreciate it. As you might expect,
Dr. Emmert, I appreciate that commitment, and you know I am
going to hold you to that.
My final question as, you know, as I mentioned, or as has
been mentioned, I think we are all encouraged by the efforts
from individual institutions--Chapel Hill, Washington State, it
sounds like Baylor as well--that have proactively provided
support to college athletes with respect to their NIL rights.
Do you agree that in those instances they should also be
required to provide the same level of support to all athletes
in their program regardless of their race, their gender, the
sport they play?
Dr. Emmert. I do.
Mrs. Trahan. Great. Thank you. This is a much longer
conversation, and we didn't get a chance to talk on some of the
bigger issues in terms of the structure of college athletes,
but I really appreciate getting your input on getting the NIL
legislation to a place that we can all be proud of. Thank you.
I yield back.
Ms. Schakowsky. The gentlewoman yields back.
Those people who may have extra time, if you want to yield
to Congresswoman Trahan, I would recommend it.
Next, Mr. Armstrong is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Armstrong. Thank you, Madam Chair.
College athletics is undergoing significant change. I think
Congress' priority should be to do no harm and be cautious of
unintended consequences.
And, Dr. Livingstone, can you provide us with student
athlete sports played in teams at Baylor?
Dr. Livingstone. I am sorry. What was the question, how
many student athletes we have in sports?
Mr. Armstrong. How many student athletes do you have at
Baylor?
Dr. Livingstone. We have about 525 student athletes across
19 sports.
Mr. Armstrong. And, roughly, how many of the Baylor student
athletes play in revenue sports?
Dr. Livingstone. Men's basketball and football are our two
revenue sports at Baylor. All of our other sports require
reallocation of resources in order to support them.
Mr. Armstrong. And, Dr. Emmert, can you provide the same
figures for the NCAA?
Dr. Emmert. Yes. There is roughly a half a million student
athletes that play across in total over 19,000 different teams,
1,100 different schools. Most of those--all of those programs
have basketball programs and football programs, but for the
great majority of those 1,100 schools, none of them are
revenue-producing sports. There is an aggregate when you look
at the total revenue minus expenses of schools, there is well
less than 50 of those 1,100 schools that we would describe as
cash flow positive or profitable, but where they are, that
revenue is grossly disproportionately coming from football and
men's basketball and, in some cases, a few other sports:
women's basketball, in a few cases, ice hockey, in the case of
North Dakota and, you know, a handful of others.
Mr. Armstrong. Thank you. And I think those numbers
indicate that there is a significant majority of student
athletes that participate in nonrevenue sports. And there is a
Senate proposal that would require institutions to pay 50
percent of revenue from certain revenue-generating sports,
minus expenses, to a fund that would be distributed to all
athletes in that specific sport.
Now, Dr. Livingstone, it is my understanding that many
institutions use funds generated by revenue sports to sustain
nonrevenue sports. Is that correct?
Dr. Livingstone. That is correct. So when we look at our
overall athletics budget, all of that revenue goes into one
pool, so to speak, and then we use that to support all of our
sports programs, all of the support services that we provide
across sports programs. And it would be very challenging for
even an institution like Baylor or institutions in the Power
Five conferences to support as many nonrevenue sports as we do,
as many women sports as we do, if you had a model like that.
And then if you think about those institutions who do not have
profitable programs, even in men's basketball and football,
doing some kind of reallocation would be even more devastating
to those kinds of institutions.
Mr. Armstrong. Yes. So if we assume that covered sports for
this provision are likely to be men's football and basketball,
and in UND's case probably men's hockey, we are benefiting
athletes of those sports at the cost of other sports and
student athletes. Will their sports even exist at the
collegiate level without those funds?
Dr. Livingstone, what challenge would an institution face
if its revenue sports were no longer funding nonrevenue sports?
Dr. Livingstone. Well, we would have to make some very,
very difficult choices. You would either have to decide to
either fund those other sports at a much, much lower level, or
you might have to decide to reduce the number of sports you
offered, or you would have to make a determination to
reallocate resources from other aspects of your university to
then support those sports programs that used to be supported by
athletics revenue.
And so--and that is very challenging in higher education.
We try to do everything we can to make our athletics programs
self-sustaining and not have to use resources from other parts
of the university to support our athletics programs. And that
is challenging given the small number of institutions that
actually have athletics programs that generate excess revenue.
Mr. Armstrong. And, Dr. Emmert, has the NCAA studied this
proposal? Would it have ramifications on female collegiate
athletics?
Dr. Emmert. Well, the majority of women sports are
nonrevenue-producing sports, so therefore they are dependent
upon the revenue sports within that institution, or direct
subsidies from the schools either in the form of student
athletic fees or targeted donations or just transfer of money,
as Dr. Livingstone said, from the rest of the university.
There are very, very few schools of those 1,100 who operate
without some level of subsidy at this point. So you would have
to make the kinds of tradeoffs and decisions that Dr.
Livingstone was just describing.
Mr. Armstrong. Thanks. I see my time is expired. I
appreciate it.
And I yield back.
Ms. Schakowsky. I thank the gentleman.
And now I recognize Mr. McNerney for 5 minutes.
Mr. McNerney. Well, I thank the Chair, and I thank the
panelists. It is an interesting discussion.
In general, I have heard clearly that uniform NIL
regulations are needed, as well as a level playing field, so we
will take that as a sort of starting point.
To Mr. Huma, my State of California was the first to pass
the college athlete NIL bill, the Fair Pay to Play Act. The
laws made it possible for these athletes to earn compensation
through endorsements, autographs, signings, and more. It also
allowed college athletes to enter into group licenses,
permitting a coalition of athletes to collectively enter into
licensing deals with a company.
Mr. Huma, how could licensing deals like this benefit
college athletes?
Mr. Huma. Well, thanks for the question. Group licensing is
an important part. Actually, it was pretty exciting, earlier
this year, EA Sports announced the return of college football
in their video games. And for their athletes to be--they used
to put their athletes in there and not pay them because of NCAA
prohibitions, which are illegal, but now that that has opened
up, there is an opportunity for players to actually be in the
game and be paid. And, traditionally, how that is done is EA
Sports pays the athletes in the form of a group license to use
all of their rights, and the players get to be in a great game
that they love to play, and they receive a few bucks and get
some money, as well as trading cards. There is other areas as
well, but every dollar--especially in some of the sports that
are predominantly Black, like football, basketball, women's
basketball--every dollar can matter to many of these athletes
who are from low-income backgrounds. And so that is something
California got right, which we are proud of as a cosponsor of
that bill.
Mr. McNerney. So is there some altruism involved in that? I
mean, some players are going to be less likely to get the bucks
for their endorsements and so on, and so the more prominent
athletes have to agree to give up a little bit? Am I
interpreting that correctly?
Mr. Huma. Typically, in those agreements, the athletes get
an even amount, an even distribution, whether they are the
third-string offensive lineman or the starting quarterback. So
it is something, a way for athletes who, many of them, again,
who aren't going to get an NIL deal of any kind of
significance, have a chance to earn a few bucks.
Mr. McNerney. Ms. March, have you and your fellow athletes
discussed the possibilities of group deals, maybe for the whole
golf team? And, basically, how much interest is there with this
approach among your friends and teammates? Do you feel there is
a widespread interest in this sort of arrangement outside of
your group and your university?
Ms. March. Yes, thank you for your question. On my team
specifically, we have six ladies that are international
students. So, given the new NIL rules, they aren't allowed to
participate in these deals at this moment. So on my team, we
have not discussed group deals. I bet on other teams that there
probably are--have been some discussion. But with me,
personally, we have not. I have not discussed this.
Mr. McNerney. Thank you.
Ms. McWilliams, in your written testimony, you discuss the
importance of understanding resource disparities among
institutions. My district is the home of the University of the
Pacific, it is a Division I school, as well as the San Joaquin
Delta College, it is a community college. Both possess highly
successful athletic programs but bring in far less revenue than
other high-profile institutions.
How can we ensure that lower-revenue-generating schools and
programs are all able to offer the same NIL opportunities to
their athletes?
Ms. McWilliams. Yes. I mean, I think, again, you know, with
the baseline framework of legislation that allows at least that
start of everyone having access of the same thing. I mean, even
with the group licensing fees, there are institutions who
currently have resources to have access to third parties to do
that. I can tell you that my institutions are still working on
what that could look like for there because we don't have those
extensive resources to bring in a third party quite yet. And
though we need to, that is still in discussion for each of our
institutions.
I think, you know, the ability for us to continue to--we
fundraise. We do all these things for our student athletes,
honestly. I mean, I want our student athletes to be successful
in this NIL piece, and the level playing field is never going
to be level playing field. It is never going to be the same
equity across all of our institutions and divisions, Power
Five, HBCU. It never has been. But at the end of the day, what
can we do individually at our institutions to make sure that we
have whatever resources we have to make these opportunities
great for our students and not to put legislation in that is
going to impact us even more?
We can't afford. My school will close athletics. We will
lose programs if there are rules and laws in place that are
going to require us to do more than we are currently doing. So
you could help us by not putting in laws that are going to put
more strain on us.
Mr. McNerney. Thanks for that nuanced answer.
And I am going to yield back.
Ms. Schakowsky. The gentleman yields back.
And now I recognize Congresswoman Clarke for 5 minutes.
You are muted. Yvette, we can't hear you. You are muted.
Ms. Clarke. Got that.
Thank you, Madam Chair. And I thank our expert witnesses
for joining us for this important hearing.
Today's college athletes in the aggregate generate millions
of dollars in revenue for the NCAA athletic conferences and
universities. These record revenues have led to lucrative
coaching contracts, lavish gold-plated athletic facilities, and
seemingly exponential increases in recruiting funds.
But the athletes, overwhelmingly students of color, who put
themselves at risk of injury to compete, particularly in the
highest revenue-generating sports, are often responsible for
covering the costs of their health insurance, out-of-pocket
expenses from injuries suffered during their time as student
athletes.
Dr. Emmert, do the current policies governing healthcare
coverage effectively protect the health, safety, and welfare of
collegiate athletes, and does that coverage extend beyond the
time period when their efforts are being televised and
monetized by the NCAA?
Dr. Emmert. Well, thank you for the question,
Congresswoman. I think the area of the healthcare and health
concerns of student athletes is something that we always have
to keep in the front of our mind. NCAA was created 115 years
ago specifically around those issues and concerns.
The policies today require that student athletes all be
covered by health insurance, either that of their--themselves,
if they are an adult and independent, or their families, or the
university or college itself.
In the case of the high-revenue sports and high-revenue
schools that are those that you see on TV, the vast majority of
those provide that healthcare directly. Many, but not all,
provide healthcare to continue beyond the time that they have
competed when their eligibility expires. And should they have
injuries that are catastrophic injuries that continue into
their years beyond eligibility, the NCAA itself has a
catastrophic insurance policy that can protect them throughout
their life.
There has been and continues to be active debate about
whether or not that is adequate, and I think those are
important questions.
Ms. Clarke. Well, thank you. Dr.--excuse me--Mr. Huma, do
you agree with that assessment?
Dr. Emmert. I beg your pardon?
Mr. Huma. I would say----
Dr. Emmert. Oh, OK.
Mr. Huma. I would say most of it is not accurate in terms
of what you are asking.
The catastrophic injury insurance policy, virtually no
athlete qualifies for. You have, as I mentioned, about 50
percent of college athletes with chronic college sports
injuries after they are done, and virtually none of them
qualify for that fund.
In terms of even the big schools, typically they require
players to have their own insurance, and many of them, if they
don't, they require the athlete to purchase the school's health
insurance plan. They don't simply provide it. It is actually--
actually, at my alma mater, it was right there in the handbook.
They actually garnish your scholarship check in order to pay
for it.
So lots of disturbing trends.
Ms. Clarke. So, Mr. Huma, would the health, safety, and
welfare of collegiate athletes improve if institutions of
higher education were required to cover all costs of medical
insurance and any out-of-pocket expenses incurred by the player
for college sports-related injuries? And what about if the
schools had to cover long-term care related to injuries that
occur while the player is competing for the school?
Mr. Huma. Absolutely. And I think that the reality is that
for the schools that can afford it, absolutely. We suggested
trigger language. Schools in, say, Division III and II that are
struggling a lot more, it might be a bit much. But when you hit
$20 million in athletics revenue, you can pay for out-of-pocket
expenses. When you hit $50 million, you can pay for full
coverage and out-of-pocket expenses for up to 4 years.
And that $7 billion I mentioned in revenue explosion of the
last 16 years can be used for a fund. Put some of that in a
fund for players who, long after they are done, some of those
athletes I mentioned among the 50 percent who have chronic
injuries, where they can go and get help for surgeries and
treatment that they still need.
Ms. Clarke. Very well.
Dr. Livingstone, I know we all want to ensure the students
are properly taken care of. Why don't schools already cover
these expenses?
Dr. Livingstone. Well, I think that the level at which
schools cover these expenses varies pretty significantly based
on the financial resources that that school has access to. We
certainly provide medical support and care for our student
athletes. We provide mental health support and care for our
student athletes.
We have even--we provide support for them for the first
couple of years after they leave if they have mental health
support they need to continue and they don't have their own
means to cover that from an insurance perspective, or from a
physical injury. We have even provided care for student
athletes in extended-care addiction recovery programs or mental
health facilities when they needed that and it was something
that was going to help them continue their education to be
successful.
So I think where the challenge becomes--and Ms. McWilliams
might be able to speak to this even better than I can--for
institutions that do not have athletics programs that generate
excess revenue, the impact of having a significant burden of
requiring some of these benefits could be quite challenging for
them. We all care deeply about the health and well-being of our
student athletes. I think how to manage that and how to pay for
that is a real challenge.
Ms. Clarke. I yield back. Thank you very much, Madam Chair.
Ms. Schakowsky. The gentlewoman yields back.
And now I recognize Congresswoman Dingell for her 5 minutes
of questions.
Mrs. Dingell. Thank you, Chairwoman Schakowsky, and thank
you for holding this hearing, and to all of you that are
testifying today.
As a member who represents a Big Ten school and the
University of Michigan--go Blue--and a mid-American conference
school at Eastern Michigan University, as well as being a
graduate of Georgetown University, this is a subject I have
deep interest in and have already been spending a lot of time
talking to coaches, athletes, and university administrators.
And I am really pleased to see the bipartisan attention on
this issue and that the committee is taking the time to dig
into the topic and examine all the different ways to support
our student athletes.
A crucial part of this conversation has been ensuring that
student athletes are able to achieve both their educational and
their personal goals. Many of you have suggested that student
athletes are students first and foremost.
In contrast, Mr. Huma, in your testimony, you suggested
some student athletes have been pushed to pursue less rigorous
subjects or majors in order to devote more time to their sport,
which would be anti-ethical to that goal--or antithetical to
that goal. Long-term educational attainment is inextricably
linked to our conversation about a student and athlete's
ability to monetize their name, image, or likeness.
Dr. Livingstone, as a university president and former
college athlete, how can a Federal NIL framework or other
policies being considered today ensure that students are not
facing a tradeoff between their participation in collegiate
athletics, monetization of NIL, and educational attainment,
which for many has long-term financial ramifications for these
athletes beyond their postsecondary years? Do you have
recommendations for specific policies that Congress or other
authorities should implement to protect college athletes'
education goals?
Dr. Livingstone. No, I really appreciate that question,
Congresswoman. And I think one of the points I made is that any
national legislation on NIL has to make sure that the student
portion of the student athletes' experience remains the highest
priority for them. We know, as we have said, 98 percent of
these student athletes will never have a professional contract.
Many of them, their NIL will be less valuable after they
graduate, and so it is very, very important that they get an
education.
So I think we have to continue to ensure that there are
requirements for attendance in college to progress towards a
degree, that we encourage and incentivize them to be successful
and to get a college degree. So I think any Federal legislation
needs to continue to make that a high priority.
I think it is why an employment model becomes more
challenging, because once someone's an employee of the
university, the question becomes, is your highest priority for
that individual as an employee or as a--probably--potentially a
part-time student rather than a full-time student?
So I think any legislation has to ensure that the student
portion of that individual's experience remains of the highest
priority in the context of their ability to take advantage of
their name, image, and likeness, and continue to be--perform
effectively as an athlete.
Mrs. Dingell. Thank you.
Mr. Huma, I am going to ask you to provide an answer to
that for the record, but I am down to a minute and 28 seconds,
and I am really worried about women's sports that doesn't often
receive the same support, promotion, recognition, or attention
that men's sports programs do.
And title IX requires equal opportunities for men and women
in college athletics, and NIL presents a potential avenue to
give women new opportunities at making money for the use of
their likeness.
So, Ms. McWilliams, in the time we have left, is there any
concern that Federal NIL legislation could exacerbate these
inequalities, or are there benefits in which thoughtful NIL
policy might help promote women's sports programs and bridge
these disparities in treatment? What policies should we
consider in crafting this NIL legislation?
Ms. McWilliams. Thank you. I think all the things that we
have discussed today and the responsibility that we have as
leaders to protect title IX, these student athletes, our
missions and our goals are why we are in higher education and
why we have athletics in the first place.
I do agree that we are out of whack here. I mean, this is
a--it is a sad day to be having this conversation, working in
this industry and then being an athlete, trying to figure out
or having conversations that the NCAA hasn't done its job. I am
the NCAA. I am a member of the organization, and gender equity
is extremely important to me.
So as leaders, every one of us that walk in the room, we
have a responsibility to make sure it doesn't get lost.
Whatever policy that is, whatever conversation that is, that is
our responsibility as leaders and around this table to ensure
those conversations don't get lost and overbeared by what we
believe is the highest priority of making sure that all these
dollars are being made and student athletes are not benefited
from it.
We all should be benefiting and we all--we are benefactors
for sports, and so we have a responsibility to make sure that
title IX never gets lost, that the conversations are real and
honest, and that every woman and every student athlete has an
opportunity to see, and policies are in place to make sure that
happens.
Mrs. Dingell. Thank you. I yield back, Madam Chair, with
more questions for the record.
Ms. Schakowsky. The gentlewoman yields back.
And now I recognize Congresswoman Kelly for 5 minutes.
Ms. Kelly. Thank you, Chair Schakowsky, for holding this
hearing today.
One thing we can all agree on is collegiate athletes
deserve a system that protects their well-being and interests
both on and off the field, but even the best-designed
frameworks will fail to achieve their objective if not properly
enforced.
Mr. Huma, as Congress considers establishing a Federal
framework to protect collegiate athletes, what enforcement
mechanisms should we consider?
Mr. Huma. Well, I think, again, I think it needs to be
third party. It should not be in the hands of the NCAA or
conferences or the schools. And I think that a lot of it would
be overseeing what the schools do and don't do, in terms of
whether or not they are getting involved in representing
players, arranging NIL deals, using NIL deals as inducements. I
think those are some of the things that I believe everyone
probably agrees on.
I also believe that there are certain freedoms that are in
place that should be protected, such as making sure that
athletes can secure representation that aren't just limited to
NIL. All representation. Legal representation. Some of the
States have restricted that.
Some of the States have prohibited colleges from allowing
to co-brand, meaning use their logos in a third-party
agreement. The logos are a win-win for the player and the
school, and it doesn't have to be arranged by the school. A
third party comes in and brokers a deal. And if it is initiated
by the third party, then that is great.
Any kind of disclosures, which, you know, from our
perspective, don't need to happen, but if there is a--too much,
you know, that a bill wouldn't pass, that there were
disclosures, it should be kept private. These aren't things
that should be public information.
You know, there are a lot of deals--and I would imagine,
you know, again, if you are an app maker, Cami, you know, if
you have some things that are maybe industry secrets, you don't
want even your school knowing, really, because oftentimes your
ideas can get stolen.
So there has to be maximum safeguards for the athletes. And
anything--if there's conflicts, the school should not have the
ability to, you know, have control of whether or not a player
can get into a certain deal. That should be third-party
regulated, mandated by Congress, the parameters of Congress.
Ms. Kelly. All right. Ms. McWilliams, care to share your
thoughts?
Ms. McWilliams. Yes. I somewhat disagree with that. I think
there is--if you are in a higher education or you are in a job,
there is conflict of interest. All of you find conflict of
interests, I am sure. So as student athletes, you have the
opportunity to use your name, image, and likeness. Whether you
disclose what you are doing or not, there has to be some
protection or guardrails.
And we have compliance and governance, people on our staff
that do this work every single day. They are the ones who are
burdening the bear, and they have to burden and bear managing
this day to day. And so, if they are going to have to do it and
we want to make sure that these student athletes are doing
their due diligence, they are having the opportunities, the
guardrails are to make sure that there is no conflict of
interest with the university.
I work for the CIAA, and though I love the NIL, I don't
want to see a student wearing CIAA making money off of CIAA,
right? So there is a commitment on both sides that we all have
to make to make this work for all of us.
Ms. Kelly. Let me--someone suggested a new independent
entity should be charged with monitoring and ensuring
compliance with laws, governing names, image, and likeness
compensation for collegiate athletes.
Dr. Livingstone, do you think there should be--do you think
there should be a new [inaudible] NIL issues? And if so, do you
think a new entity should be established, or is there an
already existing entity that could take on that role?
Dr. Livingstone. Uh-huh. I do think that an independent
body could be very effective in doing this. I do think we have
to be careful that it is not a political body that has sort of
political influences in how it makes that decision.
I am just going to use a specific example. One of the
things we struggle with at colleges and universities is the
title IX legislation, which has had a huge impact on women and
college sports. But as each administration changes, our title
IX policies have to change. And so there is a deep
inconsistency in--from administration to administration in what
we do with regard to enforcing title IX.
And so I think we need to make sure, if it is an
independent body, it is truly independent, it has people on it
that understand college athletics and NIL issues, and that it
has a fair mechanism for enforcement on a national level.
Ms. Kelly. Thank you.
Ms. March, do you feel like you have sufficient resources
to ensure your concerns in health and safety are being met?
Ms. March. Yes. Here at Washington State, I feel as though
they are athletes first, and we are a community of people that
are meant to help each other. So I feel here at Washington
State, my experience has been just great with my health and
safety, and we--and they offer us protection for our
eligibility and thereafter for health reasons.
Ms. Kelly. Thank you to all the witnesses.
And I yield back, Madam Chair.
Ms. Schakowsky. The gentleman--gentlewoman yields back.
And I recognize now Mr. Soto for 5 minutes for questioning.
Mr. Soto. Thank you, Madam Chair.
There has been two telltale stories we have read in papers
and seen in newscasts in Florida over and over, and it seems to
repeat itself with a lot of our amazing college athletes in
Florida.
One is the bizarre story of a top athlete being involved in
a theft case, whether it is at a grocery store, at a retail
establishment, someone who is gracing our television screens on
Sunday or during great, amazing games during the week. And we
see other--a repeat story over and over of an early death of a
former major college star, whether it be by a health issue as
early as their late twenties or early thirties or even by
violence as they get back home and maybe have to even turn to
crime.
And it shows all these themes that come up. A lot of
athletes are coming from poor families. They don't have health
insurance, some of them. They--many of them--or some of them
aren't graduating. They are surrounded by great wealth all
around them. And in spite of their fame, they are living
without the funds needed to be able to live their normal lives,
and so they turn to these bizarre situations that have happened
over and over and over again.
Those are telltale stories that tell us that we--we must
have some changes. We have seen it in Florida with a new law
allowing college students to be paid for their name, image, and
likeness, the NIL we have talked about a lot today. NCAA, we
see as moving forward on a similar rule, which we appreciate.
And under the Florida law, it mandates financial training
and life skills workshops to athletes twice during their
college career. And we have heard about that today, about the
importance of having proper legal representation, proper
financial training as we may be dealing with major financial
decisions.
My main two questions--and we will do them in tandem for
all of our witnesses--is, do you believe that the NCAA and our
college system will be able to come together to have a standard
guarantee of health insurance for all college athletes and a
living stipend so that they are not living in poverty
surrounded by wealth and get into these situations?
We will start with President Dr. Mark Emmert, and from
there I will call on a next witness.
Dr. Emmert. Well, first of all, thank you, Congressman. The
two questions really are at the center of what is constantly
debated and discussed within the NCAA and the rulemaking
structure that the universities participate in. There has been
a constant improvement in the healthcare support that is
provided to student athletes, as we just heard from one of our
student athletes.
The biggest differentiator that causes me concern is
between those schools who have abundant resources and those
that don't. There is--and Commissioner McWilliams was talking
about this. There are schools that struggle with providing all
of those amenities that a school like Baylor or another Power
Five school can provide, and I worry greatly about those two
distinctions on both ends of the continuum. And we need to
collectively find solutions to that.
Mr. Soto. And I want to turn next to Ms. Cameron March on--
for the same question, how important it is to have a guarantee
of health insurance and a reasonable living stipend for college
athletes.
Ms. March. I believe it is very critical to have--for the
health and well-being for student athletes, and I hope that we
all can come together and do that.
Mr. Soto. Next, Ramogi Huma, the same question, the
importance of standardizing health insurance access and living
stipends.
Mr. Huma. I think it is important to not only standardize
it, but to actually pay for it, that the schools and the NCAA,
with the post revenue--postseason revenues [inaudible] division
with the college football playoff begin to actually direct some
of that money into meaningful ways so that players don't have
to pay out of pocket.
And some of the players whose--who are required to be on
their own insurance, their parents are paying for them to be on
that premium, so they are shifting the burden and
responsibility for otherwise very healthy athletes to the
families, many of whom come from poor backgrounds.
I don't think NCAA sports is going to truly ever come
together and pay players any kind of affordable stipend,
because every single stitch of progress has been made through
the courts on that issue, including one of the stipends that
finally we won to just cover the cost of attendance. So any
kind of a change in those areas, I think, will be outside of
NCAA sports, unfortunately.
Mr. Soto. And just as a close, we see Major League Baseball
do profit sharing among all sorts of baseball teams, among
other private-sector leagues, so this is something that could
be brought together.
And I yield back.
Ms. Schakowsky. The gentleman yields back.
And now, Mr. Carter, you have been patiently waiting to
waive on to this committee, and I recognize you for 5 minutes.
Mr. Carter. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Dr. Emmert, earlier, Mr. Huma was talking about the
catastrophic insurance, and I believe you wanted to expand upon
that, about the insurance that is offered to the students--
student athletes.
Dr. Emmert. Simply want to make clear that student athletes
across all of our divisions are required to have either
provided by their family because of employment relationships or
the institution to have health insurance. They all have
insurance through their time as a student athlete.
And should they have injuries while they are a student
athlete that exceed the limits of those--of that insurance
coverage, then indeed there is a catastrophic injury policy
that the NCAA pays millions of dollars for every year that
covers those athletes. And we have had student athletes be
covered for significant amounts, $100,000 and more a year for
their entire lifetime, to cover the costs of their injuries.
Mr. Carter. OK. All right. Thank you.
Let me ask you, Dr. Emmert--I want to go back to one of my
colleagues, Representative Guthrie, had mentioned the pay-for-
play, and that seems like such a slippery slope in the sense
the difference between pay-for-play. A couple of questions.
First of all, what happened in the school out West where
the school actually arranged the agreement for a company to
give scholarships or to give the--to give money or whatever to
pay for each of the 123 players on the football team to get the
equivalent of tuition. How can that not be pay-for-play?
Dr. Emmert. Well, I believe, Congressman, that is part of
why we are here today, is that we need standardized definitions
across the country about what is and what isn't an appropriate
relationship around name, image, and likeness. Today, we don't
have that. We need some continuity so that both the
universities themselves and the athletes know and those who
enter into those kinds of arrangements know what the rules of
the game are.
It is indeed a slippery slope. And as we have been
discussing here today, one of the keys is, first of all, having
those relationships be transparent so that people know they are
going on, and then there is consistency about whether or not
the student athlete, him or herself, is providing something of
value in exchange for those resources rather than just showing
up and playing football.
Mr. Carter. And not necessarily for football or basketball,
but for some of the other sports especially, if it is deemed to
be pay-for-play, how is this going to impact their eligibility
for future Olympics?
I mean, if--you know, a student athlete who has been
playing--you know, has been on a swimming scholarship, or
diving or whatever, and then it is deemed, OK, that was pay-
for-play, are they going to be eligible for the Olympics once
they are finished there?
Dr. Emmert. I am not an expert on Olympic eligibility----
Mr. Carter. But don't you think it would be----
Dr. Emmert [continuing]. But I do believe that they
probably would be allowed to compete.
Mr. Carter. They would be allowed to compete?
Dr. Emmert. I believe so.
Mr. Carter. But don't you think that should be clarified
with the Olympic Committee. I would think you all would----
Dr. Emmert. It clearly should be, yes.
Mr. Carter. I hope that the NCAA will take that upon
themselves to clarify that.
Also, another concern, because I have heard you all mention
it during this hearing, about the revenues go to academics as
well to help with that. Isn't there a concern about the
sponsorships withdrawing from that and going to the students
instead, the student athletes?
I mean, at University of Kentucky, you have got Kroger
Field. You know, let's--are they still--you know, I know at the
University of Georgia, we have got the earphones or had the
Delta emblem on it, and, you know, you have got Nike jerseys
and everything.
I mean, are these companies now going to shift to the
students and away from the schools, and therefore the revenues
are going to decrease, and therefore it is going to go back on
the State legislatures to have to fund more for academics, et
cetera, et cetera? I mean, has that been looked at?
Dr. Emmert. It has certainly been widely discussed. The
evidence so far is not clear because we only have, you know, 2
months worth of data, but it is one of the real concerns I know
that athletic directors who run athletic programs is very--are
very concerned about.
Mr. Carter. And with good reason.
How are you going to handle--I remember the Olympics, when
we had the basketball dream team, that some of them weren't
with the official sponsor--I forgot who it was, whether it was
Nike--and then some of the athletes didn't want to wear Nike,
so they had to put the--had to cover up the emblem.
How are you going to deal with that if a school uses, you
know, a certain company but the student has an agreement with
another company?
Dr. Emmert. Well, again, right now, there is a patchwork of
different laws that approach that issue differently in several
of the States. Some would allow student athletes to be mandated
to wear specific uniforms produced by some sponsors. Some do
not require that. Some would allow a student athlete to wear
the shoe brand of his or her choice, et cetera.
So it is not clearly regulated today, and it is one of
those areas that is of--also of great complexity and why we
need a national law.
Mr. Carter. In a nutshell, we have got a mess.
Thank you, and I yield back.
Ms. Schakowsky. The gentleman yields back.
And now, also waiving on to our subcommittee, I recognize
Congresswoman Schrier.
Ms. Schrier. Thank you, Madam Chair.
I would simply like to yield to my colleague, Mrs. Trahan.
Mrs. Trahan. Thank you, Congresswoman. I so appreciate the
time.
Dr. Emmert, according to data available from the Equity in
Athletics Disclosure Act, there are 2,071 institutions of
higher ed with athletic programs that are recipients of Federal
funds, 90 percent of which are still out of compliance with
title IX. In fact, you know, 50 years after the passage of
title IX, females are being annually shortchanged by a billion
dollars in athletic scholarships and nearly 150,000 sports
participation opportunities.
It is also common knowledge that these institutions are
providing significantly more dollars promoting and publicizing
men's revenue sports, which has an adverse impact on female
athletes seeking NIL employment in the open marketplace.
So I have two questions. One, if a university only focuses
on deals with its basketball and football teams, are they in
violation of title IX?
And second question is: How is the NCAA ensuring that
universities that assist athletes with NIL deals do so in an
equitable manner?
Dr. Emmert. Well, I am certainly not an expert on the legal
nuances of title IX around whether or not the relationship you
are describing would be in violation of title IX. So I won't--I
won't offer an opinion on that.
I do know that the individual schools and the conferences
with which I am most familiar work quite hard, as we do at the
national level, to promote sports as equitably and assertively
as we can.
We do live in a society and, indeed, perhaps beyond our
society where the majority of the highest-profile sporting
events are male dominated. That is a reality. Whether that
makes sense or not is a different matter.
And so when you look at where are the largest revenues that
are coming in from media deals, for example, or where do you
get the largest audiences, regardless of what a school's
promotional model may be there, but typically football, which
is, of course, the largest national sport, and then basketball.
So whether or not their engagement around that violates title
IX, I simply can't say.
What I can say is that we would very much like to see in
Federal legislation policies that make clear that institutions
in the implementation of any title IX engagement are doing so
in a way that is completely equitable across genders and every
other group, regardless of their sport, regardless of their
gender. And I think that is certainly possible and plausible
within legislation that could be passed.
Mrs. Trahan. I am going to move real quickly to yesterday's
release of the NLRB's memo, because the NCAA put out a
statement saying that college athletes are students who compete
against students, not employees who compete against employees,
and added that both academics and athletics are part of a total
educational experience.
You know, I have heard from countless current and former
athletes who experienced the same thing I did, right? A system
that rewards athletic performance first, and then that full
academic experience--internships, you know, job opportunities,
travel abroad--you know, that sort of comes close to near last.
So I am a proponent of giving athletes the power to
organize and collectively bargain for fair and better treatment
in a system that, you know, just for too long has a history of
not having their backs. I mean, being a college athlete is a
source of enormous pride but also enormous sacrifice. And so
making sure that we have an ability to give the power back to
the athlete so that they can bargain for better athletic-
academic balance is key.
I know your position on the legislation. I read your
statement after Senator Murphy and I launched it. Since you are
opposed to giving athletes a voice through collective
bargaining, what do you and the Association propose to give
athletes not just a voice, but an actual say in setting the
expectations of their performance in the classroom and in their
sport?
Dr. Emmert. Well, if I can say this quickly, first of all,
I think student athletes' commitment to their sports and their
academic success is an enormous effort. It is extraordinary to
me when I see what student athletes do in both the classroom
and on the court or the field, and I am incredibly proud of
them.
I do believe that there are many ways in which they should
be provided more opportunities to strike a balance between
those two, including more time to finish their degree or to
continue in internships or a variety of other activities, as
you point out. I think it is very hard to balance those two.
I think, in terms of the student voice and vote, we need to
make sure--and I hope that we can continue to make progress on
this. It is something that I have been very engaged in--to
continue to do that so that student athletes are more involved
in every one of the committees and decisionmaking bodies of the
Association. They are in 80 or 90 percent of them now, but we
need more, and I support that clearly.
Mrs. Trahan. Thank you.
Could I just close, Madam Chair?
Ms. Schakowsky. Pardon me?
Mrs. Trahan. Could I just have a second to close?
Ms. Schakowsky. A second to close.
Mrs. Trahan. Thank you.
Ms. Schakowsky. Go ahead.
Mrs. Trahan. I appreciate this. I know that there is a lot
on the table, and I really do appreciate the testimony. It is
informative.
You know, the scales of college athletics have been so
dramatically tilted in the direction of everyone who isn't an
athlete for so long that one of the reasons why we take the
tack that we do is because we are less concerned about going
too far in the direction of giving athletes power than not
giving them enough.
So this is an issue of fairness. It is an issue of equity.
And while I don't often find myself associating my views with
Justice Kavanaugh, I share many of the perspectives that were
laid out in his concurring opinion in Alston earlier this
summer. So I think it is important we get this right, and that
means getting it right for college athletes first and foremost.
But thank you. This was--it was very helpful.
I yield back.
Ms. Schakowsky. The gentleman--the gentlewoman, who is an
expert on the subject and I am sure will be part of many of the
conversations going forward, yields back.
Mr. Duncan, welcome, and you now are recognized for 5
minutes.
Mr. Duncan. Thank you, and thank the committee for letting
me waive on. This is an issue that is very important to me. I
have been working with Anthony Gonzalez for a while on this,
ever since NCAA allied NIL.
And the gentlelady was right. We have a opportunity here to
get this right, and we need to get it right. We don't need a
hodgepodge patchwork of 50 State rules and regulations
governing NIL. That is not fair to the student athletes who are
looking to go to colleges, universities in other States to try
to figure out what they may or may not be able to do. We don't
need the recruiters having to figure out what their laws are in
Texas versus Alabama or Alabama versus South Carolina. A
national standard on NIL is urgently needed. It just makes
things easier for the college and university recruiters and
athletes.
At the end of the day, we need to make sure that we keep
the focus on the student athlete, because NIL is their name,
their image, their likeness, and they are the ones getting the
economic deal. They should negotiate it themselves. The
colleges and universities should not be in the middle of that
transaction.
And so we don't need--I think we have an opportunity here
to get NIL legislation, a national standard, passed. But we
don't need to muddy the water with collective bargaining and
revenue sharing and all these other things, because that may
prohibit us from getting an NIL bill passed. We keep our eye on
the ball and make sure that we do something to protect student
athletes--and college universities are second to that, but
protect them as well--and not muddy the water.
You know, revenue sharing is an interesting thing, because
I think Dr. Livingstone said it best, is that, you know, the
big-ticket sports of football and basketball, in some cases
they provide the revenue that allow the colleges and
universities to have all the--I will say it--down-ticket
sports, the women's soccer and lacrosse and softball and
swimming, and I can go through a whole litany of sports that
don't generate the revenue, and they are paid for. The
universities are able to have those sports because of the
football programs.
What that means is there are students--student athletes
that now have the opportunity to come to university on
scholarship that they--and get an education that they would not
have otherwise, due to economic conditions or inability of the
parents to pay for that college tuition. They have the
opportunity because football pays for women's softball.
And if you do revenue sharing, you take that ability for
those universities to have those down-ticket sports, and it
prohibits universities from providing those opportunities--
educational opportunities for those student athletes. So those
are things we need to think about.
I think we can have a conversation, Madam Chairman, about
all of the issues of revenue sharing and liability and lifetime
insurance and all pay-for-play, all the payment of students. We
can have that conversation. It is probably worth having that
conversation, not at NCAA, Dr. Emmert, but from the United
States Congress at some point. But we have a chance to get NIL
without muddying the water. That is one of the big points I
wanted to make.
And, you know, Greg Steube hit a home run last night for
the Republican team as we beat the Democrats. And if he was a
student athlete or an up-and-coming high school player, he
would have had the opportunity to probably to go get a
scholarship and probably have an NIL deal waiting on him. But
then he would have to try to figure out, well, the laws in
South Carolina where I want to go play at Clemson may be
different than the University of Florida, or even Utah, which,
you know, that is a whole other conversation what Brigham
Young, BYU, is doing.
So we need a national standard. It is that important. But
at the end of the day, who governs that and who negotiates it
and who enforces it?
I wanted to ask just one question. This is from--for Mr.
Huma: Should conferences and associations be able to make and
enforce recruiting rules that ban financial inducements? Yes or
no?
Mr. Huma. No. That should be done directly from Congress,
because otherwise they would need an antitrust exemption, which
they don't--it would put them above the law.
Mr. Duncan. OK. I don't know, is Ms. McWilliams still on?
OK.
So, Ms. McWilliams, you highlighted that the CIAA stretches
over five States, including Pennsylvania, Maryland, Virginia,
North Carolina, and South Carolina.
While North Carolina NIL law is similar to South Carolina,
they are not the same. For example, South Carolina law prevents
universities from directly facilitating NIL deals for athletes,
which I think is the right thing to do. In contrast, this is
not covered in the North Carolina law.
So how do you think coordination by one school and not
another will impact the competition on the field?
Ms. McWilliams. I think it will impact. I think that
disparity alone. Again, you can do one thing in South
Carolina--or student athletes or students who are interested in
going to Claflin University compared to going to Johnson C.
Smith. I mean, we can just talk about Division II and not
Division I. There is greater access in one State than another.
I mean, being that we are neighboring States, it is just
interesting that we haven't been able to work together on
legislation in the first place to get to a place where we both
can manage--manage our institutions in our State, but I get
there is differences.
I think it is hard. I mean, we can see right now there is--
we are all over the place. I mean, it is in the Association
membership trying to define the fine lines between our Division
I, Division II, Division III, State to State, private and
public. It is tough. And so I agree with you that there needs
to be some mandate across the board.
We are at the gates already but different legislation. How
can we take what is the best out of each of the States and get
to a place where we can all be on the same page for our student
athletes, to have the same fairness, recruiting advantages, you
name it, across the board? It is not easy.
Mr. Duncan. Yes. I agree with you. I think you are right.
Look, the horse has already left the barn. NIL is already--the
rules that NCAA has put forth. Colleges and universities are
having to navigate this quagmire of 50 different patchwork laws
because the States are passing their own laws, because they see
the need to do that, protect the student athlete and the
universities that fall under their funding stream.
Madam Chair, we have an opportunity to get NIL legislation
out of this Congress, and I urge that we pass a clean NIL bill
dealing with that.
And, with that, I yield back. Thank you so much.
Ms. Schakowsky. The gentleman yields back.
And we do have one more for questioning, and that is Mr.
Bucshon is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Bucshon. Thank you very much.
First of all, I apologize for missing some--a lot of the
questioning. I had another thing to do, and I couldn't get out
of it.
I thank you, Madam Chair.
College athletics, of course, has long served as an
important venue for Hoosiers--Indiana, I am from Indiana--as
well as college students from across the country to get their
degrees while participating in sports that they love, and even
some of them make careers out of it--2 percent, as has been
mentioned. However, the enactment of a number of State laws to
put this into focus, this system of college athletics as it
relates to the NIL situation, and we have talked about that a
lot.
So I am going to get--hone down to a specific issue that
has been mentioned. While there are a number of other issues,
this one is important. Some athletes are signing deals before
they even stepped on the playing field at the collegiate level,
and making deals with companies, some based maybe not in the
United States, and then being pressured or influenced by the
government of those countries. That is a potential concern.
Prominent college athletes can have an enormous influence
on our culture, particularly amongst our younger children. And
should we be concerned about the ability of governments--and I
will get into which ones--to interfere in affairs of our Nation
by putting pressure on college athletes and using college
campuses, which has been done, to influence our culture amongst
our young people, but now, if you--now, if you have some of the
most prominent athletes on campus that are caught up in that,
is that going to be an issue?
As an example, Dr. Emmert--I am going to ask this question
of you--do you think that there should be any restrictions
placed on NIL deals to restrict them from being entered with
companies with close ties, for example, the Communist--Chinese
Communist Party, would be the extreme example. Are there any
associated dangers to athletes or institutions that you foresee
that Congress should work to address when working on a national
NIL framework?
Dr. Emmert. Well, thank you for the question, Congressman
Bucshon. I think there needs to be, again, greater clarity
around what are and what are not appropriate sponsors. This is
confused by the patchwork of laws we have been talking about.
Some allow the schools to determine which sponsors are out of
bounds when they are inconsistent with the values of the
institution. Others specify specific industries--gambling or
alcohol, tobacco, et cetera--as being out of bounds. Other
States have no restrictions whatsoever.
So I think that what is necessary and what I would urge is,
in the final crafting of a NIL bill here and in other chambers,
that we have an open, frank discussion and debate about where
there are appropriate boundaries and where there aren't.
My instinct would be to be as liberal as possible in
allowing students to explore the market, but at the other hand,
there are challenges nonetheless that need to be explored.
Mr. Bucshon. I mean, for example, we subsequently have
found out, for example, on campuses with--related to the
Chinese Government, Confucius Institutes, and that--and also
students involved in research projects that have specific
Department of Defense focus. In fact, we have recently allowed
that not to happen anymore.
So, you know, you could see the next frontier is promoting
through high-profile college athletes things that maybe the
college athletes don't understand themselves. I am not saying
they would promote it, but I am saying they could be caught up
in this. And it is important, I think, as many people have
mentioned, to make sure the contractual relationships young
college athletes get involved in have some degree of scrutiny
by someone.
Dr. Livingstone, you represent an institution with immense
resources--I think you have mentioned that--as well as a
conference with a great deal of power in the future of NIL. How
do you perceive performing your role as an educator, as well,
these young athletes as they begin to capitalize on this
opportunity, and how do we ensure that smaller institutions
that do not have the same brand power as you do and not come
out on the losing end of multiple NIL laws if we don't do
something here at the Federal level?
Dr. Livingstone. Yes. Thank you for that question. You
know, I think that our role as educators just informs how we
help our student athletes navigate NIL. I shared earlier some
of the things we do at Baylor to help educate our students and
prepare them to do NIL, so I think it is just part of our
responsibility as we really, for all of our students on our
campus, try to help prepare them for life, both while they are
on our campus and then after they leave.
We have a phrase we use in our athletics program called
preparing champions for life. And so in all aspects of what we
do with our student athletes, we want them not just to be
successful on field or the court or on the track, we want them
to be prepared when they leave Baylor to be successful in life
as parents, as spouses, as employees, as community members. And
so NIL is just a piece of that. So I think it just--the
philosophy we have just wraps around that new piece that we
have to deal with.
In terms of smaller institutions--and we have talked quite
a bit about this--I think the uneven landscape probably has an
even more challenging impact on smaller institutions and
smaller markets, and you have heard Ms. McWilliams talk some
about that. So I think----
Mr. Bucshon. Yes.
Dr. Livingstone [continuing]. It is this national standard
that helps us all understand how to do this.
And, frankly, it probably will take fewer resources for
less-resourced schools to be able to be in compliance with
national standards than if they are dealing with just their
State standard, the students coming in from different
institutions, because you can then provide educational
materials. You can provide support at a national level, whether
it is through the NCAA or some other body, to be able to
support those institutions.
Mr. Bucshon. Yes. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman, for your
indulgence.
I just want to say, whatever we do, we certainly don't want
colleges to make the decision to scrap athletics altogether,
and that could happen if we do this wrong. And we could lose
tons of potential student athletes and educated citizens as a
result.
I yield back.
Ms. Schakowsky. The gentleman yields back, and that
concludes the questions.
I do want to thank our witnesses for their participation in
today's hearing.
And before I adjourn, I just want to have unanimous consent
to enter the following document--only one this time--into the
record, a letter from Representatives Cleaver and Allred.
I seek unanimous consent. Without objection?
Mr. Bilirakis. Without objection.
Ms. Schakowsky. Without objection, so ordered.
[The information appears at the conclusion of the hearing.]
Ms. Schakowsky. I want to remind our members--and we will
do that--that pursuant to committee rules, they have 10
business days to submit additional questions for the record to
be answered by our witnesses who have appeared today, and we
appeal to you to respond in as short a period of time as
possible.
And at that time--at this time, the subcommittee is
adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 1:22 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]
[Material submitted for inclusion in the record follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
