- INVESTING IN AMERICAN JOBS: LEGISLATION TO STRENGTHEN MANUFACTURING AND COMPETITIVENESS

[House Hearing, 117 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

INVESTING IN AMERICAN JOBS: LEGISLATION TO STRENGTHEN MANUFACTURING AND
COMPETITIVENESS

=======================================================================

VIRTUAL HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON CONSUMER PROTECTION AND COMMERCE

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED SEVENTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION
__________

OCTOBER 14, 2021
__________

Serial No. 117-52

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Published for the use of the Committee on Energy and Commerce

govinfo.gov/committee/house-energy
energycommerce.house.gov
__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

55-031 PDF                 WASHINGTON : 2024

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE

FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey
Chairman
BOBBY L. RUSH, Illinois              CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington
ANNA G. ESHOO, California              Ranking Member
DIANA DeGETTE, Colorado              FRED UPTON, Michigan
MIKE DOYLE, Pennsylvania             MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas
JAN SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois             STEVE SCALISE, Louisiana
G. K. BUTTERFIELD, North Carolina    ROBERT E. LATTA, Ohio
DORIS O. MATSUI, California          BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky
KATHY CASTOR, Florida                DAVID B. McKINLEY, West Virginia
JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland           ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois
JERRY McNERNEY, California           H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia
PETER WELCH, Vermont                 GUS M. BILIRAKIS, Florida
PAUL TONKO, New York                 BILL JOHNSON, Ohio
YVETTE D. CLARKE, New York           BILLY LONG, Missouri
KURT SCHRADER, Oregon                LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana
TONY CARDENAS, California            MARKWAYNE MULLIN, Oklahoma
RAUL RUIZ, California                RICHARD HUDSON, North Carolina
SCOTT H. PETERS, California          TIM WALBERG, Michigan
DEBBIE DINGELL, Michigan             EARL L. ``BUDDY'' CARTER, Georgia
MARC A. VEASEY, Texas                JEFF DUNCAN, South Carolina
ANN M. KUSTER, New Hampshire         GARY J. PALMER, Alabama
ROBIN L. KELLY, Illinois, Vice       NEAL P. DUNN, Florida
Chair                            JOHN R. CURTIS, Utah
NANETTE DIAZ BARRAGAN, California    DEBBBIE LESKO, Arizona
A. DONALD McEACHIN, Virginia         GREG PENCE, Indiana
LISA BLUNT ROCHESTER, Delaware       DAN CRENSHAW, Texas
DARREN SOTO, Florida                 JOHN JOYCE, Pennsylvania
TOM O'HALLERAN, Arizona              KELLY ARMSTRONG, North Dakota
KATHLEEN M. RICE, New York
ANGIE CRAIG, Minnesota
KIM SCHRIER, Washington
LORI TRAHAN, Massachusetts
LIZZIE FLETCHER, Texas
------

Professional Staff

TIFFANY GUARASCIO, Staff Director
WAVERLY GORDON, Deputy Staff Director
NATE HODSON, Minority Staff Director
Subcommittee on Consumer Protection and Commerce

JAN SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois
Chair
BOBBY L. RUSH, Illinois              GUS M. BILIRAKIS, Florida
KATHY CASTOR, Florida                  Ranking Member
LORI TRAHAN, Massachusetts           FRED UPTON, Michigan
JERRY McNERNEY, California           ROBERT E. LATTA, Ohio
YVETTE D. CLARKE, New York           BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky
TONY CARDENAS, California, Vice      LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana
Chair                            NEAL P. DUNN, Florida
DEBBIE DINGELL, Michigan             GREG PENCE, Indiana
ROBIN L. KELLY, Illinois             DEBBIE LESKO, Arizona
DARREN SOTO, Florida                 KELLY ARMSTRONG, North Dakota
KATHLEEN M. RICE, New York           CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington
ANGIE CRAIG, Minnesota                   (ex officio)
LIZZIE FLETCHER, Texas
FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey (ex
officio)
C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hon. Jan Schakowsky, a Representative in Congress from the State
of Illinois, opening statement.................................     2
Prepared statement...........................................     3
Hon. Gus M. Bilirakis, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Florida, opening statement............................     4
Prepared statement...........................................     5
Hon. Frank Pallone, Jr., a Representative in Congress from the
State of New Jersey, opening statement.........................     6
Prepared statement...........................................     8
Hon. Cathy McMorris Rodgers, a Representative in Congress from
the State of Washington, opening statement.....................     9
Prepared statement...........................................    11

Witnesses

Scott N. Paul, President, Alliance for American Manufacturing....    12
Prepared statement...........................................    15
Scott Lincicome, Senior Fellow in Economic Studies, Cato
Institute......................................................    21
Prepared statement \1\
Answers to submitted questions...............................   122
Eric P. Sills, President and Chief Executive Officer, Standard
Motor Products.................................................    22
Prepared statement...........................................    25
Answers to submitted questions...............................   125
Caolionn O'Connell, Ph.D., Senior Physical Scientist and
Professor, Pardee RAND Graduate School.........................    31
Prepared statement...........................................    33
Questions submitted for the record \2\.......................   128

Submitted Material

H.R. 2907, the Global Investment in American Jobs Act \3\
H.R. 3774, the Advancing Gig Economy Act \3\
H.R. 4594, the Restoring Brand USA Act \3\
H.R. 5474, the Reinforcing American-Made Products Act \3\
H.R. 5476, the Advancing Tech Startups Act \3\
H.R. 5479, the Supply Chain Health and Integrity for the Nation
Act \3\
H.R. 5492, the Manufacturing Economy and National Security Act
\3\
H.R. 5495, the Building Resilient Supply Chains Act \3\
H.R. 5502, the Integrity, Notification, and Fairness in Online
Retail Marketplaces for Consumers Act \3\
H.R. 5505, the Supply Chain Security and Resilience Act \3\
Statement of the Premiere Healthcare Alliance, October 14, 2021,
submitted by Ms. Schakowsky....................................    81
Letter of October 12, 2021, from Justin P. Oberman, Founder,
Assemble, to Mr. Pallone, submitted by Ms. Kelly...............    84

----------

\1\ Mr. Lincicome's statement has been retained in committee files and
is available at https://docs.house.gov/meetings/IF/IF17/20211014/
114123/HHRG-117-IF17-Wstate-LincicomeS-20211014.pdf.
\2\ Dr. O'Connell did not answer submitted questions for the record by
the time of publication.
\3\ The legislation has been retained in committee files and is
available at https://docs.house.gov/Committee/Calendar/
ByEvent.aspx?EventID=114123.
Statement of Hon. Carolyn Bourdeaux, a Representative in Congress
from the State of Georgia, October 14, 2021, submitted by Ms.
Kelly..........................................................    87
Letter of October 14, 2021, from Hon. Tom Malinowski, a
Representative in Congress from the State of New Jersey, to Mr.
Pallone, submitted by Ms. Blunt Rochester......................    89
Letter from Tori Emerson Barnes, Executive Vice President, Public
Affairs and Policy, U.S. Travel Association, to Ms. Schakowsky
and Mr. Bilirakis, submitted by Mr. Bilirakis..................    90
Letter of April 22, 2021, from Hon. Debbie Lesko, a
Representative in Congress from the State of Arizona, to
Jennifer Granholm, Secretary of Energy, submitted by Mr.
Bilirakis......................................................    91
Letter of October 13, 2021, from Mary R. Grealy, President,
Healthcare Leadership Council, to Ms. Schakowsky and Mr.
Bilirakis, submitted by Mr. Bilirakis..........................    95
Statement of Michelle Michot Foss, Ph.D., Fellow in Energy,
Minerals and Materials, Rice University's Baker Institute for
Public Policy, Center for Energy Studies, May 5, 2021,
submitted by Mr. Upton.........................................    97
Letter of October 13, 2021, from Nancy McLernon, President and
Chief Executive Officer, Global Business Alliance, to Ms.
Schakowsky and Mr. Bilirakis, submitted by Mr. Pence...........   118

INVESTING IN AMERICAN JOBS: LEGISLATION TO STRENGTHEN MANUFACTURING AND
COMPETITIVENESS

----------

THURSDAY, OCTOBER 14, 2021

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Consumer Protection and Commerce,
Committee on Energy and Commerce,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 12:01 p.m., via
Cisco Webex online video conferencing, Hon. Jan Schakowsky
(chair of the subcommittee) presiding.
Members present: Representatives Schakowsky, Castor,
Trahan, McNerney, Clarke, Cardenas, Dingell, Kelly, Soto, Rice,
Pallone (ex officio), Bilirakis (subcommittee ranking member),
Upton, Latta, Guthrie, Bucshon, Dunn, Pence, Lesko, Armstrong,
and Rodgers (ex officio).
Also present: Representatives Blunt Rochester, Kinzinger,
Johnson, Carter, and Joyce.
Staff present: Katherine Durkin, Policy Coordinator; Lisa
Goldman, Senior Counsel; Waverly Gordon, Deputy Staff Director
and General Counsel; Daniel Greene, Professional Staff Member;
Tiffany Guarascio, Staff Director; Perry Hamilton, Clerk; Ed
Kaczmarski, Policy Analyst; Zach Kahan, Deputy Director,
Outreach and Member Services; Kaitlyn Peel, Digital Director;
Caroline Rinker, Press Assistant; Tim Robinson, Chief Counsel;
Chloe Rodriguez, Clerk; Kylea Rogers, Staff Assistant; Andrew
Souvall, Director of Communications, Outreach, and Member
Services; C.J. Young, Deputy Communications Director; Sarah
Burke, Minority Deputy Staff Director; Michael Cameron,
Minority Policy Analyst, Consumer Protection and Commerce,
Energy, Environment; Nate Hodson, Minority Staff Director; Tim
Kurth, Minority Chief Counsel, Consumer Protection and
Commerce; Brannon Rains, Minority Professional Staff Member,
Consumer Protection and Commerce; and Michael Taggart, Minority
Policy Director.
Ms. Schakowsky. The Subcommittee on Consumer Protection and
Commerce will now come to order.
Today we will be holding a hearing entitled ``Investing in
American Jobs: Legislation to Strengthen Manufacturing and
Competitiveness.''
Due to the COVID-19 public health emergency, today's
hearing is being held remotely. All Members and witnesses will
be participating via video conferencing.
As part of our hearing, microphones will be on mute for the
purpose of eliminating inadvertent background noise. Members
and witnesses will need to unmute your microphones each time
that you wish to speak.
Additionally, Members will need to be visible on the screen
in order to be recognized.
Documents for the record can be sent to Ed Kaczmarski at
the email address that we have provided to staff. All documents
will be entered into the record at the conclusion of the
hearing.
We will begin now with opening statements, and the Chair
now recognizes herself for 5 minutes for an opening statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. JAN SCHAKOWSKY, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF ILLINOIS

Over a year and a half into the COVID-19 pandemic,
shortages of critical products and consumer goods continue to
plague domestic manufacturers and American families.
Consumers across the country are finding empty shelves and
longer wait times. I know I myself tried to get cleaning
products and had a hard time doing that for my home.
Those looking to buy large, durable goods, such as
furniture or cars, even face bigger challenges and wait times.
A severe shortage of semiconductors is harming vehicles,
vehicle manufacturers, and causing used car prices to jump 27
percent since last year.
These marketplace disruptions harm consumers, especially
the most vulnerable among us.
It is clear that we have significant supply chain
vulnerabilities.
The public health crisis has created manufacturing
disruptions, changed demand patterns, caused surges, and
underscores America's insufficient domestic production
capacity.
This is why we are here today to discuss legislation that
will improve our supply chain resilience, combat the growing
threat posed by foreign countries' predatory practices, and
protect consumers.
We are considering critical legislation to make the online
marketplaces, like Amazon, safer and fairer for consumers.
Online sales, as we all know, have increased significantly
during the pandemic as consumers have sought safer purchasing
options for their everyday goods and their needs.
However, American consumers face new dangers when
purchasing goods online. Counterfeit goods are all too readily
available on popular consumer websites.
Not only do these products defraud consumers, but they also
pose risks to health, safety, and security.
We can't allow dangerous or stolen products sold on the
online marketplaces, like Amazon, to line criminals'
pocketbooks. Consumers deserve to shop with confidence and to
get what they paid for.
The INFORM Consumers Act, which I introduced along with my
friend and colleague Ranking Member Bilirakis, will require
online marketplaces, like Amazon, to verify the identity of
high-volume sellers that operate on their platforms.
It will protect consumers and legitimate businesses,
increase trust in the marketplaces, and discourage criminals
and fraudsters.
The other legislative proposals from my colleagues that
will be discussed today improve America's global
competitiveness, increase supply chain resilience, promote
domestic manufacturing, and strengthen supply chains of
critical goods and services.
So I really look forward to the testimony of our witnesses
today as we explore how to improve and strengthen our supply
chains, protect consumers, and ensure an economy that works for
all Americans.
Now I want to yield the remainder of my time to
Representative Kelly.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Schakowsky follows:]

Prepared Statement of Hon. Jan Schakowsky

Over a year and a half into the COVID-19 pandemic,
shortages of critical products and consumer goods continue to
plague domestic manufacturers and American families.
Consumers across the country are finding empty store
shelves and reduced selection.
Those looking to buy larger, durable goods such as
furniture or cars face even bigger challenges and wait times.
A severe shortage of semiconductors is harming vehicle
manufacturing and causing used car prices to jump 27% since
last year.\1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ https://www.nytimes.com/2021/10/07/business/used-car-
prices.html.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
These marketplace disruptions harm consumers, especially
the most vulnerable.
It is clear that we have significant supply chain
vulnerabilities.
The public health crisis has created manufacturing
disruptions, changed demand patterns, caused surges, and
underscored America's insufficient domestic production
capacity.
That is why we are here today to discuss legislation that
will improve our supply chain resilience, combat the growing
threat posed by foreign countries' predatory policies, and
protect consumers.
We're considering critical legislation to make the online
marketplaces like Amazon safer and fairer for consumers. Online
sales increased significantly during the pandemic as consumers
sought to safely purchase the everyday goods they need.
However, American consumers face new dangers when
purchasing goods online.
Counterfeit goods are readily available on popular consumer
websites.
Not only do these products defraud consumers, they also
pose a risk to health, safety, and security.
We cannot allow dangerous or stolen products sold online
marketplaces like Amazon to line criminals' pockets.
Consumers deserve to shop with confidence and get what they
pay for.
The INFORM Consumers Act, which I introduced with my
colleague Ranking Member Bilirakis, will require online
marketplaces like Amazon to verify the identity of high-volume
sellers.
It will protect consumers and legitimate businesses,
increase trust in the marketplace, and discourage criminals and
fraudsters.
The other legislative proposals from my colleagues that
will be discussed today improve America's global
competitiveness, increase supply chain resilience, promote
domestic manufacturing, and strengthen supply chains of
critical goods and services.
I look forward to the testimony of the witnesses as we
explore how to improve and strengthen our supply chains,
protect consumers, and ensure an economy that works for all
Americans.
I now yield the remainder of my time to Representative
Kelly.

Ms. Kelly. Thank you, Chairwoman Schakowsky, for holding
this legislative hearing today.
I have heard from small business owners, local governments,
and large companies that they have struggled to obtain supplies
during the COVID-19 pandemic.
It has become clear that we need to build resilient supply
chains to strengthen our economy and our national security.
That is why I was proud to work with Representatives
Bourdeaux and Kinzinger on H.R. 5479, the Supply Chain Health
and Integrity for the Nation Act. This bill will help
centralize the Government's oversight to monitor supply chain
gaps and vulnerabilities as well as identify opportunities to
reduce supply chain risk.
The Government and private industry must work together to
ensure we are better prepared for supply chain shocks in the
future. I hope that my colleagues on both sides of the aisle
will support this bipartisan legislation.
I would also like to enter into the record a letter from
Justin Oberman, the founder of Assemble, and a letter from
Representative Bourdeaux in support of H.R. 5479.
Thank you so much. And I yield back.
Ms. Schakowsky. The Chair now recognizes Mr. Bilirakis, the
ranking member of the subcommittee, for his 5 minutes of an
opening statement.
Mr. Bilirakis, you are recognized.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. GUS M. BILIRAKIS, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF FLORIDA

Mr. Bilirakis. Thank you very much.
Thank you, Madam Chair, for holding this legislative
hearing.
And thank you to the witnesses for sharing your expertise
today. There is a lot to cover with the four of you. So we
appreciate your willingness to participate.
To begin, I want to commend my friend, the chair of the
committee, Chairwoman Schakowsky, for her leadership on the
INFORM Consumers Act and working with me to reach a strong
bipartisan agreement.
This legislation will create a uniform national standard to
provide consumers with clarity, transparency, and enhanced
protections from malicious actors online who look to pawn
stolen goods or sell dangerous counterfeits.
The consensus we have reached among stakeholders will
benefit not just our constituents so they are protected from
counterfeit or stolen products--that is very important--but
will also serve the marketplaces and their sellers well as they
do business in all 50 States with a single set of rules.
The world, as we know, has changed, as you know,
drastically since the pandemic, and our reliance on e-commerce
platforms has grown dramatically. That unfortunately means
criminals are finding new ways to prey upon innocent consumers.
That makes the INFORM Consumers Act a timely piece of
legislation, given the restrictions on visiting our favorite
local retailers.
This is a sound solution that protects consumers online
while also protecting the private information of small online
entrepreneurs who are looking to make a little extra money in
this tough economy.
This committee also comes together in the name of promoting
the economic drivers that employ so many of our constituents in
the tourism sector. Of course, you know I am from the State of
Florida, and that is our number-one industry.
I am glad to see the Restoring Brand USA Act on the docket
today that I introduced with my friend Peter Welch. And I thank
you and thank him as well for his support of this legislation.
I really appreciate your friendship, Peter, and the fact
that we work together.
We worked closely to reauthorize this program last August.
But no one could have foreseen that the matching-fund
requirement would create an impediment for companies trying to
find an avenue back to normal from the COVID-19 pandemic.
This legislation will release the dollars already collected
for the Brand USA program to help return our travel and tourism
industry back to its former glory.
As I mentioned during a hearing with Secretary Raimondo
earlier this year, the COVID-19 pandemic has drastically
impacted the travel and tourism industry, obviously, a market
that has contributed billions of dollars to local economies and
created countless American jobs.
This was an easy bipartisan win for our committee last
Congress, so there is no reason we cannot get this bill across
the finish line again this year, especially as we have so many
supporters of Brand USA.
I also ask for unanimous consent to enter into the record a
letter of support from the U.S. Travel Association for the
Brand USA program.
Can we enter that into the record, Madam Chair?
Ms. Schakowsky. Without objection.
[The information appears at the conclusion of the hearing.]
Mr. Bilirakis. Thank you.
Given the title and purpose of this hearing, I would be
remiss if I didn't highlight three bills introduced by my
colleagues that would improve American competitiveness in
emerging technologies, remove barriers prohibiting the growth
and creation of American jobs, and incentivize investment in
American companies.
The Advancing Tech Startups Act, led by Representatives
Johnson, Rush, and Phillips; the Advancing Gig Economy Act, led
by Representative Joyce; and the Global Investment in American
Jobs Act of 2021, led by Representative Pence and
Representative Rush, are three bills that promote American
leadership in emerging technologies and investment into new
jobs and companies.
I look forward to the discussion today so we can move to a
markup, and as we review the docket, I encourage everyone to
think about how we need to be thoughtful and purposeful in how
we legislate, especially when it comes to the use of American
taxpayer dollars and the future prosperity of our country.
I am hopeful we will continue with a regular order process
on these bills so we can put them through the kind of scrutiny
and improvement this committee has demonstrated in the past.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I appreciate it very much. And I
yield back.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Bilirakis follows:]

Prepared Statement of Hon. Gus M. Bilirakis

Good morning everyone,
Thank you Madam Chair, for holding this legislative hearing
and thank you to the witnesses for sharing your expertise
today. There is a lot to cover with the four of you, so we
appreciate your willingness to participate.
To begin, I want to commend my friend Chair Schakowsky for
her leadership on the INFORM Consumers Act and working with me
to reach a strong bipartisan agreement. This legislation will
create a uniform national standard to provide consumers with
clarity, transparency, and enhanced protections from malicious
actors online who look to pawn stolen goods or sell dangerous
counterfeits. The consensus we have reached amongst
stakeholders will benefit not just our constituents so they are
protected from counterfeit or stolen products, but will also
serve the marketplaces and their sellers well as they do
business in all fifty states with a single set of rules.
The world as we know changed drastically since the
pandemic, and our reliance on e-commerce platforms has grown
dramatically. That unfortunately means criminals are finding
new ways to prey upon innocent consumers. That makes the INFORM
Consumers Act a timely piece of legislation given the
restrictions on visiting our favorite local retailers. This is
a sound solution that protects consumers online, while also
protecting the private information of small online
entrepreneurs who are looking to make a little extra money in
this tough economy.
This Committee also comes together in the name of promoting
the economic drivers that employ so many of our constituents in
the tourism sector. I am glad to see the Restoring Brand USA
Act on the docket today that I introduced with my friend Peter
Welch, and I thank him for his support on this legislation.
We worked closely to reauthorize this program last
Congress, but no one could have foreseen that the matching fund
requirement would create an impediment for companies trying to
find an avenue back to normal from the COVID-19 pandemic. This
legislation will release the dollars already collected for the
Brand USA program to help return our travel and tourism
industry back to its former glory.
As I mentioned during a hearing with Secretary Raimondo
earlier this year, the COVID-19 pandemic has drastically
impacted the travel and tourism industry, a market that has
contributed billions of dollars to local economies and created
countless American jobs. This was an easy bipartisan win for
our Committee last Congress, so there is no reason we cannot
get this bill across the finish line again this year. [Madam
Chair, I also ask for unanimous consent to enter into the
record a letter of support from the U.S. Travel Association for
the Brand USA program].
Given the title and purpose of this hearing, I would be
remiss if I didn't highlight three bills introduced by my
colleagues that would improve American competitiveness in
emerging technologies, remove barriers prohibiting the growth
and creation of American jobs, and incentivize investment into
American companies. The Advancing Tech Startups Act led by
Representatives Johnson, Rush, and Phillips, the Advancing Gig
Economy Act by Representative Joyce, and the Global Investment
in American Jobs Act of 2021 led by Representatives Pence and
Rush, are three bills that promote American leadership in
emerging technologies and investment into new jobs and
companies.
I look forward to the discussion today so we can move to a
markup, and as we review the docket I encourage everyone to
think about how we need to be thoughtful and purposeful in how
we legislate, especially when it comes to the use of American
taxpayer dollars and the future prosperity of our country. I am
hopeful we will continue with a regular order process on these
bills so we can put them through the kind of scrutiny and
improvement this Committee has demonstrated in the past.
Thank you again Madam Chair and I yield back.

Ms. Schakowsky. The gentleman yields back.
And I now recognize the chair of the full committee, Mr.
Pallone, for 5 minutes.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. FRANK PALLONE, Jr., A REPRESENTATIVE
IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF NEW JERSEY

Mr. Pallone. Thank you, Chairwoman Schakowsky.
Today the committee continues its work of revitalizing our
economy by examining legislation to strengthen our
manufacturing and competitiveness.
America's competitiveness helped build the largest, most
dynamic economy in the world, but it is facing unprecedented
challenges.
For three decades, the Institute for Management Development
designated our Nation's economy as one of the five most
competitive in the world. But since 2019 that ranking has
fallen to 10th, making it more difficult for our economy to
create good-paying jobs for the American people.
The decline in our international competitiveness has been
exacerbated by the steady erosion of America's industrial
might.
Once the envy of the world, our manufacturing base has
faced steady headwinds for decades now. Between 2002 and 2016,
our Nation's share of global manufacturing activity declined
from 28 percent to just over 18 percent, and more than 5
million manufacturing jobs have been lost since 2000.
Investment in America's small and medium manufacturers, the
bedrock of our industrial might, has also declined over the
last 20 years by more than $200 billion.
Now, these numbers are staggering, and they come at a time
when the industrial power of our international counterparts is
on the rise. China superseded the United States as the world's
largest manufacturing country in 2010. And manufacturing output
has grown faster in Germany, Mexico, and South Korea than it
has here in the U.S.
As a result, America now relies on production in other
countries for many of our necessities, such as consumer
electronics, household goods, food, pharmaceuticals.
Weak supply chains threaten our industrial and
technological sovereignty, and our declining manufacturing
capacity harms our national security and economic vitality.
Now, these vulnerabilities became devastatingly apparent
during the COVID-19 pandemic, and ongoing disruptions of
critical products like semiconductors--computer chips essential
for the production of military equipment, automobiles, and
consumer electronics--has hampered our Nation's recovery.
But adverse market forces and supply chain disruptions are
not the only challenges facing domestic producers and America's
competitiveness. Online marketplaces have become pervasive
sources of fraudulent, counterfeit goods.
The Government Accountability Office found that 20 of 47
items it purchased from third-party sellers on popular consumer
websites were counterfeit. GAO also found that 16 percent of
counterfeit products seized in fiscal year 2018 posed a direct
risk to health, safety, and security.
Counterfeiters steal market share from legitimate
businesses and can cause severe reputational damage to the
companies and products they impersonate.
Online marketplaces should know who is selling products on
their platforms, and consumers should be able to know who they
are buying from.
Fraudsters claiming their products are made in the USA
undermine the integrity of domestic content labels and harm
producers who are truly making goods in America.
These unprecedented challenges to our economic prosperity
and competitiveness cannot go unchallenged.
Today we are examining legislation to strengthen the
Nation's manufacturing might, economic vitality, and American
competitiveness.
We will discuss four bipartisan supply chain bills and
create a whole-of-government process for identifying,
monitoring, and closing supply chain vulnerabilities that
imperil our national security and economic welfare.
These bills provide targeted investments to boost our
manufacturing base, strengthen supply chains, and ensure that
America is prepared to meet the next crisis. They counteract
destructive market forces and ensure that the U.S. is shaping
the global economic order with our core values.
We will also discuss the INFORM Consumers Act, which will
help prevent counterfeit and harmful consumer products from
entering the market. The legislation also provides small
businesses and domestic producers much-needed relief during
these challenging economic times.
These bills and the other legislation under consideration
today can help us turn the tide.
I want to thank the witnesses for their testimony and look
forward to the discussion.
And I did want to say to the chairwoman and our Members
that I am sure that when you are home you hear a lot about
this.
Some topics that we discuss in committee get more attention
in DC, but this is something that I hear constantly from my
constituents about: ``Why is it that we are not manufacturing
here? Why is it that we depend on China and other countries?''
I mean, people really, I think, at home are looking for us
to act. So that is why I think this is so important, Madam
Chairwoman.
I yield back.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Pallone follows:]

Prepared Statement of Hon. Frank Pallone, Jr.

Today, the Committee continues its work of revitalizing our
economy by examining legislation to strengthen our
manufacturing and competitiveness.
America's competitiveness helped build the largest, most
dynamic economy in the world, but it is facing unprecedented
challenges. For three decades, the Institute for Management
Development designated our nation's economy as one of the five
most competitive in the world. Since 2019, that ranking has
fallen to tenth, making it more difficult for our economy to
create good paying jobs for the American people.
The decline in our international competitiveness has been
exacerbated by the steady erosion of America's industrial
might. Once the envy of the world, our manufacturing base has
faced steady headwinds for decades now. Between 2002 and 2016,
our nation's share of global manufacturing activity declined
from 28 percent to just over 18 percent. More than five million
manufacturing jobs have been lost since 2000. Investment in
America's small and medium manufacturers--the bedrock of our
industrial might--has also declined over the last 20 years by
more than $200 billion.
These numbers are staggering, and they come at a time when
the industrial power of our international counterparts is on
the rise. China superseded the United States as the world's
largest manufacturing country in 2010. And manufacturing output
has grown faster in Germany, Mexico, and South Korea than it
has here in the United States.
As a result, America now relies on production in other
countries for many of our necessities, such as consumer
electronics, household goods, food, and pharmaceuticals. Weak
supply chains threaten our industrial and technological
sovereignty. Our declining manufacturing capacity harms our
national security and economic vitality.
These vulnerabilities became devastatingly apparent during
the COVID-19 pandemic. And ongoing disruptions of critical
products like semiconductors--computer chips essential for the
production of military equipment, automobiles, and consumer
electronics--has hampered our nation's recovery.
But adverse market forces and supply chain disruptions are
not the only challenges facing domestic producers and America's
competitiveness. Online marketplaces have become pervasive
sources of fraudulent, counterfeit goods. The Government
Accountability Office (GAO) found that 20 of 47 items it
purchased from third-party sellers on popular consumer websites
were counterfeit. GAO also found that 16 percent of counterfeit
products seized in Fiscal Year 2018 posed a direct risk to
health, safety, and security.
Counterfeiters steal market share from legitimate
businesses and can cause severe reputational damage to the
companies and products they impersonate. Online marketplaces
should know who is selling products on their platforms and
consumers should be able to know who they are buying from.
Fraudsters claiming their products are``Made in USA'' undermine
the integrity of domestic content labels and harm producers who
are truly making goods in America.
These unprecedented challenges to our economic prosperity
and competitiveness cannot go unchallenged. Today, we are
examining legislation to strengthen the nation's manufacturing
might, economic vitality, and American competitiveness.
We will discuss four bipartisan supply chain bills that
create a whole-of-government process for identifying,
monitoring, and closing supply chain vulnerabilities that
imperil our national security and economic welfare. These bills
provide targeted investment to boost our manufacturing base,
strengthen supply chains, and ensure that America is prepared
to meet the next crisis. They counteract disruptive market
forces and ensure that the United States is shaping the global
economic order with our core values.
We will also discuss the INFORM Consumers Act, which will
help prevent counterfeit and harmful consumer products from
entering the market. The legislation also provides small
businesses and domestic producers much needed relief during
these challenging economic times.
These bills and the other legislation under consideration
today can help us turn the tide. I thank the witnesses for
their testimony and look forward to the discussion.

Ms. Schakowsky. The Chair now recognizes Mrs. Rodgers,
wishing her good health, the ranking member of the full
committee, for her 5 minutes of an opening statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, A
REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF WASHINGTON

Mrs. Rodgers. Thank you, Madam Chair.
And to the chairman, I would agree that this is a very
important issue that we hear at home, the concern about supply
chains, manufacturing in the United States, and also the
recognition that American leadership and competitiveness are so
important, as you said, in ensuring that it is our core values
that are reflected as we lead here in the United States.
There are certainly very noteworthy initiatives that are
going to be under consideration, and I appreciate the committee
spending the time today.
We want to be encouraging more investment in the United
States of America. We want to be increasing responsibility on
e-commerce platforms, assisting the travel and tourism rebound
from the pandemic, and promoting clear national strategies for
emerging technology.
All of this is important to America's leadership and
competitiveness.
I am encouraged to see our Members working together as the
supply chain challenges persist. All you have to do is look at
the L.A. Port or the store shelves that are empty. And even the
White House yesterday admitted that they are not going to be
able to guarantee that our holiday packages arrive on time,
that we need to start our Christmas shopping now.
This crisis, plus labor shortages, are increasing costs on
Americans, and we are seeing inflation at a 13-year high. We
need to be focused on solutions that are going to strengthen
America's economy and not just scoring political points with
more reckless spending.
As the Republican leader on this committee, I must raise
concerns about the legislation to authorize $40 billion of
taxpayer funds. As I understand, this proposal may serve as the
committee's response to the United States Innovation and
Competition Act, USICA, that passed the Senate earlier this
year.
While the Senate might have changed the name of the Endless
Frontier to USICA, it doesn't change my view of this
legislation. I am concerned about trying to beat the Chinese
Communist Party at their own game, through expansive government
subsidies. It is not how we will win the future.
We cannot let counties like China control critical
supplies, materials, and technology that drive the economy and
determine the future.
Creating new, duplicative, multibillion-dollar programs and
trying to outspend the Chinese Communist Party is not the
solution.
We should be addressing significant challenges to the
security of our manufacturing sectors and supply chains, like
overregulation, permitting reform, tax burdens, and unclear
rules of the road for businesses.
Creating low barriers to entry and lifting the tax and
regulatory burdens will lead to economic competitiveness,
leadership, and prosperity. That is what we set out to do in
the American COMPETE Act, which is undergoing administrative
action.
Unfortunately, time and time again we see that the
majority's answer to virtually every pressing issue is to spend
more money. It is unsustainable, and it is going to create more
problems than it solves.
These vulnerabilities in our supply chain were exposed
during the COVID-19 pandemic, and they continue to reverberate
throughout our domestic industries.
Not only do we see the Biden-Harris administration ignoring
the underlying causes of the rampant supply chain and domestic
manufacturing crises we are seeing, the Biden-Harris
administration's increasing regulations, and the reconciliation
tax and spending spree, are only going to make these issues
worse, make us more dependent upon China.
Whether it is the continued rush to green, forcing adoption
of renewables and electric vehicles, or the price controls on
prescription drug medicines, these are the priorities that are
going to destroy any hope of America being the globally
competitive economic leader.
Throwing another 10 or hundred billion dollars to pay off
industry is not going to make these issues go away, and
unfortunately it is only going to make us more dependent upon
China.
Instead, we should remove the barriers preventing America
from onshoring our vulnerable supply chains and manufacturing
emerging technologies.
We need the permitting and licensing reforms to take
advantage of America's abundant natural resources so that we
can secure domestic sources of critical minerals that will fuel
the future.
We need to keep our competitive tax code in place, that was
enacted under the Republican administration through the Tax
Cuts and Jobs Act, that will encourage investment in the United
States.
We need regulatory reforms that let the private sector
innovate.
These are the solutions to this supply chain crisis that is
raising costs on every family. It is how we will win the future
and beat China.
So let's do the hard work now, before we move to a markup,
and pass policies that are truly bipartisan coming out of this
committee.
Thank you. I yield back.
[The prepared statement of Mrs. Rodgers follows:]

Prepared Statement of Hon. Cathy McMorris Rodgers

There are many noteworthy initiatives for us to review
today..
Encouraging investment in the U.S, increasing
responsibility on ecommerce platforms, assisting the travel and
tourism rebound from the pandemic, and promoting clear national
strategies for emerging technologies.
It's encouraging to see our members working together.
However, many supply chain challenges persist. Just look at the
L.A. port. Store shelves are empty and the White House admitted
yesterday they cannot guarantee holiday packages will arrive on
time. This crisis PLUS labor shortages are increasing costs on
Americans when inflation is already at a 13-year high. We
should be focused on solutions to strengthen the American
economy--not scoring political points with reckless spending.
As Republican leader of this committee, I must also raise
concerns with the legislation to authorize over $40 billion of
taxpayer funds as I understand this proposal may serve as the
Committee's response to the United States Innovation and
Competition Act--USICA--that passed the Senate earlier this
year.
While the Senate might have changed the name of Endless
Frontiers to USICA, it didn't change my view of this
legislation. USICA--which tries to beat the Chinese Communist
Party at their own game of expansive government subsidies--is
not how we will win the future. We cannot let countries like
China control the critical supplies, materials, and
technologies that drive the economy and determine the future.
Creating new, duplicative multi-billion dollar programs,
and trying to outspend the CCP is not the solution. Instead, we
should address significant challenges to the security of our
manufacturing sectors and supply chains like overregulation,
permitting reform, tax burdens, and and unclear rules of the
road for businesses.
Creating low barriers to entry and lifting the tax and
regulatory burdens will lead to economic leadership and
prosperity. That is what we set out to do with the American
COMPETE Act, which is undergoing Administrative action.
Time and again, the Majority's answer to virtually every
pressing issues our country faces is to spend more money. This
is unsustainable and will create more problems than it solves.
These vulnerabilities in our supply chain were exposed during
the COVID-19 pandemic and continue to reverberate across our
domestic industries.
Not only are Democrats and the Biden-Harris administration
ignoring the underlying causes of the rampant supply chain and
domestic manufacturing crises we're seeing their regulations
and the reconciliation tax and spending spree will make these
issues worse and make us even more dependent on China.
Whether it's the taxpayer-financed rush to green forcing
the adoption of renewables and electric vehicles or the
innovation-killing socialist price controls on prescription
medicines. These reckless priorities will destroy any hope of
America being a globally competitive, economic leader.
Throwing another ten or hundred billion dollars to pay off
industry will not make these issues go away and it certainly
will make us more reliant on the Chinese Communist Party.
Instead, we should remove the barriers preventing America
from onshoring our vulnerable supply chains and manufacturing
emerging technologies. We need permitting and licensing reforms
to take advantage America's abundant natural resources so we
can secure domestic sources of critical minerals that will fuel
the future.
We need to keep the competitive tax code Republicans
enacted with the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act, so foreign and domestic
companies invest in America. And, we need regulatory reforms
that let the private sector innovate. These are the solutions
to this supply chain crisis that is raising costs on every
family.
That is how we win the future and beat China, not by
passing socialist agendas--on the back of CHIPS legislation--
that result in more centralized planning from the federal
government. Let's do the hard work now, before we move to a
markup, so we pass policies that are truly bipartisan consensus
of this committee. Thank you, I yield back.

Ms. Schakowsky. The gentlewoman yields back.
And the Chair would like to remind Members that, pursuant
to committee rules, all Members' written opening statements
shall be made part of the record.
And I now would like to introduce our witnesses for today's
hearing.
Mr. Scott Paul is president of the Alliance for American
manufacturing.
Mr. Scott Lincicome is the senior fellow of economic
studies at the Cato Institute.
Mr. Eric Sills is CEO of Standard Motor Products.
And Dr. Caolionn O'Connell is the senior physical scientist
at the RAND Corporation.
At this time the Chair will recognize each witness for 5
minutes to provide an opening statement. Please watch the clock
that is on your screen and conclude when the 5 minutes allotted
have elapsed.
So, Mr. Paul, you are now recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENTS OF SCOTT N. PAUL, PRESIDENT, ALLIANCE FOR AMERICAN
MANUFACTURING; SCOTT LINCICOME, SENIOR FELLOW IN ECONOMIC
STUDIES, CATO INSTITUTE; ERIC P. SILLS, PRESIDENT AND CHIEF
EXECUTIVE OFFICER, STANDARD MOTOR PRODUCTS; AND CAOLIONN
O'CONNELL, Ph.D., SENIOR PHYSICAL SCIENTIST AND PROFESSOR,
PARDEE RAND GRADUATE SCHOOL

STATEMENT OF SCOTT N. PAUL

Mr. Paul. Thank you very much, Madam Chair, and to the
chair of the committee, to the ranking members, and to the
Members who are here today.
I am grateful for the opportunity to testify before this
important subcommittee on measures that will make our country
more competitive, particularly in manufacturing, and that is
where I will confine my remarks.
I believe you all have a copy of my written testimony. It
runs 6 pages. That is well over 5 minutes. So I will summarize
the highlights, and I will very much look forward to your
questions.
I would add that over the last 15 years I have been to, I
think, virtually all of your States to talk to workers and
voters about these concerns and have been to a lot of these
industrial towns. I share the sentiment of the chairman when he
says this is a top-of-mind issue for voters even if it doesn't
always rise to the top in Washington, DC.
Let me set the stage by just asking a question: Do we have
a problem that needs to be solved? And the answer is absolutely
yes.
Obviously, there are acute supply chain challenges. As Mr.
Pallone pointed out, there have been longer-term declines in
the relative performance of American manufacturing. And this
should concern all of us. It should concern all of us for a
couple of key reasons.
First of all, manufacturing is one of the rare drivers of
upward mobility for the vast majority of Americans who don't
have a college degree, a 4-year college degree. And so when we
are foreclosing those opportunities, we are denying the
American Dream to millions and millions of our fellow
countrymen and -women.
Second of all, national security depends on the performance
of American manufacturing.
From our battleships, to our guided missile systems, to the
armored personnel carriers that keep our military personnel
safe, we depend on a vibrant commercial market in
manufacturing, since we don't have state-run defense firms, to
ensure that they can succeed in the defense market as well.
And so having a fair and successful market in manufacturing
in the commercial sector is vital to our national security
needs.
Third, manufacturing is a tremendous driver of innovation
and patents in the United States. Fully two-thirds of the
research and development and 90 percent of all the patents that
are filed are filed by manufacturing companies.
So even though as a percentage of the economy it is smaller
than it used to be, it has an outsized share in terms of its
importance in the American economy today.
And you see it in your towns as well. When the factory is
doing well, the grocery stores are doing well, the hardware
stores are doing well, Main Street is more vibrant, people can
buy better homes and buy more services and take vacations.
I recall something that Mr. Bilirakis said. I remember
visiting with voters in Florida who said to me, ``We can tell
the amusement parks are fuller when the manufacturing economy
in the rest of the country is doing well because they have
disposable income that they can bring to our State.''
And so the spillover effects of manufacturing are
critically important.
Now, we face an acute crisis. Our supply chains, this
pandemic has shown, have been incredibly fragile, and it is a
toxic combination of overglobalization, just-in-time
production, and a lack of resiliency or redundancy. And this is
what happens when you offshore a lot of American capacity.
This began many decades ago. It was turbocharged by giving
China a blank check in 2000 and then not holding China to
account. And this was true of Democratic and Republican
administrations for a number of years.
But here we are today. We have lost millions of
manufacturing jobs, tens of thousands of factories, and we have
diminished capacity.
I will give one example. Even if we wanted to rebuild a
resilient energy grid in the United States, there is just one
supplier of grain-oriented electrical steel that is based in
the United States, which is one of the core components that
goes into that. We have let our capacities become incredibly
thin in this time--and it showed.
So when we face these black swan events, like a public
health crisis, or a natural disaster that disrupts supply
chains, or political risk coming from the Communist Party of
China, it shows just how exposed we are. So it makes sense to
make smart policy choices when it comes to manufacturing.
Now, I strongly believe that the measures that have been
proposed would make a difference. America has a long history of
successful public-private partnerships that have driven growth
in manufacturing. You see that from the space sector, to the
defense sector, to the energy sector, to semiconductors in a
wave of Japanese competition back in the 1990s.
So if we make targeted, strategic, smart investments with
the partnership of the private sector, we can have an
exponentially greater effect as we look ahead.
And the stakes are very high for us. We produce a paucity
of our own semiconductors now that we need for use in the
United States of America, and lithium ion batteries and solar
panels and many other types of national security goods like
armor plate and grain-oriented electrical steel----
Ms. Schakowsky. Mr. Paul, you are going to have to wrap up.
Mr. Paul. So I appreciate the chairwoman's admonition
there, and I will wrap up.
We have made some recommendations on how we think the
legislation could move forward. We support the preponderance of
these measures. And I look forward to taking your questions.
Thanks. And I apologize for running over.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Paul follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Ms. Schakowsky. No problem. The gentleman yields back.
And now I recognize Mr. Lincicome for his 5 minutes of
testimony.

STATEMENT OF SCOTT LINCICOME

Mr. Lincicome. Thank you, Chair Schakowsky, Ranking Member
Bilirakis, and members of the subcommittee.
My name is Scott Lincicome, and I am a senior fellow in
economic studies at the Cato Institute, where my research
focuses on manufacturing, industrial policy, and global supply
chains.
I want to thank you, Madam Chair, for inviting me to
testify today. And I want to thank Ranking Member Bilirakis, in
particular, for asking me to offer my views.
Now, before I begin, I should note that the Cato Institute
and its scholars do not endorse, oppose, or otherwise lobby on
specific legislation. So my comments today are thus intended to
be just for educational purposes.
I only have a few minutes, so I will just emphasize several
themes that were in my written statement and that carry across
my work and are thus relevant today. I would welcome your
followup questions.
First, U.S. manufacturing is far more competitive and
resilient than is often claimed. Data show, for example, that
the sector remains among the largest and most productive in the
world and had enjoyed, prior to the pandemic, a long stretch of
gains in output, investment, and financial performance.
Now, like all sectors, manufacturing suffered when COVID
first hit, but it quickly rebounded. This year, for example,
real value-added in manufacturing has hit new all-time highs,
and spending on capital goods and R&D has also resumed its
upward climb.
By contrast, declining manufacturing jobs and the sector's
shrinking share of GDP tell us very little because these trends
reflect long-term global dynamics shared by most industrialized
nations. This includes ones like Germany and Japan with active
industrial policies and trade surpluses. The trends are mainly
a standard story of economic development, not reason for
serious concern.
Second, there is little to suggest that isolationism or
industrial policy would durably benefit American manufacturing.
History shows that government attempts to achieve strategic
market-beating commercial outcomes routinely suffer from a lack
of knowledge about a chosen industry, a lack of checks on
political influence, a lack of discipline on project budget,
scope, or duration, a lack of consideration of preexisting
government policies that slow or derail projects, and a lack of
a comprehensive accounting for a project's unseen costs.
More importantly, U.S. industrial policies have undermined
their very own objectives. In just the last few years, for
example, tariffs on metals and Chinese imports, allegedly
implemented to boost American manufacturing, have deterred
investment and reduced industrial output and employment.
This is a disappointing but predictable result, given that
roughly half of all imports are inputs and capital goods used
by American manufacturers.
Third, there is no simple cure for global economic shocks.
Supply chains and economic openness inevitably risk a foreign
or global shock that roils domestic supplies. Such issues
surely have arisen since last year, as has been widely
reported. Far less reported, however, is how companies
immediately began adjusting to whatever supply chain challenges
arose.
Medical goods, I think, are a great example. According to a
December 2020 United States International Trade Commission
report, U.S. manufacturers and global suppliers acted quickly
to procure or produce new drugs, medical devices, PPE, and
other goods, resolving by the fall of last year shortages for
all but one product examined. Other industries have done the
same. But, of course, challenges remain.
This is a testament to the tireless work of manufacturers,
retailers, and logistics pros. But it is also, I think, a
cautionary tale for policymakers. By the time Congress decides
to intervene in a market, it will look much different than the
one on which that decision was based, and it will change again
by the time any government-supported production comes online.
Furthermore, while reshoring supply chains might insulate
us from certain external shocks, those same policies can
amplify shocks too. Indeed, we just saw this when an
unprecedented cold snap hit Texas, knocking out domestic
production and domestic supply chains.
Now we learn that Germany, a nation far more focused on
manufacturing and often a model for American industrial policy,
has suffered greater economic harms because of its heightened
dependence on domestic manufacturing.
Finally, future government action here should focus not on
trying to outsmart the market or on delivering subsidies to
privileged manufacturers and workers, but instead on economic
openness, diversification, and flexibility. This includes
policies liberalizing trade and foreign investment and making
ports and logistics operations more efficient.
Congress should also consider horizontal economic reforms,
like expanded high-skill immigration and streamlined corporate
tax and regulatory burdens.
Such policies would attract foreign investment and boost
manufacturing by increasing efficiency, increasing companies'
access to critical goods, services, and workers, dampening
economic shocks, boosting economic growth, and facilitating
rapid adjustment--precisely what America needs right now.
Thank you.\1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Mr. Lincicome's prepared statement has been retained in
committee files and is available at https://docs.house.gov/meetings/IF/
IF17/20211014/114123/HHRG-117-IF17-Wstate-LincicomeS-20211014.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Ms. Schakowsky. Thank you very much.
And now I welcome the testimony for 5 minutes of Mr. Sills.

STATEMENT OF ERIC P. SILLS

Mr. Sills. Thank you. And it is truly an honor to be
serving as a witness here today.
My name is Eric Sills, and I am the CEO of Standard Motor
Products. Standard is a 102-year-old company listed on the New
York Stock Exchange. It was founded by my great-grandfather,
and I represent the fourth generation of family management.
The company has revenue in excess of $1.1 billion per year
in sales, most of which are here in America. And while we do
have a global footprint, here in the U.S. we have 11 facilities
in eight States and employ approximately 2,500 associates.
The purpose of my testimony today is not to weigh in on the
proposed bills. That is not my expertise. And my fellow
witnesses, I am sure, are far more versed on the details than I
am.
Rather, I am here to provide insights into my company's
experiences over the last 18 months navigating the
unprecedented challenges manufacturers like me have been
facing, managing the way though the complexities of an
entrenched global supply chain.
My company's primary business is manufacturing automotive
replacement products, servicing the vehicle repair market. They
are largely nondiscretionary repair items used in critical
vehicle systems, including power trains, safety systems, and
emissions controls.
It was determined by the Department of Homeland Security
during the 2020 pandemic lockdowns that our industry has been
deemed essential as we keep America's critical infrastructure,
the 290 million vehicles on our roads, operating properly.
As you know, vehicles are used for everything, from getting
responders to emergencies, to allowing everyday people to
commute to work and perform their daily tasks. So, therefore,
it is truly vital that our products remain in ample supply to
satisfy the repair needs of America's aging vehicle population.
Right now, like so many other domestic manufacturers, we
rely on a global supply chain, and needless to say, we are
being impacted on multiple fronts. These issues include a
combination of severe shortages, significant delays, and
exorbitant cost increases.
In terms of materials, we are seeing issues across a wide
range of commodities. Semiconductors get a lot of attention,
and we are certainly affected by that. We are also seeing it in
silicone, plastic resins, multiple metals, including steel,
aluminum, and copper, even in packaging materials.
Constrained supply is causing allocations below our needs.
Lead times are extending sometimes to as much as a year. And
prices are increasing across the board, with many commodities
up 20 percent or more from historic values.
Secondly, transportation has also been extremely hard hit.
Congestion at the ports here in the U.S. as well as abroad is
significant, and it is compounded by a shortage of containers.
Our transportation lead times have doubled, and the cost of
shipping a container has increased an unbelievable sixfold from
an historic $3,000 per container to often over $18,000 per
container today.
Lastly, we are experiencing labor issues. While highly
skilled positions, such as software and automation engineers,
have been in short supply for a while, the near-term issue is
finding factory and distribution personnel.
This has caused a continued increase in wages, which is OK.
But even with that, it is leaving us with many positions
unfilled, especially semiskilled ones, such as forklift
drivers.
All of these issues combine for significant cost increases,
some of which we absorb, while others we do pass on, which
ultimately will increase the price to consumers.
But worse is the inability to satisfy demand. Certainly it
is causing a degree of lost revenue, both in my company as well
as my downstream customers.
But I believe the far bigger issue is that consumers are
experiencing delays in getting their vehicles repaired, which
again is critical to their daily lives.
All said, while my company is obviously incurring
challenges on multiple fronts, I believe we have certain
structural advantages that have helped us.
As opposed to some companies who rely very heavily on China
for their finished products, my company has developed its
footprint much more based in North America, taking advantage of
the benefits of NAFTA and now the USMCA.
So while we are reliant on Asia for portions of our
offering and for various components feeding our North American
operations, we are somewhat less beholden to Asia and the
supply chain shocks originating from there. We have kept our
more capital-intensive, higher-tech production in our U.S.
plants and our more labor-intensive operations in Mexico.
We do believe that this a strong answer to remain
competitive as a nation, relying on the benefits of regional
cost optimization and being less reliant on the Far East and
all the challenges it presents.
No one could have anticipated this perfect storm of events
that has led to this level of disruption, and there are no
quick fixes, which does leave us scrambling to find creative
solutions and do our best to navigate the daily challenges.
But I applaud the committee's desire to gain insights from
the lessons learned and identify potential structural changes
to address our vulnerability and thereby potentially prevent
recurrence.
Thank you very much.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Sills follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Ms. Schakowsky. The gentleman yields back.
I now recognize Dr. O'Connell for your 5 minutes of
testimony.

STATEMENT OF CAOLIONN O'CONNELL, Ph.D.

Dr. O'Connell. Thank you, members of the subcommittee, for
inviting me today.
In this oral testimony I want to highlight three aspects of
my written testimony.
First, I want to briefly describe the scope of the problem.
Second, I want to highlight the role that the public sector
can have in potentially improving supply chain resiliency.
And third, I want to note what I see as a critical first
step in improving supply chain resiliency.
To my first point, I want to acknowledge the breadth of the
problem.
Supply chain is defined as the raw materials components
required to manufacture a product, what frequently has been
called a Gordian knot, so large and complicated that simply
understanding all the links can feel like an intractable
problem.
But that definition is grossly incomplete in our modern-day
society. We are entering a world where cyber disruptions can
easily become supply chain disruptions.
In the production of programmable integrated circuits, the
supply chain should include not only the chip designer and the
silicon foundry where the chip is manufactured, but also the
software tools.
Using the SolarWinds hack as an example, hackers suspected
to be associated with Russia added malicious codes to a
SolarWinds software system used widely to manage the IT
resources.
This was a cyber hack that resulted in a supply chain
disruption. The malware allowed attackers to compromise the
servers on which the SolarWinds software was installed, and
about 18,000 customers were exposed to the vulnerability,
including multiple U.S. Government agencies, thereby allowing
hackers untold access to sensitive and proprietary information.
SolarWinds was only one supplier, and this software system
is merely a single element in the supply chain. But in a very
real sense, an information system is only as secure as the
least secure piece of software that runs on the system.
I recognize the legislation before you are about
manufacturing, but it is important to acknowledge that this is
just one element of the supply chain ecosystem.
To my second point, I want to highlight the role that the
public sector can have in potentially improving supply chain
resiliency. Market forces do not always result in the desired
outcomes. They can generate local optimizations that do not
consider the problem as a whole.
Using my national security experience as a case study,
consider, for example, the supply chain for joint operations
that serves the Joint Force.
The military services, geographic combatant commanders, the
Defense Logistics Agency, and others make independent decisions
about the purchase and positioning of spare parts. These
organizations have different responsibilities, authorities, and
incentivizes that drive their supply chain decisions, which are
optimized for the individual organizations.
In practice, these competing priorities can reduce the
overall effectiveness of the joint operating force that these
organizations support.
The public sector's role can be to make investments to
increase the overall effectiveness of a given sector's supply
chain. The public sector can shore up vulnerable supply chains
that support critical national security functions and essential
elements of the U.S. economy for which the private sector has
an incomplete appreciation of the risk or for which the cost
burden outweighs the perceived benefits.
And finally, for my third point I want to note what I see
as a critical first step in improving supply chain resiliency.
Research is necessary to determine which aspects of the
supply chain pose an existential risk to the United States
economy or the well-being of its citizens. If everything is
considered essential, then nothing will be truly protected.
Just as businesses must assess the cost-benefits associated
with supply chain resiliency, the U.S. Government also needs to
understand the value proposition. Not all supply chains merit a
Federal intervention, and for those sectors that are not
essential, market forces should prevail.
Initial work is underway, but there is still significant
analysis to be done. It is our assessment at RAND that supply
chains have become a major challenge for national security and
drove our decision to recently establish the National Security
Supply Chain Institute so that we can help our government
clients better understand and mitigate these risks.
Highly interconnected supply chains are a fact of life,
bringing both benefit and vulnerabilities, and those
vulnerabilities can stretch across whole sectors of the U.S.
economy.
It is a national security issue in the most basic sense: a
set of interests that, if disrupted, could directly affect the
health and well-being of the United States and its allies.
Meeting the challenges will take considerable effort, analysis,
and thought.
I look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Dr. O'Connell follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Ms. Schakowsky. Thank you so much to all of our witnesses.
We now have concluded with the witnesses' opening
statements. And at this time, we will move to Member questions
of our witnesses. And I will start with myself for 5 minutes.
So reinvesting in America's manufacturing base is
absolutely crucial to growing the economy and creating more
jobs. But to ensure that those are good-paying and secure jobs,
we have to put workers at the core of our effort to strengthen
our manufacturing base.
So my question first goes to Mr. Paul.
To strengthen our manufacturing base and to compete
globally, do you think that we need to compromise our labor
standards, such as living wages and health coverage and
workplace health and safety?
Mr. Paul. Thank you for the question.
The simple answer is no. And I will be happy to explain.
The United States is not going to win a race to the bottom.
It will find it to be self-defeating.
We have seen that. There is a concept called labor
arbitrage, and there is considerable economic evidence that as
we opened up our markets and reduced tariffs that it had
downward pressure on wages in the United States.
There are ways to combat this. Obviously, investing in
manufacturing domestically is one of those. We need to ensure
that our trade laws are strong and strictly enforced,
particularly when it comes to workers' rights violations in
other countries. I believe USMCA made some progress on that.
But the United States, for example, in the solar panel
sector, right now a lot of polysilicon is produced in western
China in the Uyghur region, and there is a great deal of
evidence that it is produced with forced labor.
We don't want to be in a position of having to compete with
that or have our workers compete with that. So it will take an
all-of-government approach.
But the way to succeed in manufacturing is to have workers
partnering with businesses to make successful innovations and
efficiencies that will make them more globally competitive and
not to pursue that race to the bottom, which we will never win.
Ms. Schakowsky. Thank you.
Dr. O'Connell, are there other industrialized nations that
have high labor standards that have thriving industrial bases,
let me ask you, and are there any lessons that we can learn
from those countries?
Dr. O'Connell. Certainly. And I think it has been mentioned
quite a few times, Germany has a very healthy wage for their
manufacturing sector and has strategically managed their
manufacturing sector.
Most notably, they have invested considerably in sort of
the global good for research and development that can benefit
their small and midsize enterprises to ensure that they can get
access to innovation and improving their manufacturing
capabilities.
Ms. Schakowsky. Thank you.
I wanted to ask a question of Mr. Sills.
The INFORM Consumers Act will require online marketplaces
to verify third-party sellers and to disclose basic seller
contact information. And I wanted to ask you your feelings.
How do counterfeit and stolen products impact your
business? And what harm is done then to consumers and to the
vehicles that they have and the parts that they have?
Mr. Sills. Thank you for the question.
And there is really nothing new in our industry with a
certain amount of counterfeit or substandard products coming
into the market. Without a doubt, the acceleration of e-
commerce has accelerated the issue, provided easier access to
the consumer to be able to procure substandard products.
So the big issue for sure is that when we are dealing with
safety-related items or to drivability issues, if a substandard
product is able to find its way into a repair shop and onto a
consumer's vehicle, it can have very detrimental effects.
So beyond just harming the businesses of us professional-
grade, premium-quality manufacturers, it can absolutely have a
detrimental effect on the consumer and truly highway safety.
Ms. Schakowsky. Thank you so much.
And I yield back and recognize Mr. Bilirakis for 5 minutes
for questions.
Mr. Bilirakis. Thank you. Thank you, Madam Chair.
First, I want to reemphasize my sincerity and thanks to
you, Madam Chair, for H.R. 4594, the Restoring Brand USA Act.
Thanks for the agenda and the bill today.
Of course, the bill reinvigorates our travel and tourism
industry. While we don't have a witness here at the hearing, I
will be submitting some questions for the record so that maybe
some of the presenters can talk to their colleagues with regard
to these particular private sectors and how Brand USA can
benefit.
The first question is for Mr. Sills.
As I mentioned in my opening statement, the recently
introduced INFORM Consumers Act, H.R. 5502, is a timely and
sound piece of legislation that will protect consumers while
they shop online, especially from malicious products or stolen
goods.
With the current supply chain shortages, have you seen an
increase in counterfeit auto parts or stolen parts, such as
airbags, being sold online in online marketplaces? And do you
think this legislation, this particular legislation, will help
curb proliferation of online sales of such items?
Mr. Sills. Well, thank you for the question.
While I don't have any hard data on there being an increase
due to the supply chain disruption we have been seeing,
certainly by virtue of the fact that it is getting harder to
find products, reputable products on shelves, it is providing
access to the counterfeit products and substandard products.
Relative to the specifics of the bill, I don't have enough
of the details to say how well it will address it. But I will
say that supply chain disruption has opened some doors for sure
to allow offshore importers to be able to gain access because
the normal source of supply is currently unavailable.
Mr. Bilirakis. That is unfortunate.
Next question again for Mr. Sills.
On a separate note, you may be aware of the recent Reuters
report on the Biden administration recently approved the
semiconductor technology licensing for Huawei--that is very
troubling--China's blacklisted telecommunications company, to
purchase this particular technology, the Huawei.
This prompted me and 12 other Members of this committee to
send a letter to the Secretary of Transportation inquiring on
what implications this recent action will have on the U.S.
automotive industry and the development of next-generation
vehicles, such as AVs.
You mention in your testimony millions of vehicles will not
be sold in 2021 and 2022 because of the current semiconductor
shortage.
While I know your industry is not the only one hurting from
this current shortage, are you concerned with the Biden
administration's decision to prioritize semiconductors from
Huawei when American industries, American companies, are not
able to make ends meet?
If you could comment on that, I would appreciate it, sir.
Mr. Sills. I don't feel adequately informed on the Huawei
issue. But what I would say is that semiconductor access is a
major issue. And so anything that we can do to increase the
source of supply.
And really for my industry it tends to be more on the
legacy chips, which I am glad to see that there is some
emphasis on creating some increased capacity to be able to
provide the types of chips that are used in some of the more
legacy automotive products.
But I believe that anything that we can do to ensure
ongoing secure, robust supply is a positive certainly for my
company.
Mr. Bilirakis. Mr. Lincicome, do you wish to comment?
Mr. Lincicome. Yes, thank you.
So I also can't speak to the specific transaction or the
national security determination for Huawei.
But I do think it is important to note that, with respect
to U.S. sanctions and semiconductors, that this is a fantastic
example of some of the unintended consequences that can pop up
from American industrial and trade policies.
Because there is some evidence that overbroad primary and
secondary sanctions on chips and chip-producing equipment to
China have actually contributed to the current chip shortages,
because Chinese firms have hoarded chips in response to U.S.
sanctions, or they have been able to produce these low-end
legacy bulk commodity chips, decreasing global supply. And
these didn't have any really national security nexus.
So certainly it is of course important from a national
security perspective to deny potentially national security-
related products. But we do have to think, I think, be acutely
aware of the potential blowback for the U.S. economy and for
U.S. manufacturers.
Mr. Bilirakis. Thank you very much.
I will go ahead and submit the rest of my questions for the
record.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I yield back.
Ms. Schakowsky. Thank you.
The gentleman yields back.
And now I recognize the chair of the full committee, Mr.
Pallone, for 5 minutes of questioning.
Mr. Pallone. Thank you, Chairwoman.
I wanted to ask Mr. Paul. Globalization protectionist
policies and market interventions by other countries have
profoundly changed the global economic landscape. But how have
these market forces affected our manufacturing sector and
American competitiveness, if you will?
Mr. Paul. Thank you for the question, Mr. Chairman.
These--both broadly globalization and specifically some
elements of it have had profound consequences for American
manufacturing over the last two decades.
Your own opening statement pointed out that our relative
performance to other leading industrialized countries has
declined. We find that in key sectors within the United States,
as well, import penetration or the amount that we are dependent
on imports to satisfy our domestic consumer demand has
increased extraordinarily as well in things, again, that have
strategic importance like semiconductors, photovoltaic cells,
and many other--many other types of items and components that
go into American manufacturing.
Now, this is not a naturally occurring event. There were
state interventions by the Chinese Communist Party to bolster
its own industry and to prop up state-owned enterprises that
are, in fact, opened by the state, or by subfederal entities to
gain market share globally.
That, in combination with a trade policy that was far more
about liberalization than it was about enforcing the rules in
the United States over a period of decades, led to some serious
declines.
These have been documented by economists at MIT like David
Autor, at the New York Federal Reserve, and at Yale, a seminal
study called ``The Surprisingly Swift Decline of American
Manufacturing,'' that can all be traced back to this
combination of globalization and then the rules that were laid
out to do it.
Now, there is a way to unwind some of this. It is not easy.
There is no single solution. But first of all, having the
intent to bolster manufacturing is important. And that does
include public-private partnerships and smart and strategic
investments in industries that are of importance for national
security, as well as industries that we want to grow in the
future as well.
Mr. Pallone. Well, let me ask you on the same vein, Mr.
Paul. I mean, obviously, you need--you think we need some
targeted Federal investments to restore the market conditions
necessary to improve our industrial sector. But so just comment
on that.
And then as an alternative, deregulation, or tax breaks.
Will deregulation and tax breaks restore our manufacturing
strength, or do we really need to have some targeted Federal
investments? That would be my question.
Mr. Paul. Thank you, Mr. Pallone.
Well, we have some evidence. There were periods of
deregulation and increased taxes during some administrations.
The performance of manufacturing generally did not increase
during those times.
And what we have seen, however, that if we--if we can gain
leverage in the global economy, if we are making smart,
strategic investments in industries that have value chains and
having those value chains concentrated in the United States, it
makes a great deal of sense.
The tax cuts that were passed in the last administration
had a sugar rush for manufacturing. There is no question about
that. There was some pent-up investment, but that got spent
very quickly. And manufacturing employment was suffering, even
before the pandemic took effect.
Now, if we do chart a new course--and this is obviously
beyond the scope of the committee here--but with respect to
trade policy, along with the public-private partnerships and
strategic investments that you are suggesting, we can certainly
have a better outlook. And we can do this better. We don't need
state ownership. We are more entrepreneurial than Germany, and
we are flexible. And I have every confidence that we can gain
some lost market share at the global level.
Mr. Pallone. I only have 20 seconds. I was going to ask Mr.
Sills if he wanted to share any thoughts, but there is only 15
seconds left. Is there anything you want to say in 15 seconds,
or 10?
Mr. Sills. The clock is ticking, but what I would say is
that I do believe that there are benefits that having a global
supply chain, each region has some inherit benefits. And, so,
it is a matter of optimizing and, as I mentioned in my
preliminary statement, shifting as much here to North America
but then taking advantage of the different markets and benefits
that they have within the region rather than trying to force
things into an area where it will always be difficult to be
competitive.
Mr. Pallone. All right. Thank you so much.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Ms. Schakowsky. The gentleman yields back.
And now I recognize the ranking member of the full
committee, Congresswoman Rodgers.
Mrs. Rodgers. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Mr. Lincicome, I wanted to ask you about your testimony,
because you referenced in your testimony that government-
directed industrial policies have often undermined the very
objective that they seek to achieve. And, for example, you
point to government subsidies of green technologies often
crowding out the private investment.
I believe that our approach needs to be to remove barriers
that impede investment in American innovation and ingenuity,
and lift the regulatory burden and continue to keep taxes low.
I will note that, according to the Tax Foundation under the
reconciliation package that is being promoted right now by the
majority, our tax levels in the United States of America would
become the highest--or the third highest, third highest
corporate tax rate if that package is passed. Now, those are
the funds that are being meant to pay for this manufacturing
program.
I wanted to ask you: How do you suggest that we address
supply chain security and resilient manufacturing without
resorting to this approach?
Mr. Lincicome. Thank you, Congresswoman.
You are right. I think it is right to be concerned about
the tax code changes. Research shows, for example, that higher
corporate taxes actually discourage innovation, and a lot of it
falls on workers and consumers, not shareholders. But in terms
of supply chain resiliency, I think the Federal Government
should prioritize several things.
First, we really need to remove the current legal and
regulatory obstacles to companies' ability to access essential
inputs and capital goods at globally competitive prices. This
includes not only reforming tariffs and taxes but also taking a
hard look at maritime labor and transportation regulations that
make U.S. ports and logistics networks less flexible and
efficient, thus exacerbating supply chain shops.
In fact, I think Mr. Sills' is a fantastic example of a
globalized company that needs more efficient access to these
types of inputs.
Second, the United States needs to reengage with the world,
particularly with friends in the Asia-Pacific region but also
at the World Trade Organization seeking to lower barriers to
U.S. goods and services, and to provide those nations with a
consumer and supply chain alternative to China.
And, finally, I think we need to reform our domestic
regulatory regime to make it easier for manufacturers to locate
and invest here. Most notably, we need to examine closely our
environmental regulatory regime. This is permitting and
litigation under the National Environmental Protection Act, for
example, which even the Biden administration itself has
acknowledged has deterred or delayed indefinitely certain types
of essential manufacturing and mining here.
Do those things, not higher corporate taxes, and I think we
might actually move the needle.
Mrs. Rodgers. OK. Thank you.
Mr. Sills, I appreciated in your testimony you pointing to
the importance of us prioritizing policies like that would
deploy artificial intelligence and autonomous vehicles. I thank
you for being here with us today.
A national framework for autonomous vehicles has been a
priority for this subcommittee now for 3 years, and I believe
it is very important that we are enacting legislation. And, in
fact, this subcommittee--House passed legislation that was led
by this committee several years ago now.
But if we don't act quickly, we are going to cede this
lifesaving technology and really the future of automobiles to
China. And what that would mean for the United States is--would
mean a loss of countless jobs, control of the autonomous
vehicle supply chain, and the benefits that we would like to
see for seniors and people with disabilities.
So, as a business owner in the automotive sector ecosystem,
would you speak to how we would be impacted in the United
States if we failed to enact a national standard for autonomous
vehicles, that framework that China wants to dominate?
Mr. Sills. Thank you for the question.
And we have [inaudible] the past 100 years in the world in
automotive, not just from a manufacturing, design, development
standpoint, but it is from the motoring public standpoint it is
such a core part of how we operate as a country, is our
transportation. And we are much more of a vehicle-based
transportation country than many.
So I do believe, fundamentally, it is very important that
America maintains its position as a global leader. Certainly
vehicle technologies is somewhat an inflection point, whether
it has to do with electrification or a move towards autonomous
vehicles or other significant advancements in transportation
technologies. It would be a true shame, for sure, if we as a
country ceded that leadership.
So I think it is something that we need to look at all the
different elements to make sure that we can continue to lead,
remove those where we can, because it would, as I said, be a
real shame if we were to cede this leadership.
Mrs. Rodgers. Thank you. Thank you. I have more questions,
but I ran out of time.
I yield back. Thank you.
Ms. Schakowsky. The gentlewoman yields back.
And now I recognize Congresswoman Castor for questions.
Ms. Castor. All right. Thank you, Chairwoman Schakowsky,
for organizing this important hearing on American
competitiveness and manufacturing. Thanks to our witnesses.
Right now, all across America, clean energy and energy
efficiency are saving consumers and businesses money. They are
creating jobs. They are reducing pollution. It is clear that
Americans will be demanding more efficient heat pumps, electric
vehicles, solar panels, and more. And we want these products to
be made in America.
In the Climate Crisis Action Plan introduced last year, we
identified a number of opportunities to accelerate clean
energy, the clean energy transition and manufacture, clean
energy technologies in the U.S., and ways to cut industrial
pollution, all while securing more resilient supply chains and
bolstering competitiveness.
The good news for consumers and businesses is that clean
energy actually saves a lot of money. A recent analysis by
Vibrant Clean Energy found that a clean electric grid with
expanded distributed solar and storage is $88 billion less
expensive than business as usual.
So cleaning up electricity is cheaper than doing nothing.
But to secure this transition, we need to make these clean
energy technologies here in America.
Mr. Paul, several critical products, materials, and
minerals--from lithium in electric vehicle batteries, to the
steel in a wind turbine, to the polysilicon in a solar panel--
are key to the production of renewable energy. You mentioned
one at the top in your testimony as well.
How can supply chain resilience help ensure that the
continued transition to lower-cost, renewable energy creates
family-sustaining jobs and strengthens manufacturing in the
U.S.?
Mr. Paul. Thank you for the excellent question,
Representative Castor. I appreciate it.
The transition to clean energy is a very important one.
There is no question that there are laudable goals from an
environmental perspective to do it. There is also a jobs
imperative as we make this transition. And I think for the
average American, simply trading foreign oil for made-in-China
solar panels is not the tradeoff they want to make.
They need good jobs. If there are men and women who are
working on the oil rigs who are earning a good union wage, they
need to be offered a just transition to careers in clean energy
that are going to be providing those good jobs as well.
Now, some of those will be in installing, but many of those
will be in manufacturing. And that is where the United States
can possess extraordinary capabilities.
We first invented many of these technologies a generation
ago, and then we didn't build the demand here. We offshored
much of the production. We lost that capability. With the right
interventions, we can get that back.
And part of that is the demand side. But part of that is
through procurement, through tax incentives, and through other
measures that will drive investment into this sector. And we
know it is possible. We can be successful in this.
And in addition to the critical materials that you're
talking about, including some rare earth, some lithium, there
are very basic materials that go into these as well. There are
thousands of tons of steel in wind turbines. There are
extraordinary amount of tonnage of metals in solar panel
installations, as well.
And the more the supply chains are based in the United
States, the better it is for the jobs outlook for us. It makes
no sense to build a clean energy economy on the backs of forced
labor from the Uyghur population in China, but that
unfortunately is the model that could take shape unless we take
drastic steps to shape this in a way that is going to advantage
workers in the United States.
Ms. Castor. Well, I agree. There is no reason we should be
seeding our manufacturing base in these important technologies
in China and other countries, but we have got to top sensible
supply chain and resiliency provisions to help give it a push.
Mr. Sills, there is a lot of excitement among American auto
workers, the American auto manufacturers, about the new
electric vehicles. I mean, this is what the wave of the future
is going to be. There is a very significant competitiveness
issue because we want to be the world leader on electric
vehicles, buses, transit vehicles as well.
But we have to keep--be mindful of the supply chains and
how they are going to change over time. There were a couple of
recent great announcements in Tennessee and Kentucky on new
manufacturing plants.
But what do you recommend here for the automobile
manufacturing sector building and maintaining the competitive
advantage for EVs and their components?
Ms. Schakowsky. I am afraid he is going to have to answer
that in writing because the gentlewoman's----
Ms. Castor. Thank you. I yield back.
Ms. Schakowsky [continuing]. Time has passed.
And now let me recognize Mister--and how time flies--to Mr.
Upton for his 5 minutes.
Mr. Upton. Thank you. Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank you.
As the--I got the wrong--you are looking out my window
here. Well, you are looking at my bird feeder. There. I got it.
I got it. A beautiful day here in rainy southwest Michigan.
I think you have got me now. Come on there. It is a
beautiful day in rainy, southwest Michigan.
As the--first of all, thanks for the hearing. And as the
top Republican on the Subcommittee on Energy, where many of our
discussions have focused on the new technologies and sources of
energy that we need to use, in many of those discussions we
have talked about the materials that we need and the supply
chains that are required to obtain those very materials, it is
certainly most critical.
I introduced H.R. 1599, Securing America's Critical
Minerals Supply Act, last April, which focuses on critical
minerals and securing American energy. The legislation is going
to require the Department of Energy to conduct assessments of
and secure any energy resource that is essential to the U.S.
and has a vulnerable supply chain.
So, Mr. Lincicome and Dr. O'Connell, what role should we
see from the Department of Energy, which has subject matter
expertise on the critical materials that supply our Nation's
energy infrastructure? What role should they play in securing
our critical supply chains, particularly as we look at--and I
know that Ranking Member Cathy McMorris Rodgers mentioned this
from the Chinese Communist Party. What are some of the things
that we need to do?
Mr. Lincicome. Please, Caolionn.
Dr. O'Connell. So, from a national security perspective, I
think an important aspect of critical minerals is understanding
sort of our time-to-survive and time-to-recover metrics,
meaning time to survive--how long can we consume our strategic
reserves of critical materials, given an environment where
let's say we are at war, and guarantee that access?--and then,
what is the time to recover as in pivot to another location or
another supplier for those minerals?
Some of these minerals are just manufactured and produced
in certain countries, and there is no way around it. Niobium in
Brazil is a big example of that, where Chinese state-owned
enterprises have invested in those mines in Brazil for niobium.
So we need to have a policy in place for assuring that we
have access to the minerals that we need for the essential
products that rely on those.
Thank you.
Mr. Upton. So would you say this is a more of Department of
Commerce role, or Department of Energy? Are we seeing real
cooperation between those?
Dr. O'Connell. I do not know the extent of cooperation
between Commerce, Energy. I think there is an element of DoD in
there. USGS is also an element. I mean, this is--this requires
multiple agencies to engage and understand the need to then
make sure that we have resilient supply chains, given the
various circumstances we can imagine confronting.
Mr. Upton. Thank you.
Mr. Lincicome. Thank you, Congressman. I would just add a
few things.
First, I think the Government has a role in stockpiling,
for sure, in terms of assuring adequate domestic supplies in
times of national emergency or whatever.
Second, though, I mentioned before and I will mention it
again: The domestic regulatory environment is really essential
when it comes to the domestic production of critical minerals.
Again, looking at something like lithium, for example, the
Biden administration's own supply chain report started looking
at foreign sources for lithium in the near term, because
environmental regulation in the United States is quite onerous.
And it is not just NEPA litigation, but also simply
permitting process, which is longer than in developed countries
like Australia and Canada, for example.
And that gets to the third point. We really should examine
international partnerships with close allies for critical
minerals, Canada and Australia being excellent examples of
that. We have a long history through the NTIB and other
programs of creating domestic, defense-related supply chain
resiliency with our close allies. And that is something that we
should, I think, expand and that, I think, past legislation,
like the NDAA last year, actually looked to do that.
Mr. Upton. Well, thank you both.
And, Madam Chair, I would like to submit the testimony of
Dr. Michelle Foss of Rice University before the Energy
Subcommittee on the critical mineral supply chain for the
record.
And with that, I yield back the balance of my time. Thank
you.
Ms. Schakowsky. Without objection.
[The information appears at the conclusion of the hearing.]
Ms. Schakowsky. And now I recognize Mr. McNerney for his 5
minutes of questions.
Mr. McNerney. Well, I thank the Chair.
This is really a timely and important hearing as we are
seeing in our shelves in our stores get emptied and people
worried about the holiday season, but it goes much deeper than
that. It is a national security issue. The supply chain gaps
can't be addressed if they aren't identified or addressed, but
many of our supply chain vulnerabilities go ignored until a
crisis emerges. And that is really sort of human nature.
Dr. O'Connell, in your testimony, you discussed the
complexities of globalized supply chains. Are the private firms
and the Federal Government effectively identifying supply chain
vulnerabilities?
Dr. O'Connell. I would argue that most--so the Federal
Government has insight into the primary contracts and some
degree of insight into their subcontracts. Same with private
firms. They know who they do business with, who their primary
suppliers are. And they might have some insight into their tier
2 subcontracts.
But without a comprehensive understanding of the
interrelationships, and really interconnected world and global
economy, I think we have accepted risk in places that maybe we
haven't appreciated.
Mr. McNerney. Thank you.
Mr. Paul, should the Federal Government play a more active
role in monitoring critical supply chains so we can identify
the vulnerabilities before they become a crisis?
Mr. Paul. Mr. McNerney, thank you for the question.
Yes, it should. It is doing so in some cases. The
Department of Defense, again, has some emphasis on it. But it
does have limitations. Those limitations are compounded by
commercial off-the-shelf requirements and other sorts of things
that make supply chain tracing a little more difficult.
I think that there has been more attention on a bipartisan
basis paid to this recently, beginning with the last
administration and carrying into the Biden administration with
the Supply Chain Task Force as well as the supply chain
Executive order that have been established to look at four
absolutely critical technologies, and then to broaden the scope
a little bit. I think that that information will be valuable.
I will also say that some of that already exists. We
published records written by former Governor and Homeland
Security Secretary Tom Ridge in 2012 and by retired Brigadier
General John Adams in 2013 about significant supply chain
vulnerabilities with respect to goods that are critical for
Homeland Security as well as to national security. We presented
those findings to the Obama administration, to the Trump
administration, and as well as to the Biden administration. We
are pleased that this attention has been paid. I think that is
the first step.
The second step is to get solid recommendations and then to
take action that will both secure the supply chains, to
encourage the reshoring of those that we deem feasible to do
so, and to make some progress on this, because the pandemic was
not a one-off. We know that we can expect black swan events in
the future. We just don't know what form they are going to
take, but we need to be prepared for that.
Mr. McNerney. So we should have seen this coming then?
Mr. Paul. In many ways, yes. I mean, our systems run on
just-in-time inventories, on very, very fragile globalized
supply chains that depend on everything going absolutely right
all the time. And we don't build in either the redundancies,
the stockpile, or the types of flexibility that we need when
things aren't going right.
And that can appear at any time through a natural disaster,
through a global health crisis, through some political risk or
military risk that is established. We haven't done a great job
of mitigating against those, no.
Mr. McNerney. Well, thank you.
Mr. Sills, thanks for your testifying this morning. Could--
well, this morning in California. Could the supply chain
resilience of domestic manufacturing improve if the Federal
Government played a more active role in monitoring the current
supply chains and identifying vulnerabilities?
Mr. Sills. Thank you for the question.
And the notion of better visibility through monitoring
superficially, of course, sounds great. But the devil is in the
details. It is going to depend on the quality and, frankly, the
timeliness of the data. And so I think it will be effective if
you wanted to look more towards the future.
So, for example, if we had been monitoring the
vulnerability of microchips 3 years ago, maybe we would have
been able to do something. But if it only hit the radar 9
months ago when we started to be in short supply, it would not
have been something that was going to be particularly
actionable.
So I think a lot depends on the quality of the data and the
timeliness and the usability of the data. I also think it is
important to recognize that there are a lot of
interdependencies in the supply chain, and to monitor just one
link in the chain and ignore the interdependencies could
actually lead to some misleading information.
So, for example, if we spent all of our time worrying about
the ports but didn't think about container availability or
drivers to take product away from the ports, you are only to
going to be monitoring one chain in the whole link--one link,
and the whole chain could fall.
Mr. McNerney. Thank you.
My time has expired, but I was going ask Mr. Paul to answer
in writing if he thinks the legislation we are considering
today would have mitigated some of the problems we are seeing
in our supply chain. Thank you.
I yield back.
Ms. Schakowsky. The gentleman yields back.
And now I welcome Mr. Latta for his 5 minutes of
questioning.
Mr. Latta. Well, thank you very much, Madam Chair. I really
appreciate it.
And thanks to our witnesses for being with us today. And I
am very proud of the fact that, according to the National
Manufacturers' latest numbers, I have 86,000 manufacturing jobs
in my district.
Recently Peloton, which is, of course, the exercise bike
company, is going to be building their first plant in the
United States in my district. And there will be about 2,200
jobs.
And then First Solar, which is the largest solar panel
manufacturer in the Western Hemisphere, also is breaking ground
to expand their facility. And that is going to add about 500
employees. So we have a lot going on in northwest Ohio.
Mr. Lincicome, if I could ask you a couple of questions
here. The United States is the top designation for global
manufacturing investment. One of the pieces of legislation we
are considering today is Mr. Pence's Global Investment in
American Jobs Act. It would enhance America's competitiveness
on the global stage for direct--or foreign direct investment,
FDI, and reduce barriers to investment.
How can encouraging FDI create stronger supply chains and
allow U.S. manufacturers to make more--make them more globally
competitive products right here in the United States?
Mr. Lincicome. Thank you, Congressman.
I totally agree that FDI is a--should be a priority.
Studies show that foreign direct investment in the United
States not only boosts the manufacturing in other industries in
which these companies invest, but actually benefits the
surrounding communities and the surrounding companies as being
potentially input suppliers or servicing those companies.
Foreign-owned companies in the United States tend to pay
more, tend to trade more, tend to do all the--and have these
established supplier networks and knowledge that, I think, can
actually boost supply chain resilience.
So you mentioned First Solar as a German company. That is
really a great example of that. You mentioned Peloton as well.
These are companies that have a global footprint. And, of
course, they have domestic production and domestic jobs. But
they also demand on access to global inputs and global work, a
global workforce.
And so, to the extent that the United States can remove
regulatory and other barriers to foreign investment, including
trade barriers, giving these companies access to the raw
materials, inputs, and workers they need is, I think, an
excellent, excellent endeavor.
Mr. Latta. Well, and First Solar is a very interesting
company because it was formed by three individuals right here
in my home county. And it is a great story of American
ingenuity and investment right here in our own backyard.
But you bring up a point that I have heard from a lot of
different companies that are looking at committing to the
United States. One of the things they say is that, when our
energy costs were lower--unfortunately, we were seeing them go
up in this past year--that they looked at the United States as
great place to come because of the energy that we have to
offer.
But also, Mr. Lincicome, we all know that with COVID 19
pandemic it stressed--it has really stressed our global supply
chain. And we learned areas where it can be strengthened.
However, the U.S. manufacturing sector stepped up to the plate
and met increased demand quickly and efficiently. This is like
Spartan Chemical, which is also in my district in Maumee, Ohio,
increased production, invested in new product capabilities to
get cleaning supplies out for businesses and consumers,
especially at the height of the pandemic.
How would regulatory barriers and government mandates
prevent manufacturing industries from responding to future
supply chain stocks?
Mr. Lincicome. It certainly prevents--creates an
impediment, Congressman, because it denies these ability--these
companies the ability to adapt on the fly. What really is
essential for our domestic, legal, regulatory tax regimes is
maintaining or maximizing flexibility and adaptability in times
of whatever shock comes down the road, because we really never
know. Your shocks happen pretty often in the supply chain, and
you never know what the next one is going to be.
And, in fact, I mentioned that USITC report from December
of last year, and it said that in the medical goods space, one
of the primary complaints for domestic manufacturers was having
to try to navigate existing rules and regulations for certain
types of medical goods.
Now, look, of course, product safety is important. But at
the same time, there has to be a consideration of how these
types of regulations really inhibit our manufacturers from not
only adapting but from competing globally with manufacturers in
China or anywhere else.
Mr. Latta. Well, thank you very much.
Madam Chair, my time is about to expire. And I will submit
my last question to the witness as we go forward. So thank you
very much.
I yield back.
Ms. Schakowsky. Thank you. The gentleman yields back.
And Mr. Cardenas, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Cardenas. Thank you, Chairwoman Schakowsky and Ranking
Member Bilirakis, for having this important meeting.
I just want to emphasize that we can't have a strong supply
chain without the right workforce, and I have been engaged as a
former small business owner myself. I was not a manufacturer,
but I respect and appreciate that southern California is one of
the manufacturing juggernauts of the world, even though it is
only a small--a subset of the State of California. We are
dominant because of the workforce that we have. But this
workforce is not matching today's environment.
That is why I make sure that I am constantly in touch with
the manufacturing associations, manufacturers in my district.
And I have actually brought them together with high schools and
community colleges to make sure that they actually learn from
each other and realize that there are jobs out there right now,
good-paying jobs, that are not being filled, because we have a
mismatch problem.
On any given day in America--anybody can look at the
statistics. On any given day in America, there are just as many
Americans looking for a job as there are job openings, give or
take, about the same. But what we have is a mismatch problem.
And that means we have people looking for work, but they are
not matching well with the jobs that are being offered today.
That is why I think it is very important that we make sure
that at every level--at the local level, the State level, and
the Federal level--that we recognize that we need to right-size
what we are teaching in our schools, how we are educating
people, et cetera, for the jobs of today and tomorrow.
For example, I have the Expanding Opportunity through Pre-
Apprenticeships Act. The bill provides grants to serve
participants from nontraditional apprenticeship populations,
with preference to women, people of color, veterans, those
impacted by the youth or adult criminal justice system, and
individuals who have barriers to employment. These are the
kinds of things that we can and should do.
A great country to look at in this manner is Germany.
Germany is very innovative. Like America, we are very
innovative. But if we don't pay attention to down-line issues,
we are going to have a mismatch. And we are going to have a lot
of activity that is waiting to happen, but we don't have people
to fill those jobs that are going to create that activity.
So, Mr. Sills, can you describe the challenges your company
has faced when it comes to recruiting or hiring or retaining
workers? And how does the--how do these challenges affect your
manufacturing and your competitiveness?
Mr. Sills. Thank you for the question, Congressman. And
it--very well said. Your entire remarks are what I live all day
long. There is that mismatch of those who are looking for work
and the types of work that is being made available, and some
does have to do with workforce development and training, and
making sure that America's youth are coming up with the right
skills for the jobs of the future. And we do, as a country,
need to address that.
There is even a matter of today's current workforce,
deciding what type of work that they are interested in doing.
And there are no easy answers. I think that we need to look at
all options to make sure that we are encouraging, first of all,
everybody to enter the workforce, and then to provide good
opportunities with good career growth so that we can grow it.
But you are right. We have openings in every level of our
organization, from the simplest unskilled order filler in the
distribution center up to engineers and IT folks and business
analysts. And there is just--there is a shortage.
If you go downstream two levels in my industry's channel
where you are at the independent repair shops, there is a huge
shortage of automotive technicians. And it is a wonderful
career. It could be a six-figure career. But it still has the
reputation of America's youth of being a mechanic, of being a
grease monkey. But it is being a technician of a very
sophisticated computer.
How do we overcome that? How do we get more people who are
interested in associate degrees and vocational training? This
is a major issue for America, and you ask all the right
questions. I don't have the right answers.
Mr. Cardenas. OK. Well, thank you for doing what you do
every single day and putting people to work and moving our
economy in the private sector.
And I think government does have a role. I think that we
should make sure that we enhance our apprenticeship programs.
Again, I think Germany does that incredibly well. So they have
a better right-size fitting for their populace and what is
going on in their economy.
Mr. Paul, do you believe that apprenticeship programs could
be improved in our country?
Mr. Paul. I absolutely do. I identify myself with your
remarks and those of Eric Sills as well, and I will be happy to
answer in a lengthier form, I guess in a written submission, as
I know we are out of time.
Mr. Cardenas. Thank you so much.
Madam Chairwoman, I yield back. Thank you.
Ms. Schakowsky. I thank you so much.
And I now recognize Mr. Guthrie for 5 minutes.
Mr. Guthrie. Thank you, Madam Chair, for the recognition. I
appreciate it.
And one of the great announcements that was mentioned
earlier for manufacturing is BlueOval SK, which is Ford Motor
Company, they are going to put their gigaplant--it is going to
be twice the size of the Tesla gigaplant--in Kentucky. So we
are all excited, and my district is excited to have them here.
Mr. Lincicome, I was--it is good that we are, as much as we
regret not being in person, being in our districts before we
have these hearings. It is helpful this morning.
I was at a manufacturing plant and talking to a logician,
and he was talking about the issue with California isn't just
the 30 or 40 days it takes to unload the material. And
hopefully yesterday, the President meeting with some people to
get some of the work rules straightened out so we can get our
ports more productive.
And he said it is not just the lack of truck drivers. He
said that is a problem. He said, ``But I can hire trucks to go
pick up my stuff.'' He says what takes about 30 to 35 days to
get stuff off the ports is California--different than 49 other
States--have truck regulations, that, ``I can find a truck
driver with a truck that is willing to go pick up my stuff. But
a truck that you can drive in 49 other States, you can't drive
into California.''
And also, we talked about German manufacturers as well. You
won't hear this from multinational business leaders in Germany.
But if you have access to talk to German middle-level
manufacturers, family businesses, people--probably businesses
like Mr. Sills operates--in Germany, if you are able to talk to
them, they are terrified of what is going to happen this winter
with the cost of energy prices because the decisions that the
German Government has made to go to a certain level of
renewables when the technology is not there to do so. And they
are really--these are real fears that are coming from German
business leaders.
So, Mr. Lincicome, have you heard about the issue with not
truck drivers, just the type of trucks? And as we as a Congress
are debating some things moving forward, all of us on this
committee, Republicans and Democrats, want better and more
manufacturing because it produces the best jobs.
And I am for more apprenticeships with Mr. Cardenas, as we
talked about. But the problem is, we are going to do other
things that are going to counter the ability to manufacturer in
this country.
Would you like to talk about the environmental
requirements? We want a cleaner environment. But just throwing
out arbitrary standards is going to--there are some German
businesses that are really terrified about their ability to
survive this winter.
Mr. Lincicome. Thank you, Congressman.
Yes, I think, even for a Libertarian like me, I think there
is, obviously, I can say there is a role for the Federal
Government ensuring that we have efficient cross-State border
trade as well, and that regulatory impediments in one State
don't prevent the free flow of interstate commerce, which is
perfectly a constitutional authority in the Federal Government
to examine.
I would note, however, also that, in the truck situation in
the United States, we are having a chassis shortage of sorts,
which--chassis are what trucks hook up to. You put the
container on the back of the chassis. Well, one of the reasons
why we have this chassis shortage is we have imposed 220
percent tariffs on chassis from China, which is the largest
producer.
Now, China, we can have our significant concerns about
Chinese subsidies in the West. But the problem is that U.S.
trade remedies law doesn't allow us to consider in any way,
perhaps pause--at least pause during the shipping crisis--these
types of tariffs.
And truckers and logistics pros that probably haven't slept
in 18 months routinely mention the chassis shortage and these
tariffs affecting the situation.
And so this, again, is why I caution that, while
nationalist policy sounds great, it sounds easy to protect,
subsidize workers and industries, but when you--the devil, as
Mr. Sills said, is in the details. And occasionally, you can
end up--quite often you can end up doing more harm than good in
these areas.
Mr. Guthrie. I want to talk about--you mentioned, Mr.
Lincicome, foreign direct investment. We have to be careful
with that2, because Toyota Camry is an American-built car, it
is a Kentucky-built car. It is not in my district, but a lot of
suppliers are. So would you talk about foreign direct
investment with nations that share our values, and we have to
continue to work together on that as well?
Mr. Lincicome. Most definitely. You know, the United States
remains one of the largest destinations for FDI in the world.
But the--to continue that top ranking, we really need to
consider how our trade, regulatory, and other tax environments
might discourage companies from locating here.
You know, you mentioned automotive. The South, of course,
has had an explosion of automotive jobs and automotive plants
over the years. But a lot of those foreign-owned companies
depend on having unfettered access to other markets in either
Japan or Europe or Mexico and Canada. And to the extent that
government policy starts to thwart those types of voluntary
cross-border transactions by companies, then people aren't
going to invest here as much. And that is going to impact our
jobs.
Mr. Guthrie. Yes, thanks for that answer.
My time has expired.
Madam Chair, I yield back.
Ms. Schakowsky. The gentleman yields back.
Mr. Guthrie. Thank you.
Ms. Schakowsky. And now I recognize Congresswoman Dingell
for her 5 minutes of questions.
Mrs. Dingell. Thank you, Chairwoman Schakowsky, for holding
this important hearing--this subject is one of the most
important ones to me in this year--and to all of you for
testifying today.
The COVID-19 pandemic has laid bare the significant
vulnerabilities in our domestic supply chain, and I think we
all are recognizing it is crucial we take immediate steps to
address these issues. But this unprecedented crisis has
reverberated across almost every sector of our economy and
continues to impact American workers and consumers every day.
From medical supply challenges that we saw during the pandemic
to the ongoing semiconductor shortage, it is clear hardening
our domestic supply chain is as much a national security issue
as it is an economic issue.
I want to discuss direct measures to assure the security
and resilience of our domestic supply chain, although I can't
follow my colleague and friend, Mr. Guthrie, and not say I am
happy the auto companies are staying here. It was sad to lose
some of them to Kentucky and Tennessee.
And, Mr. Lincicome, I appreciate your comments, but the
fact of the matter is other countries really do support their
industries, and it is important that our industries be
supported by government too.
So the backbone, I think, of the American manufacturing is
the automobile sector. And we have all seen the devastating
impact the semiconductor shortage has had on automotive
manufacturers and their suppliers. This chip shortage has dealt
a huge blow to autoworkers in districts like mine that have
significant numbers of auto-related jobs, not to mention
negative impacts on consumers across the country.
You may be familiar--all of you may be familiar with the
CHIPS Act funding passed in the Senate, which includes $2
billion for semiconductor chips used by our auto industry. Over
the past year, I keep raising the critical importance of
improving this funding, and I have introduced identical
legislation in the House.
Mr. Sills, can you provide your thoughts on how funding in
the CHIPS Act to increase American production of semiconductors
would help support American manufacturing?
Mr. Sills. Thank you for the question, Congresswoman.
And I believe I did speak to it briefly earlier in this
meeting that our industry is highly reliant on the--that older
CHIPS Act that the $2 billion as part of the CHIPS Act.
Mrs. Dingell. Legacy. Legacy. I hate the world ``old.''
Mr. Sills. Me too, me too. The legacy chips.
And we have been dealing with the significant shock of
having shortages. As everyone is well aware, it has new
vehicles, mostly manufacturing, now sitting on lots, waiting to
be finished because they don't have access to the chips. And
that is devastating to the industry.
But it is also very harmful to the consumer who, as I said,
needs the vehicle. It has caused increased pricing in used
vehicles because they can't get the new vehicles. And it has
created a surge in demand for maintenance of the existing
vehicles because that is, again, how people go about their
daily lives.
So it was definitely laid bare through this the importance
of having stable and secure supply of these legacy chips. And
so anything we can do to secure that, I think, is very
beneficial not just to the industry but to the American
consumer.
Mrs. Dingell. Thank you, Mr. Sills. I am going to ask you
to talk in writing to expand upon that and why supporting
that--supporting it matters.
But let me move to another issue. I have got 1 minute left.
Critical shortages of critical products during the COVID-19
public health crisis demonstrate that the private sector alone
can't identify, monitor, and address supply chain
vulnerabilities.
The Biden administration's comprehensive supply chain
review found that focusing on maximizing capital returns has
led to the private sector's underinvestment in long-term
resiliency. That underinvestment led to a declining share of
corporate income going into R&D, new facilities, or resilient
production processes.
Mr. Paul, do you agree with the Biden administration's
assessment that the private sector has not appropriately valued
supply chain resilience and it is why we are in the mess we are
in?
Mr. Paul. Absolutely, Representative Dingell, I completely
agree with it. I look forward to the supply chain work that the
White House is doing as it continues, but you have hit the nail
on the head. The incentives that are built into our system,
particularly for manufacturers, which is capital intensive and
which may have a lower rate of return for shareholders,
particularly for things like supply chain resilience, is
especially vulnerable because of the financialization of our
economy.
That is why there is a role for the Federal Government to
help provide the right kind of incentives and markets so that
we can develop more resilience. There has been a market
failure, and it does need to be addressed.
Mrs. Dingell. Madam Chair, I am out of time. I have many
more questions, so I will be submitting them for the record.
Thank you.
I yield back.
Ms. Schakowsky. The gentlewoman yields back.
And I now recognize Mr. Soto for 5 minutes.
No, I am wrong. I am sorry. Excuse me.
Of course. Congressman Bucshon for 5 minutes. Excuse me.
Mr. Bucshon. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Ms. Schakowsky. Sorry.
Mr. Bucshon. Thank you for holding this legislative hearing
on ways to strengthen and support American manufacturing and
competitiveness.
In 2019, the year prior to the pandemic, Indiana
manufacturing formed the backbone of the State's economy,
accounting for over 17 percent of the jobs in the State and
exporting over 38 billion in goods, ranging from automobiles to
pharmaceuticals, around the globe.
However, since the beginning of the COVID-19 pandemic, I
have heard from manufacturers, businesses, and consumers across
Indiana, as many of you have in your States, about various
supply chain shortages and their impact on businesses and
communities, whether it was the inability to purchase toilet
paper at the store early on, or a Toyota plant in my district
having to temporarily halt production just last month. So this
is a big issue, and I am glad we are having this hearing.
Mr. Lincicome, given these struggles, do you believe
businesses will be incentivized to voluntarily share the types
of information advocated for in some of the bills before the
committee today without the presence of strong liability
protections?
Mr. Lincicome. It is a great question. I don't know,
Congressman.
Quite frankly, I left the law behind when I joined Cato a
few years ago. But I can say that we already have some
indications that companies are extremely hesitant to share
proprietary supply chain information with the Government
without really strong protections, not merely on the liability
side but on the business confidential information and
proprietary nature of this.
You know, back a couple of years ago, when the Trump
administration was investigating automobiles under--for
national security purposes, automakers across the United States
were extremely concerned about divulging this type of data.
And so, to the extent that supply chain transparency and
the Government sees a role there, it is really going to need to
get multinational manufacturers comfortable with sharing this
type of information and on their business practices, which are,
of course, highly proprietary.
Mr. Bucshon. Yes, I would agree. And I think that that is,
unfortunately, going to be a big hill to climb, because
proprietary information on not only their supply chain but the
rest of the way they run their businesses is going to be a
challenge.
I am also glad we are considering measures to ensure
American competitiveness in hard-hit industries like travel and
leisure, with bills such as the Restoring Brand USA Act that I
cosponsored.
Known as the crossroads of America, Indiana has a thriving
travel industry with designations including, of course, the
Indianapolis Motor Speedway, home of the Indy 500, the Indiana
Dunes National Park along the shores of Lake Michigan, and
Holiday World in Santa Claus, Indiana, and numerous local
festivals that attract millions of visitors annually, such as
currently ongoing Parke County Covered Bridge Festival.
Holiday World, for example, a theme park in my district, is
a prime example of supply chains and sectors besides
manufacturing have also been majorly impacted over the
pandemic. In the times that has even been allowed to operate--
at times they have been allowed to operate during the COVID,
the park has struggled to fill open staff positions. And
lodging and travel costs increased, partially due to their own
supply chain woes.
Additionally, replacement parts for vehicles and roller
coasters have become unpredictable and difficult to source,
while food and beverages are more expensive and still suffer
from major shortages. And as we have more inflation, this gets
worse.
As Congress is looking for ways to secure and support our
supply chains, we must keep in mind the lodging and tourism
industry and keep them competitive, as guests are finally
making their way through the parks and resorts thanks to quick
work distributing a safe and effective vaccine.
Mr. Lincicome, what work can Congress do to show
establishments like Holiday World in southern Indiana, who we
really failed to provide substantial relief for during the
pandemic due to the high number of seasonal workers they have
that were factored into that equation--what can we do to work
towards showing this type of industry that we are there to help
possibly, with the supply chain issues they are facing not
only--this isn't just manufacturing, as they get their feet
back on the ground after the pandemic?
Mr. Lincicome. Thank you, Congressman.
I now really want to take my daughter to Holiday World.
Mr. Bucshon. You should.
Mr. Lincicome. She would love it, I am sure.
In terms of the specifics of the tourism industry, I really
can't speak to that. But what I can say is that, to the extent
that American companies in that industry are reliant on access
to imports, whatever it is, I think the Government really has a
role to ensure that that access is available.
An example, I think, is the section 301 exclusion process
that has been shut down and just restarted that a lot of
American companies in services and elsewhere really need to
utilize so they can get the stuff they need to keep business
open.
Mr. Bucshon. Thank you very much.
Madam Chairwoman, my time is expired.
I yield back.
Ms. Schakowsky. The gentleman yields back.
Now I recognize Mr. Soto for 5 minutes.
Mr. Soto. Thank you, Madam Chair.
We are at a crossroads with American manufacturing. We have
the opportunity to change our trajectory, to boost domestic
manufacturing, and stop this manufacturing decline, especially
in areas of strategic and national security interests.
In central Florida, my constituents are ready to work. We
have production jobs that constitute about 13 percent of what
we do here in Florida's Ninth Congressional District, such as
aerospace defense and boat manufacturing in east Orange County,
beverage manufacturing in Polk County, including the largest
manufacturing plant in North America. And we just started
making microchips in Osceola County.
So passing the bills that we are hearing on the agenda
today will make critical investments in places like central
Florida to boost domestic manufacturing, fix supply chain gaps,
and protect production of critical national security, areas
like medical supplies, communications, defense, microchips, and
other tech products.
And as for central Florida's top tourism industry, we
rebounded fairly steady, boosted primarily by domestic tourism.
We have tourism attractions such as Disney World, Universal,
SeaWorld, Legoland, and others. You may have heard of them. And
for a full recovery bill, we need to have international travel,
as well, rebound.
So we applaud the Biden administration for ending the
pandemic-travel bans for Canada, Mexico, Europe, Brazil, India,
China, South Africa, and other areas over the next few months.
This will greatly help.
But the committee needs to go further, which is why I agree
with my fellow Floridian, the ranking member, Gus Bilirakis,
that we must support the Restoring Brand USA Act to make $250
million in unobligated funds available for Brand USA travel
promotion.
Thank you, Madam Chair, for agendaing it today.
Mr. Paul, you had some interesting initial conclusions. We
have our goals of boosting manufacturing and having a just
transition to a green economy. And you mentioned that
deregulation tax cuts aren't the only things that we can do to
get there. It is going to take targeted investments and key
industries.
We saw the Senate pass the U.S. Innovation and Competition
Act. Eighteen Senate Republicans voted for that bill, along
with 50 Democratic Senators. So, while it is a surprise for a
few of our colleagues on the other side of the aisle to
criticize it, obviously, it has got overwhelming bipartisan
support. And this is the House's shot at this.
We see the Supply Chain Health and Integrity for the Nation
Act, Manufacturing Economy and National Security Act, Building
Resilient Supply Chains Act, Supply Chain Security and
Resilience Act.
Are bills like this the kind of targeted investment that
you are referring to, to help give a lift to domestic
manufacturing?
Mr. Paul. Congressman Soto, thank you so much for the
question. Yes, they are.
And I will say--and I will say this as someone who worked
in the House of Representatives some time ago--that I wouldn't
defend the wisdom of the Senate in every case, or rarely. But
in this case, it was a product of they compromised. There were
a number of--number of extraordinary individuals who came
together to make that happen. I have confidence that the House
can do the same thing.
I do think that it fulfills a need. And I think that is the
important thing, that there is this demonstrated market failure
in semiconductors and that there is this need to bolster our
supply chains and to make them more resilient and, when
possible, to reshore more of them to provide well-paying jobs
for future generations as well.
And so, this is not legislation that is in search of a
problem. I want to be clear about that. This is legislation
that has been introduced with some intent, and that is to
ensure that the manufacturing sector in the United States,
which is broad and deep in every State, can thrive as we also
transition to technologies, to energy sources, and to new
innovations that we haven't even imagined yet in the future.
We have been caught behind in the competitiveness game for
a variety of reasons, and this is a chance to help level set.
Mr. Soto. As we are coming up with our bills and eventually
going to be negotiating with the Senate, what is in the U.S.
Innovation and Competition Act that we may be lacking in the
House so far that you think would be helpful?
Mr. Paul. Again, that is a great question. I will say the
USICA was not perfect. I wouldn't just rubber stamp it. I do
think that the----
Mr. Soto. They are not going to.
Mr. Paul. Yes. Please don't.
I do think that there were some provisions in there that I
think would be less effective and some that were more. I don't
know that there is enough time to talk about all of them right
now.
But I do think that it makes sense for the House to take a
targeted approach and specifically to ensure that the funds
that you are offering go to jobs and innovations that are going
to be produced in the United States. So there need to be some
guardrails established that would do that.
Mr. Soto. Thank you so much. My time has expired.
Mr. Paul. Thank you.
Ms. Schakowsky. The gentleman has completed his questions.
And now, Mr. Dunn, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Dunn. Thank you very much, Madam Chair.
I appreciate the opportunity to discuss manufacturing
competitiveness and supply chain resiliency today.
We are all acutely aware of the ways in which the COVID
lockdowns disrupted our supply chains and affected our
constituents. Unfortunately, public policy never seems to get
ahead of the impending ``everything'' shortage that we are
hearing about every day. So I am sure there will be more
lessons learned in the coming months.
In the wake of a global pandemic, it is more important than
ever to ensure that we have a secure medical and pharmaceutical
manufacturing industry, from PPEs, to APIs, to complex
pharmaceuticals. Our time is short, and so I want to get right
into the questions.
Mr. Lincicome, you mentioned in testimony that the National
Science Foundation data shows that private-sector R&D
expenditures have reached an all-time high by 2019 prepandemic.
And I am certain that we all want to stay on that track by
ensuring the United States remains an attractive place to do
business.
Maintaining U.S. manufacturing competitiveness is going to
rely on diversifying supply chains, lowering barriers to trade
among the free world, public-private partnerships in the
generic space, I think, and ensuring adversarial nations such
as China do not continue to be sole source providers for basic
and complex resources.
So can you illuminate for us what led to the increased
productivity of U.S. R&D expenditures, most especially as it
relates to biotech and pharmaceutical industries, prior to the
pandemic?
Mr. Lincicome. Thank you, Congressman. It will be difficult
to speak to the biotech sector in particular. I will note a
couple of things.
Mr. Dunn. Make it general, then. Make it general.
Mr. Lincicome. Well, I think that it is clear over the
last--if you look at the trends, the private sector really has
stepped up in terms of United States R&D. With U.S. R&D
spending hitting for the first time ever 3 percent of GDP, this
was primarily a private-sector initiative and driven, I think,
by, as I mentioned, when you lighten regulatory and tax,
particularly corporate tax burdens----
Mr. Dunn. OK. That is where I was hoping you were going to
go with this.
Mr. Lincicome. Studies show that you have, with lighter
corporate tax burdens, you have more innovation, you tend to
have that.
Mr. Dunn. I am so shocked. I am so shocked.
I am short on time.
What specific--Mr. Lincicome again--what specific current
regulatory barriers or trade barriers, regulatory or trade----
Mr. Lincicome. Yes.
Mr. Dunn [continuing]. Do you think are the worst for our
Nation's manufacturing industry?
Mr. Lincicome. Well, going back to the pharmaceutical
space, for example, I think that we have a really tremendous
opportunity to strengthen partnerships with Europe, which
actually has a substantial biotech industry as well.
And there was a thing back when--a little while ago--called
the TTIP that we were actually looking to lower trade barriers,
harmonize regulatory barriers with Europe. You look at
something like the Pfizer vaccine is a great example of that
type of multinational partnership.
Mr. Dunn. It was. It was. We are running out of time. And I
am going to submit some questions, by the way.
But here is what I would like to know: What can Congress do
to encourage companies to commit resources to our Nation and to
participate with our free world allies in medical industries
instead of our adversaries, like China?
Mr. Lincicome. Yes, sir. I think negotiating international
agreements with our allies is really an essential aspect of
this that has seemed to kind of been put by the wayside for the
last 5 years or more. So I think that is certainly one area.
But the other thing I think that is critical is consistency
and predictability in our tax and regulatory environment. If we
are consistently changing the tax code, changing the regulatory
environment every couple of years, it makes it very difficult
for investors in the United States and elsewhere to have the
predictability they need to make those massive capital
investments.
I think full expensing is a great example of that. The TCJA
did that for a couple of years--or 5 years. That really needs
to be made permanent because investors need that type of
certainty to really lay down the cash and do the things that we
want the private sector to do.
Mr. Dunn. So as a guy who has actually planned some
businesses and built some businesses--and I could tell you, you
are right, stability in the tax code, it would be a very, very
nice thing to do, because you are gaming the will of Congress,
which is, as I found in the last few years, more difficult even
than it looks like.
So with that, Mr. Lincicome, I don't have enough time left
to ask any questions. So I am just going to say thank you, and
I will submit some questions in writing.
Madam Chair, I yield back.
Ms. Schakowsky. The gentleman yields back.
And Congresswoman Rice is recognized for 5 minutes.
Miss Rice. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Ms. O'Connell, you mentioned in your--I don't know if you
said this specifically in your oral statement, in your opening
statement, but in your submitted written statement you talked
about how global supply chains are often opaque to private and
public decision makers, which is a really frightening concept,
especially when you go on to talk about the need for us to
really invest in a system that has reliable resiliency.
You talk about the 2021 Executive order on America's supply
chain, which stated that the United States needs resilient,
diverse, and secure supply chains to ensure our economic
prosperity and national security.
And you go on to talk about how important it is for the
U.S. Government to make the investments necessary to ensure
that outcome. And you also say that businesses cannot be
expected to shoulder the burden of this task without
recompense.
I think this idea of resiliency is so critically important.
I think that what I am hearing a lot of today, which is an
agreement on both sides of the aisle that we need to shore up
supply chains in various different aspects, but the resiliency
of those supply chains is incredibly important.
So if you could just kind of expound on what your thoughts
were in terms of going into--whether it is research and
development, investment in human capital, vocational schools--
if you could just kind of expound on how important it is for
the U.S. Government to invest in those aspects of supply chain
and resiliency.
Dr. O'Connell. Yes. So I think the biggest concern that I
would have is the fact that we have accepted risk in all sorts
of places, but we have no idea where they are. We are sort of
flying blind, quite frankly, and we will continue to be
surprised.
And resiliency will depend on creativity. And that is not
to say that we will always be able to muddle through, because I
think under some circumstances muddling through is just not
going to cut it.
And so I think the real priority is understanding what is
the priority that needs to be protected, and then, given that
priority, understanding the supply chains that underpin that
particular sector or that particular interest. And I think
getting more insight into that would be crucial.
Miss Rice. Well, in your opinion, what are the top three
areas that we need to focus on of national security importance?
And then take it from there.
Dr. O'Connell. So I think when people think of national
security, they are thinking sort of the large, cleared defense
contractors like your Boeings, your Lockheeds, your Northrop
Grummans. But nearly a quarter of DoD contracts by value go to
small businesses. And when we have insight into subcontracts,
nearly 40 percent also go into small businesses.
So when I am talking national security, the breadth and
scope of what that means really touches across multiple
sectors, and getting a handle on that, and even trying to make
that problem a little bit more tractable, I think, would be
sort of the first step.
And also, just to appreciate, when we say national
security, I think people think of guns and missiles and fighter
jets. But a lot of these national security interests have IT,
regular aerospace, just broadly covers a lot of different
industries.
And I think the breadth and scope of that, we just
basically need to spend more effort in understanding it and
then figuring out where we don't have that resiliency and try
and build it into the system.
Miss Rice. So how can we do better? Does this legislation
get us there or on the right track? Or how can we make it
better? What are your thoughts on that?
Dr. O'Connell. I am not a legislative analyst, so I will
not comment on the particular legislation before you.
I think that the critical thing--and of course I am an
analyst, so my priority is we need to understand the problem.
And just sort of investing money blindly might not produce the
results that you are looking for. And having some clear
insights on where that money could be most useful, I think,
would be incredibly important.
Miss Rice. Mr. Paul, your thoughts on that?
Mr. Paul. Thank you for the question.
I agree that we shouldn't throw money blindly. I do think
it will take investment, because there has been a market
failure. There are not the right market incentives in place.
The security of our country, resiliency, is a good that is hard
to measure for profit-seeking companies.
But I am encouraged by the steps that the White House, that
the Senate, and the House may be prepared to do to move us in
the right direction, because it does extend beyond these
security goods. It goes to a lot of things that we take for
granted as consumers or that we depend on as workers as well.
Miss Rice. Agreed.
Thank you, Madam Chairwoman.
And thank you to all the witnesses for coming today.
Ms. Schakowsky. The gentlelady yields back.
And now, Congresswoman Lesko, it is your 5 minutes.
Mrs. Lesko. Thank you very much, Madam Chairman.
I represent part of Arizona, and it will be--the site of
the new Taiwan Semiconductor Manufacturing corporation, will be
in my district. And also, of course, on the other part of the
Phoenix metropolitan area, Chandler, Intel in Chandler will be
expanding their semiconductor chip manufacturing as well.
I think that we can all agree that we have a major problem
with our supply chains. And the question is, How do we fix it?
One of my concerns is that there is a lot of legislation
out there that wants to subsidize certain types of industries,
like, let's say there is more priority on clean energy
industries than maybe other supply chains that need help.
And at the same time, in the same proposal, it is proposing
higher taxes on these same corporations. So we want to give
them Federal money, but then we want to tax them more money,
tax them more.
The administration wants to ban mining of critical minerals
that are needed for the manufacturing in the United States, and
they want to squash production of oil and gas energy in the
United States. It doesn't make sense to me.
And so, Mr. Lincicome, can you tell me if that makes sense
to you?
Mr. Lincicome. No, it certainly doesn't. Thank you,
Congresswoman.
And I think that one of the real concerns I have, aside
from some of the incoherence of the approach, is that if you
look at the history of these subsidy programs--and I have
delved into this a lot in my research--you see that there are
really two big reasons for concern.
The first is that a lot of times these subsidies end up
being captured by large companies with the lobbying, legal, and
financial resources to navigate and afford the process--and to
afford the subsidy's conditions, whether it is Buy American
rules or labor mandates or whatever.
In fact, studies show that in past green energy subsidies,
there is a strong connection between lobbying expenditures and
loan amounts, and that most loans actually went to large
businesses that didn't need government help and could have
gotten private funding themselves.
The second concern is that there is a long history of these
types of programs raising producers' costs and actually
delaying, if not thwarting outright, prioritized government
projects.
So even subsidy recipients that successfully navigate the
process end up bogged down in the bureaucratic details, or they
have high costs that make them totally uncompetitive versus
their global peers.
And so it is that type of unintended consequence that
pervades a lot of past industrial policy.
Mrs. Lesko. Thank you very much.
And, Dr. O'Connell, you and others at RAND are familiar
with China's ambitions in artificial intelligence. I think
autonomous vehicles will happen with or without U.S.
leadership.
And my question to you is, How concerned are you that China
will set the standard for AVs, thus compromising an important
area of national and economic security for the United States?
Dr. O'Connell. That is an excellent question.
I think that the first statement is, I don't think they
will set the standards with our application of autonomous
vehicles in the United States. And certainly there are a lot of
hurdles currently that are in the United States for that
progressing.
It is a delicate balance between sort of international
research and fostering innovation broadly and globally and sort
of ensuring that we have the investments made to be a leader in
innovative sectors and technologies that we find to be
critical.
And so I am not sure if I have actually answered your
question, mostly because I am not an autonomous vehicle expert.
But I think there is a delicate balance. And I know we are
walking that balance as well with quantum technologies. And I
think we don't want to stifle the innovation, but we also want
to protect nascent industries.
Mrs. Lesko. Thank you.
And in my last 17 seconds, I just went to make a statement
that obviously the Port of Los Angeles, there is a backflow,
and other ports. So that is causing part of the problem. But
there is a huge trucker shortage too.
I have a huge--I have Knight Transportation, which is a
huge trucking organization in my district, and they were
talking about the push for electric--all-electric trucks. Well,
all-electric trucks only go 200 miles versus a diesel truck
that goes 1,500 miles. So every 200 miles you would have to
stop and charge the truck.
So I guess what I am trying to say to some of my colleagues
is, we need to be strategic on how we spend taxpayer dollars to
solve this problem.
And with that, I yield back.
Ms. Schakowsky. The gentlewoman yields back.
Next would be Bobby Rush.
I don't see you on camera, however. Are you there?
If not, I call now on Congresswoman Trahan for 5 minutes.
Mrs. Trahan. Thank you, Chairwoman Schakowsky.
And thank you to the witnesses today.
Access to loans and other financial instruments at
reasonable rates is critical for manufacturing products that
are important to our national and economic security. But the
cost of capital for lower-margin goods in this country can be
far more expensive than our economic rivals, which may drive
production overseas.
Many American manufacturers are expected to produce 12 to
14 percent returns for such products to be able to repay loans
and stay profitable. European manufacturers are expected to
produce nearly 7 to 9 percent returns, and many Asian firms
only need to get 5 to 7 percent.
Mr. Paul, has access to affordable capital posed challenges
to manufacturing products in the United States?
Mr. Paul. Representative Trahan, that is an excellent
question, and indeed, yes, it has. And that is not just myself.
That is Federal Reserve observations over the years,
particularly among small and midsize enterprises, and even
among the larger corporations.
Manufacturing is capital intensive. The rate of return may
be slower if you have the option of developing an app that may
take a couple of people and no physical infrastructure. That is
where the capital may go. It is a difficult road for
manufacturing.
And it is a competitive environment. As you just mentioned,
manufacturing uniquely in the American economy is in global
competition, every single firm, which makes it particularly
exposed.
That is why assistance programs at the State or Federal
level that can help with respect to loan guarantees, to
interest rates, or in some cases for outright grants are
critically important.
We face extraordinary pressures, whereas in Germany, for
instance, a lot of small and midsize firms have access to that
more patient capital that exists. In China, the loans are often
forgiven by the state government and act as a direct subsidy.
So it is particularly challenging for American
manufacturers in that environment. Ensuring that there is
access to affordable loans or to subsidized interest rates,
loan guarantees, or direct subsidies in a targeted way is going
to be crucial as we move ahead.
Mrs. Trahan. Do you see that some of the supply chain
legislation under consideration today corrects these market
failures?
Mr. Paul. Yes. I think it gets us on the road to progress,
absolutely.
Taken as a whole, the body of bills that have been
presented would represent, again, an intent to do something
about the problem. Identification would start to develop those
public-private partnerships that are necessary and would direct
some much-needed investment in supply chain resiliency and in
sectors that are critical to the functioning of our economy as
well as to our homeland security, national security sectors as
well.
Mrs. Trahan. Great.
Other nations are investing heavily in their industrial
bases. You mentioned Germany's investment and development bank,
which provides financial assistance to German small and medium
manufacturers, provided $100 billion of loans and $5 billion in
grants in 2020. South Korea provides financial assistance to
support industries critical to their economic and national
security as well.
Dr. O'Connell, are there lessons that can be learned from
these international models? I mean, after all, the
manufacturing output of countries like Germany and South Korea
is growing far faster than the manufacturing output of the
United States.
Dr. O'Connell. I think what is notable from these other
countries is the fact that you don't have to sacrifice quality
or a standard of living for your workers, and you can still
have an established and strategically managed sector.
It is not a perfectly rosy picture, and there are certainly
aspects of it that want to be considered. But I think there is
something to be said for the collective good that the public
sector can offer these private companies.
Mrs. Trahan. Great. I appreciate that.
Mr. Paul, did you want to expound on that at all or----
Mr. Paul. No. I completely agree. As I said before, the
race to the bottom is not a race the United States is going to
win. We are never going to be able to underregulate or undertax
compared to some other countries. But making smart investments,
working collaboratively with the workforce is going to be a
strategy that should have measured progress as we move ahead.
Mrs. Trahan. Thank you.
Well, I am the daughter of a union ironworker, and I know
how important manufacturing jobs are to families. And I think
as Members of Congress it is essential that we pass legislation
that incentivizes U.S. manufacturing jobs.
Representative Curtis and I recently introduced the
Reinforcing American-Made Products Act, which would clarify the
national Made in the USA standard so that companies and
consumers can easily support U.S. manufacturing. In order to
reclaim our title as a world leader in manufacturing, we need
historic investments and economic incentives.
Thank you so much for being here today and for all your
expertise.
I yield back.
Ms. Schakowsky. The gentlewoman yields back.
And now I recognize for 5 minutes Mr. Pence.
Mr. Pence. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Before I begin my remarks, I would like to ask for
unanimous consent to enter into the record a letter of support
for my bill, H.R. 2907, the Global Investment in American Jobs
Act. The letter is from the Global Business Alliance.
Ms. Schakowsky. Without objection, so ordered.
[The information appears at the conclusion of the hearing.]
Mr. Pence. Thank you, Chair Schakowsky and Ranking Member
Bilirakis, for holding this hearing.
And thank you to all the witnesses today for the time you
have taken and the testimony you have given.
To grow manufacturing jobs, we need a welcoming business
environment for companies to invest in American innovation and,
of course, ingenuity.
One opportunity we are discussing today is foreign direct
investment, a key driver for jobs in the State of Indiana. In
my own hometown, we have Toyota, Clawson, Enkei, and across my
district we have Honda and Subaru and other companies.
Over 250,000 Hoosiers are employed as a direct result of
international investment, half of which is in the manufacturing
sector. That is why I introduced the bipartisan Global
Investment in American Jobs Act with my colleague, Congressman
Bobby Rush, to ensure that the U.S. remains a premier
destination to invest, innovate, hire, and manufacture.
This legislation would review the attractiveness of foreign
investment into the U.S. and identify bureaucratic barriers--
which we have discussed is an issue--that are holding back
American competitiveness.
Earlier this year, I urged the Secretary of Commerce to
help us prioritize foreign direct investment. I am encouraged
and report to you today the Secretary committed to working with
us to advance this bipartisan legislation.
While I applaud the discussion today on addressing long-
term strategies to improve our domestic manufacturing sector,
we need to consider the underlying issues we are already
dealing with today.
Supply chains that are relying on adversarial countries
like China face steep delays and increased costs for necessary
production materials.
I will continue to champion initiatives to improve
opportunities for manufacturing investment into the U.S. But
before solving long-term outlooks, we need to address issues
that are already facing U.S. consumers and producers right now.
We saw some of the information that came out today from the
Government.
Mr. Lincicome, over the past year the impact of inflation
and supply chain disruptions are affecting both supply and
demand in the market, as we said. Month after month, job
reports are indicating poor economic growth, as we all know. I
am concerned that we may be moving forward without accurately
identifying the real cause of the problems in our economy.
In your opinion--and here are a number of questions--do we
have an accurate understanding of the underlying economic
factors affecting PPI, CPI, labor shortages, and supply
disruptions? What if we are misidentifying the problem? What if
the real issue is prolonged demand destruction and supply
pricing manipulation by China in an OPEC-like model?
Mr. Lincicome. Thank you, Congressman.
It is a complex question. I would just say that I am not
very concerned about PPI and CPI, quite frankly. I am more
concerned about labor shortages and what is causing that.
It seems to me that there has been a natural assumption--by
myself included--that everybody who was in the labor force
prepandemic is going to be in the labor force now, and it
really doesn't seem like that is the case. It seems that, for
whatever reason it is--whether it is early retirements or
change in lifestyle or geographic mismatch or government
payments that have given people the financial comfort and
stability to stay home--it doesn't matter.
But what does appear to be the case is fewer workers now
available.
Mr. Pence. What if the jobs are disappearing as well? Like,
you have been to restaurants. They have reduced their hours,
the number of seating. What if the jobs are actually
disappearing as well because of demand?
I am concerned that demand is causing a lot of these
problems, the reduction in demand. China may not be producing
as much. Have we looked at that?
Mr. Lincicome. Not that I am aware of, Congressman.
Mr. Pence. With that, I am running out of time. I wish I
had more time to talk to you about it.
Thank you again for holding this hearing. I yield back.
Ms. Schakowsky. The gentleman yields back.
We have one more Republican who is on the subcommittee, Mr.
Armstrong, who will be next. And then we are going to move to
people who have waived on.
So, Mr. Armstrong, you have 5 minutes.
Mr. Armstrong. Thank you, Madam Chair.
I am going to start with a couple of specific questions and
then just have some general comments. That is what is nice
about getting to go towards the end.
The Generalized System of Preferences and Miscellaneous
Tariff Bill programs both reduce tariffs on products that
aren't available from U.S. suppliers. Both programs have long
enjoyed bipartisan support. However, Democrats did not
prioritize reauthorization before these programs expired at the
end of 2020. The lapse of both programs effectively acts as a
tax increase, which is particularly difficult for smaller
businesses to handle.
Mr. Sills, do you agree that the resulting tariffs are an
unnecessary burden that worsens inflationary pressures?
Mr. Sills. Thank you for the question.
Let me speak specifically to the 301 tariffs, because those
are the ones that affected my company and my industry the most.
And while perhaps the intent was to make America more
competitive by making imports more expensive, I do not believe
it had the intended effect. I believe that the vast majority of
the cost of those tariffs was borne by the American importers
and not by the Chinese companies.
And speaking for myself--but I think I can also fairly
speak for a lot of my peers in the industry--we passed those
tariffs on. And so, ultimately, it ended up in increases at the
cash register.
I do not believe it caused much, if any, reshoring. It
perhaps created a certain amount of shifting of production from
China to other low-cost countries. But I don't believe that it
had the intended consequences. I believe it really mostly just
increased cost.
Mr. Armstrong. I think Mr. Lincicome is agreeing with you.
So I am going to ask him the same question.
Mr. Lincicome. Yes, I am definitely going to ditto
everything that Mr. Sills said. That is certainly confirmed by
my research as well.
Now, specifically on GSP and the Miscellaneous Tariff Bill,
these are relatively narrow programs in the sense of causing
macroeffects like inflation. But they do affect small
businesses, particularly those that are reliant on these
products and have come to at least expect the resumption of GSP
and the Miscellaneous Tariff Bill, which usually happens.
But Congress has a way of taking these programs, I think,
for granted because they are not huge programs. But they do
affect a lot of small businesses in the United States, and
certainly I think reauthorization is indeed appropriate.
Mr. Armstrong. Well, and for me I represent a State that
essentially doesn't have large businesses. It is North Dakota.
It is all small businesses. We are the geographic center of
North America. We produce a lot of things we don't consume
here. We want to get them out.
And that is kind of my point to this. Like, even
prepandemic, when you start looking at supply chain, I am old
enough to remember when we cared about the cost of prescription
drugs, not where they were sourced from.
Steel: perfect example of dealing with tariffs. Obviously,
there are a lot of bad actors in the steel trade, moving,
flooding the market, dealing with those issues. We have steel
companies ramping up in the U.S. We obviously want to buy
American. But, for example, essentially Turkey is the only
place that makes real pipeline steel.
So in the process of trying to shore up our domestic supply
and all of that, how do we deal with the situation where we are
not capable of producing it?
I mean--and this isn't a matter of higher cost or lower
cost. These are oil pipeline companies. They will pay to put it
in the ground. They just couldn't get it. Like, they physically
couldn't get it. They couldn't work the waiver provisions.
And, Mr. Lincicome, you had said something earlier about
when we do these incentives and deal with this, about only
really large companies are able to navigate the bureaucratic
land mines that exist to do this. They have whole floors of
companies of compliance officers and lawyers, where smaller
businesses take the hit.
But I think we also have to view this in a way of, like,
what is made in America and how that works. I think USMCA
actually got a bunch of this right. Ford Expeditions are made
in Mexico. Toyota Tundras are made in Michigan. The parts come
from everywhere all over the world.
And we have to be able to deal with that, not only in being
able to get them quickly, but also to be able to get them and
have a redundancy set in place and make American companies
competitive. And I just often find that when we try and put a
government program in place or a government regulation in
place, we do the exact opposite of what we are trying to do.
That was a lot. It is towards the end. Do you have any
comments?
And then I would ask Mr.--actually, I am going to ask Mr.
Sills that.
You haven't got to talk as much today, and you are the one
who does this on the ground every day.
Mr. Sills. I am not sure what is the question.
Mr. Armstrong. A comment on whatever you want for the last
4 seconds.
Mr. Sills. I am out of time. I am sorry. It is too open-
ended. I would rather not speak to it. Thank you.
Mr. Armstrong. Thank you.
I yield back.
Ms. Schakowsky. The gentleman yields back.
And now we will begin. I have never seen this before. This
is a tribute I think to how important this topic is, many
topics that we have been hitting today about manufacturing and
our economy. But we have five people who have waived on to our
subcommittee.
First, let me recognize for 5 minutes Congresswoman Blunt
Rochester.
Ms. Blunt Rochester. Thank you so much, Madam Chairwoman.
Thank you to Chairman Pallone, as well as yourself, for calling
this important meeting--hearing.
And thank you to the panelists. I think you are right,
there is a lot of interest because all of us are being touched
by this.
And amongst the most pressing issues that I hear about from
my constituents, as well as employers here in Delaware, whether
they are large, medium, or small, are supply chain disruptions
and workforce challenges.
And so I am so proud that our committee is working toward
solutions and also proud to have worked alongside
Representatives Malinowski and Kinzinger to introduce two
bipartisan pieces of legislation, the Building Resilient Supply
Chains Act and the Manufacturing Economy and National Security
Act.
Both bills take important steps to stabilize and make more
resilient our supply chains by providing financial support to
develop, diversify, restore, and expand our supply chains and
ultimately strengthen our national and economic security.
In Delaware, every industry has been impacted in some way:
healthcare, agriculture, restaurants, car dealerships, and
housing. Not only are these supply chain disruptions impacting
our access to critical goods, but these disruptions are also
creating price hikes at a time when we continue to build toward
economic recovery. Passing these bills will be an important
step in Building Back Better.
With that, I ask the Chair for unanimous consent to submit
into the record a letter of support from Representative
Malinowski for the Building Resilient Supply Chains Act.
Ms. Schakowsky. Without objection, so ordered.
[The information appears at the conclusion of the hearing.]
Ms. Blunt Rochester. Thank you, Madam Chair.
In Delaware, despite our economy reopening, our restaurants
continue to suffer the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic. Food
costs are extremely unstable, and rising gas prices are
impacting restaurants' ability to deliver food.
A recent survey found that 75 percent of restaurants were
forced to change their menu items due to supply chain issues.
And the Biden administration has identified that supply chains
for agricultural commodities and food products are critical.
Mr. Paul, how could stabilizing our supply chains prevent
sticker shock and inflation in the future?
Mr. Paul. Thank you very much for the question.
Obviously, sometimes there is whiplash after unpredictable
events with respect to supply and demand, and you will see
temporary increases. That is obviously not uncommon.
The question is whether this is transitory or whether this
is going to be a longer state of play here, which is why it
makes sense to invest in productive capacity.
This is a good time to do it, to ensure--particularly for
items in which the supply chains are tremendously globalized or
supply categories where there is a lot of import penetration in
the United States--that we take a look at where we can make a
difference, to offer an adequate supply, particularly in a time
of need, or to have companies that have ramp-up capability here
at home so that it doesn't have to sit on a ship for 73 days
and get to the United States.
So will these bills obviously solve the problems that exist
this day? They won't. But this is a chronic condition as well.
And so that is why I believe that the committee, that the House
of Representatives, should take action on a set of
competitiveness bills. I think that that would do a great deal
to help those in the food industry and other categories that
are dependent on getting supplies in a timely and efficient
way.
Ms. Blunt Rochester. Thank you.
And just to follow up, the Building Resilient Supply Chains
Act actually will not only use Federal funds to strengthen our
supply chains but also ensure employers who receive the funds
allow workers to use their voice to form a union if they choose
to do so.
Can you talk about why you think creating good-paying union
jobs is important when the Government provides significant
Federal support to manufacturers?
Mr. Paul. I think it is absolutely important to reward
companies that are doing the right thing by workers and sharing
some of their profits with their workers. It makes a great deal
of sense.
Too many of the gains over the last couple of decades in
our economy have benefited a certain class--shareholders--and
others have been left behind. And particularly in industries
that we are trying to grow, we find that they are
underrepresented by women and people of color. And so this is
an opportunity to ensure that workers are a part of the
beneficiaries of the policy choices that are being made.
Ms. Blunt Rochester. Thank you. My time is up.
Mr. Sills, I will follow up with you later. But thank you
very much for your testimony. And specifically I will follow up
to ask you about how these shocks have affected your ability to
compete internationally, even though North America is your
primary market.
So thank you so much, Madam Chair. And I yield back.
Ms. Schakowsky. The gentlewoman yields back.
And, Mr. Johnson, you are recognized now for 5 minutes.
Mr. Johnson. Well, thank you, Chairwoman Schakowsky. I
really appreciate you waiving me on to your subcommittee today.
I am very pleased that my legislation, H.R. 5476, the
Advancing Tech Startups Act, was included in today's
legislative hearing. I am also pleased that this legislation
has received bipartisan support from my colleagues Bobby Rush
and Dean Phillips.
This legislation promotes a national strategy for
encouraging more tech-focused startups and small businesses in
all parts of the United States. I mean, you don't have to be in
Silicon Valley to successfully launch a tech startup. The
talent, sustainable cost structure, and opportunities are
available in many locations across the country.
Specifically, H.R. 5476 requires the Secretary of Commerce,
in coordination with the heads of other appropriate Federal
agencies, to conduct a study within 2 years on the impact of
technology startup companies on the United States economy.
This study must establish a list providing descriptions and
the locations dedicated to the creation, development, and
growth of tech startups, in addition to a list detailing the
activities of public-private partnerships focused on promoting
tech startups.
Furthermore, this study requires the development of a
comprehensive list of Federal agencies asserting jurisdiction
over entities and industry sectors dedicated to the creation
and growth of all tech startups, and to also identify all
Federal rules and regulations as they relate to States, cities,
or geographic areas committed to the creation of technology
startup companies.
This information can really help identify barriers that may
hinder technology and small business startups from taking root
all across the country.
Additionally, in order to identify emerging risks, long-
term trends, and to assess the severity of risks posed to
relevant marketplaces and supply chains, this study must also
include a survey of relevant marketplaces and supply chains
impacting the creation, growth, and development of technology
startups.
As we all know and are continuing to experience, the
pandemic has served as a painful lesson about the importance of
creating products, supply chains, and intellectual capital
right here at home. We can't rely on China or anyone else--and
we don't need to.
While we must ensure our supply chains are resilient in a
global economy, we must also be self-sufficient in critical
areas. And it is time to fully unleash the American spirit of
innovation and entrepreneurship across the entire United
States.
As I mentioned, you don't have to be in Silicon Valley to
successfully launch a tech startup. Some of my colleagues on
both sides of the aisle may already know that both Columbus and
Cincinnati were named in Forbes' list of top 10 rising cities
for startups. For instance, Columbus-based READY Robotics
empowers manufacturers to be more competitive through a line of
easy-to-use industrial robotic systems.
Additionally, Physna, short for Physical DNA, is a fast-
growing software company based in downtown Cincinnati that
offers industry-leading geometric deep learning technology,
including a geometric search engine that allows users to
search, store, share, and collaborate on 2.5 million 3D models.
And from Youngstown, just outside my district, JuggerBot 3D
is an additive manufacturing machine builder whose mission is
to design and build the finest 3D printing solutions in the
world while delivering technology solutions that meet their
customers' criteria for performance, reliability, and value.
Their goal is to deliver innovative products that break
down barriers and open doors to new possibilities for their
clients. By enabling companies to utilize readily available
production materials for their additive manufacturing
applications, JuggerBot is helping to push 3D printing to the
forefront of production.
And this is just a small sampling of the innovation taking
place through tech startups in Ohio.
Madam Chairman, it is time to tap into the American spirit
of ingenuity and entrepreneurship that is expanding and
thriving well beyond Silicon Valley so that we can ensure that
all parts of the United States can benefit from these tech
startups.
I did have a question for Mr. Lincicome, but I see that my
time has expired. So I will yield back at this point.
Thank you, Madam Chairman.
Ms. Schakowsky. Go Ohio, and go Midwest. And the gentleman
yields back.
And now I recognize Mr. Joyce, who has waived on to the
committee, for his for 5 minutes.
Is he here? I don't see him.
So I am going to move on to--OK.
Last chance. Mr. Joyce? No.
I am going to move on, then, to Mr. Carter.
You are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Carter. Thank you, Madam Chair, for allowing me to
waive on to your subcommittee.
And thank everyone, all the presenters. I appreciate you
being here.
The bills that we are discussing today fail to address
domestic manufacturing and competitiveness of medical products.
One thing that we have recognized during this pandemic--and
I think there is a difference between knowing something and
realizing something. We have known for a long time that we were
too dependent on other countries for our PPE, for our drugs,
and the pharmaceutical ingredients. All of that we have known.
We realized it during the pandemic. We realized that we
were too dependent on that, particularly China, and
particularly India. In the case of China, I mean, 90 percent of
all antibiotics that we have here in America are made in China.
Ninety percent of all the Ibuprofen, made in China.
We had 26 drugs that were held back by India for their own
use until they made sure that they didn't have to have them
before they would send them to us. Same thing happened with
China.
We spoke, the Doctors Caucus had the former Secretary of
ASPER, the Assistant Secretary of Preparedness and Emergency
Response, Dr. Kadlec, at one of our meetings a couple weeks
ago, and he told us that we noticed a downturn in the amount of
PPE that China was sending us way back in September of 2019--in
September of 2019. Not when we first recognized we had the
pandemic back in the first of 2020--in the early months of
2020, in February and March--but in September of 2019, which is
a whole 'nother story.
It tells us, first of all, they knew what was going on. But
the point is, is they decreased the amount of PPE that they
were sending us.
So we know that we have got to have manufacturing of
medical products here in America. That is why I have introduced
a bipartisan bill, the MADE in America Act, manufacturing aids
to pharmaceuticals and drugs and excipients here in America,
trying to repatriate those companies back to America so that we
are not dependent on other countries for our pharmaceutical
needs.
That is bipartisan legislation. And I hope that we will get
the opportunity to look at that bill, and I hope we will get
the opportunity to call that bill up.
I want to ask you, Mr. Lincicome. I have the honor and
privilege of representing the entire coast of Georgia. It
includes two major seaports, the Port of Savannah, the number-
three container port in the country, the fastest-growing port
in the country, the Port of Brunswick, the number-two roll-on/
roll-off port in the country.
All of these ports are extremely important. And we
recognize--and you have even said it, many of you have said
that we receive goods through a global supply chain and they
come through our ports. I mean, even the leader of the
committee has said that the Biden administration's message to
many Americans is that we may not receive our Christmas and
holiday gifts this year on time because of the supply chain
issues that we are experiencing in our ports.
Mr. Lincicome, I wanted to ask you, what do you see as the
largest issue at our ports currently? And how can we address
that issue?
Mr. Lincicome. Thank you, Congressman.
I mean, I think it is first essential to understand that
some of this is just the pandemic doing its thing. Massive
supply-and-demand imbalances all over the world are going to
wreak havoc on global shipping. And then these things tend to
build on each other as containers get locked up at port.
That said, there are significant, I think, systemic
problems facing the United States' logistics in port
infrastructure. The United States, our ports--according to the
World Bank, not a single U.S. port ranks in the top 50 in terms
of efficiency in the world. The Port of L.A. in Long Beach out
West, one of the largest--the largest in the country--is around
335th in the world in port efficiency.
Now, why is this? Well, if you actually start digging into
the issues, you see one of the reasons is that port unions over
the years have opposed automation of U.S. ports and have
specifically demanded that they not be as efficient and
productive as possible.
U.S. maritime law, the Jones Act and other things, make
dredging ports prohibitively costly. And they also push
coastwise shipping--so, for example, bringing oranges from
Florida to Boston--they push that onto our highways, further
clogging up trucking capacity.
It is those type of long-term systemic issues, along with
our trade rules--I mentioned the chassis tariffs--that we
really need to think about for the next potential supply chain
crisis. And this is about maximizing efficiency and
flexibility, not just picking winners and losers in the market.
Mr. Carter. Well, you are absolutely right, and I
appreciate that.
And also the regulations that we have to go through. We are
dredging the Savannah port right now, and the Savannah Harbor
Expansion Project, started it in 1996. China has started and
completed three ports since that time period. So that is a big
problem too.
And I am out of time, Madam Chair, and I yield back.
Ms. Schakowsky. The gentleman yields back.
And last but not least, I recognize as a waive-on to this
great subcommittee Mr. Kinzinger for 5 minutes.
Mr. Kinzinger. Thank you, Madam Chair.
And to the witnesses, thank you for being with us.
And, Chairwoman, thank you for allowing me to waive on.
As the spread of COVID-19 began accelerating, the U.S.
quickly came to understand just how debilitating some of our
overlooked or underaddressed supply chain vulnerabilities had
become.
My office spent 14 months developing and consulting with
experts, culminating in the introduction of bipartisan
legislation, which is the MADE in the Americas Act, to address
these national security issues posed by countries of concern.
This bold and ambitious legislation takes many of the
painful lessons we learned from the pandemic and aims to
strengthen the security of our Nation and our economy.
While my original bill is not being considered today, my
MEANS Act, which is, aims to accomplish much of the same. The
MEANS Act would provide financial tools to manufacturers
operating in countries of concern to move their manufacturing
operations to the United States or, when it would be
financially impossible, to other allied nations or key
partners.
Whether it is China threatening to withhold lifesaving
goods from the U.S. in the middle of a pandemic or the record
number of freighters waiting off the coast for entry to port,
it is clear that action is needed.
A legislative hearing on these bills represents a major
step in addressing these challenges.
I believe my colleagues would agree that these bills are
not yet perfect, and each measure would require further
negotiations and consultations with stakeholders and experts.
But I am proud of the work each office has done to this
point. I look forward to keeping up the momentum through
Congress.
Mr. Lincicome, I appreciate your testimony. You are clearly
pessimistic about Federal industry policy. But I think you and
I have more in common than not on policy preferences.
I agree that the U.S. must make itself internationally
competitive. This should be done by keeping corporate tax rates
low, immediate full expensing, and lightening regulatory
structures.
We should also be engaging in more bilateral and
multilateral trade agreements, reducing tariffs, and otherwise
eliminating as many nontariff trade barriers as possible.
In fact, the bipartisan supply chain bill I introduced in
May, the MADE in the Americas Act, sought to accomplish these
goals.
My bill under consideration was developed to fit solely
within this committee's jurisdiction. And while there is
overlap between the MADE and MEANS, pretty much all the tax,
trade, and foreign policy provisions from the former are
absent. For the record, I stand by those provisions.
Where you and I differ is on the matter of industrial
policy and the idea that there is little to no role for the
Government in this space.
You mentioned how the pandemic led to a shortage of PPE,
medical equipment, and pharmaceutical ingredients, and how
resilient the market was in filling that void. I couldn't agree
more. It is a testament to America.
But we need to consider the real-world impacts of those
shortages both from a practical standpoint and as a matter of
national security and foreign policy. We cannot ever allow
another nation, China or otherwise, to have the power to
withhold exports of critical goods.
While I agree it would be best for the market to self-
correct, we have to look at it primarily from a national
security standpoint and not as an academic or theoretical
exercise. The Federal Government's primary role is to protect
its citizens from foreign threats.
Let me ask you, do you happen to know by chance how many
Americans died because we didn't have enough masks,
ventilators, cleaning products, drugs?
Mr. Lincicome. No, Congressman.
Mr. Kinzinger. Yes, I don't think that is a figure anyone
can have. And I think the point is we can all agree that the
answer is definitely too many.
We are not looking to one-up these market corrections. We
are looking to provide tools to replicate them for other
critical goods, particularly those related to critical
infrastructure, because major supply chain shocks cost lives.
And in order to preserve life, we have to be proactive and not
reactive.
The rate at which China is cornering the markets, ranging
from rare earth minerals, to semiconductors, to industrial
chemicals, combined with the strained nature of our bilateral
relationship, is making a future crisis increasingly likely.
So when we have seen such major vulnerabilities in certain
supply chains, we can't stand idly by putting all our faith in
purely just market-driven forces.
Let me close that by saying, I don't mean to be
adversarial. You are clearly well informed on these matters and
we agree on a lot. We just simply differ on a few approaches.
So I would like to ask you, are you willing to work with my
office to make any improvements to the policy proposals under
consideration today and have an open conversation?
Mr. Lincicome. Yes, Congressman. Of course I am happy to
help. Of course, again, Cato does not specifically lobby on
specific pieces of legislation. But in terms of the principles
and the ideas, I am happy to lend my knowledge.
Mr. Kinzinger. Excellent.
Well, Madam Chair, I have got some more, but we are coming
up on 20 seconds left. So I will yield that back.
Thank you to everybody for being here.
Ms. Schakowsky. I thank the gentleman, who yields back.
And I want to now just give a really big shout-out and
thank you to our witnesses. I am on a number of committees and
subcommittees and rarely see five individuals actually ask to
waive on to a conversation like this.
I want to see if my ranking member just wants to say a few
closing words of thanks as well.
Mr. Bilirakis. Well, I just want to say thank you, Madam
Chair. I want to thank the presenters, of course, and all the
Members who stayed on with this, and also the people that
waived on. Thanks for your patience. And I think it was very
productive. So I appreciate you holding the hearing.
And with that, I yield back.
Ms. Schakowsky. The other thing I just want to say to the
witnesses, this was incredibly bipartisan also in most
situations. And so there are a number of bills that we are
considering, and hopefully we will have your support and help
and advice as we move forward.
I want to remind all Members that, pursuant to committee
rules, that they have 10 days to submit additional questions
for the record.
And I want to say to the witnesses, we ask you--that those
inquiries that are clearly going to come to you, people
referred to them. I have never seen 5 minutes also go by as
fast as in this particular hearing that we have had.
So you are going to get questions. And we are asking that
these questions be answered by the witnesses who have appeared
as quickly as possible.
And with that, let me just say that we do have to submit
for the record three letters, a letter from the Premier
Healthcare Alliance, a letter from the U.S. Travel Association.
And without objection, then, that would be so ordered.
[The information appears at the conclusion of the hearing.]
Ms. Schakowsky. And at this time the subcommittee is
adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 2:59 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]
[Material submitted for inclusion in the record follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
