- ENHANCING PUBLIC HEALTH: LEGISLATION TO PROTECT CHILDREN AND FAMILIES

[House Hearing, 117 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

ENHANCING PUBLIC HEALTH: LEGISLATION TO
PROTECT CHILDREN AND FAMILIES

=======================================================================

HYBRID HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON HEALTH

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED SEVENTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

OCTOBER 20, 2021

__________

Serial No. 117-53

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Published for the use of the Committee on Energy and Commerce

govinfo.gov/committee/house-energy
energycommerce.house.gov

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
55-509 PDF                  WASHINGTON : 2024

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE

FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey
Chairman
BOBBY L. RUSH, Illinois              CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington
ANNA G. ESHOO, California              Ranking Member
DIANA DeGETTE, Colorado              FRED UPTON, Michigan
MIKE DOYLE, Pennsylvania             MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas
JAN SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois             STEVE SCALISE, Louisiana
G. K. BUTTERFIELD, North Carolina    ROBERT E. LATTA, Ohio
DORIS O. MATSUI, California          BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky
KATHY CASTOR, Florida                DAVID B. McKINLEY, West Virginia
JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland           ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois
JERRY McNERNEY, California           H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia
PETER WELCH, Vermont                 GUS M. BILIRAKIS, Florida
PAUL TONKO, New York                 BILL JOHNSON, Ohio
YVETTE D. CLARKE, New York           BILLY LONG, Missouri
KURT SCHRADER, Oregon                LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana
TONY CARDENAS, California            MARKWAYNE MULLIN, Oklahoma
RAUL RUIZ, California                RICHARD HUDSON, North Carolina
SCOTT H. PETERS, California          TIM WALBERG, Michigan
DEBBIE DINGELL, Michigan             EARL L. ``BUDDY'' CARTER, Georgia
MARC A. VEASEY, Texas                JEFF DUNCAN, South Carolina
ANN M. KUSTER, New Hampshire         GARY J. PALMER, Alabama
ROBIN L. KELLY, Illinois, Vice       NEAL P. DUNN, Florida
Chair                            JOHN R. CURTIS, Utah
NANETTE DIAZ BARRAGAN, California    DEBBBIE LESKO, Arizona
A. DONALD McEACHIN, Virginia         GREG PENCE, Indiana
LISA BLUNT ROCHESTER, Delaware       DAN CRENSHAW, Texas
DARREN SOTO, Florida                 JOHN JOYCE, Pennsylvania
TOM O'HALLERAN, Arizona              KELLY ARMSTRONG, North Dakota
KATHLEEN M. RICE, New York
ANGIE CRAIG, Minnesota
KIM SCHRIER, Washington
LORI TRAHAN, Massachusetts
LIZZIE FLETCHER, Texas
------

Professional Staff

TIFFANY GUARASCIO, Staff Director
WAVERLY GORDON, Deputy Staff Director
NATE HODSON, Minority Staff Director
Subcommittee on Health

ANNA G. ESHOO, California
Chairwoman
G. K. BUTTERFIELD, North Carolina    BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky
DORIS O. MATSUI, California            Ranking Member
KATHY CASTOR, Florida                FRED UPTON, Michigan
JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland, Vice     MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas
Chair                            H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia
PETER WELCH, Vermont                 GUS M. BILIRAKIS, Florida
KURT SCHRADER, Oregon                BILLY LONG, Missouri
TONY CARDENAS, California            LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana
RAUL RUIZ, California                MARKWAYNE MULLIN, Oklahoma
DEBBIE DINGELL, Michigan             RICHARD HUDSON, North Carolina
ANN M. KUSTER, New Hampshire         EARL L. ``BUDDY'' CARTER, Georgia
ROBIN L. KELLY, Illinois             NEAL P. DUNN, Florida
NANETTE DIAZ BARRAGAN, California    JOHN R. CURTIS, Utah
LISA BLUNT ROCHESTER, Delaware       DAN CRENSHAW, Texas
ANGIE CRAIG, Minnesota               JOHN JOYCE, Pennsylvania
KIM SCHRIER, Washington              CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington
LORI TRAHAN, Massachusetts               (ex officio)
LIZZIE FLETCHER, Texas
FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey (ex
officio)

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hon. Anna G. Eshoo, a Representative in Congress from the State
of California, opening statement...............................     2
Prepared statement...........................................     4
Hon. Brett Guthrie, a Representative in Congress from the
Commonwealth of Kentucky, opening statement....................     4
Prepared statement...........................................     6
Hon. Frank Pallone, Jr., a Representative in Congress from the
State of New Jersey, opening statement.........................     7
Prepared statement...........................................     8
Hon. Cathy McMorris Rodgers, a Representative in Congress from
the State of Washington, opening statement.....................     9
Prepared statement...........................................    10

Witnesses

Hon. Richard M. Nolan, a Former Representative in Congress from
the State of Minnesota.........................................    13
Prepared statement...........................................    16
Donald M. Lloyd-Jones, M.D., President, American Heart
Association....................................................    28
Prepared statement...........................................    30
Answers to submitted questions...............................   202
Stacey D. Stewart, President and Chief Executive Officer, March
of Dimes.......................................................    38
Prepared statement...........................................    40
Answers to submitted questions...............................   209
Jenny Radesky, M.D., Assistant Professor of Pediatrics,
University of Michigan Medical School..........................    54
Prepared statement...........................................    57
Answers to submitted questions...............................   214
Bruce L. Cassis, D.D.S., President, Academy of General Dentistry.    61
Prepared statement...........................................    63
Raymond N. DuBois, M.D., Ph.D., Former President, American
Association for Cancer Research................................    68
Prepared statement...........................................    70
Answers to submitted questions...............................   219
Ellyn Miller, President and Founder, Smashing Walnuts Foundation.    73
Prepared statement...........................................    75
Answers to submitted questions...............................   224

Submitted Material

H.R. 623, the Gabriella Miller Kids First Research Act 2.0 \1\
H.R. 1193, the Cardiovascular Advances in Research and
Opportunities Legacy Act \1\
H.R. 1956, the Increasing Access to Quality Cardiac
Rehabilitation Care Act of 2021 \1\
H.R. 2161, the Children and Media Research Advancement Act \1\
H.R. 3749, the Katherine's Law for Lung Cancer Early Detection
and Survival Act of 2021 \1\
H.R. 4555, the Oral Health Literacy and Awareness Act of 2021 \1\
H.R. 4612, the Protecting Access to Lifesaving Screenings Act of
2021 \1\

----------

\1\ The legislation has been retained in committee files and is
available at https://docs.house.gov/Committee/Calendar/
ByEvent.aspx?EventID=114134.
H.R. 5487, the Stillbirth Health Improvement and Education for
Autumn Act of 2021 \1\
H.R. 5551, the Improving the Health of Children Act \1\
H.R. 5552, the Lead Poisoning Prevention Act \1\
H.R. 5558, the Prostate Cancer Prevention Act \1\
H.R. 5561, the Early Hearing Detection and Intervention
Reauthorization Act \1\
Statement of the American Association of Nurse Practitioners,
October 20, 2021, submitted by Ms. Schrier.....................   150
Letter of October 19, 2021, from Tim Powderly, Senior Director,
Government Affairs, Americas, Apple, to Mr. Pallone and Ms.
Eshoo, submitted by Ms. Schrier................................   156
Letter of October 20, 2021, from Debbie Hatmaker, Chief Nursing
Officer and Executive Vice President, American Nurses
Association, to Mr. Pallone, et al., submitted by Ms. Schrier..   158
Letter of May 12, 2021, from WomenHeart, et al., to Hon. Andy
Barr, et al., submitted by Ms. Schrier.........................   160
Statement of U.S. Rep. Debbie Wasserman Schultz, October 20,
2021, submitted by Ms. Schrier.................................   162
Statement of U.S. Rep. Brendan F. Boyle, October 20, 2021,
submitted by Ms. Schrier.......................................   164
Letter of October 18, 2021, from Laurie Fenton Ambrose,
Cofounder, President, and Chief Executive Officer, GO2
Foundation for Lung Cancer, to Ms. Eshoo and Mr. Guthrie,
submitted by Ms. Schrier.......................................   166
Letter of October 19, 2021, from Celina Gorre, Chief Executive
Officer, WomenHeart, to Ms. Eshoo and Mr. Guthrie, submitted by
Ms. Schrier....................................................   168
Statement of U.S. Rep. Jennifer Wexton, October 20, 2021,
submitted by Ms. Schrier.......................................   169
Statement of U.S. Rep. Kathleen M. Rice, October 20, 2021,
submitted by Ms. Schrier.......................................   171
Letter of October 19, 2021, from Debbie Haine Vijayvergiya, The 2
Degrees Foundation, to Mr. Pallone, et al., submitted by Ms.
Schrier........................................................   172
Report of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention,
``Stillbirth in the United States,''submitted by Ms. Schrier...   177
Statement of U.S. Rep. Jamie Raskin, October 20, 2021, submitted
by Ms. Schrier.................................................   195
Letter of October 20, 2021, from Academy of General Dentistry, et
al., to Mr. Pallone, et al., submitted by Mr. Cardenas.........   197
Letter of October 19, 2021, from A. Lynn Williams, President,
American Speech-Language-Hearing Association, to Mr. Guthire
and Ms. Matsui, submitted by Mr. Guthrie.......................   199
Statement of U.S. Rep. Andy Barr, October 20, 2021, submitted by
Mr. Guthrie....................................................   200

----------

\1\ The legislation has been retained in committee files and is
available at https://docs.house.gov/Committee/Calendar/
ByEvent.aspx?EventID=114134.

ENHANCING PUBLIC HEALTH: LEGISLATION TO PROTECT CHILDREN AND FAMILIES

----------

WEDNESDAY, OCTOBER 20, 2021

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Health,
Committee on Energy and Commerce,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 10:30 a.m., in
the John D. Dingell Room 2123, Rayburn House Office Building,
and remotely via Cisco Webex online video conferencing, Hon.
Anna Eshoo (chairwoman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Members present: Representatives Eshoo, Butterfield,
Matsui, Castor, Sarbanes, Welch, Schrader, Cardenas, Ruiz,
Dingell, Kuster, Kelly, Barragan, Blunt Rochester, Craig,
Schrier, Trahan, Fletcher, Pallone (ex officio), Guthrie
(subcommittee ranking member), Upton, Burgess, Griffith,
Bilirakis, Long, Bucshon, Mullin, Hudson, Carter, Dunn, Curtis,
Joyce, and Rodgers (ex officio).
Also present: Representative Walberg.
Staff present: Shana Beavin, Professional Staff Member;
Waverly Gordon, Deputy Staff Director and General Counsel;
Tiffany Guarascio, Staff Director; Perry Hamilton, Clerk;
Fabrizio Herrera, Staff Assistant; Stephen Holland, Health
Counsel; Zach Kahan, Deputy Director, Outreach and Member
Service; Mackenzie Kuhl, Digital Assistant; Aisling McDonough,
Policy Coordinator; Meghan Mullon, Policy Analyst; Juan
Negrete, Junior Professional Staff Member; Kaitlyn Peel,
Digital Director; Caroline Rinker, Press Assistant; Tim
Robinson, Chief Counsel; Chloe Rodriguez, Clerk; Andrew
Souvall, Director of Communications, Outreach, and Member
Services; Kimberlee Trzeciak, Chief Health Advisor; C.J. Young,
Deputy Communications Director; Alec Aramanda, Minority
Professional Staff Member, Health; Kate Arey, Minority Content
Manager and Digital Assistant; Sarah Burke, Minority Deputy
Staff Director; Seth Gold, Minority Professional Staff Member,
Health; Grace Graham, Minority Chief Counsel, Health; Nate
Hodson, Minority Staff Director; Emily King, Minority Member
Services Director; Clare Paoletta, Minority Policy Analyst,
Health; Kristin Seum, Minority Counsel, Health; Kristen
Shatynski, Minority Professional Staff Member, Health; and
Michael Taggart, Minority Policy Director.
Ms. Eshoo. Good morning, everyone. The Subcommittee on
Health will now come to order.
Due to COVID-19, today's hearing is being held remotely as
well as in person.
For members and witnesses that are taking part in person,
we are following the guidance of the CDC and the Office of the
Attending Physician. So please wear a mask when you are not
speaking.
For Members and witnesses taking part remotely, microphones
will be set on mute to eliminate background noise, and you will
need to unmute your microphone when you wish to speak.
Since Members are participating from different locations at
today's hearing, recognition of Members for questions will be
in order of subcommittee seniority.
Documents for the record should be sent to Meghan Mullon at
the email address we have provided your staffs, and all
documents will be entered into the record at the conclusion of
the hearing.
The Chair now recognizes herself for 5 minutes for an
opening statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. ANNA G. ESHOO, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA

Today our subcommittee examines 12 bipartisan bills.
There is some noise in the background. Can you maybe
refrain, or take your conversations out of the hearing room?
Today our subcommittee examines 12 bipartisan bills to
improve the healthcare of the American people. Six of the bills
focus on children's health and well-being.
Pediatric cancer is the number-one disease killer of
children in America, but it is chronically underfunded by the
public and private sectors. The Gabriella Miller Kids First
Research Act 2.0 addresses this gap by redirecting hundreds of
millions of dollars in penalties currently paid by
pharmaceutical, cosmetic, supplement, and medical device
companies into funding for a large-scale genetic and clinical
database to help researchers find insights into childhood
cancer. We are honored to hear testimony about this bill from
Gabriella's mother, Ellyn Miller.
Thank you, Ms. Miller, for joining us today, so close to
the 8-year anniversary of Gabriella's death. And thank you for
her beautiful portrait that you have at the table with you.
Another children's health bill, the Children and Media
Research Advancement Act, authorizes the NIH to lead research
on the effects of technology and media on infants, children,
and adolescents.
We can't trust social media companies to do the right thing
for our children. This bill provides funding for long-overdue
independent research to keep media and tech companies from
evading scrutiny about their impact on the development of
children in our country.
The other four children's health bills seek to prevent and
reduce the impact of stillborn--of stillbirth, newborn hearing
loss, lead poisoning, and birth defects or anomalies. We are
fortunate to have Stacey Stewart of the March of Dimes as our
expert witness for these bills. For over 80 years, the March of
Dimes has been a trusted advocate for the health of all moms
and children in our country.
The next three bills focus on screening and prevention for
lung, breast, and prostate cancer.
First, Katherine's Law. It provides free coverage of lung
cancer screening for individuals over the age of 40, even if
they have no history of smoking.
Nearly 25 percent of all cancer deaths in the United States
are due to lung cancer, and a growing share of lung cancer
cases are occurring in never-smokers. If lung cancer in never-
smokers were a separate category, it would be in the top 10
cancers in our country for sickness and death. This tragedy hit
home for one of our cherished colleagues, former Congressman
Rick Nolan, who is with us today. He lost his precious
daughter, Katherine, to lung cancer, even though she did not
smoke.
Thank you, Congressman Rick, for being here today. It is
good to see you, and we look forward to hearing your all-
important testimony.
The PALS Act allows for the early detection of breast
cancer through free screenings for women over the age of 40,
and the Prostate Cancer Prevention Act funds CDC programs to
prevent and detect prostate cancer, the second most common
cancer among men in our country.
Finally, we are considering two bills to improve cardiac
care and a bill to improve oral health literacy. The CAROL Act
is named in honor of Carol Leavell Barr, the wife of
Representative Andy Barr, who died last year of sudden cardiac
arrest.
The bill funds NIH grants to support research into valvular
heart disease as well as increasing public education and
awareness of valvular heart disease through the CDC. And the
Increasing Access to Quality Cardiac Rehabilitation Care
authorizes PAs, nurse practitioners, and clinical nurse
specialists to supervise cardiac rehabilitation care so more
Medicare patients can benefit from that care. Patients who
receive cardiac rehab typically recover faster from heart
attacks or surgery, and improve their quality of life.
Through our efforts today, these 12 important, bipartisan
health bills move closer from being words on a page to actually
walking into the lives of our constituents to improve their
health and well-being for decades to come.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Eshoo follows:]

Prepared Statement of Hon. Anna G. Eshoo

Today, our Subcommittee examines 12 bipartisan bills to
improve the health care of the American people.
Six of the bills focus on children's health and wellbeing.
Pediatric cancer is the number one disease killer of
children in America, but it is chronically underfunded by the
public and private sectors. The Gabriella Miller Kids First
Research Act 2.0 addresses this gap by redirecting hundreds of
millions of dollars in penalties currently paid by
pharmaceutical, cosmetic, supplement, and medical device
companies into funding for a large-scale genetic and clinical
database to help researchers find insights into childhood
cancer.
We're honored to hear testimony about this bill from
Gabriella's mother, Ellyn Miller. Thank you, Ms. Miller, for
joining us today, so close to the 8-year anniversary of
Gabriella's death. And thank you for her beautiful portrait you
have at the table with you.
Another children's health bill, the Children and Media
Research Advancement Act authorizes the NIH to lead research on
the effects of technology and media on infants, children, and
adolescents. We can't trust social media companies to do the
right thing for our children. This bill provides funding for
long overdue, independent research to keep media and tech
companies from evading scrutiny about their impact on the
development of children.
The other four children's health bills seek to prevent and
reduce the impact of stillbirth, newborn hearing loss, lead
poisoning, and birth defects or anomalies. We're fortunate to
have Stacey Stewart of the March Dimes as our expert witness
for these bills. For over 80 years, the March of Dimes has been
a trusted advocate for the health of all moms and children in
our country.
The next three bills focus on screening and prevention for
lung, breast, and prostate cancer.
First, Katherine's Law provides free coverage of lung
cancer screening for individuals over the age of 40, even if
they have no history of smoking. Nearly 25% of all cancer
deaths in the U.S. are due to lung cancer and a growing share
of lung cancer cases are occurring in never-smokers. If lung
cancer in never-smokers were a separate category, it'd be in
the top 10 cancers in the U.S. for sickness and death. This
tragedy hit home for one of our former colleagues, former
Congressman Rick Nolan, who lost his daughter Katherine to lung
cancer even though she did not smoke. Thank you, Congressman,
for being here today. It's good to see you and we look forward
to hearing your all-important testimony.
The PALS Act allows for the early detection of breast
cancer through free screenings for women over the age of 40 and
the Prostate Cancer Prevention Act funds CDC programs to
prevent and detect prostate cancer, the second most common
cancer among men in our country.
Finally, we're considering two bills to improve cardiac
care and a bill to improve oral health literacy.
The CAROL Act is named in honor of Carol Leavell Barr, the
wife of Rep. Andy Barr, who died last year of sudden cardiac
arrest. The bill funds NIH grants to support research into
valvular heart disease, as well as increasing public education
and awareness of valvular heart disease through the CDC.
The Increasing Access to Quality Cardiac Rehabilitation
Care authorizes PAs, nurse practitioners, and clinical nurse
specialists to supervise cardiac rehabilitation care so more
Medicare patients can benefit from that care. Patients who
receive cardiac rehab typically recover faster from heart
attacks or surgery and improve their quality of life.
Through our efforts today, these 12 important, bipartisan
health bills move closer from being words on a page to actually
walking into the lives of our constituents to improve their
health and wellbeing for decades to come.

Ms. Eshoo. The Chair now is pleased to recognize the
gentleman--and that he is--Mr. Guthrie, the ranking member of
our subcommittee, for 5 minutes for his opening statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. BRETT GUTHRIE, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE COMMONWEALTH OF KENTUCKY

Mr. Guthrie. Thank you, Madam Chair, for hosting this
important meeting, and welcome to my friend from Minnesota--
have you here, and the rest of the panelists that are here with
us today.
Before us today are several public health bills pertaining
to critical prevention and early detection efforts for children
and families. But before I get into those bills, I would like
to draw attention to the partisan health policies currently
being drafted by Democrats behind closed doors here in
Washington.
My colleagues on the other side of the aisle are trying to
pass a reckless tax-and-spending spree package that would get
the Government more involved in Americans' lives, including
their healthcare. The Democrats' bill would cost an estimated
$4.3 trillion and, according to the Congressional Budget Office
letter received yesterday, this bill would lead to 2.8 million
Americans losing their employer-based health insurance.
Further, this spending bill is a stepping stone for a
Government-run, one-size-fits-all healthcare system that can
lead to millions more losing their employer- or union-sponsored
health insurance, along with their doctors.
And I have been a long-time supporter of increasing
healthcare access for patients and allowing patients to keep
the doctor of their choice. I believe we need to modernize,
personalize, and improve healthcare, not let the Government
take it over. That would lead to worst-case, longer waits--
worse care, longer waits, and fewer choices.
And further, I must bring up H.R. 3 that is in the spending
bill that would stifle innovation for finding new cures and
result in fewer new treatments. I strongly believe in investing
in biomedical research to discover innovative solutions to
prevent, detect, and treat disease. Innovation improves
healthcare outcomes and saves lives. The drug pricing scheme
would do the opposite and destroy innovation.
But fortunately, today we are taking a step in the right
direction by examining several important bipartisan public
health initiatives. Since 2015 I have been proud to lead, along
with my colleague Representative Doris Matsui, the Early
Hearing Detection Intervention Reauthorization Act, or EHDI.
This bipartisan bill would provide early diagnosis,
intervention, and treatment of children with hearing loss.
Nearly 3 out of every 1,000 children in the U.S. are born
with a detectable level of hearing loss in one or both ears.
Before the EHDI program began 2 decades ago, only 46\1/2\
percent of infants were screened for hearing loss. Thankfully,
due to the success of the program, 98 percent of infants are
now screened. However, followup treatments continue to be a
concern, with only 67 percent of infants receiving early
intervention treatment. It is essential that infants are
screened early for hearing loss and receive necessary
intervention services in a timely manner so families can get
the appropriate care needed.
Additionally, I am honored to cosponsor H.R. 1193, the
Cardiovascular Advances in Research Opportunities Legacy Act,
or CAROL Act. Despite having long been a supporter of
legislation that promotes health research, these efforts became
much more personal for Representative Andy Barr when he
tragically lost his wife, who was 39, Carol, to sudden cardiac
arrest in 2020, June of 2020. Inspired by her extraordinary
life--and, those who knew her, she was extraordinary--he
introduced H.R. 1193, the Cardiovascular Advances in Research
and Opportunities Legacy, or the CAROL Act.
The CAROL Act will address the gaps in understanding about
valvular heart disease by authorizing a grant program
administered by the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute
to support research on valvular heart disease, including MVP.
The bill has garnered the support of 167 bipartisan Members of
Congress, including many on this committee. Companion
legislation was introduced in the Senate by Minority Leader
Mitch McConnell and Senator Kyrsten Sinema. The legislation
would help other families avoid the tragedy that has so
profoundly impacted Andy's family and so many others throughout
the country.
In closing, we do have bipartisan and successful public
health programs that should continue. Before Congress
authorizes new programs, we need to ensure that current
programs are impactful, funds are spent appropriately, and
reform or improvements to a program are evaluated. We have
learned time and time again that throwing money at a problem is
not an effective way to solve issues, or a good use of taxpayer
dollars.
I yield back.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Guthrie follows:]

Prepared Statement of Hon. Brett Guthrie

Chair Eshoo, thank you for holding this important hearing.
Before us today we have several public health bills
pertaining to critical prevention and early detection efforts
for children and families. Before I get into those bills, I
would like to draw attention to the partisan health policies
currently being drafted by Democrats behind closed doors in
Washington.
My colleagues on the other side of the aisle are trying to
pass a reckless tax and spending spree package that would get
the government more involved in Americans' lives, including in
their health care. The Democrats' bill would cost an estimated
$4.3 trillion and, according to a Congressional Budget Office
letter received yesterday, this bill will lead to 2.8 million
Americans losing their employer-based health insurance.
Further, this spending bill is a stepping-stone for a
Government-run, one-size-fits-all health care system that could
lead to millions more losing their employer or union sponsored
health insurance, along with their doctors.
I have been a longtime supporter of increasing health care
access for patients and allowing patients to keep the doctor of
their choice. I believe we need to modernize, personalize, and
improve health care--not let the government take it over. That
would lead to worse care, longer waits, and fewer choices.
Further, including H.R. 3 in the Democrats' reckless
spending bill would stifle innovation for finding new cures and
result in fewer new treatments. I strongly believe in investing
in biomedical research to discover innovative solutions to
prevent, detect, and treat disease. Innovation improves health
outcomes and saves lives. The Democrats' drug pricing scheme
would do the opposite and destroy innovation.
Today we are taking a step in the right direction by
examining several important bipartisan public health
initiatives.
Since 2015, I have been proud to lead along with my
colleague, Representative Doris Matsui, the Early Hearing
Detection and Intervention Reauthorization Act, or EHDI (ed-
ee). This bipartisan bill would provide early diagnosis,
intervention, and treatment for children with hearing loss.
Nearly 3 out of every 1,000 children in the U.S. are born with
a detectable level of hearing loss in one or both ears. Before
the EHDI program began two decades ago, only 46.5% of infants
were screened for hearing loss. Thankfully, due to the success
of the program, 98% of infants are now screened. However,
follow up treatments continue to be a concern with only 67% of
infants receiving early intervention treatment. It is essential
that infants are screened early for hearing loss and receive
necessary intervention services in a timely manner so families
can get the appropriate care needed.
Additionally, I am honored to cosponsor H.R. 1193, the
Cardiovascular Advances in Research and Opportunities Legacy
Act or CAROL Act.
Despite having long been a supporter of legislation that
promotes health research, these efforts became much more
personal for Rep. Andy Barr when he tragically lost his wife
Carol to sudden cardiac arrest in June 2020.
Inspired her extraordinary life, he introduced H.R. 1193,
the Cardiovascular Advances in Research and Opportunities
Legacy Act (CAROL Act).
The CAROL Act will address the gaps in understanding about
valvular heart disease by authorizing a grant program,
administered by the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute,
to support research on valvular heart disease, including MVP.
The bill has garnered the support of 167 bipartisan Members
of Congress, including many on this Committee. Companion
legislation was introduced in the Senate by Minority Leader
Mitch McConnell and Senator Krysten Sinema.
This legislation would help other families avoid the
tragedy that has so profoundly impacted Andy's family and so
many others throughout the country.
In closing, we do have bipartisan and successful public
health programs that should continue. Before Congress
authorizes new programs, we need to ensure that current
programs are impactful, funds are spent appropriately, and
reform or improvements to a program are evaluated. We've
learned time and time again that throwing money at a problem is
not an effective way to solve issues or a good use of taxpayer
dollars.
I yield back.

Ms. Eshoo. The gentleman yields back. The Chair is pleased
to recognize the chairman of the full committee, Mr. Pallone,
for his 5 minutes of opening statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. FRANK PALLONE, Jr., A REPRESENTATIVE
IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF NEW JERSEY

Mr. Pallone. Thank you, Chairwoman Eshoo.
Today the committee continues our important bipartisan work
to protect children and families. The COVID-19 pandemic has
tested every aspect of family health and demonstrated how
critical physical and social environmental factors are to
health outcomes.
There are also significant concerns that many children and
families have gone without routine care during the pandemic,
and this is worrisome, because this care is critical to
promoting public health and identifying health conditions
early.
Unfortunately, it will be some time before we realize the
full impact of this lapse in care. Today we are considering
legislation that will tackle these challenges in multiple ways.
For example, the pandemic created obstacles to preventative
care, including cancer screenings, which could have resulted in
early forms of cancer going undetected. We will consider three
bills that reauthorize or otherwise expand lifesaving screening
services for lung, prostate, and breast cancer. And these are
important bipartisan pieces of legislation that will help
Americans access care and treatment when it is most effective.
The pandemic has also undoubtedly delayed care for children
and introduced new challenges in the absence of child care and
in-person learning. Some studies suggest that nearly 30 percent
of parents postponed or did not seek care for their children,
due to concerns about exposure to COVID-19. The impacts have
been greater on lower-income families, who have been more
likely to delay care or just simply go without care. And since
the pandemic has had a disparate impact on lower-income
families, it is important that we act to reverse any harmful
effect on the health and well-being of children.
And today we are considering multiple bills that seek to
expand pediatric research and healthcare services. We will
discuss H.R. 2161, the Children and Media Research Advancement
Act, which will reauthorize the National Institutes of Health
to expand research into the cognitive, physical, and social-
emotional development effects of media on infants, children,
and adolescents. This bill is particularly important right now,
as the pandemic has resulted in children spending more time on
electronics for learning and social engagement with friends.
We will also consider H.R. 5487, the Stillbirth Health
Improvement and Education for Autumn Act. This bill would
provide resources to State and Federal health departments to
improve data collection, and increase education about
stillbirths, which tragically affect an estimated 24,000
families nationwide each year.
And these are just a few of the proposals that we will
consider. And we have an excellent panel of witnesses ready to
discuss the full slate of bills. We'll hear from medical
experts in the fields of cancer, cardiology, and pediatrics.
And we will also hear from two parents, who will share the
stories of their two daughters, Katherine Bensen and Gabriella
Miller, who both lost their lives too soon to cancer.
I look forward to hearing from Ellyn Miller, who is also
the president and founder of the Smashing Walnuts Foundation,
about the Gabriella Miller Kids First Research Act.
And I would also like to thank our former colleague,
Representative Nolan, for coming to share his daughter
Katherine's story and to discuss the Katherine's Law for Lung
Cancer Early Detection and Survival Act.
Finally, I am pleased we are able to work with Ranking
Members Rodgers and Guthrie on this hearing and on this
bipartisan slate of bills that will improve the health of
children and families all across the Nation.
And I look forward--I know we are having these legislative
hearings, but we look forward to moving these bills soon. So
thank you, and I yield back, Chairwoman.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Pallone follows:]

Prepared Statement of Hon. Frank Pallone, Jr.

Today, the Committee continues our important, bipartisan
work to protect children and families.
The COVID-19 pandemic has tested every aspect of family
health and demonstrated how critical physical and social
environmental factors are to health outcomes. There are also
significant concerns that many children and families have gone
without routine care during the pandemic. This is worrisome
because this care is critical to promoting public health and
identifying health conditions early. Unfortunately, it will be
some time before we realize the full impact of the lapse in
care.
Today, we are considering legislation that will tackle
these challenges in multiple ways.
For example, the pandemic created obstacles to preventative
care, including cancer screenings, which could have resulted in
early forms of cancer going undetected. We will consider three
bills that reauthorize or otherwise expand life-saving
screening services for lung, prostate, and breast cancer. These
are important bipartisan pieces of legislation that will help
Americans access care and treatment when it is most effective.
The pandemic has also undoubtedly delayed care for children
and introduced new challenges in the absence of childcare and
in-person learning. Some studies suggest that nearly 30 percent
of parents postponed or did not seek care for their children
due to concerns about exposure to COVID-19. The impacts have
been greater on lower income families who have been more likely
to delay care or to simply go without care. Since the pandemic
has had a disparate impact on lower income families, it is
important that we act to reverse any harmful effect on the
health and well-being of children.
Today we are considering multiple bills that seek to expand
pediatric research and health care services. We will discuss
H.R. 2161, the Children and Media Research Advancement Act,
which will authorize the National Institutes of Health to
expand research into the cognitive, physical, and social-
emotional development effects of media on infants, children,
and adolescents. This legislation is particularly important
right now as the pandemic has resulted in children spending
more time on electronics for learning and social engagement
with friends.
We will also consider H.R. 5487, the Stillbirth Health
Improvement and Education for Autumn Act. This bill would
provide resources to State and Federal health departments to
improve data collection and increase education about
stillbirths, which, tragically, affect an estimated 24,000
families nationwide each year.
These are just a few of the proposals we will consider, and
we have an excellent panel of witnesses ready to discuss the
full slate of bills. We will hear from medical experts in the
fields of cancer, cardiology, and pediatrics.
We will also hear from two parents who will share the
stories of their two daughters, Katherine Bensen and Gabriella
Miller, who both lost their lives too soon to cancer. I look
forward to hearing from Ellyn Miller who is also the President
and Founder of the Smashing Walnuts Foundation, about the
``Gabriella Miller Kids First Research Act.'' And I would also
like to thank our former colleague, Representative Nolan, for
coming to share his daughter Katherine's story, and to discuss
the ``Katherine's Law for Lung Cancer Early Detection and
Survival Act.''
Finally, I'm pleased we were able to work with Ranking
Members Rodgers and Guthrie on this hearing and on this
bipartisan slate of bills that will improve the health of
children and families all across the Nation.
I look forward to moving these bills forward soon. Thank
you.

Ms. Eshoo. The gentleman yields back. The Chair now is
pleased to recognize Congresswoman Cathy McMorris Rodgers.
Is she----
Mr. Guthrie. She is virtual.
Ms. Eshoo. She is virtual? Oh, OK, great.
Congresswoman McMorris Rodgers is the ranking member of the
full committee, and I am pleased to recognize her for her 5
minutes for an opening statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, A
REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF WASHINGTON

Mrs. Rodgers. Thank you, Madam Chair, Mr. Chairman, and to
all our witnesses, thank you for being here this morning.
Many of the solutions we are considering today renew key
public health programs [audio malfunction] importance of
renewing and updating expired authorizations that continue to
be appropriated. So I am pleased that our Members are
fulfilling the duties we have as an authorizing committee.
Mr. Carter's Improving the Health of Child Act reauthorizes
activities at the National Center on Birth Defects and
Developmental Disabilities.
Mr. Walberg's Lead Poisoning Prevention Act renews critical
lead poisoning prevention and screening initiatives.
Dr. Dunn's bill reauthorizes prostate cancer activities at
the CDC.
Other bills reauthorize programs that expire next year,
like Mr. Guthrie's Early Hearing Detection and Intervention
Reauthorization Act.
We will also be considering bills that establish new public
health programs, like Representatives Mullin and Herrera
Beutler's SHINE for Autumn Act to mitigate the risk of
stillbirths and help more moms and babies, and Mr. Barr's CAROL
Act that will improve research and public health outreach
related to heart disease.
All of these solutions reflect the importance of the
committee's authorizing responsibilities over key public health
programs.
It is important for Federal agencies to come before this
committee to comment, discuss programs and other related health
initiatives that--and that also should have happened today. In
fact, except for a budget hearing with Secretary Becerra on the
budget that was not released at the time, no administration
official has come before the Health Subcommittee this Congress.
We need to hear from the administration and public health
officials. They have not been before this committee, even after
making top-down decisions that impact every person in this
country related to COVID-19 data, changing guidelines, schools,
vaccine mandates, and booster shots. Unfortunately, it is
undermining trust in public health and people's abilities to
make the best decisions for themselves.
We are also seeing a historic surge in opioid overdose
deaths made worse by the economic shutdowns, lost jobs,
isolation, fear, and despair. The majority's refusal to bring
the administration before us to address these crises is a
complete lack of our oversight and legislative
responsibilities. We should be plowing the hard ground,
listening, and working together to crush this pandemic and
modernize healthcare.
The bills we are considering touch on several important
issues, but we also must recognize the central role our public
health programs have played over the last year and a half, and
the massive influx of funding that they have received as a part
of the pandemic response. We should be addressing these public
health agencies more holistically.
Let's hear from States and the Substance Abuse and Mental
Health Services Administration on how to save lives, combat the
opioid epidemic, and improve the mental health of children who
are in crisis.
Let's permanently schedule fentanyl analogues in Schedule
I. DEA is warning the American public on the increasing dangers
of fake prescription pills containing fentanyl.
Let's learn from the pandemic on how we safely speed up
innovation, like we did to get safe and effective vaccines, and
supply those--apply those lessons to discover new cures and
treatments.
Let's investigate how this pandemic even started, so it
never happens again.
This committee has a rich history of bipartisan work by
listening and leading on solutions to solve our greatest
challenges. Today is a step in that direction, but we have a
lot more work to do to address the concerns that are on the
hearts and minds of the American people.
And this brings me to the tax-and-spending spree that
Speaker Pelosi is rewriting right now behind closed doors. It
will lead to fewer cures, lost coverage, and force the sick to
beg the Government for lifesaving care. Just yesterday, CBO
provided its analysis that shows the dangers of the
majority's--to socialized medicine that is going to cost more
than half a trillion dollars: 2.8 million people will lose
their employer-sponsored healthcare. Just like 11 years ago,
Speaker Pelosi plans to pass a massive bill that radically
disrupts people's lives and livelihoods. And if you like your
health insurance, you may not be able to keep it.
I again urge this committee to get back to the people's
work, not the Speaker's agenda, and take a step in the right
direction today. I hope we can continue this encouraging trend
by addressing the important major public health issues facing
our Nation today.
[The prepared statement of Mrs. Rodgers follows:]

Prepared Statement of Hon. Cathy McMorris Rodgers

INTRO
Many of the solutions we are considering today renew key
public health programs.
I have led for years on the importance of addressing
expired authorizations that continue to be appropriated, so I'm
pleased to see our Members fulfilling the duties we have as an
authorizing committee.
Mr. Carter's Improving the Health of Children Act
reauthorizes activities at the National Center on Birth Defects
and Developmental Disabilities.
Mr. Walberg's Lead Poisoning Prevention Act renews critical
lead poisoning prevention and screening initiatives.
Dr. Dunn's bill reauthorizes prostate cancer activities at
the CDC.
Other bills reauthorize programs that expire next year,
like Mr. Guthrie's Early Hearing Detection and Intervention
Reauthorization Act.
We will also be considering bills that establish new public
health programs.
Like Representative Mullin and Herrera Butler's SHINE for
Autumn Act to mitigate the risk of stillbirths and help more
moms and babies...
.. and Mr. Barr's CAROL Act that will improve research and
public health outreach related to heart disease.
PROCESS
ALL of these solutions reflect the importance of the
committee's authorizing responsibilities over key public health
programs.
It's important for Federal agencies to come before this
committee to comment, discuss programs, and other related
health initiatives, and that should have happened today.
In fact, except for a budget hearing with Secretary Becerra
on a budget that was not released at the time...
.. no administration official has come up before the health
subcommittee yet this Congress.
We need to hear from the administration and public health
officials.
They have NOT been before this committee even after making
top-down decisions that impact every person in this country
related to COVID-19 data, changing guidelines, schools, vaccine
mandates, and booster shots.
It's undermining trust in public health...
. and people's abilities to make the best decisions for
themselves and their families.
We are also seeing an historic surge in opioid overdose
deaths... made worse by economic shutdowns, lost jobs,
isolation, fear, and despair.
The Majority's refusal to bring the administration before
us to address real crises like these is an abdication of our
oversight and legislative responsibilities.
PLOWING THE HARD GROUND
We should be plowing the hard ground...listening and
working together... to crush this pandemic and modernize health
care.
The bills we are considering touch on several important
issues, but given the central role our public health programs
have played over the last year and a half, and the massive
influx of funding they have received as part of the pandemic
response.
. we should be addressing these public health agencies more
holistically.
Let's hear from States and Substance Abuse and Mental
Health Services Administration on how to save lives, combat the
opioid epidemic, and improve the mental health of children who
are in crisis.
Let's permanently schedule fentanyl analogs in Schedule I.
DEA is warning the American public on the increasing
dangers of fake prescription pills containing fentanyl.
Let's learn from the pandemic how we can safely speed up
innovation, like we did to get safe and effective vaccines and
apply those lessons To discover new cures and treatments.
Let's investigate how this pandemic even started so it
never happens again.
This Committee has a rich history of bipartisan work--by
listening and then leading on solutions to solve our greatest
challenges.
Today is a small step in that direction...
.. but we have a lot more work to do to address top
concerns of the American people.
RECONCILIATION
This brings me to the tax and spending spree that Speaker
Pelosi is re-writing behind closed doors right now.
It will lead to fewer cures, lost coverage, and force the
sick to beg the government for lifesaving care.
Just yesterday, CBO provided its analysis that shows the
dangers of the Majority's lurch to socialized medicine that
will cost more than a half trillion dollars.
2.8 million people will lose their employer sponsored
health plan.
Just like 11 years ago, Speaker Pelosi plans to pass a
massive bill that radically disrupts people's lives and
livelihoods... and, if you like your health insurance, you may
not be able to keep it.
CONCLUSION
I again urge this Committee to get back to the People's
work... not Pelosi's work....and we're taking a step in the
right direction today.
I hope we can continue this encouraging trend by addressing
the important major public health issues facing our Nation
today.
Thank you, I yield back.

Mrs. Rodgers. Thank you, I yield back.
Ms. Eshoo. The gentlewoman yields back. I would just like
to make a couple of comments. I always welcome constructive
criticism, it is always welcome. We learn from each other.
But the ranking member is not correct about testimony from
administration officials. We have had the FDA, we have had the
NIH. We--they were both in July. We have had the CDC, Dr.
Collins, who testified on long COVID.
And there is no bill that is being written behind closed
doors. All of the Energy and Commerce Committee were involved
in--what was it, 36, 38, 39--hours of markup of the Build
Better--Build Back Better legislation. And the Energy and
Commerce Committee, of course, had a significant role in that.
So I just want to state that for the record, because those are
the facts.
I now would like to introduce our witnesses. We are so
fortunate to have each one here today.
First, our colleague, our former colleague, our--someone
that will be a friend for life, Congressman Rick Nolan of
Minnesota. He is the father of Katherine, and the namesake of
Katherine's Law, which we are considering today.
Dr. Donald Lloyd-Jones is the president of the American
Heart Association.
Welcome to you too.
Ms. Stacey Stewart, the president and the CEO of the March
of Dimes. When she came into the hearing room this morning I
went over to welcome her and told her what I recall as a child,
maybe 7 years old, 8 years old, my mother holding my hand and
walking through the entire neighborhood, ringing doorbells in
the early evening after supper for donations to the March of
Dimes. So that is not only etched in my memory, but it is
etched in my heart.
Dr. Jenny Radesky is the assistant professor of pediatrics
at the University of Michigan Medical School and a constituent
of Congresswoman Debbie Dingell. And we will call on
Congresswoman Dingell to introduce Dr. Radesky.
Dr. Bruce Cassis is the president of the Academy of General
Dentistry.
Dr. Raymond DuBois is the former president of the American
Association for Cancer Research.
And Ms. Ellyn Miller is the president and founder of the
Smashing Walnuts Foundation and the mother--most importantly,
the mother of Gabriella Miller.
So, Congressman Nolan, we will start with you. You have--
you are recognized for 5 minutes. And welcome again, and thank
you for traveling across the country to be with us this
morning.
[Pause.]
Ms. Eshoo. Is your microphone on, Rick?
Mr. Nolan. There we go.
Ms. Eshoo. There you go.
Voice. Turn it towards you.
Ms. Eshoo. And bring it towards you.
Mr. Nolan. Thank you. It is such a joy----
Ms. Eshoo. And you can take off your mask while you are
testifying. And pull the mike up to you. There you go. See,
just 2 years and----
Mr. Nolan. Used to sitting on the other----
Ms. Eshoo. There you go. Two years, and you are out of
practice.
Mr. Nolan [continuing]. Side of the table.
[Laughter.]

STATEMENT OF HON. RICHARD M. NOLAN, FORMER REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF MINNESOTA; DONALD M. LLOYD-JONES,
M.D., PRESIDENT, AMERICAN HEART ASSOCIATION; STACEY D. STEWART,
PRESIDENT AND CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER, MARCH OF DIMES; JENNY
RADESKY, M.D., ASSISTANT PROFESSOR OF PEDIATRICS, UNIVERSITY OF
MICHIGAN MEDICAL SCHOOL; BRUCE L. CASSIS, D.D.S., PRESIDENT,
ACADEMY OF GENERAL DENTISTRY; RAYMOND N. DuBOIS, M.D., Ph.D.,
FORMER PRESIDENT, AMERICAN ASSOCIATION FOR CANCER RESEARCH; AND
ELLYN MILLER, PRESIDENT AND FOUNDER, SMASHING WALNUTS
FOUNDATION

STATEMENT OF HON. RICHARD M. NOLAN

Mr. Nolan. It is such a joy to see so many old friends, and
thank you for inviting me to be here today.
As I was saying, Chairwoman Eshoo, Ranking Member Guthrie,
chairman of the full committee Frank Pallone, and
Representative McMorris Rodgers, and thank you all for being
here.
I am here as--not as a former Member. I am really here as a
father and a public citizen and a nonlobbyist for anybody, I
might add, and to give testimony and to thank all of you on
this committee, your personal staff, your committee staffs, for
their service, for conducting this hearing, for giving me an
opportunity to testify on behalf of H.R. 3749, Katherine's Law,
for the early detection and survival of lung cancer victims.
It--a little history. It was in 1971 that President Richard
Nixon declared war on cancer. And since that time every
president, Democrat and Republican, has entered into that war
and joined with the Congress of the United States and this
committee in a very strong, resolute, nonpartisan manner to win
this war against cancer, which kills so many people--lung
cancer, in particular, which kills more people than virtually
all the other cancers combined.
Our daughter, Katherine, who was a nonsmoker, devoted her
terminal cancer diagnosis as what she called her ticking time
bomb. It was not a matter--question of whether, it was just a
question of when. And she chose to devote the last years of her
life to her four children, her husband, and then doing
everything she could to spare people in the future from having
to endure what she and so many others had to endure.
And it was during that process where Katherine learned and
informed her dad that breast cancer, prostate cancer,
colorectal cancer benefited from public policies that provided
routine, free cancer screening, which enabled early detection.
Unfortunately, for lung cancer, the only people--and by the
way, that was starting at age 40 for most of these other
cancers. Unfortunately, for lung cancer, the only people who
were entitled to that routine screening were 55 years of age,
and they had to have smoked a package of cigarettes every day
for 20 years. Or was it 30 years? Somebody can correct me on
that. I forget at the moment. But people who were nonsmokers,
many of whom are victims of lung cancer, were not entitled to
any screening whatsoever.
And she learned also--and informed me and others--that that
was in part because of the stigmatization of lung cancer by
virtue of smoking but also the fact that our lungs don't have
any nerves, unlike the other parts of our body. So in the other
cancers, in addition to early detection and screening, you
might feel a lump, you might feel discomfort, you might feel
pain. That doesn't happen with lung cancer. There are no
nerves. You don't have any discomfort until it starts pressing
against other organs.
And without the benefit of early screening, you are not
getting the same strong, positive results that the victims of
other cancer have. Breast cancer, for example, prostate cancer,
colorectal cancer. They, respectively, have survival rates
after 5 years of 90 percent, breast--prostate cancer, 98
percent; colorectal, 65 percent. Unfortunately, for lung cancer
it is a little over 20 percent after 5 years because of that
disparity, very unfair to the victims of cancers, whether they
were smokers or nonsmokers.
And during her journey, that is when we learned this. So
she said to me, ``Dad, is there any reason why we can't draft a
bill to provide that same kind of opportunity for free
screening for victims of lung cancer? It kills more people than
all the other cancers. Why not do that, give them an
opportunity to survive with early detection?''
So that is how the bill emerged. And I have told you what
the survival rates are. This bill gives each and every one of
us here a chance to advance that. And they said it has always
been a strong, nonpartisan, bipartisan effort that has resulted
in those wonderfully good statistics for so many of the other
cancers, but not for the victims of lung cancer.
In any event, Katherine said, ``Dad, if that bill could be
passed, I would gladly, along with--endure all that I have had
endured, along with so many others, gladly, including my
fatality at the end, if I knew that it would spare so many
other people the pain that we have had to endure.''
So the bill was drafted, and Congressman Brendan Boyle
agreed to sponsor it, and sponsor it in her name.
And let me conclude with just a couple of things here.
Several hours before Katherine died--we, of course, were with
her, and she was very weak. And I said to her, ``Katherine, one
of the great mysteries''--most will admit we don't know where
we are going when this life of ours is over, but I said,
``Wherever that is, I want to be there with you as soon as
possible.''
And with her weak but clear voice, she just raised her
hand. She looked her dad in the eye and said, ``Dad, not until
you get my bill passed.''
So it is in that spirit that I am here today, and I can't
thank--and each and every one of you.
So let me close by saying what that immortal western cowboy
hero of ours, John Wayne, who died of lung cancer, might have
said--``God willing, the creek don't rise''--and the Congress
enacts this important legislation, Katherine's Law will become
the law of the land, and many tens if not hundreds of thousands
of lives will be saved.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Nolan follows:]

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Ms. Eshoo. Thank you, Congressman Nolan. Katherine's Law
will become the law of the land. We are on our way. And your
being here to help launch it, and the work that we are doing
today is a--we have a clear path, and we are going to make sure
what Katherine said before she left this world becomes reality.
How is that? OK, thank you so much.
Dr. Lloyd Jones, you are recognized for 5 minutes of
testimony.
Dr. Lloyd-Jones. Good morning. Thank you. Can you hear me?
Ms. Eshoo. Good morning. Welcome.

STATEMENT OF DONALD M. LLOYD-JONES, M.D.

Dr. Lloyd-Jones. Thank you. Chairwoman Eshoo, Chair
Pallone, Ranking Members Guthrie and McMorris Rodgers, and
members of the Health Subcommittee. Thank you for the
opportunity to testify today on behalf of the American Heart
Association and its more than 40 million volunteers and
supporters.
My name is Dr. Donald Lloyd-Jones and, as president of the
American Heart Association, I serve as its chief volunteer
officer responsible for the oversight of all medical,
scientific, public health, and public policy matters.
I am also a cardiologist and a cardiovascular
epidemiologist, and chair of the Department of Preventive
Medicine, professor of preventive medicine, cardiology and
pediatrics at Northwestern University's Feinberg School of
Medicine in Chicago.
I am pleased to testify today about the ways in which two
bipartisan bills under your consideration would improve heart
health for all. Specifically, I wish to address the Increasing
Access to Quality Cardiac Rehabilitation Care Act of 2021, H.R.
1956, and the Cardiovascular Advances in Research and
Opportunities Legacy, or CAROL Act, H.R. 1193.
My statement today is a summary of my more extensive
remarks in support of these bills that have been submitted for
the record.
I would like to thank Representatives Lisa Blunt Rochester
and Adrian Smith for championing the Increasing Access to
Quality Cardiac Rehabilitation Care Act, which would
significantly expand patient access to cardiac rehabilitation
services.
Cardiac rehabilitation, or cardiac rehab, for short, is a
medically supervised program for patients who have experienced
a serious cardiac event or surgery. It includes monitored
exercise training, education about heart healthy lifestyles,
and counseling to reduce stress. Participation in cardiac rehab
has been shown to significantly reduce the risks of death and
cardiovascular events as well as result in decreased hospital
readmissions.
As a practicing cardiologist, I am an avid user of cardiac
rehab for all of my qualifying patients, and those who have
participated routinely tell me that it teaches them about
improving their heart health and what symptoms they need to pay
attention to in the future and, crucially, that it restores
their sense of well-being and their ability to trust their body
as they return to normal life and activities.
Despite these clear benefits of cardiac rehab, only one-
third of all eligible patients, and only a quarter of Medicare
patients, will ever receive it. Barriers to participation
include things like lack of referral, large disparities in
referral patterns based on sex, race, ethnicity, socioeconomic
position, and geography, and long wait times to enrollment.
This act would improve health equity by facilitating the
timely referral of patients and by enabling greater patient
access in rural and underserved communities.
It would also remove burdensome requirements for direct
physician supervision at cardiac rehab facilities, where highly
trained advanced-practice providers are already able to provide
necessary safety oversight.
These advances will allow cardiac rehab programs to operate
in areas where physicians are scarce, improving patient access
to these lifesaving programs.
The American Heart Association is also pleased to support
the CAROL Act.
And first, I would like to express my deepest sympathy to
Representative Andy Barr and his family for the tragic loss of
his wife, Carol. We are deeply grateful to him for sponsoring
this legislation to advance our understanding and awareness of
heart valve diseases that kill approximately 25,000 Americans
each year. With this bill we could help prevent more families
from enduring a similar tragedy.
The CAROL Act authorizes funding for the National Heart,
Lung, and Blood Institute to gather information and fund
lifesaving research on heart valve disease. This investment
will help address gaps in our understanding, including what
causes sudden cardiac death due to mitral valve prolapse, or
MVP.
MVP is a degenerative heart valve condition that is present
in approximately 2 percent of individuals, many of whom are
unaware that they have it, and that led to the untimely death
of Carol Barr. MVP uncommonly becomes a serious condition. But
when it does, it can cause heart failure, stroke, or abnormal
heart rhythms that may become life threatening. Significant MVP
poses a threefold elevated risk of sudden cardiac death
compared to the general population.
One of the most troubling aspects of MVP for me, as a
clinician, is just how much we still don't know about its
causes, factors that lead to progressive problems, when is the
best time to intervene, and what increases risk for sudden
cardiac death.
The CAROL Act would authorize new workshops and research
funded by the NIH, increase awareness through projects at the
CDC, and invest in efforts to improve data collection about
sudden cardiac arrest. Ultimately, it would increase screening,
detection, and diagnosis of heart valve disease and help reduce
the incidents of sudden cardiac death.
So, in conclusion, the bills under consideration today will
advance equity by improving access to care for cardiac rehab
and will expand our understanding of treatment for heart valve
diseases, including MVP.
Thank you so much for the opportunity to offer my
testimony, and I look forward to answering questions.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Lloyd-Jones follows:]

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Ms. Eshoo. Thank you, Dr. Lloyd-Jones, for your important
and superb testimony. We appreciate you being with us.
The Chair now recognizes Ms. Stewart for your 5 minutes of
testimony. And welcome, again. It is great to see you.
Ms. Stewart. Great to see you too.

STATEMENT OF STACEY D. STEWART

Ms. Stewart. Thank you and good morning, Chairwoman Eshoo
and Ranking Member Guthrie, and members of the Health
Subcommittee. Thank you for the opportunity to testify today. I
am Stacey Stewart, president and CEO of March of Dimes.
The March of Dimes' work is now more important than ever.
Our Nation is in the midst of a dire maternal and infant health
crisis, which the pandemic has worsened. By improving the
health of women before, during, and after pregnancy, we can
improve outcomes for both mothers and for infants. But we have
many public health challenges before us.
The U.S. remains the most dangerous developed nation in the
world in which to give birth. And it is even more dire for
women and babies of color. Pre-term birth is the second leading
cause of infant mortality, which has slowly declined over the
past few years. Yet still, two babies die every single hour,
and two women die from pregnancy complications every single
day.
This month, as we observe Pregnancy and Infant Loss
Awareness Month, we know that one out of every four individuals
and families' lives are affected by the death of their children
during pregnancy, at birth, and in infancy.
We must help these families by remembering their losses and
working to better understand the causes of stillbirth, with the
goal of lowering the stillbirth rate.
We hope new efforts by the Biden administration and
Congress will spur further action to address the maternal and
infant health crisis that we face. However, we must continue to
focus our attention on the other challenges facing us and
utilize the tools we have to improve the health of children and
families.
To that end, March of Dimes supports the following
legislation that is being considered by the subcommittee today.
First, H.R. 5487, Stillbirth Health Improvement and
Education for Autumn Act of 2021, or the SHINE for Autumn Act,
would invest in research and data collection to better
understand stillbirth in the U.S. This will allow us to better
track and research stillbirths, find out who is impacted, and
the role disparities have in negatively impacting infant and
parental health.
Second, H.R. 5551, the Improving the Health of Children
Act, would reauthorize the National Center for Birth Defects
and Developmental Disabilities. The Center's tracking and
public health research systems help to identify causes of birth
defects and find opportunities to prevent them. It also does
critical work at researching developmental disabilities such as
autism, addressing blood disorders that affect millions of
people each year, and advancing healthcare for people with
disabilities so they can stay well, active, and a part of the
community.
March of Dimes has partnered with the Center to support
research and prevention, promote birth defects prevalence data
from States on our Peristats website, and we have led efforts
to help reduce health-related stigma through our Beyond Labels
initiative.
We are also a strong supporter of the Surveillance for
Emerging Threats to Mothers and Babies Network--it is called
SET-NET--which we must scale nationally to have a complete
picture, through real-time clinical and survey data, of how
COVID-19 impacted care for mothers and babies.
Third, H.R. 5552, the Lead Poisoning Prevention Act, would
provide critical resources for educational outreach for
screenings and referrals, the CDC's Advisory Committee on
Childhood Lead Poisoning Preventions, and help lead exposure
before children are harmed. Children can be severely affected
by lead's impact on brain and body development, with Black
children nearly three times more likely than White children to
have elevated blood lead levels. High levels of exposure before
and during pregnancy can cause fertility problems,
hypertension, delayed brain development, premature birth, low
birth weight, and miscarriage.
H.R. 5561, the Early Hearing Detection and Intervention
Reauthorization Act. This act authorizes the early detection
and intervention program for deaf and hard-of-hearing newborns
and infants and young children. The program has dramatically
increased the number of newborns screened annually, as we heard
from Ranking Member Guthrie, from less than 10 percent to
currently around 98 percent, which has significantly helped
deaf and hard-of-hearing children begin learning speech and
language in the first 6 months of life to develop better
language skills.
Chairwoman Eshoo and Ranking Member Guthrie, I want to say
thank you for inviting me to be here. I was so moved by your
story, Chairwoman, of your early involvement with March of
Dimes. As I know, that has been the case for many of you. Thank
you for attention--for your attention today, for focusing on
some of the Nation's most critical public health challenges. We
must continue to invest in programs in our toolbox, such as
prevention and data collection and surveillance systems. Thank
you so much.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Stewart follows:]

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Ms. Eshoo. Thank you, Ms. Stewart, and the entire team at
the March of Dimes. It is an organization that is trusted and
respected by the American people. Thank you for your
leadership.
Next we are going to have Dr. Radesky testify, and I am--we
are going to call on our colleague, a distinguished member of
our subcommittee, Mrs. Dingell, to introduce Dr. Radesky, who
is--of course, hails from Michigan. And she can tell you the
rest.
So, Debbie, are you out there?
Mrs. Dingell. Thank you. I am, Madam Chair. Can you hear
me?
Ms. Eshoo. OK, good to see you.
Mrs. Dingell. Good to see you. And it is good to see all of
our witnesses, who--two of whom I have worked with closely for
many years, and to see our dear friend Rick.
But I am really proud we have got a Go Blue presence in the
House today.
Dr. Jenny Radesky is a practicing developmental behavioral
pediatrician and assistant professor of pediatrics at the
University of Michigan Medical School. Her research focuses on
the impact that digital media use and mobile technology has on
children's health and behavior as well as on parent-child
interaction. She is a practicing pediatrician who has focused
on psychosocial determinants of childhood development, and she
is the lead author of the 2016 American Academy of Pediatrics
policy statement on digital media use in early childhood. Her
research has been cited by many people: CBS, the New York
Times, and other leading publications.
We look forward to her testimony today on the CAMRA Act and
her expertise as a researcher and clinician.
Thank you very much, Madam Chair. I yield back, and I have
to close again with ``Go Blue.''
Dr. Radesky. Thank you so much, Representative Dingell. Can
you hear me OK?
So good morning, everyone.
Ms. Eshoo. We can, and welcome.

STATEMENT OF JENNY RADESKY, M.D.

Dr. Radesky. Thank you. I am so happy to be here. I would
like to thank Chairwoman Eshoo, Ranking Member Guthrie, and
members of the Committee on Energy and Commerce, the
Subcommittee on Health, for the invitation to speak today.
I am a developmental behavioral pediatrician at U of M
Medical School, where my NICHD-funded research focuses on
media, parenting, and child socioemotional development.
So my testimony today is in support of CAMRA, the Children
and Media Research Advancement Act, and it represents my
expertise as a pediatrician and researcher, not the views of
the University of Michigan.
So I first want to preface my remarks by emphasizing that
caring about children's relationships with digital media is not
an emotional issue. It is highly practical. It is good public
health. Digital media are some of the most universal,
ubiquitous exposures children experience on a daily basis, and
they are often designed by adults untrained in the curious and
expansive ways that children experience the world.
Consequently, digital design often focuses on monetization or
engagement metrics and may not consider unintended negative
consequences on society--in particular, children.
So parents have seen firsthand the way digital design can
either support or frustrate their family's needs during the
COVID-19 pandemic--for example, whether their child is learning
new computer coding skills through a well-designed app or is
distracted from remote learning by YouTube videos, whether
their family feels connected through video chat or divided by
extreme social media posts.
And new digital products are being adopted at an
increasingly rapid pace. For example, Pokemon Go reached 50
million users in less than 3 weeks, and tech companies are
investing millions of dollars in marketing and data analytics
to engage child and teen users.
Academic research on how these technologies impact our
youth cannot keep up. We need the support of the NIH to carry
out rigorous, independent research on children and media.
In my expert opinion, there are several pressing gaps in
scientific knowledge that would benefit from CAMRA's funding.
First, we need more nuanced understanding of the day-to-day
relationships between media and child well-being. Research
studies on children and media have often relied on global
ratings of how children use media, such as screen time, which
is not detailed enough for the complex outcomes like mental
health. We need study designs that follow children in their
natural experiences, track their responses to the media they
use, and the media messages they consume, so we can uncover
sources of resilience and vulnerability.
Second, new measurement tools are needed. My research lab
has created innovative methods, with the support of NICHD, for
studying media use, like harnessing data streams already
collected by smartphones to see which apps children are using,
and when. My work with Common Sense Media has generated new
ways of collecting children's YouTube viewing histories to
evaluate what types of content dominates this platform. Tech
companies already collect troves of these types of data.
However, researchers need more access so that we can truly
characterize the positive and negative experiences that
children have online.
Third, we need to know more about children's differential
susceptibility to media. Research usually examines children as
homogeneous population, but we know that children have
remarkable variability in their strengths, their challenges.
Some children are more anxious, some are easygoing, while
others are impulsive and reactive, and this likely determines
which children will have problematic versus balanced
relationships with media. CAMRA specifically calls for this
type of research, focusing on individual differences and media
use.
Fourth, we need to understand more about the interplay
between poverty, psychosocial stress, and media use. There are
deep, socioeconomic inequities in our country, and this is
rarely addressed head-on in media research. But as we saw
during COVID-19, structural factors play a strong role in how
much media children use, and their access to other
opportunities.
Finally, CAMRA is unique in that it envisions a sustained
commitment to this field, which needs to keep up with the
rapidly evolving technology around us. For example, we need to
understand the impact of virtual reality or the algorithms that
shape children's recommendation feeds, or other understudied
areas like online gambling. Sustained CAMRA research dollars
would also train a new generation of scientists to use cutting-
edge methods, and then translate their findings for parents and
policymakers.
This is a crucial moment for funding research in children
and media. There is a growing consensus that it is time to
shift the scientific framework away from only asking what
children and parents can do better to also asking what
technology companies can change, whether in their designs or
their business models, to promote child well-being. This
digital ecosystem is relatively young, so there is much that
can be done, based in part on solid, independent evidence
generated through NIH funding.
So I am grateful for your time today, and I appreciate your
consideration of the CAMRA bill.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Radesky follows:]

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Ms. Eshoo. Thank you very much, Dr. Radesky. We appreciate
your testimony, and this is an area that really cries out for
study. So your testimony is--and on this legislation, the
legislation itself, I think, is really badly needed, and I am
glad we are addressing it today.
Next we recognize Dr. Cassis to testify for 5 minutes.
We welcome you, and we thank you for being with us, and you
are on.

STATEMENT OF BRUCE L. CASSIS, D.D.S.

Dr. Cassis. Thank you, Chairwoman Eshoo, Ranking Member
Guthrie, Chairman Pallone and Ranking Member McMorris Rodgers,
and members of the subcommittee. Thank you so much for----
Ms. Eshoo. Can you speak up, Doctor?
Dr. Cassis. I certainly can. Thank you so much----
Ms. Eshoo. Wonderful.
Dr. Cassis [continuing]. For the opportunity--is that
better?
Ms. Eshoo. It is much better, thank you.
Dr. Cassis. OK. Thank you so much for this opportunity to
speak with you today.
My name is Dr. Bruce Cassis, and I am a general dentist
from Fayetteville, West Virginia. I am also president of the
Academy of General Dentistry, or AGD, which represents over
40,000 general dentists across the country. We exist to serve
the needs of our members through continuing education and
advocacy, which in turn better serves the needs and interests
of our patients.
I am pleased to be here today to discuss legislation that
would help improve the health of families and children,
specifically H.R. 4555, the Oral Health Literacy and Awareness
Act.
Oral health literacy is the degree to which people have the
capacity to obtain, process, and understand basic health
information and services needed to make appropriate oral health
decisions. As a dentist practicing in rural West Virginia for
nearly 42 years, I have seen firsthand more times than I can
count the effects of oral disease, especially on our most
vulnerable population: our children.
Many people are unaware that oral health is linked to
overall health. Diseases related to oral health can cause so
many negative things: pain, loss of school and work time,
nutrition problems, emergency room visits, and even death. Oral
disease does not stop at the mouth and teeth. Diabetes, low
birth weight, even early onset Alzheimer's, and many more.
Fortunately, most oral-health-related ailments can be
prevented. Good oral health habits are especially important for
expectant mothers, children, and young parents.
Oral disease especially impacts children. Tooth decay is
the most common chronic disease among school-aged youth.
Roughly one in four U.S. adults has at least one untreated
cavity. Most of oral health ailments can be avoided by
increasing oral health literacy among all populations, with an
emphasis on children, to ensure that they develop and maintain
healthy habits into adulthood.
Folks need to complete regular dental visits to stay on top
of their oral health. Unfortunately, the majority of Americans
are not using the oral healthcare system. According to the
latest data from HHS, 46 percent of the population had a dental
visit in 2018. This is only 1.7 percent higher than the
percentage of the population who visited the dentist in 2003.
The lack of progress on this front is startling and cannot
continue.
Notably, significant disparities continue to exist within
our population when it comes to both oral healthcare
utilization and status. While 52 percent of non-Hispanic White
people were able to visit a dental provider in 2018, only
around 34 percent of those who are Hispanic and non-Hispanic
Black saw a dentist in the same year. According to the CDC,
nearly twice as many non-Hispanic Black or Mexican American
adults have untreated cavities, compared to other groups.
Adults with less than a high school education are almost three
times as likely to have untreated cavities as adults with at
least some college education.
These disparities highlight the need to focus on oral
health literacy improvement within vulnerable populations.
Fortunately, Representatives Cardenas and Bilirakis have
introduced legislation, H.R. 4555, that would do just that.
The Oral Health Literacy and Awareness Act would direct the
HRSA to develop and test evidence-based oral health literacy
strategies. These strategies aim to improve oral healthcare
education, including education on preventing oral diseases such
as early childhood and other caries, periodontal disease, and
oral cancer. This multi-year initiative would focus
specifically on children, pregnant women, parents, older
adults, and people with disabilities, and, of course, racial
and ethnic minorities.
A strategy HRSA uses would need to communicate with these
populations in a language that resonates with them. While we
are all aware of the pressures and broad messaging on the
importance of oral health, there has never been a serious
effort at the Federal level to develop actual evidence to
measure outcomes on oral health literacy messaging.
I believe HRSA's work through this initiative to measure
outcomes on the effectiveness of targeted oral health literacy
strategies would be indispensable in advising----
Ms. Eshoo. Dr. Cassis, you need to wrap up.
Dr. Cassis. Yes, OK.
I want to end today by stressing the importance of
recognizing oral health literacy as an integral part of
national health policy. And I do greatly appreciate the
subcommittee's recognition that oral health literacy is a
priority.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Cassis follows:]

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Ms. Eshoo. Thank you, Dr. Cassis, for your important
testimony.
Dr. DuBois, we want to thank you for testifying today, and
you now have 5 minutes to do so.
Dr. DuBois. Can you hear me OK?
Ms. Eshoo. Yes.
Dr. DuBois. OK, great.

STATEMENT OF RAYMOND N. DUBOIS, M.D., Ph.D.

Dr. DuBois. Well, Chairman Eshoo and Chair Pallone, Ranking
Members Guthrie and Rodgers, and members of the subcommittee,
thank you for inviting me today. I am Ray DuBois, and I am the
past president of the American Association for Cancer Research.
I am editor-in-chief of the Cancer Prevention Research Journal
and director of the Hollings Cancer Center here, in Charleston,
South Carolina.
I really commend you for this hearing, and holding it to
discuss important prevention for public health, and I am very
pleased you are including cancer screenings as a part of these
discussions, and we have heard some very important testimony
earlier.
The data show that cancer screenings do save lives and
improve outcomes, because cancers, or in some cases precancers,
can be identified in an earlier stage, when physicians can
treat it much more effectively. This often results in less
invasive treatment, quicker recovery, and lower cost.
Cancer organizations such as AACR publish research that
informs the medical community about who, how, and to--how to
most effectively screen for different types of cancer. We
really want to avoid those false negatives and false positives,
and really have the most sensitive and specific screening
possible.
The U.S. Preventive Services Task Force, or USPSTF,
examines the evidence of lower--trying to lower cancer
mortality, as well as risk cost and other complications. They
grade guidelines based on an A or B, and the Affordable Care
Act uses those tools, the A or B, so that those screenings can
be covered by insurance without cost to the patient.
As more research is generated, those guidelines can be
updated. This year they did update the eligibility for lung
cancer and colon cancer screenings. For lung, as you heard
earlier, they did--they changed the lung cancer deaths by 24
percent after 10 years by expanding screening to smokers as
young as 50 who smoked a pack a day for 20 years. That doubled
the number of individuals who could now be screened at no cost.
Previously, only older Americans could be screened. These new
guidelines are especially beneficial for women and African
Americans, who tend to smoke fewer cigarettes.
The task force also reduced the age recommendation for
colonoscopies from 50 to 45 because of the increasing incidence
of that disease in the younger population.
I am of the belief that effective screening is extremely
important. However, that does not mean that screening for all
cancers without a scientific basis is in the public interest.
Overscreening can be cost prohibitive, and sometimes with side
effects. The task force has to balance this evidence with risk
and benefits and be mindful that those recommendations are
based on evolving science.
Colon cancer screenings do not take into account the
growing evidence that the younger, obese Americans are being
diagnosed with colon cancer at a growing rate. For lung cancer,
it is based on smoking history and age, but it does not take
into account whether a person grew up in a home with smokers or
may have substantial interactions with secondhand smoke or
increased risk due to occupation and environmental factors.
The recommendation to start mammograms for women at age 50
will leave many younger women vulnerable to breast cancer that
could spread before it could have been detected. In some cases
I would encourage Congress to consider the individual, rather
than the population as a whole, when designing these screening
criteria. There are many other factors besides just age,
including underserved populations, occupation, environmental
exposures, and lifestyle factors.
The simple age criteria contribute to inequities,
especially in the underserved communities, who are
underrepresented in screening trials and don't usually
participate in those studies, and we want to ensure that all
racial and ethnic groups and socioeconomic classes have the
knowledge to make informed decisions.
In South Carolina the incidence of breast cancer in Black
women is lower than that in White women, but their death rate
is much higher because many Black women have longer delays to
get screened and treated, possibly due to their lack of
access--of care, to health services.
The mortality rate in prostate cancer for Black men is much
worse than White men. While it could be genetic influences, it
is most likely due to lack of access to specialty care.
Screening and treatment outcome disparities are areas that
the medical research community must improve on as we go
forward. Many cancers we don't have effective screening
mechanisms for at the current time.
In addition to the advances in healthcare delivery, the
congressional investment in basic and translational research is
very important. Several academic institutions in the industry
are making progress in cancer blood testing, which will bring
new and innovative ways to screen for these cancers once they
are validated and studied in large populations.
Before I conclude, I want to importantly note that we are
still not yet out of the pandemic, and we have lowered cancer--
screening for all cancers during this time. The NCI estimates
that, due to COVID-19 and delaying cancer screenings, as many
as 10,000 additional Americans could die of breast or colon
cancer in the coming decade alone. As the scientific community
works to improve cancer screening, it is imperative that we
really improve our screening in the [audio malfunction].
I want to thank you again for the opportunity to testify
before you today.
[The prepared statement of Dr. DuBois follows:]

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Ms. Eshoo. Thank you very much, Dr. DuBois, for your
important testimony. There was so much packed into it, with the
statistics, and it is a reminder to all of us how important
witnesses are, the expertise they bring to us and, obviously,
shoring up the reasons why the legislation we are considering
should become law for the people of our country. So thank you.
Last, and certainly not least, is Ms. Ellyn Miller.
Welcome again to you. Thank you for traveling and being
with us in person today. You are now recognized for your
testimony.

STATEMENT OF ELLYN MILLER

Ms. Miller. Thank you. Chairwoman Eshoo, Ranking Member
Guthrie, and distinguished members of this committee. My name
is Ellyn Miller, and I would like to thank you for the
opportunity to testify in support of this childhood cancer and
disease legislation, the Gabriella Miller Kids First 2.0.
My daughter was only 9 years old when she was diagnosed
with a terminal-upon-diagnosis brain cancer called diffuse
intrinsic pontine glioma. This is the same brain cancer that
Neil Armstrong's daughter, Karen, died from in 1962. Sixty
years later, and our children that are diagnosed with this
cancer are still receiving the exact same treatment. But yet,
in these 60 years, we have gotten men to the moon and safely
back home, we have a rover on Mars, but we can't solve
something that is a few inches under our skin?
In the 1980s, AIDS was a death sentence. Today it is a
chronic disease. A handful of years ago, Ebola was also a death
sentence. Now it is curable. We, as a country, can claim these
incredible accomplishments because we banded together to make
them a national priority.
In 6 days from now, on October 26, will mark 8 years since
my daughter died. In those 8 years, daily incidences of
childhood cancer diagnoses in the United States has risen from
36 to 47. And every day, at least seven kids die from cancer.
This means that, in those 8 years since my daughter died, over
137,000 parents have heard the words ``Your child has cancer''
and more than 20,000 families have buried their child.
We must make our children a national priority. And we have
the vehicle to do that with the Kids First 2.0. The original
Kids First was signed into law with strong bipartisan support
in 2014. Many of those Members are in this room right now. And
it is because of your support that over 60 grants have been
awarded to institutes across the country to research childhood
cancer and birth defects.
The Kids First program has generated the largest molecular
and clinical data sets, with approximately 50,000 genetic
sequences that are publicly available to researchers across the
country. Resources are brought together to develop new
connectivity that allows for real-time data availability. All
the while, this program is developing and implementing a
transformative infrastructure that NIH has embraced and is
using as a template across the institutes.
The Kids First was selected to lead a development of new
technologies that will empower the use of electronic health
records. Its infrastructure is being used for a model for
developing and piloting programs that focus on Down Syndrome,
rare disease, the Childhood Cancer Data Initiative, and more.
It was also chosen to lead the development of the pediatric
COVID clinical trial via the NIH Caring for Children with COVID
Initiative.
The Kids First has opened the door in a transformative
force within NIH and around the world, and it is just the
beginning. I reached out to my congresswoman, Jennifer Wexton,
with the need to continue the work of the Kids First. She
suggested an innovative funding source that Congress has used
in the past: the use of existing, nondesignated penalties
against bad actors that knowingly violate the Foreign Corrupt
Practices Act. The Kids First 2.0 proposes to use this untapped
resource from pharmaceuticals, medical device manufacturers,
cosmetics, and natural supplements to continue the battle
against childhood cancer and disease. To date, 77 bipartisan
Members agree, 22 of whom are members of the Energy and
Commerce Committee.
Two weeks before Gabriella died, she was interviewed and
asked what message she had for our elected official about kids
like her, and she responded, ``Stop talking, and start doing.''
Our political leaders have certainly done that, and today I am
personally asking the committee to continue doing by proceeding
through markup and moving this critical piece of legislation to
the floor as quickly as possible.
My daughter's name might be on this legislation, but, truth
be told, it could be any number of the hundreds of thousands of
children that are afflicted with cancer and disease across this
country. And I bring with me today almost 1,000 families that
have signed on because they wanted their children to be
represented here today, and it could be one of them.
I thank you for your time, and I look forward to your
questions.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Miller follows:]

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Ms. Eshoo. Thank you so much, Ellyn. Your voice is an
eloquent one, as a mother. And thank you for representing all
the other families that have lost their child. There can't--it
simply cannot be a greater grief than for a parent to bury
their child. It is not the way it is supposed to be. But we can
do something about it, and that is what we are here for today.
Thank you.
To our former colleague and friend Rick Nolan: Rick, you
have really taught us all something. I never knew that lung
cancer patients that never smoked got lung cancer. And I think
that we have--you have been a great teacher in that. And is--
can you, just for a moment, tell us when--I am recognizing
myself now for questions that--when was your daughter
diagnosed, and how?
Did she have any symptoms, or was it--yes, turn your mike
on.
Mr. Nolan. Thank you, that is a very good question. My
aunt, Eleanor Nolan--the first female judge in the State of
Minnesota, by the way, a real pioneer, was--a half-a-century
ago was diagnosed with terminal lung cancer, and she died 6
months later.
Katherine was diagnosed a little over 6--just about 6 years
ago. But because of the great progress that has been made by
this committee and people in the past--by the way, I like to
remind people that, in my grandfather's time, life expectancy
in this country was 47.
Ms. Eshoo. Right.
Mr. Nolan. Forty-seven. Today, because of good public
health----
Ms. Eshoo. We would all be dead and gone, right.
Mr. Nolan [continuing]. Policies, bipartisan policies, it
is in the middle to upper 80s----
Ms. Eshoo. So how did she find out that she had it?
Mr. Nolan. Well----
Ms. Eshoo. Did she not feel well?
Mr. Nolan. Because, as I mentioned, the lungs don't have
nerves, which is why early detection is so important. You don't
find out----
Ms. Eshoo. But how did she find out, Rick?
Mr. Nolan. You don't----
Ms. Eshoo. I have some other questions----
Mr. Nolan. You are out of breath. You are out of breath.
Ms. Eshoo. I see, OK, all right.
Mr. Nolan. At which point it is too late. It is terminal.
You didn't get those early indications. You didn't get the
benefit of the early screening.
Ms. Eshoo. OK, that is instructive.
Mr. Nolan. And it is too late.
Ms. Eshoo. That is instructive.
Ellyn, to you, in the--the funds that come out of the
penalties that are paid that that you referenced, what amounts
are those, on average, annually, about? What--how much are we
talking about?
Ms. Miller. I would love to be able to say a number with
that. The challenge that comes into play is that you need to
have somebody who is violating law. They have to be----
Ms. Eshoo. No, I was just curious if you know how much that
is, approximately what goes into that fund.
Ms. Miller. I would love to be able to answer that. I
could----
Ms. Eshoo. Maybe we will find out from the----
Ms. Miller [continuing]. Get you information, and share
that.
Ms. Eshoo [continuing]. From the authors.
Ms. Miller [continuing]. Share that with Aisling about
those that are in the past. But moving forward, it is
impossible to say that.
Ms. Eshoo. I don't know, does the staff on either side of
the aisle know if--it is hundreds of millions of dollars?
Well then, that funding is going to be--those dollars are
going to dance, I think, if it is hundreds of millions of
dollars.
To Dr. Radesky: Facebook research that was shared by the
most recent whistleblower, Frances Haugen, demonstrated that 32
percent of teen girls said that they felt bad about their
bodies, and Instagram made them feel even worse. I think that
this is astonishing. I mean, it just takes my breath away.
What is the difference, in your view, between internal
company research and the type of research that the CAMRA Act
would enable?
Dr. Radesky. There are several differences.
First, with academic or independent research, we have to go
through rigorous training in protecting vulnerable populations,
the IOB, and ethical board approval. There is lots of
transparency, and lots of accountability, in terms of reporting
negative side effects or unintended events that might happen
during our research.
And the internal research for Facebook revealed some of
those negative and likely unintended consequences of the design
of Instagram, which is very focused on appearance, and filters
and other ways of editing images. But they didn't have the
accountability to either stop their research, change their
intervention, their product, or to be accountable to the users
who were involved.
Ms. Eshoo. Have you ever been asked by a social media
platform to provide any guidance to them?
Dr. Radesky. I have communicated with several different
teams. Facebook had reached out to me a few years ago. There
has been an invitation to conferences, or more informal
conversations with the child policy and safety teams at these
companies. But I do not have a formal role with any of them.
Ms. Eshoo. Thank you very much.
The Chair now recognizes Mr. Guthrie, our ranking member of
the subcommittee, for his 5 minutes of questions.
Mr. Guthrie. Thanks, Madam Chair, and thanks for all of you
being in this important meeting. And I am just going to say I
am going to step out in a few minutes, not because I don't find
this extremely important. I have a World War II vet and a
couple of other veterans that are going to be arriving at the
World War II Memorial, and I am going to see them, and I will
come right back--I want to greet them--because this is very
important to do.
First, Rick, thanks for sharing your story. It is important
as to how our loved ones live on when we share their stories
and move forward.
And also, Ms. Miller, I had a--back in the early 1970s,
when I was probably 10 or 11, I had a friend of mine that had
leukemia, Tam Hambach--that is how they live, by mentioning
their names--and I always think she would be--could be alive
today, if we knew what we were--if we moved forward with
leukemia.
And then I had a good friend of mine, Abby Cummings--her
mom, B.J. Cummings, a friend of mine--was 11 in 2006, was
diagnosed with bone cancer, I guess, and passed away a couple
of years later. And it is just like, can we not fix that? It is
the frustrating thing with so much, as you mentioned, going on.
And I would tell you there is nothing more bipartisan in
Washington. As you see, if you watch the new cable news,
particularly, you think everybody is fighting over everything.
But we are trying to figure out how to do more for NIH and
cancer research, and just trying to find the right way to do
that. And so I appreciate it.
And Ms. Stewart, I enjoyed talking to you the other day. We
are--Atlanta was the city we would go to when I was a kid, and
we shared some experiences of growing up. My dad was the only
one that--we never flew, we couldn't afford to fly, but he took
us to the airport to watch planes take off and land. And I
found out your father did, as well. So maybe we are not that
unique.
But I have a question on the early childhood hearing--I
only have a couple of questions, and I have used some of my
time, so I wish I could ask everybody a question--but I have
been a long-term champion of the early childhood detection.
And, as we saw, 98 percent of the kids now have early detection
of everything. If we can catch it early, we can treat it,
hopefully, and develop--children can develop further.
But we are having 98 percent get screened, but only 67\1/2\
percent getting the care that they need for--as a result of
this screening. And what--in your opinion, how can we reduce
barriers to access?
Ms. Stewart. Well, I think that your point is well taken,
in that we have made a lot of progress with early
identification. But the issue is to go further than that, to
not only identify it early but to make sure the kids have the
right access to the care, the referrals that they need, the
services that they need.
And we know that, for example, when kids are not able to
identify hearing challenges early in life, it affects them, it
affects them over the--over their lifetime. It affects their
early progress with early education, and it affects their
ability to succeed later in life. I think part of it is just
making sure that both kids have access to the right referrals
and the right services to follow up with and that their
families have the right education and awareness to know how
their children can be treated, as well.
You know, parents have a big role to play in this, along
with pediatricians, with early child care providers. We have to
make sure that everyone is aware of hearing challenges, and
making sure that those kids have the right access to early
identification and then referral and services, as well. And
that may need to continue over a lifetime, not just early in
life.
Of course, we know that the earlier that those problems can
be identified, even within the first month or two of life, that
can make a big difference.
Mr. Guthrie. Right.
Ms. Stewart. But we may need to provide services over a
longer period of time, to the extent that children have
continued challenges.
Mr. Guthrie. Thank you for that, and thank you for the work
the March of Dimes is doing for that. I think a lot of us know
where we were when we got the phone call that my colleague Andy
Barr's wife had passed away. Just tragic. And people get those
phone calls all the--every day, all the time. And so the CAROL
Act is before us.
So, Dr. Lloyd-Jones, you discovered--you discussed in your
testimony that some individuals are born with genetic risks for
developing mitral valve prolapse, or MVP. The CAROL Act
improves research that would help medical professionals detect
the existence of this genetic risk and diagnose it early on.
What are the main barriers hindering medical professionals from
being able to improve detection methods?
Dr. Lloyd-Jones. Well, thanks very much for your question,
sir. You know, you are absolutely right. Mitral valve prolapse
is one of the heart conditions that can run in families. There
are other connective tissue diseases and other considerations
that can lead to an increased propensity for mitral valve
prolapse.
But unfortunately, there is really no great way to diagnose
this. Symptoms, as with lung cancer, only occur very late in
the process, so we need people to have access to healthcare so
we can listen to their chest with a stethoscope, which is
probably the main way we start to become suspicious about
mitral valve prolapse. But you can't diagnose this without
echocardiography. And so that is really our main way.
And once again, access to healthcare, and quality
healthcare, are major issues for people in order to be able to
be diagnosed and monitored over time, which is a crucial
portion----
Ms. Eshoo. Doctor, what did you say was needed to diagnose?
I couldn't hear you. And I think it is important to know this.
Dr. Lloyd-Jones. Yes, so the firm diagnosis of mitral valve
prolapse requires echocardiography, or ultrasound of the heart.
Mr. Guthrie. Echocardiogram.
Ms. Eshoo. I see.
Dr. Lloyd-Jones. Yes, in order to actually make the
diagnosis. And it is the main way we monitor patients, as well,
to see if that is progressing over time.
Mr. Guthrie. Yes, I think Carol actually had been screened
and was scheduled for one and, because it wasn't deemed a
critical--as critical at the time, because of COVID, she
couldn't get the service before she passed away from that,
unfortunately.
Dr. Lloyd-Jones. So sad.
Mr. Guthrie. So I just want to--I know my time has expired,
but I have a statement from Congressman Barr on his bill to
introduce to the record, and then also an American Speech-
Language-Hearing Association statement, I think, that has been
given to the staff. I would like to introduce those to the
record.
Ms. Eshoo. The gentleman yields back. The Chair now
recognizes the chairman of the full committee, Mr. Pallone, for
his 5 minutes of questions.
Thank you, Mr. Guthrie.
Mr. Pallone. Thank you, Madam Chair. I want to emphasize
that prioritizing robust funding in these key children's
prevention, research, and screening programs really is critical
in protecting the most vulnerable from long-term poor health
outcomes. But I think the levels at which we authorize these
programs matter and speak to the success and confidence and
work of these programs and their policies.
So my questions are all of Ms. Stewart. I know the March of
Dimes is at the front lines of supporting the EHDI program, and
how these investments--you probably know well how these
investments can help improve health outcomes.
So my first question is, in your view, is the level of the
authorization in the reauthorization of the EHDI program
sufficient to support the program needs and service as many
families as possible?
And if not, what authorization level do you think is
necessary to ensure sufficient support?
Ms. Stewart. Thank you. I think, you know, I think the most
important thing is making sure that we can reach as many kids
as possible, and I think what we are asking for in terms of
reauthorization is probably sufficient.
I think the other thing, though, is--but, you know, the
fact of the matter is we still have a number of kids who are
still being impacted by this issue, and they are suffering for
a long period of time.
I think one of the most important things we can do is to
make sure that the amount of funding over a long period of time
is available. For example, if they are screening early on,
making sure that those resources are available so that they do
have the kind of support that they may need over a longer
period of time.
A lot of families also need more support, as well. So I
think the reauthorization amount is probably sufficient, but I
think we ought to continue to revisit to see what more--what
may be needed, what more may be needed over time.
Mr. Pallone. All right. And then I have the same question
for the level of support for the National Center for Birth
Defects and Developmental Disabilities.
Do you think the proposed authorization that is included in
that bill, H.R. 5487, is sufficient to support the program?
Same question.
Ms. Stewart. Well, I think, obviously, the National Center
has done some great work in a number of areas around birth
defects, looking at blood disorders. We have been working with
the Center for a number of years on a number of these issues.
I think one of the things that, you know, we have to better
understand, for example, during COVID-19 is what is the effect
that it is having on families and children today.
So one of the things that we don't know right now is what
more will we learn over time that we might need to invest more
in later on. For example, what is the long-term effect of
babies that may have been affected by COVID? What are the long-
term effects that children may be affected by that we still
don't understand today?
So I think we need to, again, look at refunding where we
are today, but be prepared that we may need to put more money
into this----
Mr. Pallone. The----
Ms. Stewart [continuing]. Going forward.
Mr. Pallone. No, and I agree with you. But, I mean, as far
as the bill, you are OK with it at this point.
Ms. Stewart. We are.
Mr. Pallone. You think it is adequate?
Ms. Stewart. We are, for what is being requested, yes----
Mr. Pallone. Because I wanted to ask you one more question
about health inequities.
You know, these health inequities were brought to light as
a result of the pandemic, even more so. And many of those on
the front lines of intervention and screening programs have
been raising these issues for years. But do you see health
inequities as a concern in early intervention and screening
programs such as EHDI?
And should this committee consider more detailed guidance
encouraging the expansion of work in this program to address
disparities in followup services among racial or ethnic
minoritie, or other medically underserved populations? My last
question.
Ms. Stewart. So, Congressman, in just about every one of
the issues that I have addressed today, starting from the
broadest level of maternal and infant health all the way down
to issues around lead poisoning, or around other issues
generally around health inequity, this country faces those
challenges across the board.
There--it is very clear that we have underinvested, and we
have not had the kind of policy environment that really
supports making sure there is an equal playing field with
respect to health equity.
We know that Black women, for example, are three to four
times more likely to die as a result of pregnancy and
childbirth. Black women are 50 percent more likely to give
birth to a baby preterm. Black women are far more likely to
have a baby born in stillbirth. So the fact that we have all
these statistics really suggests that we are underinvesting, to
your point, in eliminating health inequity. But it is going to
have to be a much more comprehensive approach.
There is one big effort that we are supporting right now
around Momnibus, for example, that is intended to address those
issues. But even in the--some of the issues that we are dealing
with today, it is an issue that we have to continue to focus
on, because the health inequities are there and we have
historically underinvested in all of these areas.
Mr. Pallone. I appreciate that. And let me just say we are
still pushing very hard for the----
Ms. Stewart. Momnibus?
The Chairman [continuing]. Momnibus----
Ms. Stewart. Yes.
Mr. Pallone. [continuing]. In the reconciliation.
Ms. Stewart. I appreciate that, thank you.
Mr. Pallone. Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Ms. Eshoo. Certainly. And Mr. Chairman, can you give the--
our witnesses, especially the parents that are here, some
indication when you think we can bring these bills to the full
committee, and then to the floor?
He is going to kill me for doing this.
Mr. Pallone. Well, as you know----
Ms. Eshoo. But I want you to leave----
Mr. Pallone. As the chairwoman----
Ms. Eshoo [continuing]. With a lot of hope in your hearts.
Mr. Pallone. As the chairwoman knows, we wouldn't be having
this legislative hearing today if we weren't trying to move
these bills soon, believe me. So, I mean, the answer is yes,
that we--I am not sure I know exactly what she asked me, but
the answer is yes.
Ms. Eshoo. Yes, you do.
Mr. Pallone. We want a bill--we want to move these bills
soon. Thank you.
Ms. Eshoo. OK.
Mr. Pallone. I just have to rush to another meeting. I
apologize.
Ms. Eshoo. Well, I just wanted to get you before you left.
How's that? Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
OK, now I am pleased to recognize the gentlewoman who is
the ranking member of the full committee, Congresswoman Cathy
McMorris Rodgers, for your 5 minutes of questions.
Mrs. Rodgers. Thank you, Madam Chair. And to all our
witnesses, I just want to thank you for joining us today. We
have heard some really telling, powerful testimony.
Mr. Nolan, on behalf of Katherine's Law, it is good to see
you, and thank you for sharing her story again.
And to Mrs. Miller, I remember when the Gabriella Miller
Act was first passed, and just appreciate everyone for being
here and advocating for so many others.
And certainly, Carol Barr's death was so untimely and hit
us all really hard, and I appreciate the work that is being
done to help others that may face similar situations.
I have been very clear about my concerns with Big Tech, and
I am troubled by Big Tech censorship of conservatives, and
anyone that seems to disagree with liberal ideology. I believe
that free speech is fundamental to our great Nation. We need to
cherish it, defend it, and not attack it.
I am also very concerned about the harm that Big Tech is
doing to our children. And we have seen it recently again with
Instagram. But you know, they are not alone. The same applies
to TikTok, YouTube, Snapchat, any platform that profits from,
you know, keeping our children online as much as possible. And
that is why the Energy and Commerce Republicans are committed
to leading this fight against Big Tech.
And, in fact, in July, every Republican on the--on this
committee rolled out a bill as a part of a larger package to
address censorship and provide protection for our kids.
Dr. Radesky, I have been calling on Big Tech to be more
transparent about the impact that their products are having on
children's mental health. And studies have shown that even
passively consuming content is harmful. And yet these companies
continue to design their products to increase this passive
consumption. I just wanted to start by asking you, what advice
do you give to parents as they consider their children's own
use of social media?
Dr. Radesky. Yes, thanks for that question, and yes, I work
a lot with the American Academy of Pediatrics on guidelines to
help families adapt to this rapidly changing tech environment
that is often hard to understand.
So the guidance we give is to be as curious and open-minded
as possible. Gather all the information you can, use resources
like Common Sense Media, be extremely informed. Because right
now, the tech environment still feels like a Wild West. It
feels a little bit like a circus. They are trying to get lots
of attention.
There is a lot of good stuff out there, but in our research
on YouTube we found that the videos with the highest views, the
ones that are getting the most reach through algorithms, are
the ones that are actually the most shallow or the most
consumerist, or they have some pranking and other sort of role
modeling that we don't necessarily want kids to be, you know,
spending all their time with.
So we encourage parents to watch along and help their
children recognize when there is bad information or stereotypes
or other sorts of messages that they don't agree with and to
help their kids be savvy, critical consumers. How to find the
right sort of channels to subscribe to, how to take breaks from
social media so you can reflect and see how it makes you feel.
Our emotional and social reactions to these social media
platforms that are often constructed to really get a lot of our
attention around social relationships, it can happen without us
truly thinking about it. It is supposed to be frictionless so
that we are not pausing and reflecting on why we have these
relationships. So that is another thing, is I encourage parents
to take breaks----
Mrs. Rodgers. Thank you----
Dr. Radesky [continuing]. Have experiments, open the
conversation with their children to really help them guide
through.
Mrs. Rodgers. What--would you speak to how you believe
COVID-19 pandemic distance learning and social isolation has
also impacted kids' social media use and the increase of mental
health issues?
Dr. Radesky. Yes, this is such an important issue. And even
yesterday the AAP, together with other organizations, released,
you know, a state of emergency on child mental health. We have
seen a large increase in emergency room visits for mental
health issues in my own clinical practice. Children have really
suffered. School is very stabilizing for children, and the
experience of remote learning resulted in decreased motivation,
decreased sense of connection, more mood symptoms, sleep
disruption, defiant behavior, or withdrawn behavior. This has
been shown in multiple studies.
And in our own research at Michigan we have found that
parents of elementary school kids said they started social
media accounts for their children younger than they hoped to,
just so they could keep in touch. So this is an extremely
pressing issue, because children now have much more access to
digital platforms that weren't necessarily designed with young
minds in mind.
And so what we have found is that, in some cases, digital
connections such as video chatting has helped child mental
health, whereas, more online gaming, lots of video viewing,
less sleep isn't as supportive. And this is why both research
and policy on this area right now is equally pressing.
Mrs. Rodgers. Well, thank you for sharing your expert----
Ms. Eshoo. Who is next?
Mrs. Rodgers [continuing]. Mental health, the suicide
crisis, and the rest.
I yield back, Madam Chair.
Dr. Radesky. Thank you.
Ms. Eshoo. And thank you, Cathy. And we are all saying our
prayers that your children are healthy and well very soon. We
miss having you here in person but want you to know that we are
all thinking about you.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from North Carolina,
Mr. Butterfield, for his 5 minutes of questions.
Mr. Butterfield. Thank you, Madam Chair. Let me first say
good afternoon to all of my colleagues.
And thank you, Madam Chair, for convening this very
important hearing, and thank you to the witnesses. I have
listened to all of your powerful testimonies, and just thank
you for coming forward today and giving us the benefit of this
information. Let me address my comment and my question to Ms.
Stewart.
Ms. Stewart, in your opening remarks, you mentioned how
critical SET-NET, the National Center for Birth Defects and
Developmental Disabilities, is to protect vulnerable mothers
and babies. Can you expand more on this program's importance,
both the reauthorization of the Center as well as increased and
sustained funding?
Ms. Stewart. Thank you, Congressman. And I did mention
about SET-NET, and I just want to say a couple more things
about it.
What SET-NET is is really an innovative data collection
system that links maternal exposures during pregnancy to health
outcomes for babies. What we found, especially during the Zika
outbreak, is that SET-NET came in as a very useful system that
allowed us to leverage existing data sources, enabling CDC and
health departments to detect new and emerging health threats,
to understand that health threat.
We also know that in fiscal year 2021 SET-NET has provided
support to 29 State, local, and Territorial health departments
to monitor impact on pregnant individuals' and babies' exposure
to Zika, to syphilis, to COVID-19.
So what we know is that, when we have better data
collection, we can monitor these kinds of outbreaks more
successfully, and we can create the right interventions.
The most important thing, though, is that SET-NET, in
fiscal year 2021, was funded at $10 million. The House proposed
increasing funding to--by another 5 million, but we still think
that that is woefully inadequate to really get to the high-
quality data collection system that we need.
We have actually recommended SET-NET be funded at $100
million. And what we know is, especially as we are still
dealing with the pandemic, the lack of data to really
understand the impact and what is going on with pregnant women,
with women and with children, is affecting our ability to serve
them and keep them healthy. So we would ask for that to be
certainly reconsidered, and that goes back to the early
question, as well----
Mr. Butterfield. Yes, let's drill down and--let's just
drill down, if we can, on data collection. I believe that data
collection is just critically important for making a positive
impact on maternal and child health outcomes.
You may know that, 2 weeks ago, the Communications and
Technology Subcommittee held a hearing on my bill, which is
referred to as H.R. 1218, the Data Mapping to Save Moms Act of
2021. The bill would require the FCC to map areas of the
country that have both high rates of negative maternal health
outcomes and gaps in internet service.
It would also require the GAO to issue a report on the
effectiveness of Internet connectivity in reducing maternal
morbidity rates.
Can you now discuss how broadband and telehealth access
will intersect with maternal and infant health?
Ms. Stewart. Yes, and we are a proud supporter, the March
of Dimes, of the Data Mapping to Save Lives Act.
We also saw during the pandemic how many pregnant women,
for example, went without prenatal care because they were too
concerned about getting out to their healthcare provider to
seek care.
We also know, for example, in this country we have--half of
all the counties in this country lack basic access to obstetric
care. And so, if we don't have the ability for women to seek
care through other means, especially through technology,
through digital tools, we are still going to be leaving too
many women without the care that they need, especially in rural
areas.
So this Data Mapping to Save Lives Act is really important
to bridge the gap, to make sure we have technology available
for women who may not be able to seek services close to where
they live.
And we would also want to make sure--and we support the
provision that the GAO provide a report on the effectiveness of
Internet connectivity in reducing maternal morbidity rates, as
well. So thank you for your leadership on that.
Mr. Butterfield. And thank you for including those comments
in the record. That is very important, and we are going to act
accordingly.
Madam Chair, before yielding back, let me just ask that we
consider additional legislative hearings. I encourage the
subcommittee to take up the H.R.--the bill H.R. 2356, the
Better Wound Care at Home Act, which I jointly introduced with
Congressman Markwayne Mullin. This bipartisan bill will help
patients with chronic wounds stay healthy in their homes and
avoid future complications, particularly for patients of color
who are at higher risk for infection, hospitalization, and limb
loss.
I thank the Chair for listening. I thank you for your
consideration. Thank you for your friendship. And at this time,
I yield back the balance of my time.
Ms. Eshoo. You are such a gentleman, Mr. Butterfield, and a
friend to all of us. Truth be told, I would have a hearing
every single day of the week, I really would. So I think you
need to nudge a little bit at the top of our committee. I
certainly will. There are so many bills pending.
This subcommittee is really the workhorse of Energy and
Commerce, in terms of subcommittees. We have some 700 bills,
over 700 bills that have been referred to us. But it doesn't
mean that we have taken them up. So I am all for a crowded
calendar. How is that?
Mr. Butterfield. Let's do it, let's do it.
Ms. Eshoo. And I would love to take your bill up.
Mr. Butterfield. Thank you.
Ms. Eshoo. So let's talk some more about it, talk to Mr.
Pallone, and I would like more hearing dates for the rest of
the fall, so that we can really move, put the pedal to the
metal, and move a lot more legislation. A lot of good bills, a
lot of good ideas, worthy ideas that are going to help people
in our country.
So thank you, Mr. Butterfield.
Next, it is a pleasure to recognize the gentleman from
Michigan--he is indeed that, a gentleman--and he is the former
chairman of the Energy and Commerce Committee, Mr. Upton, for
your 5 minutes of questions.
Mr. Upton. Well, thank you, Madam Chair.
And Ms. Miller, it is nice to see you again. As I recall, I
managed the time on the House floor debate with you and your
daughter and the gallery a number of years ago, and was glad to
shepherd that bill through and get it signed into law. And I
have asked to cosponsor the bill that you referenced today,
H.R. 623.
And Rick, as always, it is a pleasure to see you, even
though you have a mask on. Mine was on a moment ago. But I am
going to help you keep your promise. And I am going to
cosponsor your bill, as well.
Madam Chair, I want to thank you for holding this very
important hearing on a good number of bipartisan public-health
priorities. I want to really thank you also for looking at the
Protecting Access to Lifesaving Screening, the PALS Act, which
is going to help millions of women between the ages of 40 and
49 keep access to breast cancer screening.
I also want to highlight Representative Walberg and Tonko's
Lead Poisoning Act, which I have cosponsored. We are certainly
having a declared state of emergency in my district, in Benton
Harbor, Michigan, due to the lead in the water, and this bill
is going to help ensure that those situations don't happen in
the future.
And I know that there are several expiring authorizations
from 21st Century Cures that we still need to look at that were
not part of this hearing, going along with Mr. Butterfield's
comments, especially with regards to mental health. So it is my
hope that we can add that to the workload list for
reauthorization soon.
Two questions in my remaining time.
Ms. Stewart, as I mentioned before, we are currently facing
a crisis in my home district, Benton Harbor, related to lead in
the water. And I was able to get $5.6 million in EPA funding
last October for the city to replace lead service lines, and
the State is providing additional resources that they have
referenced in the--just in the last couple of weeks.
What are some things that the Federal Government can do in
addition to ensuring continued predictable support that H.R.
5552 provides for lead poisoning prevention and screening to
ensure that this doesn't happen in communities?
How can agencies at the Federal, State, and local levels
work better in order to prevent future crises, Ms. Stewart?
Ms. Stewart. Thank you, Mr.--Congressman, and I acknowledge
that we--you have, in Benton Harbor, been experiencing and seen
it up close and personal, the devastation that has been created
in Benton Harbor. I had a chance to visit Benton Harbor when I
was a student at University of Michigan. Benton Harbor is a
predominantly Black city, and we know that lead poisoning does
impact disproportionately people of color, especially Black
children and Black families. And what is going on in Benton
Harbor is simply a disaster, and it is a manmade disaster.
And so if we are prepared to deal with manmade disasters in
other areas, we certainly should deal with it in this area,
because lead poisoning has such a devastating effect on the
health of families, on the health of children.
One of the things that the Lead Poisoning Prevention Act
does do is it reconstitutes this advisory committee at the CDC
that, for years, supported CDC's Childhood Lead Poisoning
Prevention Program. It would allow there to be expansion of
resources for grants for support, for relief and recovery,
especially in at-risk communities.
We think that, for a lot of States that are struggling with
some of these issues--and we think it goes beyond just Michigan
and Benton Harbor--that States need more support, and financial
support, in dealing with these kinds of crises. And it is not
only in terms of prevention, but it is also in dealing with the
effects of lead poisoning as they exist today. So there have to
be more resources paid to the--attention to make sure that we
can address those children, especially, that have been impacted
by lead poisoning.
But again, to your point, also preventing it and putting
more resources into the issue in places like Benton Harbor and
more.
Mr. Upton. Yes, we had some promising news just yesterday.
The Governor was there, the Lieutenant Governor was there last
week, and they have announced that they are going to replace
all of the lines, hopefully, within 18 months. And I know in
the--what we call the BIF, the bipartisan infrastructure bill,
that did pass the Senate 69 to 30 back in August, it includes
15 billion for lead lines in that, as well.
Dr. DuBois, can you speak to how the U.S. Preventive
Services Task Force screening guidelines are tied to insurance
coverage and copays?
Isn't it true that any screening decisions--breast cancer,
any other preventive screening decisions that don't receive
that A or B grade is no longer guaranteed coverage with a
copay?
Dr. DuBois. Can you hear me?
Mr. Upton. I can.
Dr. DuBois. Yes, that is correct. The--if it is not an A or
a B by the task force, then it is not automatically covered by
insurance coverage.
Although many societies and other bodies do recommend
screening starting at age 40, and so there is a lot of that
going on. I think this bill actually helps support funding for
those services. Most people in the cancer field and other
individuals in this area definitely feel that screening needs
to begin at 40 for women for breast cancer.
Mr. Upton. Thank you.
I yield back. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Ms. Eshoo. The gentleman yields back. I am pleased to
recognize the gentlewoman from California, Ms. Matsui, for your
5 minutes of questions.
Ms. Matsui. Thank you very much, Madam Chair, for the
recognition.
And I want to thank all the witnesses for joining us today.
Your--you have been absolutely outstanding, and I really
especially want to say thank you to my former colleague Rick
Nolan for sharing your story. It is--what a wonderful way to
really honor Katherine in the sense that you are doing her
work, as far as trying to ensure that no one else goes through
what she has gone through. So thank you, Rick.
I want to talk about the Early Hearing Detection and
Intervention, the EHDI program, which has proven key to
improving public health for children and families. Before the
program began 2 decades ago, less than 10 percent of infants
were screened for hearing loss. And today, thanks to a
successful EHDI program, the screening rate is 98 percent.
But I am really concerned that all infants with hearing
loss are not receiving the necessary followup treatment they
need in a timely manner. So further, too many of our children
who have been identified as deaf or hard of hearing are still
facing disparities in access to care.
Early childhood is, as we know, a crucial period for
language acquisition, and it is critical that we equip
healthcare providers and parents with the knowledge and tools
they need to make timely decisions about hearing services and
supports for their children.
Now, with these goals in mind, I recently joined Ranking
Member Guthrie in introducing legislation that will reauthorize
this program, and I am looking forward to our continued efforts
here and have several questions about the status of the
program.
Ms. Stewart, it is important for the CDC to improve their
hearing loss, surveillance, research, and connection followup
services. Could you explain what role CDC plays in ensuring
newborns screened through this program can access the followup
services that they need?
Ms. Stewart. Well----
Ms. Matsui. Ms. Stewart?
Ms. Stewart [continuing]. Thank you, Congresswoman. As we
talked about, one of the things that is really important in all
of this hearing is understanding the importance of early
detection, of good data collection, and that extends to a lot
of issues, including the issues around early hearing and
detection.
And we are doing a much better job, as we have talked
about. When we look back, in 1999, according to NIH, when,
prior to the establishment of this Federal universal newborn
infant hearing screening program, we were only screening less
than 10 percent of newborns. We are now screening 98 percent of
newborns.
But what we also know, according to the CDC, and in the
school year--and this was just--these are older numbers, but
from the school year of 1999 to 2000, the total cost of special
education programs for children who were deaf or hard of
hearing was about $652 million. That is about $11,000 per
child. But the lifetime educational cost for a child who is
deaf or hard of hearing is estimated at $115,000 per child. So
the costs that go into monitoring kids early in life isn't just
screening them in the first month of life, which is what the
recommendation is, that babies should be screened at one month,
it is also making sure that there is funding and we are
tracking the progress of children over their lifetime
education, for their lifetime educational needs.
And we would hope that the CDC would play a vital role in
making sure that we can track that, as long as--with what other
lifelong health challenges, or----
Ms. Matsui. And certainly, Ms.----
Ms. Stewart [continuing]. Other issues that children may
experience.
Ms. Matsui. Ms. Stewart, would you agree that the increase
in CDC funding in this bill is key to expanding these
activities?
Ms. Stewart. I would agree with that, for sure.
Ms. Matsui. Thank you very much.
I was deeply disturbed, as others, about the Facebook
testimony by the whistleblower Frances Haugen and about young
users, in particular, who--leading young users to anorexia
content. I have long been concerned about the mental health
impact of eating disorders on young people, especially young
girls.
In 2015, as the E&C lead of the Anna Westin Act, I was
proud to support passage of this important legislation, which
increased education and resources for those suffering with
eating disorders. Now, while we made progress in ensuring
access to treatment, we have to do more to protect our kids
from being exposed to toxic content on social media.
Dr. Radesky, thank you for your testimony. Would you agree
that the connection between mental health, eating disorders,
and algorithms that determine children's recommendation feeds
is an issue area in urgent need of the funding and research
provided by the CAMRA Act?
Dr. Radesky. Yes, thank you for that question. One thing I
really appreciate about the CAMRA Act is that it tries to
understand individual children's vulnerabilities to what might
make them profiled in a certain way, and therefore be fed
content that is not in their best interest, how they might be
profiled to send them advertising that is--you know, also could
nudge their behavior, in one way or another, that is not in
their best interest.
Ms. Matsui. Right.
Dr. Radesky. One thing about eating disorders, in
particular, is that we do need more research that focus on
specific diagnosis populations. Eating disorders, or autism
spectrum disorder, or learning disabilities, ADHD, all of this
would be much more robustly funded through the CAMRA Act.
Ms. Matsui. OK. Well, thank you very much, Dr. Radesky.
And I yield back.
Ms. Eshoo. The gentlewoman yields back. It is a pleasure to
recognize the gentleman from Virginia, my friend, Mr. Griffith,
for your 5 minutes of questions.
Mr. Griffith. Thank you very much, Madam Chair. I do
appreciate it.
I want to go a little off subject, because we have the
stillbirth bill, which I think is a good bill. A lot of these
bills are.
But it came to my attention a couple of years ago, as often
happens with us in our profession. I was at a county fair, and
a lady brought a situation to me that I think we need to work
on. It is not our committee, so we can't do anything about it,
but it deals with stillbirth situations. And many States,
including Virginia--in fact, there was a somewhat notorious
prosecution of a lady who had a stillbirth, and Virginia law,
because she just put the baby in the trash can, but it was
clearly stillbirth, no misconduct on her part, other than that,
and the State requires that you both fill out the proper forms,
but that you also, once a baby gets to a certain age, we
require a burial, or a proper disposal of the remains, which I
think is appropriate.
But we, as a Congress, have not done anything to give a tax
credit. If the child is born alive and takes one breath, you
get a tax deduction. You have all the same expenses. And in
fact, what was brought to me at the county fair was a young
lady who didn't know her baby had died and went in on the due
date, only to discover that the baby had had died, and they had
to put her through labor in order to take care of it. So she
went through all the expenses, all the trauma of having a baby,
knowing that the baby was dead, and yet no help from our
Federal Government.
So that is just an aside, and I apologize to our witnesses,
but I think it is important.
I am going to take another side and go to you, Congressman
Nolan, and I want Dr. Lloyd-Jones to listen, as well.
I am for the bill, so that is not the issue. But I am
wondering, because I had a constituent who--his watch told him,
``You are in AFib,'' and he went to have it checked out, they
couldn't find it at first. He did a stress test, and sure
enough, they found a heart valve problem. He had it fixed. It
was no problem, as long as he got it fixed, and he is out there
and doing fine today.
I am wondering if, both in regard to lung cancer and you
can't get your breath, is there some kind of--do we see any
kind of future technology that would make it so that you can
basically do something at home? Your watch isn't going to tell
you you are having a breathing problem, I don't think. But I am
just wondering if you know of any new technologies coming
along.
I am for the screenings. I think that makes sense. But I am
just wondering if there is any other technologies that you are
aware of that might--that you might be able to do something at
home to get an earlier screening, as well.
Mr. Nolan. Thank you, Congressman. That is a very good
question.
I think it is reasonable to understand why that early free
screening wasn't initially given to the victims of lung cancer
who were nonsmokers, of whom there are many, because all that
was available was a chest X-ray, and that was not very good,
and it caused too many false positives and false negatives,
and--but over the years since that time, low-dose CT scans have
been developed that are very, very good, and as good or equal
to the screening techniques made available for other cancers.
So I think it is the advance of technology that makes this
legislation ready----
Mr. Griffith. And that makes sense. And I will tell you,
because of stuff I had going on as a kid, they spotted a little
teeny spot on my lungs and popped me into one of those, and
everything is fine, and it is not a problem, it is just old
scarring. But that is what they were looking for.
And--but you shouldn't have to have a spot caused by having
bronchitis 100 times when you were a kid that gets you that
screening, and I think that your legislation is----
Mr. Nolan. Well, thank you.
Mr. Griffith. It is right on. I appreciate----
Mr. Nolan. And I might tell you, my daughter was very
physically active and very conscious of her health, and she had
started a new business and had kind of backed off a little bit
on her daily exercise routines and figured that her lack of
breath was because she hadn't been exercising as----
Mr. Griffith. Right.
Mr. Nolan [continuing]. As she should have. And so she
doubled down on her exercise, and things didn't get better,
they got worse. So she went to the doctor and was diagnosed,
and by that time it was too late. It was terminal.
Mr. Griffith. Yes.
Mr. Nolan. But I might add to the committee--and thank you,
because this committee has played such an important role in the
advances in preventing and extending the lives of cancer
victims.
And you know, Katherine, my--I started to say my aunt
Eleanor Nolan, who was dead in 6 months after----
Mr. Griffith. Right.
Mr. Nolan. Katherine lived another 6 years.
Mr. Griffith. Yes.
Mr. Nolan. And had a great time with her family and her
husband and was able to devote much time to advocating for lung
cancer victims, donated her body to the Mayo Clinic, and was
very grateful for the men and women who have promoted good
public policies. And she would be--I would be remiss if I
didn't thank the committee for the work that has been done over
the years.
Mr. Griffith. Well, I thank you for that, and the
chairwoman and I were talking about it earlier, in that so much
of what we do here is not partisan, it is just trying to solve
problems, and that is what this committee normally tries to do.
My time is up. I did--I may ask a few questions after the
fact of Dr. Lloyd-Jones. I will note, as the head of the Welsh
Caucus, Dr. Jones, that--or Dr. Lloyd-Jones, that, as a fellow
with the name of Morgan Griffith, it is mighty nice to have a--
somebody who has got at least some Welsh ancestry, because you
wouldn't have names of Lloyd and Jones if you didn't have some
Welsh ancestry. So I look forward to your answers to the
written questions I will submit later.
I yield back.
Ms. Eshoo. Thank you, Congressman. The gentleman yields
back, and he says that with enormous pride, and we are proud of
you too.
So the Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Maryland,
Mr. Sarbanes, for your 5 minutes of questions.
Mr. Sarbanes. Thanks very much, Madam Chair. I want to
thank our panel for their testimony. I want to thank, in
particular, our former colleague, Rick Nolan, for being here
and delivering very difficult but powerful testimony.
All the bills that we are hearing about today are very
critical. I am going to focus on one that has already gotten a
fair amount of attention that I, along with many of our
colleagues, are cosponsors of, which is the CAMRA Act.
We certainly know that the internet and the digital
revolution have been vital tools. It created vital tools for
innovation, creativity, economic growth, both for individuals
and communities, obviously. But we also know that it has
created a lot of new considerations around safety and health
that we have to address.
I am often discussing the use of media, particularly social
media, in the context of protecting our democracy, and
safeguarding our elections and things of that nature. But I am
also super concerned about the effects social media is having
on our children's well-being. And we know the topic is getting
a lot of attention increasingly now, which is good, but it
means we really have to wrestle with what are the solutions.
What do we bring to bear, and make sure children are protected?
Dr. Radesky, you have already talked at some length about
all of this. I wonder if you could speak for a moment to
whether there is a way--whether we should have the ambition, I
guess, of trying to kind of flip the presumptions here that,
when these tools are being developed inside of these large,
digital ad companies or, frankly, inside any organization that
is going to deploy them widely, whether they should, in a
sense, have to first demonstrate the precautions they are
taking to protect children before the tools are more widely
deployed. Because, as you know, and I think you have testified,
you know, there is a blind spot there. These get developed with
adults in mind, and how to sort of cultivate the connection
with adults.
But the collateral damage on young people is huge. And I am
sure you have been tracking with your own work, whether you are
beginning to see any culture change inside some of these
organizations, where they frontload their focus on what this
can do when it gets in the hands of children, knowing that that
is going to happen. And then, in a sense, back out the product
line from there, instead of it being an afterthought.
So if you could speak to that for a couple of minutes, I
would be interested to hear, because I think that could guide
the way we design legislation here on the Hill to try to
protect young people in this digital age with all its benefits,
but, as we know, with some severe drawbacks, as well.
Dr. Radesky. Thank you. That is an excellent question. And
I really like the emphasis on children not being an
afterthought.
Children have such different ways of interacting with
digital spaces that it is normal that adult designers wouldn't
recognize all those things. But we have lots of know-how from
really good research on TV and video games about how children
experience those platforms. What we need is more research to
inform our advisement to tech companies about how a child at
different developmental stages, from infancy to preschool,
elementary school, teenage years, would interact with different
types of algorithms that elevate different content that might
take off different social engagement metrics like liking and
sharing.
And one thing that I have been impressed with, from a
policy standpoint, is the UK and the EU have done a lot of
movement in the past few years about a child-centered design
code. And here in the U.S., I sit on a steering committee along
with other folks like Center for Humane Technology, Common
Sense Media, Fair Play, where we are trying to find the same
sort of child-centered principles to put children's needs first
before products are released.
In the EU they do--they are recommending or debating a
child impact assessment before tech is released, so that you
can have child experts and technologists working together to
say, ``Can we anticipate how this might be misused? Can we do
some trial runs to see what are the metrics that show children
are really benefiting from this?'' It is giving them new ideas,
not sucking away their time.
Mr. Sarbanes. Thanks. That is really helpful. That is
exactly the answer I was looking for, and I like this concept
of a child-centered design code, and sort of making sure,
before the broader rollout happens, that that assessment is
being done.
And we can learn from what our peer nations are doing
around the world, absolutely, in this space.
Thank you very much, Madam Chair, I yield back.
Ms. Eshoo. Thank you, Mr. Sarbanes. The Chair is now
pleased to recognize the gentleman from Florida, Mr. Bilirakis,
for your 5 minutes of questions.
Mr. Bilirakis. Thank you, Madam Chair, I appreciate it very
much. And I feel blessed to, of course, represent the 12th
Congressional District in the State of Florida, but also to sit
on this committee and make a real difference, because this is
the best committee in Congress, without question. Thank you,
Madam Chair.
Ms. Eshoo. Thank you.
Mr. Bilirakis. Again, I was particularly glad to see the
bill I coled with my friend Representative Cardenas, the Oral
Health Literacy and Awareness Act, including--included on
today's docket. So thank you again for that, Madam Chair, and
the ranking member, as well.
This bipartisan bill would direct HRSA to develop and test
oral health literacy strategies capable of reaching across
vulnerable populations to provide oral disease prevention
education through a 5-year oral health literacy campaign.
Dr. Cassis, can you tell us why HRSA is best equipped to
push out such a campaign, as opposed to an entity like the CDC?
And can you explain why establishing evidence-based
strategies, as outlined in this bill, are important to ensure
the agency is reaching our communities effectively?
Dr. Cassis. Certainly, I would be happy to respond to that.
And forgive me, you know, I am from West Virginia, and we don't
talk real fast here, unlike some of my distinguished colleagues
on the committee and witnesses.
But to be quite factual, HRSA is a much smaller
organization than the CDC, and they definitely deal with a lot
of facts, as opposed to how you guys operate, and knowing is it
a good program or not. They can--with their small size, we can
figure it out real fast, whether it is effective or not.
And as far as funding for that, you know, it is really a
small amount, but it is this--the catalyst that may help.
Again, I have--I have practiced 42 years, and I have to
speak so many different languages of understanding with all of
my patients. So if there's better ways to get people into the
office, then we need to--that common thread of what works for
everybody.
Mr. Bilirakis. Thank you, sir. My next question is for Ms.
Miller.
I want to thank you for testifying today and highlighting
the importance of the Gabriella Miller Kids First Research Act
2.0.
I appreciate everything, and--which I am proud to be a
cosponsor, the Republican lead. I am glad to see many other
Members joining in support of this, of course, very important
legislation named after your late daughter--may her memory be
eternal--and remain hopeful we can continue to move this
forward through the legislative process.
We know that all pediatric cancers are considered rare but
that is not a rare problem, as you know. And as cochair of the
Rare Disease Caucus, we need to ensure we are directing much-
needed research funding and attention for these most vulnerable
patients.
Some have expressed concern that using civil fines to fund
the Pediatric Research Initiative could result in varying
levels of money each year. Can you elaborate why you believe
using this particular mechanism can be helpful in properly
funding these critical programs? Because, obviously, you have a
lot of support for the program. If you could answer that, I
think that would be very helpful.
Ms. Miller. Well, first, let me thank you for being an
original sponsor on this piece of legislation. I appreciate
your leadership on this.
As you stated, the funding for childhood cancer and
childhood diseases desperately needing an infusion, the--
childhood cancer gets approximately 4 percent of the NCI
budget. And what is so fantastic about this piece of
legislation is the unique funding source does not require our
elected officials to appropriate the other 96 percent--it could
stay as is--it supplements what we already have.
And what is also fantastic about it is that it will be a
never-ending source until such time as we have no longer a need
for that. And right now, there is such a desperate need.
So this source of funding is unique and innovative and will
truly move the bar forward. Thank you for asking.
Mr. Bilirakis. Very good. Sounds great.
I will yield back, Madam Chair. Thank you.
Ms. Eshoo. I thank the gentleman. The Chair now is happy to
recognize the gentleman from Vermont, Mr. Welch, for his 5
minutes of questions.
Mr. Welch. Thank you very much.
Ms. Eshoo. There you are.
Mr. Welch. It--you know, it is always good to see Mr.
Nolan. I mean, most of the time.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Welch. And it is always good to see Ms. Miller--such
fond memories of us working together with Eric Cantor to pass
the first bill.
But I do want to say sincerely to both of you, it is so
refreshing in this world that is so filled with strife, and
then oftentimes with personal pain and personal loss, to have
before us two people who have turned that loss, that pain, into
progress in benefit for other people. That is inspiring for all
of us.
So Rick, I want to thank you, and Gabriella, I want to
thank you so much--on behalf of your daughter, Gabriella. And I
see your husband is here too, and I have fond memories of the
bill signing. We went down with Eric Cantor, and President
Obama signed it. And even as that was being signed, you were
advocating with President Obama for the next step. So thank you
very much.
Ms. Miller, Marilyn, I want to ask you about the funding
source, because that was the whole issue here, and how is it
that--just elaborate a little bit about what the insecurity is
of the funding source and why it is--that we need to have this
Gabriella Miller 2.0.
Thanks, Marilyn. Go ahead.
Ms. Miller. Again, as with Congressman Bilirakis, let me
thank you for your support. And you are an original sponsor of
the first piece of legislation. And when I approached you on
this one, you just immediately said, ``Count me in.'' So thank
you for that.
The original piece of legislation was a designated funding
amount. We knew that every year that we get it appropriated, it
is $12.6 million. This new funding source, we don't have that.
We need to wait, obviously, for a penalty to be----
Mr. Welch. Right.
Ms. Miller [continuing]. Found. But the--and Madam Chair
asked earlier the amounts of the monies, and I wish that I
could answer that with definite--you know, a definite answer,
but we don't know how much they could be.
Mr. Welch. OK.
Ms. Miller. It could be, you know, $10 million----
Ms. Eshoo. My staff tells me that the--excuse me, that the
total amount of--in terms of penalties that came in that go
into the general fund in 2019 was 335.8 million. So I am
surprised some Member hasn't found that money before to use
for----
Ms. Miller. It is ours.
Ms. Eshoo [continuing]. Filling the----
Ms. Miller. It is ours.
Ms. Eshoo. But it is a----
Ms. Miller. The kids need it.
Ms. Eshoo. It is a good sum of money.
Ms. Miller. Yes.
Mr. Welch. The bottom line here is it is----
Ms. Miller. So----
Mr. Welch. There has got to be some stability in the
funding if we are going to do the research.
Ms. Miller. So one thing that we truly like about this
piece of legislation is that----
Mr. Welch. Yes.
Ms. Miller [continuing]. You know, we don't know that we
will get a penalty every year. So there could be a year that
there is no funding. And what we have done differently in this
year is, once our bill was introduced in the 116th Congress, I
reached out to Dr. Collins, the Director of NIH, and I asked
him to help me with language, so that we could ensure that it
is not a use-it-or-lose-it situation, as it was with the
original.
Mr. Welch. Right.
Ms. Miller. And his staff helped, and we got that language
put into our current legislation, where it will allow for it to
roll over. So there----
Mr. Welch. Well, thank you.
Ms. Miller [continuing]. Will never be a year that will go
by----
Mr. Welch. Right.
Ms. Miller [continuing]. That there won't be any monies
that are allowed for----
Mr. Welch. Thank you, very----
Ms. Miller [continuing]. To research.
Mr. Welch. Thank you very much.
And I wanted to ask Congressman Nolan, if you were back
here, what would you have Congress be doing to assist cancer
patients from diagnosis--throughout diagnosis and treatment?
Mr. Nolan. For lung cancer, I presume.
Mr. Welch. Yes.
Mr. Nolan. Yes.
Mr. Welch. That is right.
Mr. Nolan. Well, I would like to see it become a national
priority, because it is a national emergency. Every day 361,000
people die. It is like an Airbus going down every day, and
every passenger being killed.
And I think, you know, there is some very disparate
treatment between lung cancer and many other cancers. Lung
cancer kills more than almost all of them combined. It has been
stigmatized, because of smoking.
Mr. Welch. Right.
Mr. Nolan. And while other cancers are given early
detection, as a common procedure, lung cancer victims only get
it if they are 55 years of age and smoked 20, 30 packs of--
cigarettes a day for 20 or 30 years.
Mr. Welch. Right.
Mr. Nolan. And it has become epidemic among young women
between 20 and 30.
And so, providing early screening----
Mr. Welch. Right.
Mr. Nolan [continuing]. As well as additional funding for
research and prevention and those, I think, is the most
important thing, I think, we can do. It will save tens if not
hundreds of thousands of lives by providing that early
screening and detection for lung cancer.
Mr. Welch. Thank you very much, and thank you again, both,
for your advocacy.
Mr. Nolan. Thank you.
Ms. Eshoo. The gentleman yields back. It is a pleasure to
recognize Dr. Dunn of Florida for his 5 minutes of questions.
Mr. Dunn. Thank you very much, Madam Chair and Ranking
Member Guthrie, for hosting this hearing today to consider
legislation related to public health.
And the public health focus over the last 18 months has
appropriately been on COVID-19, and we have experienced
successes and failures with COVID-19 and should legislate
accordingly.
We also, however, now have to ensure that Americans are
able to get back on track when it comes to maintaining their
health and staying up to date with routine healthcare visits. I
am very concerned that the data indicates nearly 10 million
screenings for cancer were foregone during the public health
emergency so far, which is why I introduced H.R. 5558, the
Prostate Cancer Prevention Act.
This bill will reauthorize the expired CDC Prostate Cancer
Research Prevention Program, and I want to thank my colleague
Mr. Bobby Rush, who is chair of the Energy Subcommittee, for
cosponsoring this important bill.
I witnessed firsthand immense progress in the field of
cancer treatment throughout my medical career and continue to
be amazed at how far we have come.
I am concerned over the impact of COVID-19, what it has had
on the diagnosis, treatment, and outcomes of cancer. An
essential aspect of success in the field of cancer is, of
course, early and accurate detection of disease.
Dr. DuBois, I have a question for you. You spoke during
your testimony about the importance of cancer screening. I
appreciated your comments regarding evaluating the whole
picture of an individual's risk when considering cancer
screening, and I believe that a strong doctor-patient
relationship leads to this type of thoughtful risk assessment.
Doctors should be looking at far more than just age and race
when making determinations about risk, and physicians should be
examining the full spectrum of risk, including life
circumstances and whatnot when making screening
recommendations.
We should be empowered to make the most appropriate care
recommendations for each of our patients. So Dr. DuBois, could
you elaborate on your concerns regarding the Preventive
Services Task Force reform and how to ensure that the task
force is not impeding appropriate patient care decisions?
Dr. DuBois. Well, thank you for the question. I think the
task force has a, you know, sometimes a difficult task. They
really are focused on looking at the whole population----
Ms. Eshoo. We need you to speak up.
Dr. DuBois. OK.
Ms. Eshoo. We need you to speak--get closer to your
microphone. Maybe raise your voice a little bit. We don't want
to miss what you are saying.
Mr. Guthrie. Thank you.
Ms. Eshoo. Sure.
Dr. DuBois. OK, so can you hear me now?
Ms. Eshoo. Yes, it is better.
Dr. DuBois. OK, sorry about that.
You know, the task force looks at the whole population, and
they calculate their risk and benefits of that screening and
who would benefit from it and who would be harmed by it. It is
really made up of individuals who are mostly public health
experts, or epidemiology experts, and people like that. And it
is--you know, it is sort of a formula that--examined.
I think you are right in the sense of there are many other
exposures and issues related to the hereditary issues. There is
environmental exposures, there is secondhand smoke exposures,
and all of those aren't considered in the calculation. So it is
always important for patients to speak with their primary
doctor, let them know if----
Mr. Dunn. So--we are--our time grows short, Doctor, so I am
just going to jump in with another question to you, and I
encourage you, as Chairwoman Eshoo did, to turn up your
microphone a little bit, because we--you are soft.
So throughout the COVID-19 pandemic, the CDC has repeatedly
released inconsistent guidance surrounding masking, testing,
immunity, you know, just simple knowledge about the classroom
policies, et cetera. Do you think the inconsistent messaging
from public health agencies in general, but specifically
regarding COVID-19, harms our Federal public health efforts
regarding cancer screenings and credibility, moving forward?
Dr. DuBois. Can you hear me better now?
Mr. Dunn. A little. Go ahead.
Dr. DuBois. Sorry about that. I am not sure what has
happened to my----
Mr. Dunn. The clock is running. Go ahead and answer.
Dr. DuBois. Well, you know, the CDC, it is a tough
situation. We--there has been a rapid development of agents for
treating COVID patients and diagnosing them. And we have
learned a lot in a very short time. So it is--you know, it has
been a very difficult issue for the whole medical field to deal
with.
In terms of, you know, for cancer patients, which is my
main focus, we are trying to get everybody vaccinated. We are
trying to make sure that they are as protected as possible
because of they're immune compromised from their treatment and
from their disease.
Mr. Dunn. Thank you. So I would summarize it--I think that
credibility in cancer treatment also suffers from credibility
in general public health announcements. And I suspect that you
would agree with that.
With that, Madam Chair, thank you, and I yield back.
Ms. Eshoo. Thank you, Dr. Dunn. The Chair is pleased to
recognize the gentleman from California, a special friend to
me, Mr. Cardenas, for your 5 minutes of questions.
Mr. Cardenas. Thank you very much, Madam Chairwoman, and
also Ranking Member Guthrie, for having this very, very
important hearing.
And I want to thank all of my colleagues for the diligent
effort that we have had in this discussion today, and the work
that we have done leading to this day, and the work that we
have yet to do to complete--to do the work that is demanded of
us. I say that respectfully, ``demanded of us.'' And I want to
give a special thank you to somebody that I love very dearly,
my former colleague, Congressman Rick Nolan.
It is just so wonderful to see you. You are one of the
kindest individuals to ever serve in this House. And I miss you
very much, and we are going to do everything that we can to
keep your promise to your daughter and to all the people who
deserve the best of us. The best of us.
And we must keep in mind that what we do on this
legislation, these pieces of legislation, not only will honor
those who have passed, but it will, more importantly, honor
those that will live because we have given them the opportunity
to have the respect and the dignity that they deserve so that
if, in fact, cancer comes their way, that they will survive.
Because we are and shall be the greatest nation in the world,
not by our military might, but by the care that we give to
every human being that deserves the best of us. The best of us.
I would like to start by thanking my colleague,
Representative Bilirakis--Republican, by the way, and I am a
Democrat. And together we introduced the bill which is H.R.
455, and that bill actually is included--and I want to thank
the chairwoman and the ranking member for doing so--and it is
the Oral Health Literacy Act.
Yes, oral health, something that is very important,
something that has already been explained today that most
Americans don't have access to, or don't afford themselves the
opportunity to get that dental checkup, to be preventative
about saving--yes, in some cases, actually saving their life by
making sure that they get preventative care.
This bipartisan bill will allow U.S. Health Resources and
Services Administration, otherwise known as HRSA, to carry out
a public education campaign to increase oral health literacy
and awareness.
Chairwoman Eshoo, I would like to request that we enter
into the record at the end of this committee hearing a letter
of support for this bill, H.R. 455, Oral Health--by the oral
health professionals and stakeholders.
Ms. Eshoo. So ordered.
Mr. Cardenas. Thank you, Madam Chair.
I am grateful again for the inclusion of this bill in this
important hearing, and I hope to see it advance for the sake of
all of us in this great country.
Dr. Cassis, thank you again for being here, and I would
like to ask you a question. Is there--when it comes to people
in America not having true access to oral healthcare, is it
only people who, for example, are homeless, or are there--does
this include people who are working perhaps one, two, three
jobs? Are people who are hardworking Americans, are they not
having access to oral health?
Dr. Cassis. Thank you for the question, Representative
Cardenas. This----it is across the board. It has nothing to do
with, you know, where you might live. It is definitely across
the board.
We have to do a better job of communicating the necessary
appointments to safeguard their lives. As you said, there are
people that die from dental disease and complications every
day.
Mr. Cardenas. So, Dr. Cassis, again, could you please help
emphasize that--we are talking about many of these individuals
are hardworking, full-time workers, people who are working full
time, and they and their family members are--don't have true
access to oral healthcare. Is that the case in America today?
Dr. Cassis. It is, you are exactly right. There are--you
know, they have to ration dental care out, just like they have
to ration food at times. And, you know, it is not a pretty
scene, but it is across the board.
Mr. Cardenas. Yes, thank you. I wanted to emphasize that
because I think in these hearings, when we talk about helping
those who are less fortunate, a lot of people think that we are
not talking about you, hardworking Americans. We are definitely
talking about you, people who are holding down a full-time job,
single moms. We are talking about you. That is who we are
fighting for.
And I see that my time has expired. Thank you very much,
Madam Chairwoman, I yield back.
Dr. Cassis. Thank you.
Ms. Eshoo. The gentleman yields back. It is a pleasure to
recognize one of the outstanding doctors that is a member of
our subcommittee.
Dr. Bucshon of Indiana, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Good to see you----
Mr. Bucshon. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman, and I am sorry
for not being here for a good part of the hearing, but I have
read your testimony, and----
Ms. Eshoo. Oh, Dr. Bucshon, can I just interrupt for a
moment?
Mr. Bucshon. You can.
Ms. Eshoo. I--and I am not going to--I am not taking your
time away. I have been asked to remind Members and witnesses
that are not in the hearing room to turn off your mikes, mute
them, because there is background noise on the live stream. We
are not picking it up here, but evidently others are. OK? Thank
you very much.
And Dr. Bucshon, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Bucshon. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman.
Mr. DuBois--is it ``Doo-Bois'' or ``Doo-Bwah''? I want to
thank you for focusing in on the importance of preventive
health and routine screenings, especially for cancer. As a
doctor myself, I believe Congress can do better in promoting
preventative healthcare--health.
I also agree we need to encourage Americans to screen early
and screen often for preventable diseases, especially now that
so many are behind in their screenings due to the public health
emergency.
A growing concern I have regarding routine screenings is
our ability to maintain timely access to quality cancer care in
all settings. While many facilities are already facing
physician shortages across the country, many are also facing
the reality of having to scale back staff or, even worse, close
due to looming reimbursement cuts that are facing--they are
facing at the start of next year.
Coupling the fee schedule cuts with the proposed update to
the clinical labor component, some providers I talk to are
facing up to 20 percent in cuts. This is especially true for
radiation oncology.
Mr. DuBois, what are the real-world implications of
proposed policies like these, and do you think such drastic
reimbursement cuts would disrupt access to quality cancer care?
Dr. DuBois. Can you hear me OK now?
Mr. Bucshon. Yes.
Dr. DuBois. OK, I had to switch my microphone. I am sorry
about that earlier.
Well, those cuts are having impacts, and I know exactly
what you are talking about. My focus on my testimony today was
really on cancer prevention, but those changes in
reimbursements for the radiation oncology and other services,
you know, will have an adverse impact. I don't know the total
extent of that, but clearly, we need to keep an eye on that and
make sure that, you know, we can continue to support those
individuals who are providing that essential care.
Mr. Bucshon. Thank you very much. And earlier this Congress
I joined my friend and colleague Congressman Rush in
introducing the PSA Screening for HIM Act. This bill waives
deductibles, copayments, and coinsurance for prostate cancer
screenings for African-American men and men who have a family
history of prostate cancer, as both of these patient
populations have a much higher risk of prostate cancer. By
encouraging early and routine screening, doctors will be able
to catch the disease in its early and treatable stage, saving
countless lives.
Congress, I think, has a bad habit of looking at healthcare
policies in a 10-year budget window, ignoring potential savings
that accrue past the 10-year mark. So frequently that blocks
healthcare policy, because it costs money in the short run, but
in the long run, I would argue, saves not only lives, but
money.
Although many preventive care policies seem to cost--again,
cost them on the front end, I think it is prudent for us, for
the reasons I have explained, to look at these policies as they
affect the entire lifespan of individuals.
Mr. DuBois, how do screenings for early detection and
preventive health measures lead not only to lives saved but
also lower costs to the overall healthcare system?
And how can we do better, as a country, in promoting and
encouraging preventive health?
Dr. DuBois. Well, thank you for that great question. You
know, I have devoted my entire sort of career to cancer
prevention and early detection, and the data is coming out now.
Some very good studies have been done in colon and breast and
other cancers. Clearly, when we can detect it early in the
precancerous stage, or early while it still hasn't
metastasized, the outcome is just tremendous. There is a much
more longer term of life. There is, you know, the--if it can be
removed early by surgery, there is a cure, a chance for a cure.
So early detection definitely pays off. The health economic
studies have been done. And the overall long-term impact is
tremendous.
So I agree with your statement. I think we need to focus
more on disease prevention. It is something that we do in
cardiovascular disease and other diseases, and cancer is
something we just can't ignore.
Mr. Bucshon. Do you think there are things--I mean,
obviously, paying for preventative or early detection, things
like--that we have started to do a number of years ago--for
example, breast cancer screening, and screening--colonoscopy,
for example, I mean, are there things we can still do better?
Is it primarily just reimbursement, or are there other
things the Federal Government can do more to encourage people
to take advantage of preventive evaluations?
Dr. DuBois. Well, I mentioned this in my testimony. There's
definitely some underserved rural communities who don't have
good health coverage and don't have access to this type of
screening, and the outcomes are much worse in those
populations. It is very clear.
One thing that we have been doing here is sending out
screening mobile units to these areas so that we can include
those populations in that type of early screening.
There is some very exciting research that is supported by
the NCI that has developed a blood test for pan cancer testing.
Cancer cells are released into the bloodstream, and this test
can detect when they are present, and what tissue they came
from. It is too early to deploy this clinically, but once those
tests are validated and sensitive and specific enough, it could
really change the way we do our early screening for all cancer
patients.
Mr. Bucshon. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman. I yield back.
Ms. Eshoo. The gentleman yields back. The Chair is pleased
to recognize the gentlewoman from New Hampshire, Ms. Kuster, to
be followed by the gentleman from Missouri, Mr. Long.
Annie, you are on.
Ms. Kuster. Thank you so much, Madam Chair. This is a very
important discussion, and I want to thank the witnesses,
especially my very, very dear friend and colleague, Rick Nolan,
for joining us here today.
While this committee has been keenly focused on the COVID-
19 pandemic, we must continue to support and invest in programs
that protect our children and families. We have all heard the
startling statistics of delays in routine healthcare during
COVID, and there are simply too many Americans--including, I
might add, my own brother--who recently postponed screenings
and surgeries, only to later discover they may have much more
serious healthcare conditions.
We have also discussed in the Oversight and Investigation
Subcommittee the enormous impact the pandemic is having on our
children, and I recently raised the issue with--of adolescent
mental health during a visit to Mountain Valley Treatment
Center in my district in Plainfield, New Hampshire. It was
incredible to hear directly from these teens about the mental
health challenges that they are facing, and I am pleased that
today's hearing includes the CAMRA Act, which would have the
National Institutes of Health research the effects of
technology and media on infants, children, and adolescent
health and development.
We need to better understand the effects of digital media
on our children's well-being, and I am a proud cosponsor of
this legislation as well as the CAROL Act, which would expand
research on valvular heart disease and treatment. Many
Americans, particularly women, suffer from valvular heart
disease, and they do not know that they are at serious risk. So
we need better public health outreach and data to address the
gaps in understanding, especially for women, people of color,
and those living in rural areas like my district.
Dr. Jones, could you elaborate on how valvular heart
disease and its related complications, despite requiring
minimal intervention, can become fatal?
Dr. Lloyd-Jones. Certainly. Thank you so much,
Congresswoman.
So we are talking today really about chronic valvular heart
diseases, and they come in two subtypes. There is either
narrowing or scarring of a valve we call stenosis, or there is
leakiness of a valve we call regurgitation. But really, at the
end of the day, both of these lead to a kind of a final common
pathway, where the heart tends to enlarge, the pump weakens,
and that leads to the development of heart failure symptoms:
congestion, development of shortness of breath, retention, and
fluid. And when severe enough, that leads to rhythm
disturbances that can cause sudden cardiac death.
So because of these processes, it is incredibly important,
just as with cancer, that we catch these processes early, and
that really requires routine screening--again with the
stethoscope. But also, if there is any suspicion of a valvular
heart problem, that we do echocardiography or ultrasound to be
able to detect both the presence and the severity of valvular
heart disease.
Ms. Kuster. And what role do health disparities due to
gender, race, or socioeconomic status play in increasing the
risk for fatal heart valvular disease?
Dr. Lloyd-Jones. Well, there are really no known major
genetic or sociocultural differences that sort of lead to
disparities. So I will come back to the issues of--really, of
access to healthcare.
It is really that access problem that means people are
getting diagnosed only when they have symptoms, after the heart
has been damaged too significantly to actually be able to
reverse that damage and avoid some of the complications and,
potentially, deaths that are related to it.
So much of what drives those disparities is the underlying
risk factors for heart disease: high blood pressure, diabetes,
cholesterol problems, and smoking. So if we can address those
things, those upstream determinants, it will also help with
valvular heart disease, as well. But of course, there are major
health disparities in all of those things, as well.
Ms. Kuster. And is there a factor related to gender? I know
that women seem to be particularly at risk.
Dr. Lloyd-Jones. Yes, there are some issues with gender
related to valvular heart disease and also in some of the
consequences, like sudden cardiac death, where women may be
more susceptible. So, you know, I think that encouraging women
to get this as part of their routine screening, make sure that
someone is paying attention to their heart and their heart
valve, is incredibly important.
We know that only recently fewer women now are dying of
heart disease than men, but still far too many, and over
400,000 women per year dying of heart disease. Much of that, 80
to 90 percent, would be preventable with good, routine
screening and care.
Ms. Kuster. So I will just close by saying that is why it
is so important for us to provide access to affordable
healthcare to every American, including those in States like
Florida and Texas, large States with large populations that did
not increase their rolls under the Medicaid expansion. And that
is why we want to include that in the Build Back Better.
So I thank you, and I yield back.
Ms. Eshoo. The gentlewoman--let's see. Oh, the Chair is
pleased to recognize the very patient, wonderful Member from
Missouri, Mr. Long, for your 5 minutes of questions.
Mr. Long. Thank you, Madam Chair.
And Rick, I would like to start with you. Are you familiar
with Philip Francis Thomas?
Mr. Nolan. With who?
Mr. Long. Philip Francis Thomas.
Mr. Nolan. No, I am not.
Mr. Long. Philip Francis Thomas was a congressman in
Washington, DC, and he had a small gap in his service of 34
years, from 1841 to 1875, 34 years. So he is number one. Who
would you think number two is that had a 32-year gap in their
service in Congress?
Mr. Nolan. Yes, mine was 32 years.
Mr. Long. Huh?
Mr. Nolan. Mine--my gap was----
Mr. Long. Can you take your mask off, so I can see what you
are saying?
Mr. Nolan. I guess I am number two, huh?
Mr. Long. Yes, but--yes, I just wanted to point that out to
the folks that are seeing this, that you were in Congress and
then had a little minor 32-year gap and came back to Congress
the same year that I came in. And it is very good to see you
again.
Mr. Nolan. Oh, thank you. I enjoyed serving with you. It
was great.
Mr. Long. And this is a very important hearing that we are
having here today.
And particularly near and dear to my heart, our youngest
daughter was diagnosed with Hodgkin's lymphoma 6\1/2\, 7 years
ago, and we thought we were going to lose her, knew nothing
about the disease, and I couldn't talk to anybody, I couldn't
pick up the phone, I couldn't talk to friend or foe for a
couple of weeks when she was first diagnosed. And I am proud to
report that she is 6 years past her last chemo treatment,
actually got married last October. And so this is--and then our
older daughter is a pediatrician, so she deals with a lot of
these situations, especially on the children and things.
And I am also a member of the Black Maternal Mortality
Caucus. We had one of the most heart-wrenching testimonies ever
delivered in this hearing room a couple of years ago by a
fellow that lost his wife during a pre-planned C-section. And
they just--she was having issues, and they actually came in and
told her that she was not a priority, and he was begging for
her life for a 16-, 18-hour period, and she deceased with her
second child, like I said, in a planned C-section. So I know
what the mortality rate is like with Black women, and it is not
acceptable, and I hope to be able to do something. And I have
been on that caucus for a couple of years now.
Dr. Lloyd-Jones, there is really an untold story about how
COVID took a toll on people, and it is not always reflected in
the numbers. COVID and shutdowns disrupted normal healthcare
for months, and many people were simply not able to receive
normal treatments. If it was a noncritical treatment or if it
was a routine procedure, the hospitals were not allowed to do
it. And sadly, that adversely affected Andy Barr's family, his
wife, Carol, who we have been talking about here today.
She--I was on the House floor one day, and Andy came up to
me, and he had his cell phone out, and he said, ``Read this,
Billy, read this,'' and it--he had just received the notes from
his wife's doctor. He came home--37 years old, I believe she
was 37, 39--and was deceased after he came home from a meeting.
And two beautiful young daughters that Andy is raising now. But
he said, ``Read this,'' and I read his cell phone, and it was
the notes his doctor had written, and they said that ``echo
after virus subsides.''
Well, the virus didn't subside, and Carol subsided before--
so they couldn't do an echocardiogram because it was not
considered a critical procedure that would have probably, most
likely, have saved her life. And so I am a proud cosponsor of
the CAROL Act introduced by Andy Barr, my buddy from Kentucky.
And Dr. Lloyd-Jones, we still don't know a lot about heart
valve disease causes and the factors that increase risk for
sudden cardiac death. Obviously, that is the reason why this
bill is so important. Can you talk about the workshop that this
bill creates, what its goals are, and how the findings of the
workshop are translated to results at the National Institute of
Health and the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute?
Dr. Lloyd-Jones. Thank you, Congressman, and thank you for
sharing that story. I think it is tragic, and really important
that we get our patients back into care as quickly as possible.
So that NIH uses workshops as very important fact-finding
opportunities. And I have been a member of a number of these
for the NHLBI. But it is really an opportunity to bring
together experts in the field, researchers, even industry and
other public-private partners, to make sure we understand all
aspects of a situation, and that then NHLBI can use--or NIH can
use--that information to actually design calls for research and
grant applications so that we are really targeting the most
important aspects of whatever the disease of interest is.
In this case, you are absolutely right. We need to know
much more about the causes, the reasons for progression, and
the link to sudden cardiac death related to valvular heart
disease.
Mr. Long. OK, thank you. And unfortunately, I am out of
time with all my gift of gab beforehand.
So Madam Chair, I yield back.
Ms. Eshoo. And we enjoy all of it, Mr. Long. You add a
great deal of interest to our committee. You really do.
The Chair is pleased to recognize the gentlewoman from
Illinois, Ms. Kelly, for her 5 minutes of questions.
Ms. Kelly. Thank you, Chairwoman Eshoo and Ranking Member
Guthrie, for holding this important hearing. Today we are
focusing on legislation that impacts a wide range of diseases.
While it is important to increase research funding for
cancer and other diseases to identify new treatments, we also
need to ensure that clinical trials are reflective of racial
disparities and disease. According to the Prostate Cancer
Foundation, Black men are 75 percent more likely to develop
prostate cancer and more than twice as likely to die of it,
compared to other racial groups. Yet, according to the NIH, the
median percentage of Black participants in prostate cancer
clinical trials funded in fiscal year 2018 was only 8 percent.
Dr. DuBois, how can public research funders such as the NIH
hold clinical trial sponsors accountable for increasing the
diversity in clinical trials?
Dr. DuBois. Thank you for that question. Can you hear me
OK?
Ms. Kelly. Yes.
Dr. DuBois. Good. Well, this is a big problem. And one of
the things the NIH has done through the NCI is to establish
these community oncology outreach efforts, where we have
community oncology groups that actually do participate in
clinical trials.
We have five of these sites in South Carolina, and that--if
we have those trials available in the communities where most of
these people live, there is a much higher likelihood that they
are going to participate. And so we have been able to increase
the percentage of minorities in many of the trials, and it is
really in the outreach effort that we are doing in those local
communities.
I think we really need to--program, because we are also
missing out on other community groups that--where patients just
can't get to major urban areas where a lot of those trials are
being held. And the--so I think more support for this program
would be wonderful and improve participation from those groups.
Ms. Kelly. Thank you. Would there be any benefit to
empowering NIH with greater authority to work with clinical
trial sponsors to establish clear, measurable diversity goals
in the funding application?
Dr. DuBois. I think that is a great idea. And, you know,
they do look at that in some applications. It is not as--
probably as stringent as it should be. But I think that that is
something that could be [audio malfunction].
Ms. Kelly. Thank you. We do need to increase accountability
to make sure that all clinical trials are--racial and ethnic
disparities and diseases. This is why I am working on a
clinical trial diversity bill with my E&C colleagues
Representative Cardenas, Butterfield, and Clark. And we look
forward to working with the committee to advance this important
issue.
Ms. Stewart, good to see you. In your statement you
mentioned the importance of increasing access to prenatal and
postpartum care. Can you speak to the role that extending
Medicaid postpartum coverage to 1 year can play in reducing
racial disparities in maternal health outcomes?
Ms. Stewart. Good to see you, Congresswoman. Yes, we have
been a big advocate of extending Medicaid postpartum at least
12 months. It is--we have made some progress towards that,
where it is now an option for some States to do that. But we
feel it shouldn't be an option, it should be mandatory.
And the reason for that is because, when you look at
maternal deaths, between pregnancy at the time of childbirth
and then after childbirth, about a third of all maternal deaths
happen in that stage 1 week beyond when the baby is born out to
1 year. And that is when women need care just as much as they
do when they are pregnant, just as much as they do when they
are delivering their baby.
We know that a lot of women are suffering with mental
health challenges. They may have extenuating health challenges
that may have developed during pregnancy or at the time of
childbirth, and they need to be seen by a care provider. And
because Medicaid covers 40 percent of all the births in the
country and because so many women of color are a part of that
coverage, we know that it can go a long way to helping to
eliminate and reduce the disparities that we see between Black
maternal health, Brown maternal health, and other groups, as
well.
Ms. Kelly. Well, I would like to thank you and commend the
March of Dimes for your work to address maternal mortality. And
you know that I am out here fighting to do exactly what you
said is needed. So thank you so much, and I yield back.
Ms. Eshoo. The gentlewoman yields back. It is a pleasure to
recognize the gentleman from Oklahoma, Mr. Mullin. And then,
coming up, followed by Blunt Rochester from Delaware, followed
by Mr. Carter from Georgia. I think that is the lineup. I know
that we have votes scheduled, I think, at about 1:45. So let's
see if we can make it before the votes are called, OK?
So Mr. Mullin.
Mr. Mullin. Thank you, Ms. Chairwoman, I appreciate it, and
thank you for holding this hearing.
Ms. Stewart, with the United States ranked 25th in the
number of stillbirths per capita, why do you think these rates
remain unchanged despite medical innovations?
And what interventions do you think other countries have
done that we aren't that has lowered their stillbirth rates?
Ms. Stewart. Thank you, Congressman. I think it is a very
good question.
I mean, yes, we have seen stillborn rates where, today,
24,000 babies by--die as a result of stillbirth. And that rate
has--that number has not really improved. In fact, when you
look at other countries, we are ranked 183rd out of 195
countries, in terms of reduction of stillbirth rates over the
last two decades. So we have a lot of work to do.
When you look at other countries, they have implemented
successfully--for example, in Australia--some impressive care
bundles that look at issues around early detection of fetal
growth restriction, smoking cessation--which we actually do
focus on a lot in this country--decreased fetal movement, safe
sleeping practices for moms, some side sleeping practices,
making sure that babies are avoiding early C-sections so that
they are not born early.
You know, one of the things that we have to do is just have
a more comprehensive approach to maternal care, and I think a
lot of the gaps in our system of care, again, these maternal
care deserts that I talked about, the lack of access to care,
if you don't have insurance, or if you just don't even live
near a care provider are all contributing to the high rates of
stillbirth. And because we have not made comprehensive
improvements in maternal care in this country is also why we
have not seen much improvement in stillbirth. Even though we
have seen increases in NICU care, where we have seen technology
and medical care actually extend life, a baby's, in the NICU,
we have not seen that same kind of advancement with stillbirth.
Mr. Mullin. Thank you. How important is adequate data,
then, to fight this, to fight against stillbirths?
Ms. Stewart. Sorry, I just want to make sure--how important
is adequate----
Mr. Mullin. Yes, when you start looking at data, what is--
what do you feel about----
Ms. Stewart. Yes.
Mr. Mullin. I mean, there doesn't seem to be----
Ms. Stewart. Yes.
Mr. Mullin [continuing]. That good of information out there
when we start talking about data. And so, when we are looking
at fighting the stillbirth--I would almost say a pandemic, but
it is not really, but, you know, the serious issues we are
dealing with there, when we are looking at it, how important is
that data?
Ms. Stewart. So it is really important.
One of the things that we know, when a stillbirth occurs,
is that it may be noted on the death certificate, but that
doesn't explain the full reason, or the----
Mr. Mullin. Right.
Ms. Stewart [continuing]. All of the underlying issues that
may have led to the stillbirth.
And in fact, some tests that would determine that actually
are made available sometimes weeks after the death certificate
is actually filed. And so we haven't been actually collecting
all of the best data around stillbirth.
And so what the SHINE for Autumn Act will hopefully do is
to provide more resources so that we can do a much better job
of research and data collection to understand, first, the
underlying causes of stillbirth, which we need to do more of
that around preterm birth and miscarriage and all of that, as
well, but also better data collection around stillbirth so we
can design better interventions.
We saw this same kind of progress made that we made with
maternal mortality when we--when Congress passed legislation
that would allow for maternal mortality review committees.
Collecting better data allowed us to identify better underlying
causes of maternal death, leading to better interventions. The
same needs to be true for stillbirth, as well, and that is what
we hope the SHINE for Autumn Act will do.
Mr. Mullin. Well, thank you. Thank you so much, because you
answered all my other questions while you were answering that
question, and I really appreciate it.
In closing, I just want to second what Mr. Butterfield said
earlier. He made a suggestion that we look at the Better Wound
Care Act at home, and maybe look at doing an upcoming hearing
on this. I, Madam Chair, I would like to say I would like to
second that, because it is an important policy that is good for
patients. And hopefully, I look forward to advancing this
through our--through the committee.
With that, I yield back.
Ms. Eshoo. Thank you, Mr. Mullin. So noted. Thank you.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from California, Dr.
Ruiz, for his 5 minutes of questions.
Mr. Ruiz. Thank you. Thank you very much. This is a very
important hearing.
The COVID-19 pandemic has illuminated health equity issues
that we have long known to be the norm in the United States.
One disease that continues to disproportionately impact
minorities or--is cancer, with unacceptably high death rates
and unequal late-stage diagnoses.
New multicancer early detection tests and development have
the potential to detect many cancers simultaneously, including
cancers without screening tests today and those that
disproportionately impact underserved populations.
While access barriers to healthcare services including
prevention have improved over time, there is still much work to
do. Technologies like multicancer early detection tests could
reduce late-stage diagnoses by catching cancers earlier and
saving lives. That is why I have joined my colleague,
Congresswoman Sewell, to introduce H.R. 1946, the Medicare
Multi-Cancer Early Detection Screening Coverage Act, which
would provide a possible future pathway for Medicare coverage
of these lifesaving technologies.
While this bill is not under consideration today, I urge
the committee to consider advancing this bill, supported by a
consensus of cancer care stakeholders and over 90 bipartisan
Members.
So now onto the legislation at hand. Oral health is
physical health, but too often people neglect their oral
health, whether that is because they don't have access to a
provider or because they can't afford to see a dentist or
because they don't realize how critical oral health is. That is
why I really want to highlight the bill introduced by my
colleagues Mr. Cardenas and Bilirakis, the Oral Health Literacy
and Awareness Act of 2021, which will increase public education
for oral health literacy and awareness.
We know that there are oral health disparities by race and
by income. According to the CDC, for children aged 12 to 19,
nearly 70 percent of Mexican-American children have had
cavities in their permanent teeth, compared with 54 percent of
non-Hispanic White children. So for that same age group, 23
percent of children from lower-income families have untreated
cavities in their permanent teeth, twice that of children from
higher-income households.
So, Dr. Cassis, can you speak to some of the disparities
that exist in oral health and how this bill might help address
those disparities?
Dr. Cassis. The bill helps in educating. We are so far
behind in how we communicate with minorities and, really,
everybody.
I would like to point out that, prepandemic, the--dentistry
was in a good place. You know, we have the best infection
control ever, since the 1980s. And after our mandatory
shutdown, we came back busier than ever, and it hasn't let up.
And what I would like to tell the whole community is that we
see more minorities or underprivileged patients now than we
ever have. So some of that has come out that, you know, it is
safe to go to the dentist. And I would tell you, absolutely, if
you are following the OSHA guidelines, we are in a great
position for that.
However, the bill itself will go so far into getting more
minorities into the dental offices around the country. It is
something I would highly endorse, and would beg the committee
to consider keeping that funding in place.
Mr. Ruiz. In addition to that we need more dental offices
in minority communities, or in the medically underserved areas
of our country. There is--so, you know, it is--this is one
piece of a larger puzzle, a very important piece.
Dr. Cassis. Yes.
Mr. Ruiz. If there is a cost-effective way of improving
health, it is to increase health literacy. In this case,
increasing oral health literacy is vital, and very important in
people to understand not only just the importance but the
practical way to care for their oral health and to really make
that association that your oral health is--has a direct
connection to your cardiac health. It has a direct connection
to your other systems, organ systems. And so that is why it is
so important to really put that in the forefront, as well.
So with that, I yield back my time, and I thank you for
your work and bringing attention to this.
And again, I thank my colleagues Congressmen Cardenas and
Bilirakis for putting this bill forward.
Ms. Eshoo. The gentleman yields back. The Chair is pleased
to recognize the gentleman from Georgia, Mr. Carter, for your 5
minutes of questions.
Mr. Carter. Thank you, and thank all of you for being here.
Congressman, good to see you.
I wanted to ask Dr. Radesky and Ms. Stewart--I will ask you
separately. But first of all, let me say, as you all know, the
National Center on Birth Defects and Developmental
Disabilities, this Center works to detect, to prevent, and also
to research birth defects and intellectual disabilities. And
that is why I feel like it is crucial that we work and pass my
legislation that we are discussing today, the Improving the
Health of Children Act. This would reauthorize the Center for
the first time since 2007, and I think it is extremely
important that they would--that we do that.
Ms. Stewart, I will ask you first, why is it so important
to have early diagnosis for birth defects and intellectual
disabilities?
Ms. Stewart. Thank you, Congressman. Well, birth defects
are common, and they are also costly, and it is critical that
we provide early detection and early treatment for babies.
We have been a strong advocate at March of Dimes for
newborn screening for many, many years, and we have been
working in partnership with the National Center on a lot of
these issues around birth defects. There are close to 8 million
babies worldwide that suffer from a serious birth defect, and
more than 3 million of them die before the age of 5.
So--and there are a range of different birth defects that
babies are sometimes dealing with in newborn babies, and the
screening has to happen very, very, very quickly, in many
cases.
Developmental disabilities, as you mentioned, around
autism. The Center has done an amazing job to really advance
the research around the causes of autism, as an example.
Many families that suffer with blood disorders, especially,
for example, in the African-American community around sickle
cell, the Center has done an incredible job of advancing
success there.
And then it is not just babies with disabilities. When we
identify those disabilities early in life, people are then
dealing with those disabilities over a long period of time. And
so the Center has also been there to make sure that healthcare
and programs are available for people to sustain them, to keep
them active in life, and providing the care that they need to
have an improved quality of life over a long period of time.
Mr. Carter. Right. So you would agree the Center does need
to be reauthorized?
Ms. Stewart. Oh, no question about it.
Mr. Carter. OK. Dr. Radesky, let me ask you. The Center
itself, do you feel like parents of newborns and--with
disabilities have easy and readily accessible access to the
resources of the Center?
Dr. Radesky. You know, I am not sure I am qualified to
answer that question. I can speak to my clinical experience
with--families of children with developmental disabilities in
general find it very challenging to access resources throughout
the community, whether provided through private or public
sources. I just think--I don't know specifically about the
Center in question.
Mr. Carter. But you are saying your experiences are that,
in general, there is a problem with accessing any of the
centers, or any of the available options for these parents?
Dr. Radesky. It varies, depending on the family's health
insurance and what is authorized in terms of treatments for
things like autism or other developmental delays.
Another factor is socioeconomic status or health literacy
and other material hardships that impact a family's ability to,
say, get transportation for early intervention for therapies.
And also, just the fact that it is intimidating to
coordinate and navigate all of these different therapies for
your child, that I think some families feel very engaged and
activated for, and other families find it confusing,
overwhelming, and have a hard time engaging.
Mr. Carter. Well, I appreciate your input on that, because
I consider you to be boots on the ground, if you will.
And Ms. Stewart, what can we do to improve this? What do
you think the solution is, with the situation like she is
describing?
Ms. Stewart. Well, I think she is right in that every State
it varies and every community varies, in terms of the access of
actual resources on the ground. I think what she is referring
to are followup with experts and with specialists and others
who can help in addressing those developmental disabilities. So
there is a range of care.
What the Center really does is help to provide a lot of the
surveillance and the data collection and the understanding of
what kinds of birth defects and other kinds of health issues
can be--that can be screened at the time of birth. But there
has to be a better way of connecting that to the healthcare
system and more resources, especially in low-resource
communities, so that it can access the care that they need,
whether that is at home or----
Mr. Carter. So how do you do that? I mean, do you educate
the caregivers? Do you educate the--not caregivers, but the
healthcare professionals, the doctors and the nurses?
Ms. Stewart. I think it is not only them, but you have to
educate family members and you have to educate community
members, school members. A lot of people don't know how to
address these special needs, and without the level of awareness
and the education that is needed--and, frankly, the funding
that many families need if they don't have access to high-
quality healthcare--they need additional resources to access
the care that they may be looking for.
Mr. Carter. Great. My time has expired. Thank you all for
being here today, and I yield back.
Ms. Eshoo. The gentleman yields back.
Now I need some assist from our staff, because we have a
series of eight votes that are on the floor right now. Should
we take a----
Voice. So take Ms. Barragan and go into recess.
Ms. Eshoo. OK, so the Chair is going to recognize the
gentlewoman from California, Ms. Barragan, for her 5 minutes of
questions. Then we will recess and, I think, have someone
else--will someone--oh, we are going to have to recess because
of eight votes on the floor, and there are still Members that
are--that haven't had the----
Voice. So we will take a 2-hour.
Ms. Eshoo. We are going to take a 2-hour break. You
probably--all the witnesses need a break. I am sorry that we
have to do it this way, but it is a compliment to each one of
you that we have had such wonderful participation of committee
members today, and that is what we want.
So let's hear from or recognize the gentlewoman from
California, Ms. Barragan, for your 5 minutes of questions, and
then we will recess.
Ms. Barragan. Thank you, Chairwoman Eshoo, for holding this
important hearing today on legislation that will advance
scientific research, improve our public health system, and
expand access to care for so many families across the Nation.
Maternal mental health conditions are a significant barrier
for the health and well-being of women. In my home State of
California, one in five California women suffer from
depression, anxiety, or both while pregnant or after giving
birth. Despite this high prevalence, 75 percent of impacted
mothers never receive treatment.
In addition, Black mothers are twice--two times more
likely, and Latina mothers are 1\1/2\ times more likely than
White mothers to develop depression during and after pregnancy.
Ms. Stewart, how should maternity care, mental healthcare,
and pediatric health systems work together to ensure the health
and well-being of both the mother and child?
Ms. Stewart. Thank you, Congresswoman. And the fact that we
pay so much attention to maternal healthcare from a physical
point of view really doesn't give the most attention that we
need to pay to maternal mental health, which are the issues
that you are dealing--that you are addressing and you are
raising, and we are grateful that you are, and your leadership
on these issues.
Maternal mental health challenges are some of the biggest
challenges that many women face during pregnancy and after
pregnancy. We know very, very much the issues of postpartum
depression. A lot of people don't know--again, I think I
mentioned earlier--that maternal mental health is often one of
the leading causes of death for women between--after giving
birth to their child.
And we are grateful that there have been some expanded
resources. For example, there is now a maternal mental health
hotline that the March of Dimes advocated for. The grant was
just awarded by HRSA. That is a huge step forward, but we need
to do more.
We have been strong--given a strong endorsement for the
creation of a Federal task force on maternal mental health
through the Triumph for New Moms Act of 2021.
We also are very supportive in the Momnibus of the Moms
Matter Act, which is currently being reviewed by this
committee, and it would also invest critical resources in
maternal mental health, as well.
So one of the things that you mentioned is how stress and
anxiety have an impact on maternal health outcomes and birth
outcomes. That is especially true in communities of color that
are dealing with the issues of stress and anxiety, often
brought on by the racism and discrimination that they
experience in their own lives, especially in the course of
bringing a baby into the world. So the issue of focusing on
maternal mental health is really critical, and we strongly
support all the efforts to improve and create more resources to
address the issue, especially for women of color.
Ms. Barragan. Well, thank you, Ms. Stewart, for your
important testimony on this subject, for mentioning my bill.
Certainly, given the significant impact of our families, I hope
that the committee will consider my bipartisan Triumph for New
Moms Act and other maternal mental health bills in the near
future.
Ms. Stewart, this next question is also for you. Lead in
older homes remains a persistent problem for families across
South Los Angeles. Roughly 2,000 children are diagnosed with
unsafe levels of lead in their blood each year in Los Angeles
County alone, particularly for communities of color, where
costs are a major barrier to access healthcare. Families are
often unaware their homes could be a source of lead until the
children are tested.
Ms. Stewart, oftentimes Federal outreach and education
programs use language that is overly technical, or does not
resonate with the intended audience. Can you discuss why a
Federal advisory committee on childhood lead poisoning should
provide culturally and linguistically appropriate outreach to
communities of color to reduce the risk of childhood lead
poisoning?
Ms. Stewart. Well, thank you, and I am aware of the recent
issues in communities of color in Los Angeles with respect to--
especially in the southern part of the city, with respect to
children being--testing positive for high blood levels. And it
just reinforces the importance of passing the Lead Poisoning
Prevention Act to invest more in resources and education
outreach, referrals, and screenings for children that are
testing positive for lead in their blood.
It is also really important--and we have seen this in the
pandemic--that the way in which we provide information to
communities of color has to be culturally appropriate. It has
to be done in conjunction with those communities, so that it
addresses language barriers, it addresses other barriers, and
it especially addresses the trust barriers that exist in
communities of color, as well.
So we would strongly recommend that all of the education
outreach that happens be done in conjunction with those
communities, so that communities can receive it, understand how
to use that information, and appropriately address the needs
that their children may be having, especially if they are
affected by high blood levels of lead.
Ms. Barragan. Thank you, Ms. Stewart----
Ms. Eshoo. The gentlewoman's time has expired, and your
comments about your legislation, so noted----
Ms. Barragan. Thank you.
Ms. Eshoo [continuing]. Congresswoman Barragan. I am going
to stay, because Mr. Curtis has been here since the beginning
of the hearing this morning, and I want to call on him for his
5 minutes of questions, and then we will take a break.
Mr. Curtis, thank you for your patience and being here for
the entirety, and you are on.
Mr. Curtis. Madam Chair, you are too gracious, and I will
go quick, because we don't want you to miss the vote.
Ms. Eshoo. No, that is--go ahead. We will make it.
Mr. Curtis. And to our witnesses, we will all shorten our
answers, if we can do this quickly.
First of all, Madam Chair, thank you. It has been clear
that this is an important hearing. I would just point out I do
have a bill. It is the Fix Nondisclosure in Health Research Act
that I hope we can include in future hearings. I would have
loved it to be included in this.
In short, it requires the NIH to report to Congress on
funded research grantees that have ties to foreign governments.
Ms. Stewart, maternal healthcare is important, and it is a
priority for me, as for so many here, specifically helping moms
who are also suffering from substance use disorder. And I heard
you talk about a number of conditions, but if maybe we could
just touch on that one just a minute, I authorized legislation
that required the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention to
study the causes of opioid substance use disorder in pregnant
and postpartum women, and that was the Poppy Seed Act.
Have we improved outcomes for those expecting mothers and
postpartum moms dealing with substance abuse disorders?
Ms. Stewart. Well, I think there is, you know--obviously,
the opioid crisis has had a severe impact on maternal health
outcomes, infant health outcomes. You know, we have seen a
dramatic increase in the number of babies that are affected by
Neonatal Abstinence Syndrome. It is really a huge issue that we
are facing.
We have been a strong supporter of making sure, one, that
we don't penalize women who are suffering from substance use
disorder, that we find them treatment if they are pregnant or
if they are a new mom, and also making sure that we identify
those babies who are suffering from NAS and really need
additional treatment, as well.
Mr. Curtis. You think the pandemic has hurt our efforts?
And is there anything specifically you can think of that you
would like Congress to do?
Ms. Stewart. I think there is no question the pandemic has
created even more of a stress on the system with respect to
mental health overall, and that has shown up in the ways in
which the opioid crisis, even though we aren't--we are not
paying attention to it as much as we are the pandemic, it is
still raging in this country, and it is affecting many, many
families. It is affecting pregnant women.
We strongly advocate to do more to make sure that women are
able to get the treatment and the help they need as soon as
they are able to, that they are able to stay in treatment,
because it is going to protect their lives and their babies, as
well.
Mr. Curtis. Thank you very much. Quickly, Dr. Jones, I am
curious if we should be looking at preventive measures in
addition to the steps you outlined in your testimony to reduce
chronic heart disease in the United States. For example, I
introduced legislation that would make it easier for small
group plans and individual marketplace plans to invest in
social determinants of health services, including offering, for
instance, gym memberships as a benefit.
Could you quickly explain if this would be helpful in
addressing some of these chronic conditions?
Dr. Lloyd-Jones. Yes, absolutely. As you are implying, you
know, cardiovascular disease remains our leading cause of death
and disability, not only in this country but across the globe.
And we know what causes 90 percent of heart disease and stroke,
and that is the traditional risk factors of cholesterol, blood
pressure, diabetes, smoking, overweight, and all the things
that actually happen up upstream, those social determinants of
health that are the causes of the causes.
And so it is really critical that we apply all of our
knowledge about improving social conditions, economic things,
education, social and community context, and especially
healthcare, so that people have access to all of the tools that
we know can prevent cardiovascular diseases and stroke.
So amen to what you said. We need to do a much, much better
job focusing on prevention. And in fact, it touches on some of
these other things. If we improve the cardiovascular health of
our population, we see dramatically lower rates of cancer, we
see much healthier mothers heading into pregnancy who don't
deliver, unfortunately, either stillbirths or, you know, have
adverse pregnancy outcomes or have children who start off on
less healthy trajectories. So this is really the key to driving
towards a healthier population. So very much support anything
we can do in this regard.
Mr. Curtis. Thank you. The Chair has slipped out. I would
like to thank her, even though she is not here, for extending
this for a few minutes, and I appreciate everybody's patience
and quick answers. Madam, I yield my time.
Ms. Schrier [presiding]. The gentleman yields. I will now
recognize myself for 5 minutes.
Thank you to all the witnesses who are here today for
hanging in there, and I want to thank the chairwoman, who I am
replacing for the moment, for this focus on children and
families.
There's two bills that I would like to speak on today, and
the first is the Gabriella Miller Kids First Research Act 2.0.
And Mr. and Mrs. Miller, I just want to thank you for being
here today. Your experience with Gabriella is, sadly, one that
far too many other heartbroken parents have also experienced,
as you said in your testimony.
And just yesterday I spoke with the mother of a little girl
named Danica, who was diagnosed with a brain tumor at age 21
months. And she died, sadly, last year, at just 5 years old.
And her mom, as she told me her tragic story and the family's
tragic story, I thought about so many children with cancer who
I have taken care of over 20 years as a pediatrician, and it is
because of them and Danica that I so strongly support this
legislation that will increase funding for pediatric cancer and
rare disease research.
The other bill that I would like to talk about today is the
CAMRA Act, and I really want to thank Dr. Radesky for being
here virtually to talk about the importance of this research
into the impacts that screens and screen time and social media
have on our children.
And so, Dr. Radesky, I first want to appreciate your
highlighting that ``screen time'' is far too general a term,
and that there is a difference between a FaceTime chat with
Grandma and Grandpa and violent video games. And so I was
wondering if you could first describe the family media plan
that you created that helps pediatricians work with families to
incorporate screen time in a healthy and balanced way.
Dr. Radesky. Yes, I am happy to, thank you. So when our
American Academy of Pediatrics guidelines came out in 2016, we
wanted to have more practical ideas for families who were
trying to navigate this Wild West of new technologies. And we
thought that having really actionable ideas delivered through a
kind of tailored, digital format through the Family Media Use
Plan on the HealthyChildren.org website would just help this be
delivered a little bit more easily to families.
We also wanted to encourage conversations that really get
to the heart of when is technology a problem, when is it
interrupting our family connections and our meals, when is it
actually fun to do together, and to tell us stories that make
our lives more meaningful? When are we using it for our human
needs?
And so it represented that sort of balanced conversation,
and we have found that, you know, tens--hundreds of thousands
of families have used it, and we are actually updating it now,
because the research is constantly changing, the platforms that
families are using are constantly changing, and we want to
continue to be a resource for families, you know, that is
relevant on the ground, understanding the everyday tensions
around this.
Ms. Schrier. And I know I appreciate that, as a
pediatrician: No devices in the bedroom, not at the kitchen
table, et cetera. And I was wondering if you could give some
quick answers, just a few words on each of these: Generally
speaking, the effect on social media and video games on
attention spans, specifically in school.
Dr. Radesky. Yes, there have been a couple of longitudinal
studies. These are important, because they look at how a child
started off and how things change over time. And a few of the
good ones have shown that the more frequent checking of social
media, the more that children's everyday activities are
fractured into different fragments by media use, that that does
impact attention span, and that it is not only kids who have
preexisting ADHD.
Ms. Schrier. Thank you. And I will note, just in the
interest of time, the effect of social media and video games on
sleep, staying up too late, social interactions, the ability to
communicate face to face, also between time spent on screens
and myopia and obesity and learning.
And I--yesterday I was speaking with one of your
colleagues, Dr. Dimitri Christakis at Seattle Children's, and
he noted that schools are spending a lot of money on buying
devices, computers in the classroom, and that it is really not
clear yet whether that is helpful or not.
And so I would just like to round--to kind of wrap up by
saying that we need to be really strategic about screen time
and media and our children. And the fact of the matter is that
you are researchers and you still don't have access to the data
that Big Tech does. And that is why the CAMRA Act is so
important, to make sure that the NIH gets this data to guide us
as pediatricians, teachers, parents on our children's access
and use of social media and screen time.
Thank you, and I yield back. I would like to recognize----
Voice. So we don't have any Members yet, so I would say
that you can adjourn.
Ms. Schrier. I will adjourn, and call the--I will recess
this committee.
[Recess.]
Ms. Schrier. The hearing will resume. Dr. Joyce has just
arrived.
That is all right, we are happy to have you, Dr. Joyce, and
thrilled to resume the hearing. You have 5 minutes.
Mr. Joyce. First of all, I want to thank Dr. Schrier, my
colleague and my friend, for bringing us all together today,
because this is an important slate of bipartisan bills that we
are considering.
I would especially like to note that H.R. 1113, the CAROL
Act, named for the late wife of my friend and my colleague,
Andy Barr, and urge that it be marked up by this committee as
soon as we are able to do so.
Since March of last year, the COVID-19 pandemic has
disrupted and upended lives in many ways that none of us could
have ever imagined. Even with the staggering impact of this
virus on public health, as a physician I remain gravely
concerned about the secondary effects that we will ultimately
and continue to see. As businesses and practices have shut
down, routine cancer screenings, health checkups, immunizations
were delayed and even skipped altogether. The delay in
diagnosis of possible cancers and other health disorders will
be something that we will be seeing and living with in the
future.
My first question is to Dr. Lloyd-Jones. One of the other
effects that we have seen is the staggering increase in BMI
among school-aged children. Dr. Jones, can you please speak
about what impacts this will have from a general and from a
cardiovascular health standpoint, and provide any
recommendations on how we, as a legislative body, can address
this?
Dr. Lloyd-Jones. Well, thank you, Congressman. This is a
really critically important issue.
And as you point out, you know, we have looked at data that
showed that 45 percent of Americans delayed routine healthcare
in the summer of 2020, and it is still running around 20
percent saying that they are going to delay, related to the
virus and their concerns about coming into healthcare
facilities. And that plays out in our children, as well.
As you pointed out, we have seen significant weight gains
in Americans across the board during the pandemic because of
changes in eating habits, because of forced sedentariness, as
we have been home more. And unfortunately, that plays out in
the COVID-19. We saw that, on average, in the first year of the
pandemic, American adults gained 19 pounds--on average--which
is really a striking setback to our public health.
And that--we have seen that in children, as well. When
children get obese early in life, it drives not only immediate
metabolic changes, it puts them at risk for type 2 diabetes--
usually a disease of adults--puts them at risk for higher blood
pressures, puts them at risk for worse cholesterol. And we know
that each of those things is time dependent. The longer you are
exposed to those things, the worse your vascular changes, the
damage to your heart and your arteries, and the earlier the
onset of those diseases will be, in terms of heart attack and
stroke.
So it is really a tragedy that we are seeing much heavier
children, and we were already one of the most obese nations in
the world, with regard to our children and our adults. But we
are going to see this play out now over decades, because it is
so hard to lose the weight once it has been gained, and that
will drive earlier and more rapid rises in blood pressure,
blood sugar, cholesterol, and other metabolic problems that
will play out. And we will see, unfortunately, increases in
cardiovascular disease, event rates, and death.
Mr. Joyce. Dr. Jones, I think you make an excellent point
in--we will see this play out over decades.
But immediately, right now, we have seen increases in
overdose deaths, some of the largest in our Nation's history.
Losing over 95,000 Americans to overdoses in 2020 is an
unacceptable number. And we need to work fast to reverse this
deadly trend.
In Pennsylvania the availability of illicit drugs,
specifically fentanyl, is a crushing blow to our local
communities. We know these drugs are easy to get and fast to
kill.
During the COVID-19 pandemic, the opioid epidemic has
further spiraled out of control. While Congress recently did
just extend the scheduling of fentanyl analogues until early
next year, we, as a committee, must make this ban permanent,
and I would hope to see our committee activity on this
lifesaving policy very shortly.
Thank you, and I yield back.
Ms. Schrier. The gentleman yields. I want to thank you, Dr.
Joyce, always my friend and my colleague, for raising such
important points about both of those things, the opioid
epidemic and children's health.
I would like to now recognize my friend Ms. Blunt Rochester
from Delaware for 5 minutes.
You are recognized.
Ms. Blunt Rochester. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman, for the
recognition, and thank you to the witnesses for being here
today to discuss the critical public health issues of cancer
prevention, children's health, cardiac health, and oral health.
The issues we are discussing today impact Americans of all
backgrounds, but none more than heart disease.
Heart disease is the leading cause of death in the United
States, and by 2035 nearly half of the U.S. population will
have some form of heart disease. If left untreated, heart
disease can turn fatal because of serious cardiac events like
heart attack, heart failure, and stroke.
In addition to costing the country billions of dollars
annually, serious cardiac events can also disrupt the long-term
quality of life of survivors and families because of the
physical, emotional, and financial trauma that accompany these
events.
Fortunately, we have evidence-based interventions like
cardiac and pulmonary rehabilitation that can help those who
have suffered get their lives back on track. Cardiac
rehabilitation programs help patients recover more quickly by
supporting them through supervised exercise training, emotional
support, and lifestyle education.
However, despite the clear benefits of cardiac
rehabilitation, only one in four Medicaid patients eligible
will ever receive it, simply because many patients are not
being referred by their clinicians. Congress addressed this
referral gap in 2018 by authorizing physician assistants, nurse
practitioners, and clinical nurse specialists--advanced
practice providers, or APPs, for short--to supervise cardiac
and pulmonary rehabilitative care beginning in 2024.
APPs are already delivering this level of care. For
example, some physician assistants order and supervise cardiac
stress tests, pacemakers, and defibrillators, and some nurse
practitioners already perform the care planning and oversee the
care delivery for patients with complex cardiac conditions.
But the question is, why wait? Let's remove the Federal
barrier. This is why I was so pleased to be leading the
Increasing Access to Quality Cardiac Rehabilitation Care Act,
H.R. 1956, with Congressman Smith. This legislation will build
on the previous success in 2018 and eliminate obstacles that
prevent patients from beginning this critical therapy by
allowing APPs to supervise and order these vital programs.
I want to thank Dr. Lloyd-Jones for his enduring support of
this legislation.
And can you elaborate on how allowing advanced practice
providers to supervise and order cardiac and pulmonary
rehabilitative care could decrease disparities in access for
those in rural and underserved communities?
Dr. Lloyd-Jones. Certainly. Well, thank you so much,
Congressman Blunt Rochester, and thank you for your sponsorship
of this critically important bill.
You know, APPs are people that we work with every day as
physicians. They are highly trained, and they are really--you
know, some people call them physician extenders, but they are
much more than that, and they are a critical part of our
healthcare system.
Simply put, there just aren't enough doctors, and doctors
aren't doing enough to order cardiac rehab in the first place
for the 1.1 million heart attack survivors we have every year.
And so we are talking about a lot of people here.
So it is a lack of referral. We need APPs to be writing
those prescriptions. And it is clear who is eligible for this
intervention.
We also need APPs because, to start and maintain a cardiac
rehab program, you need nurse practitioners, you need exercise
physiologists on site monitoring the patients. But what you
don't really need is a physician every time. Yes, you need
access to a physician. They need to be, you know, available to
be called if there is a problem. But APPs know exactly what to
do if there is an urgent or emergent situation. They know how
to call 9-1-1. They know how to administer basic life support,
and they know how to give CPR immediately and often much more
quickly and better than a physician could do if one waited
around for the physician to arrive.
So I think that is a critically important feature of this
bill, and we are very much in support of it.
Ms. Blunt Rochester. Thank you so much.
And Dr. DuBois, I am working on legislation to promote the
use of preventive healthcare services like routine screenings
and examinations which have been delayed or foregone because of
the pandemic. In your testimony you note that we are still not
back to prepandemic levels. Can you briefly elaborate on what
the consequences of that may be for individuals and for our
society?
Dr. DuBois. Thank you. Well, that is a great question and a
big concern of mine, because the screenings did go down
dramatically, especially each time we had the surges. It is
really going to delay diagnoses in that, you know, when that
delay happens, it makes the outcome much worse, because it is
harder to treat these cancers when they, you know, present at a
much later stage.
We are trying to encourage everybody we can to get back in
and get on their screening regimens. And it has improved
considerably since the first surge, but it is still not back up
to normal levels, and we are continuing to do whatever we can
through our societies, through the press, public education to
make that happen. But anything Congress can do would be well
received because this is still a problem.
Ms. Blunt Rochester. Thank you so much, Dr. DuBois, and we
are working on it.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and I yield back the balance. I
have no time, but I yield it back.
Ms. Schrier. The gentlewoman yields. Thank you very much to
my colleague, Ms. Blunt Rochester.
I would like to now recognize for 5 minutes the gentlelady
from Minnesota, Ms. Craig.
Ms. Craig. Thank you so much, Madam Chair, and thank you to
this committee for holding this important, important hearing
this afternoon.
Witnesses, just thank you for being here, for sharing your
stories, your expertise. I have to say, though, a special thank
you to Congressman Rick Nolan. It is so good to see you, and
thank you for sharing your story and putting your pain and your
family's experience into progress.
I know Katherine, just like you, was a woman of grit, a
woman of love, of empathy. And just on a personal level, I will
never forget that last moment I saw you and President Joe Biden
embrace just after Beau had passed away, and it just--an
enormous amount of empathy for what you and your family have
gone through.
You know, in Minnesota and nationally, lung cancer is the
leading cause of cancer deaths. It is also one of the most
commonly diagnosed types of cancer. Despite that commonality
and lethality, we have made woefully little progress, compared
to other cancer types.
We know that early detection saves lives, yet no-cost
screening for lung cancer is limited, and those over the age of
55 with a history of smoking. In his testimony, Dr. DuBois
points out that incremental progress is being made by the
USPSTF in recommending screening of lung cancer, which, of
course, could be beneficial for women and African Americans,
who tend to smoke fewer cigarettes than White men yet still
have a rate--high risk of developing lung cancer.
Dr. DuBois, what other factors besides smoking history
should be studied in women ages 40 to 49 to increase the
scientific data available for policymakers like ourselves?
Dr. DuBois. Well, thank you very much for that question.
Some of the things that are related to increased risk in the
younger population are secondhand smoke exposure, and some of
that is not always collected properly or, you know, put into
the record or documented to allow us to know what degree of
risk that is.
There's also things like radon exposure and other
environmental exposures that increase risk in that younger
population.
And then there is also a segment of those individuals who
have genetic risk factors and a history of lung cancer in their
families that would need to undergo some genetic testing to
sort that out.
So there are other factors, and, you know, that is just one
of the issues with the way the task force works. They really
set things, really, based on age, because they really look at
the population as a collective instead of these individual,
higher-risk groups.
Ms. Craig. Thank you so much.
Congressman Nolan, I just want to ask. Katherine fought.
She fought all the way through the very end of her life. Can
you talk just for a minute about that fight and why she so
strongly believed that she had such purpose at her end of life,
and the mantel that you have now taken up for her?
Mr. Nolan. Thank you for that question. I could not have
ever been more proud of her.
She--I said earlier she said that she would gladly go
through all that she had endured, as so many others have, if it
could result in the passage of this screening to provide early
detection, because it is so critical in saving and extending
lives.
And in her final moments we were with her. And she said--I
said, ``Katherine, the great mystery is--for many of us--is not
knowing what is going to happen to us here when our life is
over.'' But I said, ``Wherever that is, I want to be with you
there soon.''
Her last words and wishes were, she said, ``No, Dad, not
until this bill gets passed.''
So I am so grateful to the committee for considering this
and the other important legislation and, in particular, for a
beautiful young woman's last dying wishes to pass this bill,
because she knew it would save so many lives. And she said she
would undergo everything she has gone, including the finality
of it in losing her life, because she knew it would save so
many thousands--tens, if not hundreds of thousands of people,
465,000 people dying every day from lung cancer. Thank you.
Ms. Craig. Congressman, this committee looks forward to
taking up this fight with you on her behalf.
Thank you, and I yield back.
Mr. Nolan. Thank you.
Ms. Schrier. The gentlewoman yields. Thank you for those
moving comments.
I would like to thank our witnesses today for your
participation in today's hearing, and I will submit the
following statements for the record.
The list here is provided, and, with your permission, I
will waive the reading of these. Thank you.
[The information appears at the conclusion of the hearing.]
Ms. Schrier. Members have 10 business days to submit
additional questions for the record.
Witnesses, please respond promptly to any questions that
you receive.
At this time, the subcommittee is adjourned. Thank you.
[Whereupon, at 2:15 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]
[Material submitted for inclusion in the record follows:]

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
