- CHARGING FORWARD: SECURING AMERICAN MANUFACTURING AND OUR EV FUTURE

[House Hearing, 117 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

CHARGING FORWARD: SECURING AMERICAN
MANUFACTURING AND OUR EV FUTURE

=======================================================================

HYBRID HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON ENERGY

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED SEVENTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

MARCH 8, 2022

__________

Serial No. 117-72

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Published for the use of the Committee on Energy and Commerce

govinfo.gov/committee/house-energy
energycommerce.house.gov

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
59-695 PDF                  WASHINGTON : 2025

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE

FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey
Chairman

BOBBY L. RUSH, Illinois              CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington
ANNA G. ESHOO, California              Ranking Member
DIANA DeGETTE, Colorado              FRED UPTON, Michigan
MIKE DOYLE, Pennsylvania             MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas
JAN SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois             STEVE SCALISE, Louisiana
G. K. BUTTERFIELD, North Carolina    ROBERT E. LATTA, Ohio
DORIS O. MATSUI, California          BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky
KATHY CASTOR, Florida                DAVID B. McKINLEY, West Virginia
JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland           ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois
JERRY McNERNEY, California           H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia
PETER WELCH, Vermont                 GUS M. BILIRAKIS, Florida
PAUL TONKO, New York                 BILL JOHNSON, Ohio
YVETTE D. CLARKE, New York           BILLY LONG, Missouri
KURT SCHRADER, Oregon                LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana
TONY CARDENAS, California            MARKWAYNE MULLIN, Oklahoma
RAUL RUIZ, California                RICHARD HUDSON, North Carolina
SCOTT H. PETERS, California          TIM WALBERG, Michigan
DEBBIE DINGELL, Michigan             EARL L. ``BUDDY'' CARTER, Georgia
MARC A. VEASEY, Texas                JEFF DUNCAN, South Carolina
ANN M. KUSTER, New Hampshire         GARY J. PALMER, Alabama
ROBIN L. KELLY, Illinois, Vice       NEAL P. DUNN, Florida
Chair                            JOHN R. CURTIS, Utah
NANETTE DIAZ BARRAGAN, California    DEBBIE LESKO, Arizona
A. DONALD McEACHIN, Virginia         GREG PENCE, Indiana
LISA BLUNT ROCHESTER, Delaware       DAN CRENSHAW, Texas
DARREN SOTO, Florida                 JOHN JOYCE, Pennsylvania
TOM O'HALLERAN, Arizona              KELLY ARMSTRONG, North Dakota
KATHLEEN M. RICE, New York
ANGIE CRAIG, Minnesota
KIM SCHRIER, Washington
LORI TRAHAN, Massachusetts
LIZZIE FLETCHER, Texas
------

Professional Staff

TIFFANY GUARASCIO, Staff Director
WAVERLY GORDON, Deputy Staff Director
NATE HODSON, Minority Staff Director
Subcommittee on Energy

BOBBY L. RUSH, Illinois
Chairman
SCOTT H. PETERS, California          FRED UPTON, Michigan
MIKE DOYLE, Pennsylvania               Ranking Member
JERRY McNERNEY, California, Vice     MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas
Chair                            ROBERT E. LATTA, Ohio
PAUL TONKO, New York                 DAVID B. McKINLEY, West Virginia
MARC A. VEASEY, Texas                ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois
KIM SCHRIER, Washington              H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia
DIANA DeGETTE, Colorado              BILL JOHNSON, Ohio
G. K. BUTTERFIELD, North Carolina    LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana
DORIS O. MATSUI, California          TIM WALBERG, Michigan
KATHY CASTOR, Florida                JEFF DUNCAN, South Carolina
PETER WELCH, Vermont                 GARY J. PALMER, Alabama
KURT SCHRADER, Oregon                DEBBIE LESKO, Arizona
ANN M. KUSTER, New Hampshire         GREG PENCE, Indiana
NANETTE DIAZ BARRAGAN, California    KELLY ARMSTRONG, North Dakota
A. DONALD McEACHIN, Virginia         CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington
LISA BLUNT ROCHESTER, Delaware           (ex officio)
TOM O'HALLERAN, Arizona
FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey (ex
officio)
C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hon. Bobby L. Rush, a Representative in Congress from the State
of Illinois, opening statement.................................     2
Prepared statement...........................................     4
Hon. Fred Upton, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Michigan, opening statement....................................     5
Prepared statement...........................................     7
Hon. Frank Pallone, Jr., a Representative in Congress from the
State of New Jersey, opening statement.........................    10
Prepared statement...........................................    12
Hon. Cathy McMorris Rodgers, a Representative in Congress from
the State of Washington, opening statement.....................    14
Prepared statement...........................................    16

Witnesses

Bob Holycross, Vice President, Sustainability, Environment and
Safety Engineering, Ford Motor Company.........................    19
Prepared statement...........................................    22
Answers to submitted questions...............................   223
Natalie King, Founder and Chief Executive Officer, Dunamis Clean
Energy Partners, LLC...........................................    24
Prepared statement...........................................    26
Answers to submitted questions...............................   228
Cassandra Powers, Senior Managing Director, National Association
of State Energy Officials......................................    28
Prepared statement...........................................    31
Answers to submitted questions...............................   231
Thomas Pyle, President, Institute for Energy Research............    39
Prepared statement...........................................    41
Answers to submitted questions \1\

Submitted Material

Letter of March 8, 2022, from Lonnie Spires, President, Chief
Executive Officer, American Association for Laboratory
Accreditation, to Mr. Rush, submitted by Mr. Rush..............   108
Letter of March 8, 2022, from Member of Congress, to Electrify
America submitted by Mr. Rush..................................   110
Letter of March 8, 2022, National Association of Convenience
Stores, NATSO, Representing America's Travel, Plazas and
Truckstops, and SIGMA: America's Leading Fuel Marketers to Mr.
Rush and Mr. Upton, submitted by Mr. Rush......................   127
Letter of March 8, 2022, from Ashley Nunes, Director of
Competition Policy, Philip Rossetti, Senior Fellow for Energy
and Environment, Lucas Woodley, Research Associate, R Street
Institute, to Mr. Rush ad Mr. Upton, submitted by Mr. Rush.....   132
Letter of March 8, 2022, from Ben Prochazka, Executive Director,
SAFE, Electrification Coalition, submitted by Mr. Rush.........   139
Letter of March 7, 2022, from Joseph Britton, Executive Director,
Zero Emission Transportation Association, to Mr. Rush and Mr.
Upton, submitted by Mr. Welch..................................   142

----------
\1\ Mr. Thomas Pyle did not answer submitted questions for the
record by the time of publications.
Letter of March 8, 2022, from Debra Phillips, CEO and President,
National Electrical Manufacturers Association, to Mr. Rush and
Mr. Upton, submitted by Mr. Rush...............................   146
Fact sheet ``Importing Our Energy Future, Minerals Mining, Import
Dependence and U.S. Energy Transition,'' National Mining
Association, submitted by Mr. Rush.............................   147
Letter of March 8, 2022, from Sharky Laguana, President, American
Car Rental Association, Chief Executive Officer, Bandago, San
Francisco, CA, American Car Rental Association, to Mr. Pallone,
et al., submitted by Mr. Rush..................................   148
Letter of March 7, 2022, from Garrick Francis, Vice President,
Federal Affairs Alliance for Automotive Innovation, to Mr. Rush
and Mr. Upton, submitted by Mr. Rush...........................   152
Article of March 1, 2022, ``The West's Green Delusions Empowered
Putin,'' While we banned plastic straws, Russia drilled and
doubled nuclear energy production. Common Sense, submitted by
Mr. Rush.......................................................   154
Article of January 4, 2022, ``Europe Sleepwalked Into an Energy
Crisis That Could Last Years,'' With its natural gas stockpiles
running dangerously low, the European Union is at the mercy of
two wily forces-Putin and the weather. Bloomberg, submitted by
Mr. Rush.......................................................   159
Infographic ``Electric Vehicles Depend on Mining,'' from
MineralsMakeLife.org, submitted by Mr. Rush....................   165
Report of 2021 ``Alliance for Automotive Innovation'' Get
Connected, submitted by Mr. Rush...............................   166
Fact sheets ``2021 Mining Facts,'' National Mining Association,
submitted by Mr. Rush..........................................   173
Letter of March 8, 2022, from John Boesel, CEO, CALSTART, to Mr.
Rush and Mr Upton, submitted by Mr. Rush.......................   187
Article of September 23, 2010, ``Amid Tension China Blocks Vital
Exports to Japan,'' New York Times, submitted by Mr. Johnson...   194
Article of February 24, 2022, ``The Biden administration
shouldn't ignore hybrid cars,'' R Street Institute, submitted
by Mr. Rush....................................................   199
Infographic of March 2022, ``The Future is Electric: Let's Drive
There Together,'' Get Connected, submitted by Mr. Rush.........   202
Article of August 11, 2021, ``The inequities of electric
vehicles,'' R Street Institute, submitted by Mr. Rush......   203
Article of ``U.S. Mineral Mining, The Heart of our Economic
Recovery and a Prosperous Future,'' The National Mining
Association, submitted by Mr. Rush.............................   207
Article of March 8, 2022, ``The cold hard truth about electric
vehicles in winter,'' from Joann Muller and Margaret Harding
McGill, Axios, submitted by Mr. Griffith.......................   211
Article of February 22, 2022, ``U.S. Shale firms hold the line on
growth,'' Argus, submitted by Mr. Rush.........................   217
Letter of March 8, 2022, from Gina Oliver, Sr. Director, Durable
Markets Advocacy Team, American Chemistry Council, Plastics
Division, American Chemistry Council, to Mr. Rush and Mr.
Upton, submitted by Mr. Rush...................................   219

CHARGING FORWARD: SECURING AMERICAN MANUFACTURING AND OUR EV FUTURE

----------

TUESDAY, MARCH 8, 2022

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Energy,
Committee on Energy and Commerce,
Washington, DC.

The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:15 a.m. in
the John D. Dingell Room, 2123 Rayburn House Office Building,
and remotely via Cisco Webex online video conferencing, Hon.
Bobby Rush (chairman of the subcommittee), presiding.
Members present: Representatives Rush, Peters, Doyle,
McNerney, Tonko, Schrier, DeGette, Butterfield, Matsui, Castor,
Welch, Schrader, Kuster, Barragan, McEachin, Blunt Rochester,
O'Halleran, Pallone (ex officio); Upton, Burgess (subcommittee
ranking member), Latta, McKinley, Griffith, Johnson, Bucshon,
Walberg, Duncan, Palmer, Lesko, Pence, and Rodgers (ex
officio).
Also present: Representatives Dingell, Ruiz, Schakowsky;
Carter, and Joyce.
Staff present: Waverly Gordon, Deputy Staff Director and
General Counsel; Jessica Grandberry, Staff Assistant; Tiffany
Guarascio, Staff Director; Perry Hamilton, Clerk; Zach Kahan,
Deputy Director Outreach and Member Service; Rick Kessler,
Senior Advisor and Staff Director, Energy and Environment;
Tyler O'Connor, Energy Counsel; Lino Pena-Martinez, Policy
Analyst; Kaitlyn Peel, Digital Director; Kris Pittard, Policy
Coordinator; Andrew Souvall, Director of Communications,
Outreach, and Member Services; Medha Surampudy, Professional
Staff Member; Caroline Wood, Staff Assistant; Tuley Wright,
Senior Energy and Environment Policy Advisor; Michael Cameron,
Minority Policy Analyst, Consumer Protection and Commerce,
Energy, Environment; Jerry Couri, Minority Deputy Chief Counsel
for Environment; Nate Hodson, Minority Staff Director; Peter
Kielty, Minority General Counsel; Emily King, Minority Member
Services Director; Mary Martin, Minority Chief Counsel, Energy
and Environment; Brandon Mooney, Minority Deputy Chief Counsel
for Energy; Peter Spencer, Minority Senior Professional Staff
Member, Energy; and Michael Taggart, Minority Policy Director.
Mr. Rush. The subcommittee on Energy will now come to
order.
Today----
[Pause.]
Mr. Rush. Well, staff is not ready, although the members
are. So we are going to slow down and let the staff catch up
with its members.
[Pause.]
Mr. Rush. Staff is sufficiently ready, and preparing to
assist us.
So again, the Subcommittee on Energy will now come to
order.
Today the subcommittee is holding a hearing entitled,
``Charging Forward: Securing American Manufacturing and Our EV
Future.''
Due to the COVID-19 public health emergency, members can
participate in today's hearing either in person or remotely,
via online video conferencing.
In accordance with the updated guidance issued by the
Attending Physician, members, staff, and members of the press
present in the room are not required to wear a mask.
For members participating remotely, your microphone will be
set on mute for the purpose of eliminating inadvertent
background noise. Members participating remotely will need to
unmute your microphone each time you wish to speak. Please note
that, once you unmute your microphone, anything that is said in
Webex will be heard over the loudspeakers and in the committee
room, and is subject to being heard by the livestream and the
C-SPAN audience.
Since we have witnesses appearing before us virtually this
morning, I need to ask my colleagues in the hearing room to
make--to mute themselves whenever they are not speaking during
the Q and A portion, so that we can clearly hear the witnesses'
responses.
Given that members are participating from numerous
locations around our Nation for today's hearing, all
recognition of members, such as for questions, will be made in
order of the subcommittee seniority.
Documents for the record of this hearing can be sent to
Lino Pena-Martinez at the email address that we provided to the
staff. All documents will be entered into the record at the
conclusion of today's hearing.
And now, with that said, we shall proceed, and the Chair
now recognizes himself for 5 minutes for the purposes of an
opening statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. BOBBY RUSH, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF ILLINOIS

Again, good morning to each and every one of you, and thank
you for coming to today's hearing on the State of the American
electric vehicle industry.
I want to begin today's hearing with an observation. The
last few weeks have made painfully clear to all of us the
importance of our energy security. They have also made clear
that a vision of energy independence that subjects Americans to
volatile global funding [inaudible] is not independence at all.
Any true vision of energy security must be--must free Americans
from the shackles of Russian fuel, and embrace the electric
vehicle transition.
Thankfully, the Biden-Harris Administration has done just
that very thing. The bipartisan infrastructure law was working
out [inaudible] members of the subcommittee from both sides of
the aisle were laying the essential groundwork for the future
of transportation in our Nation.
That critical legislation that I spoke of included $7.5
billion for EV infrastructure and, additionally, another $7
billion for materials processing and batteries manufacturing.
This investment will help our Nation achieve the President's
goal of ensuring that EVs account for half of all vehicles sold
in our Nation by the year 2030. This investment will transform
the EV industry in our Nation, and all of our 50 states,
including my State of Illinois.
I fully expect that we will hear just that this morning
from our witnesses or experts--or who are experts, and who have
tremendous expertise. We will hear that the investment in
electric vehicles is spurring growth, creating good, well-
paying jobs all across our Nation, from [inaudible] automobiles
makers to new startups.
This investment in EVs are good for our environment, good
for our economy, and good for our national security. They are,
indeed, a win--win-win situation.
When they are by themselves that are not enough the funding
contained in the bipartisan infrastructure law is only a
downpayment on the investments necessary to usher in an EV
economy that truly works for everyone.
The reconciliation bill that the House passed last year
contained an additional $3 million for EV charging
infrastructure. Importantly, emphasizing that we must build
chargers not only along the highways, but in the low and
disadvantaged communities that will desperately require them.
We have more work to do, my friends, and I hope that we can
come together to make EVs commonplace [inaudible] vehicles.
With that said, I am looking forward to today's discussion
about the promise of an EV future in America.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Rush follows:]

Prepared Statement of Hon. Bobby Rush
[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Rush. I now would like to recognize my dear friend, my
colleague from the great state of Michigan, the ranking member
of the subcommittee Mr. Upton for 5 minutes.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. FRED UPTON, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF MICHIGAN

Mr. Upton. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I am sorry
you are not in person for us to congratulate you on your
legislative win yesterday in the Senate, for getting the anti-
lynching bill passed in the Senate, knowing that we had only
three Members of Congress vote against it in the House, and
that bill is now going to the President. So congratulations on
that long-sought goal to you.
And I want to thank our witnesses for appearing before the
subcommittee to provide their testimony, as well.
Mr. Chairman, I am deeply troubled by the focus of today's
hearing, and by the failure of this committee and the Biden
Administration to address the gravest threat to Europe and the
U.S. since World War II. Our hearts are breaking for the people
of Ukraine. Thousands are dying: women, children, men, and
boys. We see the video every night. Ukrainians are under
constant assault, forced to shelter underground to protect
themselves from Russian missiles raining down on them.
The crisis didn't happen overnight. For years there were
many of us, certainly on the Republican side, that have been
sounding the alarm about Europe's growing reliance on Russian
oil and gas. I know, under my chairmanship of this committee,
we sought to maximize America's energy independence, promoting
a North American independent plan, producing more energy here
at home, and exporting the surplus to our allies overseas.
Today America is the world's leading producer of oil and
gas, not Russia. And we are emerging as the world's leading
exporter of liquid LNG. Republicans and Democrats should
embrace this fact, and use American oil and gas to deter Putin
from continuing Russia's bloody assault on democracies. Putin
felt emboldened to attack because Russia has a stranglehold on
Europe's pipelines and energy supplies, and he saw a real
weakness in President Biden's anti-fossil-fuel agenda.
You know, under President Biden's leadership, we have
watched the U.S. oil production decline by over a million-and-
a-half barrels a day, from the peak production of 13 million
barrels back in 2020. Investments in drilling pipelines and
energy infrastructure projects have also been slow, while
regulatory red tape and permitting delays continue to pile up.
Under Biden, America's reliance on foreign oil has grown. In
fact, last year oil imports from Russia reached an 11-year
high, nearly $20 billion.
It is time we stand up to this aggression, and help our
allies in Europe fight back by flooding the global market with
affordable and reliable American energy. We have got to act
now. Gas prices, over $4 a gallon in my district and across the
State of Michigan, are the highest in 14 years. Since America
produces so much natural gas, the U.S. benchmark natural gas
prices remain low and relatively stable. However, natural gas
and electricity prices in Europe are surpassing all-time highs,
as much as 400 percent, as fears grow that Russia will close
the taps.
Here at home, people are struggling to make ends meet,
obviously. Sadly, many are forced to decide whether they should
put gas in the car or food on the table. In Europe the
situation is even worse, because there is a very real risk that
they could completely run out of energy.
So, Mr. Chairman, with the global energy crisis and the war
in Ukraine right in front of us, why are we holding a hearing
on electric vehicles?
I am always impressed by the innovative spirit of our
American automotive companies. However, given where we are
right now, with only the richest one percent driving electric
vehicles, this committee ought to be focused on more pressing
issues. Even Elon Musk, founder of the world's leading EV
maker, understands that EVs should not be our main focus right
now, and he said over the weekend that the U.S. needs to
increase oil and gas production immediately. He is right on.
Republicans have proposed solutions to address the energy
crisis and take on Russia.
First, we have got to immediately surge U.S. oil and gas
production, and send this unmistakable signal that America, not
Iran, Venezuela, or Saudi Arabia, is going to step in to
replace Russian energy that was taken off the market. I would
welcome all of our audience to look at the Wall Street
Journal's editorial today. Why aren't we talking to U.S.
producers, instead of Venezuela and the Saudis?
Second, we need to isolate Russia by sanctioning Russian
energy supplies and cutting off their access to global markets.
I hear that the President may announce that a little bit later
this morning. That is a good first step.
But third, we have got to modernize our energy
infrastructure of pipelines, storage tanks, export terminals so
we can move products more efficiently and stabilize global
markets. Last week, Leader Rodgers and I sent a letter to
Secretary Granholm and Glick to urge them to immediately
approve long-delayed LNG export reauthorization and natural gas
permits. Yesterday I sent a letter to the President to urge him
to end the importation of Russian oil, and increase production
and exports.
These are important steps. We need to take them right away.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Upton follows:]

Prepared Statement of Hon. Fred Upton
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Upton. And I yield back the balance of my time.
Mr. Rush. The gentleman yields back. The Chair now
recognizes the chairman of the full committee, Mr. Pallone, for
5 minutes for his opening.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. FRANK PALLONE, Jr., A REPRESENTATIVE
IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF NEW JERSEY

Mr. Pallone. Thank you, Chairman Rush. Today the committee
is examining the ongoing transition to electric vehicles that
is good for consumers, our economy, and our environment.
Thanks to passage of the bipartisan infrastructure law last
November, we have the historic opportunity to charge forward on
EVs. This investment comes at a time when Americans are facing
sticker shock at the gas pump, Russian President Putin's
premeditated invasion of Ukraine is driving up gas prices all
over the world, and these prices remind us yet again that we
must kick our oil habit and free ourselves from the price
volatility of fossil fuels.
If we want to reduce Putin's power, as well as the power of
all the oil companies that are currently pocketing record
profits while American families suffer, then we need to double
down on alternatives, not on the same old failed policies of
the past. And that is why I am pleased to hear that President
Biden will soon move to ban Russian oil imports. This action is
necessary, considering that Shell could not resist the
temptation of profiteering off of a cheap Russian oil purchase
last week. This is the right thing to do, and I commend the
President for taking this action.
The transition to EVs is one of the ways we can save
consumers money at the pump, and the bipartisan infrastructure
law makes EVs more convenient and accessible for all Americans.
The law invests $7.5 billion in electric vehicle charging
infrastructure along our Nation's highways and communities, so
that consumers are able to reliably power their cars all over
the country.
It also includes 6 billion for domestic manufacturing and
processing of EV components like batteries and charging
equipment. And this funding will strengthen American
manufacturing, and ensure more of these components are made
right here in America, rather than in China.
The bipartisan infrastructure law makes necessary and
urgent investments in our future, so that we can out compete
any other nation. Thanks to President Biden's leadership,
manufacturing jobs are returning to America. Since the
President took office the economy has created 7.4 million new
jobs, 360,000 of which are in manufacturing. And our hard work
is paying off, but we must keep moving forward.
Fortunately, nearly every week there are announcements of
new EV and battery factories being built throughout the Nation.
Companies like Ford, GM, and Tesla are making investments
across the country. These investments are occurring in
traditional automotive manufacturing states like Michigan, but
also in the emerging manufacturing hubs in the southeast.
Domestic EV sales nearly doubled in the last year, and the oil
industry has clearly seen the writing on the wall. Consumers
want EVs, and the industry is delivering.
Now, unfortunately, my colleagues on the other side of the
aisle are using Putin's tragic and illegal war in Ukraine to
promote the same old oil and gas policies they have been
pushing for years. The lesson from Russia's invasion of Ukraine
is not that we need to drill more. America is already the
largest oil and natural gas producer in the world, and yet that
has not protected us from global oil shocks. No matter how much
we drill, our reliance on fossil fuels makes us weaker, subject
to the whims of dictators and foreign adversaries, and
vulnerable to global supply and demand disruptions.
Now, our EV investments will not lower prices at the pump
for oil consumers today, but neither will Republican efforts to
force open more public lands to drilling, especially when oil
companies are already sitting on some 9,000 unused drilling
permits. We need to work together and find ways to take
reasonable and responsible actions that will lower fuel prices
for consumers today.
But it is also critical in this moment to ensure we are
making smart investments to usher in the post-oil era as
quickly as possible. So I am proud to have voted for the
bipartisan infrastructure law, and I believe we must continue
to invest in EV infrastructure now. EV drivers need to know
that they will have reliable charging options, that they will
enjoy the experience of driving electric vehicles.
We must also make sure that the transition to the EV future
is equitable, and the industry could help do that by employing
people from all communities.
Our witnesses today are part of this historic shift toward
electrification. I look forward to hearing about the work in
the EV transition, and how the investments in the bipartisan
infrastructure law will further support this growing domestic
industry.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Pallone follows:]

Prepared Statement of Hon. Frank Pallone Jr.
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Pallone. And again, thank you for--Mr. Chairman, this
is a very important hearing, and I yield back the balance of my
time.
Mr. Rush. The gentleman yields back. The Chair now
recognizes the ranking member on the full committee, Mrs.
McMorris Rodgers, for 5 minutes for her opening statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, A
REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF WASHINGTON

Mrs. Rodgers. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. With no end in
sight, we have been watching the innocent bloodshed spilled in
Ukraine. Putin's evil attack on freedom-loving people is
becoming more brutal and brazen by the day.
I want to first address President Biden's expected
announcement to ban Russian energy imports. We should not be
buying a single barrel of oil from Russia. But I want to be
very clear: any import ban on Russian oil that fails to flip
the switch on American energy is incomplete. To lower energy
costs here at home, Democrats must stop blocking the American
Energy Independence from Russia Act.
This is a pivotal moment in our Nation's history. For a
prosperous future, we must strengthen our security, not weaken
it. Republicans have been crystal clear, especially since day
one, when President Biden canceled the Keystone XL Pipeline.
President Biden needs to work to restore American energy
dominance, lower prices, and use our abundant energy resources
and technologies to help Ukraine and Europe fight back. Our
allies should not have to depend on energy from regimes that
attack freedom, nor should Americans.
We are facing the greatest military and economic crisis in
Europe since World War II. Putin is using his energy resources
as a weapon against the West. Europe's dependance on Russian
oil and gas is a cautionary tale on how this crisis happened.
Instead of focusing on how American energy can be used to
counter authoritarian countries, Democrats are doubling down on
their war to shut down American energy. These are the same
policies that weakened Europe, raised energy prices to historic
highs, and emboldened Putin to exploit their dependance on
Russian energy.
Meanwhile, the Biden Administration is going hat in hand to
other dictatorships and human rights abusers, begging them for
more oil. It is shocking.
Today we should be focused on American energy security, and
how we can aid our allies by producing more oil and natural gas
and exporting LNG. Instead, the topic today is on forcing
electric vehicles, which will increase our dependance on
another authoritarian regime, China.
In many ways, EVs promise to be a leading edge. But to the
extent they take hold in the market--new innovations in vehicle
technologies, including autonomous vehicles. However, the
proposed command-and-control approach to EVs is central to a
radical agenda to dismantle America's tremendous energy
systems.
Energy is foundational for our prosperity and the security
of the world. We cannot avert our eyes from the risk of handing
our energy dominance to dictators. We shouldn't be giving Putin
what he wants. When European countries dismantled their energy
systems and curtailed fracking, it played right into Putin's
hands.
When I visited Ukraine in 2015, NATO officials warned us
and the members of this committee that Putin was funding the
anti-fracking campaigns of environmental NGO's. We are now
seeing the results of Putin's successful campaign to kill
European energy. This should be a wake up call for every
politician and policymaker.
And there are similar reports about Russian influence among
NGO's in America, and Energy and Commerce Republicans will open
an investigation this week to expose any attempt by Russia to
use NGO's to weaken American energy.
It is a mistake to double down on dangerous policies that
will increase energy costs, weaken our security, and make us
even more beholden to authoritarian regimes. Today it is Russia
invading Ukraine and killing innocent people; tomorrow, we
could be facing a similar invasion of Taiwan by China, who
holds way more economic sway than the rest of the world.
But it is not too late for us to reverse course. We must
come together and say no to Putin and Communist China, and say
yes to American energy. We can say yes to flipping the switch
on domestic production of oil and cleaner American natural gas,
rather than the continued bloodshed. We can say yes to advanced
nuclear by removing burdensome and costly regulations, and we
can say yes to innovation for abundant, affordable, clean
energy for us and the rest of the world.
It is not too late, but we must learn from Europe's
mistakes. This is an urgent time to wake up to the plain, clear
lessons of Putin's invasion in Ukraine. Let's embrace a path to
a cleaner future by building on the success of our energy
systems and energy supplies, not dismantling them.
[The prepared statement of Mrs. Rodgers follows:]

Prepared Statement of Hon. Cathy McMorris Rodgers
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mrs. Rodgers. And with that, I yield back.
Mr. Rush. The gentlelady yields back. The Chair
[inaudible]----
Mrs. Rodgers. Thank you.
Mr. Rush [continuing]. Written opening statements shall be
made a part of the record.
With that said, I would like to welcome our witnesses for
today's hearing. They are Mr. Bob Holycross, who is the vice
president, sustainability, environment, and safety engineering
at the Ford Motor Company; Ms. Natalie King, who is the CEO of
Dunamis Clean Energy Partners; Ms. Cassandra Powers, senior
managing director at the National Association of State Energy
Officials; and last, but not least, Mr. Thomas Pyle, who is the
president of the Institute for Energy Research.
Again, I want to thank all of our witnesses for joining us
here today. We certainly anticipate and look forward to your
testimony. Now, at this time, I want to recognize each witness
for 5 minutes to provide their opening statement.
But before we begin, I want to explain the lighting system
for witnesses that are testifying in person. In front of our
witnesses is a series of lights. The lights will initially be
green. The light will turn yellow when you have 1-minute
remaining. Please begin to wrap up your testimony when you see
the yellow light. The light will turn red when your time fully
expires.
And with that said, Mr. Holycross, you are now recognized
for 5 minutes for the purposes of an opening statement.

STATEMENT OF BOB HOLYCROSS, VICE PRESIDENT, SUSTAINABILITY,
ENVIRONMENT AND SAFETY ENGINEERING, FORD MOTOR COMPANY; NATALIE
KING, CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER, DUNAMIS CLEAN ENERGY PARTNERS,
LLC; CASSANDRA POWERS, SENIOR MANAGING DIRECTOR, NATIONAL
ASSOCIATION OF STATE ENERGY OFFICIALS; AND THOMAS PYLE,
PRESIDENT, INSTITUTE FOR ENERGY RESEARCH

STATEMENT OF BOB HOLYCROSS

Mr. Holycross. Well, thank you, Chairman Rush, our Michigan
delegation partners, Ranking Member Upton and Energy and
Commerce Committee member Congresswoman Dingell, Committee
Chairman Pallone, and Ranking Member McMorris Rodgers, and the
members of the subcommittee. It is a privilege to join you
today as the subcommittee considers how EVs can play a role in
strengthening American innovation and global competitiveness,
while helping the world avoid the worst impacts of climate
change.
The United States is at an inflection point. We can see the
environmental need and customer demand for innovative, high-
performance electric vehicles, but if we are to be world
leaders in this space, we must pivot quickly.
To be clear, if U.S. policies are not efficient and
effective in this transition, we risk being outpaced by global
competitors like China and Europe. Ford is doing its part to
transition its workforce, manufacturing operations, and supply
chains to fulfill our mission to lead the EV revolution. I
welcome this chance to share our vision and efforts with you.
We are built for America. Ford employs more U.S. auto
workers and assembles more vehicles in the U.S. than any other
automaker. We are committed to leading the electric vehicle
revolution, transforming our business, and going all in on
electrification because it is good for our customers, it is
good for business, and it is good for the planet.
Massive customer demand for our all-electric F-150
Lightning, Mustang Mach-E, and E Transit validates that this is
the right direction to move. Just as we did nearly 120 years
ago, when Ford put the world on wheels, we don't plan to just
be a part of this historic transformation, we intend to define
it.
Mr. Rush. I see.
Mr. Holycross. Ford is investing $50 billion in
electrification by 2026. We are electrifying our most iconic
vehicles, like the F-150 Lightning, the first all-electric
version of America's best-selling vehicle for 45 years. In
January, in response to soaring customer demand and excitement,
we announced plans to double production of that truck at the
Rouge Electric Vehicle Center in Dearborn, Michigan.
We also recently announced that Ford is making the largest
single investment in our nearly 120-year history, $11.4
billion, to build two new massive environmentally and
technologically advanced campuses in Tennessee and Kentucky.
We are creating 11,000 direct new jobs to produce the next
generation of electric trucks and batteries to power our future
EVs.
By 2026 Ford will have the global capacity to produce 2
million fully electric vehicles annually. To support and
increase this capacity we need to strengthen our domestic
supply chains for core elements like batteries and
semiconductors.
In addition to investing in battery manufacturing in
Tennessee and Kentucky, we are also joining forces with Nevada-
based Redwood Materials to develop a closed-loop supply chain
network by recycling key battery materials from end-of-life
vehicles, and returning them back into U.S. battery production.
Improving these domestic supply chains will strengthen
United States' global leadership in this space. It will promote
energy independence, and protect and create American jobs. A
recent study found producing electric vehicles using U.S.-
sourced EV components could support 13 to 14 jobs for each
direct job.
We are working hard to get more electric vehicles into the
hands of customers who want them, and to accelerate our
progress to be carbon neutral no later than 2050. But if the
United States wants to lead and make this transition on the
timeline that climate science and global competition require,
we need to build out infrastructure to support it. The recently
passed bipartisan infrastructure law was a great first step.
We know that, for customers to make the transition to EVs,
they need to have confidence in their ability to charge their
vehicles, whether they live in urban, rural, or suburban areas.
Access to electric vehicles can create opportunity and economic
mobility. Our sustainable financing framework focuses on ways
to strengthen disadvantaged and under-served communities, so no
one is left behind.
Ford is delivering the largest public charging network in
North America, with access to more than 70,000 charge plugs,
and offering exciting technology within our vehicles that
instills confidence and enriches the customer experience.
Our approach to electrification is about creating a
transportation future that is safer, more sustainable, and more
inclusive. Ford didn't invent the automobile, but we
revolutionized the freedom of movement, and it helped
generations of Americans pursue their dreams. The electric
revolution is no different. This is our commitment to future
generations, and we are already matching our ambition with
action. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Holycross follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Rush. Thank you very much. The Chair now recognizes Ms.
King for 5 minutes for the purposes of an opening statement.

STATEMENT OF NATALIE KING

Ms. King. Good morning. Good morning, Chairman Bobby Rush,
Ranking Member Frank Upton, who hails from my home State of
Michigan, and members of the subcommittee. I am Natalie King,
the founder and CEO of Dunamis Clean Energy Partners and its
wholly owned subsidiary, Dunamis Charge.
Thank you for the opportunity to speak before you today
regarding our experience and role in the transformative clean
energy economy that is currently being created through the
electrification of the automotive industry, as well as the
resulting nationwide EV infrastructure that is needed to bring
equitable, energy-efficient, carbon-reducing mobility solutions
to all Americans.
Dunamis was founded in 2012. We are a woman and minority-
owned company based in Detroit, Michigan, and we are dedicated
to changing how people access energy. Our company provides
energy management and energy efficiency products and services
for commercial and industrial customers throughout the United
States. And we have an intentional commitment toward
environmental and social justice.
Our new Clean Energy Initiative, Dunamis Charge, is proudly
the first African American, woman-owned electric vehicle
charging manufacturer in this country. We specialize in
providing intelligent, reliable, and user-friendly electric
vehicle charging equipment that will optimize and stabilize
energy flow to fill the needs of individual, commercial, and
utility customers that charge at home, in their workplace, or
public space.
Dunamis Charge is preparing to manufacture level-two
charging stations and charging connectors in our new production
facility in Detroit beginning this summer. We will also begin
production of our DC fast chargers by early 2023.
As a small business owner, the launch of the electric
vehicle charging manufacturing plant is a monumental, yet
immensely rewarding step of faith that has been undergirded by
the substantive support and investment of the Biden
Administration's bipartisan infrastructure law.
The bipartisan infrastructure law provides for $7.5 billion
to buildup the first-ever nationwide public EV charging
network. This funding is--also includes $2.5 billion in
community grants that will support creative charger deployment
in rural and disadvantaged, low-income communities to ensure
that all Americans have the ability to access this carbon-
reducing technology.
A key component of the Act will further spur economic
growth and development by ensuring that future electric vehicle
service equipment manufactured by companies like mine will be
procured through Federal dollars that are made in America by
American workers. These groundbreaking EV infrastructure
initiatives will have an immense impact on small, U.S.-based
businesses like Dunamis to grow its manufacturing presence in
the EV charging station market.
It will also allow us to play our part in strengthening the
American economy, and delivering on President Biden's promise
to diversify emerging industries and deploy clean energy
technologies and infrastructure. We are proud that our chargers
meet Buy America, Build America requirements for steel, iron,
manufactured products, and construction materials.
In addition, our products will be made in America by
American workers. Dunamis is training our pre-apprenticeship
and apprenticeship and workforce development efforts. We will
focus on under-represented, economically disadvantaged Detroit
communities. We anticipate creating up to 150 good-paying,
green-collar jobs by 2025. These jobs will enable our workforce
to develop technical expertise in this new, burgeoning
industry, while creating sustainable livelihoods for themselves
and their families.
As part of this commitment to bring best-in-class electric
vehicle manufacturing equipment to Detroit, we are aiming to
have the greatest impact where greenhouse gas emissions and
poverty overlap. We envision building a world where going
electric is easy, and power is available wherever you go and
whenever you need it, for everyone. We believe the transition
to electric mobility should benefit every community, and
provide reliable options for all electric vehicle owners and
operators.
It is our commitment to have American workers make a
superior, American-made EV charging product, which will also
lessen our dependency on outside countries like China. We will
meet this commitment by incorporating engagement and job
creation for those communities that are the most under-served,
under-represented, and disproportionately impacted by pollution
in their communities.
Thank you so much for your time.
[The prepared statement of Ms. King follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Rush. Well, thank you.
And Ms. Powers, you are recognized for 5 minutes for
purposes of an opening statement

STATEMENT OF CASSANDRA POWERS

Ms. Powers. Good morning, Chairman Rush, Ranking Member
Upton, and members of the committee. I am Cassie Powers, senior
managing director at the National Association of State Energy
Officials, or NASEO. I am testifying on behalf of NASEO and our
56 designated State and territory energy office members.
First I would like to thank you, Chairman Rush, as well as
Ranking Member Upton, for your leadership in reauthorizing the
U.S. State Energy Program, as well as the transportation and
energy security enhancements included in the reauthorization.
NASEO has supported State energy offices across the country
for over a decade, as they design and implement electric
vehicle policy priorities of their Governors and administer EV
infrastructure programs.
Initiatives from the State energy offices stress public-
private sector partnerships, and are accomplished using State
and private sector funds, as well as critical formula funding
the states received from Congress through the U.S. State Energy
Program. The bipartisan support for both SEP, as well as the
Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act, is transforming our
Nation's energy and transportation infrastructure to enhance
economic competitiveness and create high-paying jobs.
In addition, the newly established Joint Office of Energy
and Transportation is demonstrating a serious commitment to
working with the states and the private sector as partners to
achieve the EV infrastructure goals set forth by Congress. In
fact, NASEO signed a memorandum of understanding just last
month with the Joint Office, as well as with the American
Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials, to
ensure the strategic, coordinated, efficient, and equitable
investment in EV charging infrastructure. And we are excited
for the partnership.
Today I would like to highlight the strong history of
bipartisan support at the State level for EV infrastructure
investment and, in particular, the multi-State collaborations
that are ensuring a coordinated and holistic approach to EV
infrastructure buildout.
Through the REV Midwest MOU, Illinois, Indiana, Michigan,
Minnesota, and Wisconsin are working together to support fleet
electrification and strategic electrification along key
commercial corridors, and they are working to safeguard
economic security, reduce emissions, improve public health, and
advance innovation.
There are lots of great examples. In Michigan the State is
partnering with utilities and the private sector to invest in
EV chargers, using a one-third model at strategic locations,
with a focus on activities that will enhance economic
development opportunities.
In Illinois, the Reimagining Electric Vehicle in Illinois
Act was signed into law, and that is designed to bolster
Illinois manufacturing and create new capacity for EV and
component parts in the State.
If we shift to the West, Governors from Arizona, Colorado,
Idaho, Montana, Nevada, New Mexico, Utah, and Wyoming in 2017
signed the REV West Memorandum of Understanding to support EV
infrastructure buildout in rural and remote areas, and, in
particular, with a focus on supporting transportation
electrification in a way that can support EV tourism in the
states.
This collaboration, in partnership with utilities and the
private sector, in particular, has been particularly important
as the Western states face the significant challenge of long
stretches of highway with limited electric service or amenities
to support EV charging, and that often requires for states and
the private sector to find creative solutions to complete EV
charging corridors in the region.
Lots of great examples from this region, as well. In
Montana the states used Volkswagen settlement funds and
strategic public-private partnerships, such as with Town Pump,
to buildup EV chargers across the State and promote EV tourism.
Colorado has built out 34 DC fast-charging stations across the
State, in partnership with ChargePoint, as well as with sites
at local governments, utilities, and private companies. And
there are lots of other great examples.
If we move to the Southeast you will see that Alabama,
Arkansas, Florida, Georgia, Kentucky, Mississippi, North
Carolina, South Carolina, and Tennessee, as well as Puerto Rico
and the Virgin Islands, are collaborating through the Southeast
Regional Electric Vehicle Information Exchange to support EV
infrastructure planning, policy, development, and program
implementation, with a focus on rural and under-served areas.
Tennessee is developing an EV fast-charging network, which
is going to add roughly 50 DC fast-charging locations
throughout the State.
And in Florida the State is prioritizing DC fast-charger
investments along key corridors, and also along evacuation
routes and other under-served areas.
There is lots of other great examples. In New Jersey, the
It Pays to Plug In program provides grants to offset the cost
of purchasing and installing an EV charger.
New York has launched Charge New York, an initiative to get
more electric cars and trucks on the road.
And in Washington, the State Energy Office/State Department
of Transportation partnership is ensuring a holistic approach
to EV planning and, in particular, are focusing on EV
infrastructure buildout in under-served areas and engaging
disadvantaged groups.
The regional nature of many EV infrastructure
collaborations and the strong history of cross-agency
collaboration at the State level has prepared states for the
historic $7.5 billion in infrastructure investment through the
Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act.
As noted earlier, NASEO was thrilled to see the
collaboration between the U.S. Department of Transportation and
Department of Energy through the new Joint Office. We also
encourage EPA, USDA, the Department of the Interior, and other
Federal agencies to build on the work of the Joint Office, and
approach EV infrastructure in a holistic manner.
The states recognize the urgent need for EV infrastructure
development in urban, suburban, and rural settings, and also
the need to ensure that disadvantaged communities across the
country benefit from this historic investment.
There is also a need to coordinate EV infrastructure
buildout with enhanced transmission, distribution, and
generation planning, and siting at strategic locations in the
states.
Thank you for the opportunity.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Powers follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Rush. The Chair thanks our witness. And our next
witness is Mr. Pyle.
Mr. Pyle, you are now recognized for 5 minutes for the
purposes of an opening statement.

STATEMENT OF THOMAS PYLE

Mr. Pyle. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member Upton,
and all the members for holding this hearing on the important
questions of American factoring and electric vehicles.
I am a strong supporter of energy freedom. I support the
right of the American people to choose the types of vehicles
and fuels that work for them, including electric vehicles.
Consequently, I am opposed, as are most Americans, to the idea
that government should mandate energy technologies or fuels.
In its recent rule on tailpipe emissions, EPA instituted a
de facto electric vehicle mandate. They estimate, to meet that
standard, about 17 percent of vehicles sold by model year 2026
will have to be electric. They also concluded that the rule at
an average of $1,000 of the cost of each car. That is an
average. Purchasers of crossovers, SUVs, and trucks will almost
certainly pay more, as they will need to subsidize purchases of
smaller, less popular cars.
With respect to charging for electric vehicles, it seems
unfair to ask taxpayers to pay for them when investors have
already provided EV makers with hundreds of billions in
capital.
But beyond questions about consumer choice and cost, it is
clear that EVs will increase our dependance on the communist
regime in China. China dominates the global advanced battery
supply chain. Even materials and components manufactured
domestically are often sourced from or transit China. It is not
just the mining and mineral production. China also dominates
critical mineral processing.
The United States could, of course, mine and process many
of those materials. But the current Administration is unlikely
to rush to approve new mines, certainly not anywhere near the
number needed to reduce our dependance on Communist China. I
don't believe that Americans are in favor of trading our energy
independent for dependance on the genocidal regime identified
as such by both the current and previous Administrations.
I would like to close with three thoughts.
First, the high prices in Europe are a result of an over-
reliance on wind power, which under-performed this summer and
winter, along with decades of under-investment in oil and
natural gas. Consequently, Russian natural gas has become more
critical to European energy security. It is no surprise that
European governments--and, until today, the American
Government--has yet to impose strong sanctions against Russian-
sourced energy and Russian energy companies. All of this, like
the current push for EVs, was driven by government policy, not
market forces.
It turns out that the existential threat related to energy
is being overly dependent on another nation for a commodity
that is essential for electricity, heating, and even food
production.
Second, in the wake of the 2020 election, President Biden
made it clear that he intended to be an enthusiastic advocate
against domestic natural gas and oil production. The
cancelation of the Keystone Pipeline, the de facto lease
suspension, the weaponization of financial regulators, proposed
tax increases on natural gas, market-distorting tax credits for
unreliables, the recent policy statements, and many more are
part of an effort to purposefully create an environment in
which it is difficult to invest in domestic natural gas and
oil.
Third, the reputation--the repetition of rhetoric about the
utility of alternative sources of energy, the possibility of
net zero greenhouse gas emissions, and the inevitability of the
energy transition have led directly to higher energy prices for
Americans. Those involved in finding and producing the fuels
that currently power the world are rightly concerned that our
government might be serious about creating an electricity
system entirely dependent on wind and solar power, or outlawing
gas and diesel-powered cars and trucks. How can anyone blame
them, when that is what they hear from their leadership, both
in Congress and in the White House?
Consequently, these businesses have under-invested in
natural gas and oil over the last several years. In 2014 the
world spent about 490 billion finding and producing oil and
natural gas. In 2021 that number was less than half of that.
Despite high prices, growing demand, and shrinking supplies,
energy companies are disinclined to rush to produce more oil.
Why? Because they are listening, and they are concluding that
such investments and such actions, which, in most cases require
years to pay off, are simply too risky in the current political
and social environment.
Therefore, it should come as no surprise to anyone that the
cost of gasoline, natural gas, and food are all soaring.
Support for electric vehicles isn't going to make this problem
go away. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Pyle follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Rush. The gentleman yields back. And with that we have
concluded the openings. We will now move to member questions,
and each Member will have 5 minutes to ask questions of their--
of our witnesses, and I will begin by recognizing myself for 5
minutes.
I would like to, first of all, thank all of our witnesses
for appearing before the subcommittee today to offer testimony
and to answer questions.
Mr. Holycross and Ms. King, I would like you to tell a
little bit about the investment--electric vehicle charging
infrastructure that was included in the bipartisan law, and how
that has helped both of your companies to increase grow.
Can both of you briefly discuss how the investments made by
the bipartisan infrastructure law have paved the way for your
own companies' investment in EV industry, and how that will
enable you to create additional high-paying America jobs?
Mr. Holycross. Yes, thank you for the question. The
recently passed infrastructure law is a great first step in
beginning to increase the number of available charge stations
in the overall EV charging infrastructure. But that hasn't
stopped us at Ford from moving quickly.
So our customers today have access to the largest public
charging network available. We have over--access to over 70,000
charge stations. We are providing, also, unique solutions for
our customers for at-home charging, in terms of mobile
charging, as well.
But we do have to do more, whether it is for rural
communities and others that depend upon a wide array of
vehicles. We are electrifying not just retail vehicles, but
commercial vehicles for small businesses, electricians,
plumbers, and others. And we are going to continue to partner
with them to provide the unique charging solutions that they
require. But if we are going to further increase the confidence
that these consumers need to have to--driving electric
vehicles, we are going to need to do more, in terms of public
charging availability. So the infrastructure law is a good
first step. It recognizes some of the unique needs for
commercial customers, as well.
But the other key thing for us, with our investments that
we have made for increased capacity, is going to continue to
send a strong signal that the vehicles are coming, and the
infrastructure can be there to support it. The chicken-and-egg
debate is more or less settled now. We are committed to have
the vehicles in large volume, and now we need the
infrastructure----
Mr. Rush. Thank you very much.
Ms. King, would you respond briefly, because I have an
additional question for you?
Ms. King. Yes, sir. With respect to how the infrastructure
law has assisted us with respect to our operations and--we
believe that implementation is absolutely key.
So, as the automotive industry has moved forward in its
commitment to electric vehicles, I believe that there is a
comprehensive knowledge that we need to move toward carbon
neutrality. And so our goal is to really have a holistic
approach. Again, so if we can reach our goals of ensuring in
our mission to promote a carbon-neutral environment, while also
creating economic development within our communities, I believe
that this is something that all of America can get behind.
And so we want to ensure, as Dunamis, that we use this
technology. Electric vehicles are coming. This technology is
here. I believe that it will promote carbon neutrality. It is a
first step in ensuring that we incorporate measures that will
not only create a more carbon-neutral environment, but will
also give us an opportunity to create economic development,
lessen the dependance that we currently have on countries like
China to be able to provide this infrastructure.
Mr. Rush. Thank you so very much. I have one additional
question, Ms. King, and you may know that one of my most
important duties in the Energy Subcommittee is to increase the
participation of black and--in the energy industry.
Ms. King. Yes, sir.
Mr. Rush. And one of the many ways I have tried to do this
is through my bipartisan blue collar and green collar which
will provide the workforce development support putting into the
sector.
Ms. King, can you talk about the development of Dunamis is
implementing in the city of Detroit?
And what resulting impacts you have seen the diversity of
Dunamis workforce?
Ms. King. Absolutely, Chairman.
We have a very specific goal of ensuring that, as this new
economy, which will be a trillion-dollar economy as it
develops, includes and incorporates disadvantaged communities,
those communities that are the most disproportionately impacted
by carbon emissions, greenhouse gas emissions in their
communities. And usually, those communities are communities of
color. And so we want to ensure that, as this industry grows,
those communities are not left behind.
If you have a community that may be a low-income community
that may not be able to participate in electric--the purchase
of an electric vehicle, why not give that community an
opportunity, the ability to create an electric vehicle charging
station, thereby having the ability to feed their families,
create a substantive, sustainable livelihood for themselves and
their community, thereby creating economic growth within the
communities at large?
That is why, Chairman, it is so important for us to
incorporate this holistic approach, as we see this industry as
a new opportunity for wealth creation that all Americans should
be able to participate in, while meeting the goal of carbon
neutrality to take care of our environment. It is very
important that we, as we meet the needs of job creation within
our sectors, our country, our State, that we also take care of
our country, and make sure that greenhouse gas emissions are
targeted through that.
Mr. Rush. Thank you, Ms. King.
Ms. King. Absolutely.
Mr. Rush. The Chair now will recognize Mr. Upton, the
subcommittee ranking member, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Upton. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Pyle, I appreciate your testimony. It is clear, I
think, to many of us that the world cannot rely on Russia and
OPEC for oil.
We are also concerned about batteries and solar panels
controlled by China, which would improve our reliable energy
situation, either (sic). Many of us, I think, on our--certainly
on our side, believe that the U.S. is the world's leading
producer of oil and gas, and we have enough capacity to produce
oil to make up for taking Russia out, and driving them out of
the market.
In 2020 the U.S. reached peak oil production. That summer
we produced some million-and-a-half barrels a day more than
what we are producing now. What is it going to get--take to get
us back to where we were before?
Mr. Pyle. Thank you for the question. It is going to take a
lot.
But I think the first thing that can be done--and could
have been done--is that this Administration can work as
fiercely as they are working now to secure oil sources from
other countries like Iran and Venezuela as they do here (sic).
Lift these impediments to production on Federal lands. Get rid
of the de facto moratorium on leasing. The Keystone Pipeline, I
know we keep hearing that, well, even if we built it today
wouldn't come online, but if we had built it in 2008, it would
be bringing 800,000 barrels a day of Canadian crude to our
refineries in the Gulf.
So--and it seems to me that the Administration would prefer
to lower the price of gas by securing oil sources from other
countries, while still continuing to pressure the oil and gas
industry here at home not to produce here at home. And I think
that is an immediate shift that needs to take place.
Mr. Upton. So, as I mentioned in my testimony, or in my
opening statement, what is holding back on U.S. LNG exports?
I mean, this is an issue that many of us--we actually
traveled to Ukraine a few years ago. I took--led a bipartisan
trip. My boss Mrs. Rodgers, went along with us. Mr. Palmer went
with us. We met with a number of our NATO allies. Less an issue
today. Where are we on that?
Mr. Pyle. Well, fortunately, we are producing a lot, and we
were encouraged to bring shipments of LNG to Europe during this
crunch that we have had. But I know there are permits sitting
over at DoE that need to be expedited. Let's get those done.
Let's build pipelines, so we can get this stuff moving around.
I also suggest that we lift the Jones Act so that we can
move LNG domestically, as well, so we are not importing oil or
LNG from Russia or other places, and bringing it into the
Boston Harbor, for example. So that is the immediate thing that
we need to do.
But this overall demonization of this industry, along with
the pressures from institutional investors, ESG and other
things, has created a climate where I wouldn't--it doesn't make
sense for them to make these long-term investments, in some
cases, if they think they are not going to get a return on
those.
Mr. Upton. Thank you.
Mr. Holycross, I think you referenced you were hoping that
Ford would be some 40 to 50 percent in global sales of EVs by
2030, is that correct? Where Ford expects to be?
Mr. Holycross. That is correct, about 50 percent global
sales by----
Mr. Upton. And if you break that down between U.S. sales
and out-of-U.S., China, what would the U.S. sales number be
that you would expect by 2030, just a few years down the road?
Mr. Holycross. Yes, the majority of those vehicles will,
obviously, be in the U.S., given our share of the market. So as
we start to approach 2030, and get to the 40 percent of lead
sales in the U.S., approaching 50 percent, a lot of that is in
the U.S.
But we have made similar commitments and plans for capacity
in Europe and China, as well.
Mr. Upton. So I just--you know, I look at your--and I am a
Ford--I drive a Ford. I look at--you got the 150, which is the
most popular vehicle built in--ever. You have got the Mach-E.
What other passenger vehicles do you have that is going to fit
the market that consumers, the individual consumers, are going
to be looking at, what--to achieve that 40 to 50 percent in the
next 6 to 7 years?
Mr. Holycross. Yes, and that is exactly the heart of our
strategy, is to go right after those iconic nameplates that you
mentioned, like Mustang, like F-150, like our e-transit
commercial franchise, which----
[Audio malfunction.]
Mr. Holycross [continuing]. The highest share of the
commercial market, globally. For those customers, even in the
U.S.--nearly 50 percent of that market.
So these are the vehicles that customers depend on Ford
today to provide all the function, performance, utility. And
now we are going to show, through electrification, that they
can have all of that and more. So by hitting the heart of the
market of our--of the vehicles that are most popular with those
customers today, that is the first of how we are going to get
to 40 to 50 percent by 2030 across our fleet vehicles. It is
just the first step.
Mr. Upton. OK, we will wait and see.
My time has expired, so with that I yield back. Thank you,
Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Rush. The gentleman yields back. The Chair now
recognizes Mr. Pallone, the chairman of the full committee, for
5 minutes of questions.
Mr. Pallone. Thank you, Chairman Rush. I wanted to ask Ms.
King, initially.
Your chargers are made in America and meet Buy America
standards. And Buy America policies are important to support
the growth of domestic EV and charger industries and reduce our
reliance on international supply chains. But they are also
important to ensure that our equipment meets certain security,
hardware, and software standards.
So can you please talk about the importance of Buy America
policies, and how does domestic manufacturing play a role in
addressing security concerns, if you will?
Ms. King. Thank you for the question, Mr. Pallone.
The importance of having American-made products is--as it
relates to security, is that it decreases our dependency on
outside countries like China, on outside countries like Russia,
with respect to our dependency in oil, because we then have the
ability to secure our technologies, particularly with our
network software.
And so we then, if we have the control over how we create,
how we engineer, and how we design, and how we maintain our
network software through our EV infrastructure presence, then
we now have the ability to control cyber attacks, hacking from
outside influences like a dominating China in the industry.
So the infrastructure bill--or, excuse me, the
infrastructure law then undergirds companies like Dunamis,
other electric vehicle charging manufacturers that are bringing
the technology for the hardware and the software into the
United States, so that we can really promulgate, we can meet
again the implementation that is going to be needed for this
widespread rollout of electric vehicles throughout the United
States. I think that the infrastructure law is giving us the
support, as manufacturers, that we need in order to ensure that
we have sustainability and stability with respect to our
network software, firmware, and hardware by creating it in
America.
Mr. Pallone. Thank you. Let me ask Mr. Holycross.
It is good to have you today, even in the virtual forum.
But last year we had the company Redwood Materials testify
before the subcommittee for a supply chain hearing that focused
on developing secure domestic sources. And we understand your
company is now partnering with them.
So my question is, could you please expand on Ford's
partnership with Redwood Materials, and talk about the role and
opportunity for battery recycling?
And how does this help to secure our domestic supply
chains?
How can we best use the funding in the bipartisan
infrastructure law to support domestic battery manufacturing
and recycling, if you will?
Mr. Holycross. It is a really exciting opportunity for us,
and we are extremely proud to be partnering with Redwood on
this. It really gets at a couple of different aspects of
battery materials in the overall supply chain.
So, as we are manufacturing batteries and the scrap that
can come through the natural manufacturing process, it is going
to allow us to reuse that, right there in the same facility, to
reduce the dependance on more virgin material, original
material.
The really exciting part, too, is at the end of the life of
vehicle----
You can get these materials by recycling batteries, as you
indicated. Bring those batteries back from service, get the
materials out of them, and put them back into the production
process. So it really is a true close loop process.
And to your point, that inevitably continues to reduce over
time, as we get more and more vehicles into the field, our
dependance on getting, you know, new or original materials. And
when you couple that with all the research and advancements we
have made in diversifying the types of battery chemistries, all
these actions together will continue to diversify and reduce
our dependance on one particular metal, one particular source,
whether it is regionally or within a given industry.
And getting them back from the vehicles is a big piece, so
our partnership with Redwood is really exciting, and we have
got a pilot program that is starting now, where we are actually
pulling electric vehicles from the road today, and starting
already to get those materials.
Mr. Pallone. Let me just quickly, because I know we are out
of time, but I just wanted to ask Ms. Powers quickly.
How are states planning for an EV future that is also
climate resilient and supports grid hardening, if you will?
Thirty seconds.
Ms. Powers. Thank you for the question.
The states are working hard to make sure that grid
modernization and grid hardening activities are paired equally
with electric vehicle infrastructure investment. We are seeing
examples in the West and the Southeast, in particular, at
states looking at how they can make sure that EV infrastructure
is placed at places like evacuation routes, so that people can
get out when they need, but then are also looking for
opportunities to make sure that the electric system is
bolstered.
One of the challenges we see, particularly in rural and
remote areas, is that there are often long stretches of highway
without any electric service. And so there is a challenge where
we need to be able to place an EV infrastructure at relatively
short intervals to make sure that people can stop when they
need to, and to recharge.
But also, how do you get the power there? So states are
looking at creative ideas, grid edge activities, pairing
distributed generation and solar, but are really working hand
in hand with their utilities, both the IOUs and the co-ops, to
figure out what is it that they need to make sure that the
electric system can adequately service EV drivers.
Mr. Pallone. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Rush. The gentleman yields back. The Chairman now
recognizes Mrs. Rodgers for 5 minutes.
Mrs. McMorris Rodgers, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mrs. Rodgers. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. We cannot do
anything without energy.
Mr. Pyle, you touched on it in your testimony, but I wanted
to expand about the role of affordable, reliable energy for
economics. Supply security, of course, is a part of that.
On Sunday the Financial Times of the UK reported that
Europe faces building material shortages as energy prices soar.
Natural gas prices are nine times higher than a year ago, and
now fertilizer prices are also soaring.
So much is connected to energy supplies here, and an
anticipated long disruption will make matters even worse. Would
you speak some more about energy security, its role in our
Nation's energy policy, and then what we need to learn?
Do you think Europe has learned its lesson around rushing
to green, while shutting down other energy supply before they
had the capacity to ensure energy security?
Mr. Pyle. Sure. I mean, energy security is everything,
right? Because energy is an input cost to every single thing:
food; transportation; obviously, utility bills.
People are struggling right now. The price of gas is as
high as most people can remember, and that has a really
difficult impact on their budgets. But more importantly, if you
look at what has happened in Europe, this rush in Europe to
green the grid, to convert to renewables, those energy--in
Europe and Germany, for example--this invasion is a huge wake-
up call.
It took, unfortunately, this for Europe to recognize that
they were moving way too fast. They weren't investing in
diversification of their supplies of resources. They became
dependent, to the tune of 40 percent, on Russia for their
natural gas, and that is why they are not going to lift--they
are not going to impose sanctions on that energy. They
reiterated that again today. So that revenue is fueling this
very same conflict that is happening in Europe right now.
Now, fortunately, the EU has recognized that they have to
make changes. They have already announced yesterday that they
plan to move their pipelines around, and to build pipelines so
that they are less dependent on Russia, that they will be
investing in more LNG. Germany said that they are going to
invest in LNG. They may pause the decommissioning of their
nuclear plants. France has indicated that they intend to build
more nuclear. But man, why would it take something like what is
happening right now for them to come to that realization?
And I am worried that we are not that far behind Europe, in
terms of the stuff that we are doing here. You know, 80 percent
of the total energy consumed 40 years ago came from three
sources. Today that number is still roughly 80 percent. And the
EIA predicts that that number will be roughly the same in
another 40 years. We cannot have an energy future without
secure supplies of oil and natural gas. That is just a reality.
Mrs. Rodgers. So now we hear from the Administration about
building back supply chains, that we are going to make it in
America. Would you speak to that?
Would you speak to the--so in order to make it in America,
we are going to have to address permitting. We are going to
have to address access to raw materials. Are we addressing the
red tape, the permitting, the access to raw materials in order
to make it in America?
Mr. Pyle. I alluded to this in my testimony, and I will
reiterate it. We have created a Byzantine structure of
regulations and rules and requirements that makes it nearly
impossible to build anything in this country in a timely and
efficient manner, especially when it comes to energy. And even
after the situation in Ukraine, FERC is issuing policy
statements that would make it practically impossible to build a
new gas pipeline.
This is--this has to be stopped and reversed if we are
going to do any of the buildout that we would like to see
happen. If we really don't want our minerals, our EVs, to be
dependent on China, then we have to permit mines, we have to be
aggressive about bringing new supply chains and diversifying
them outside of China. China controls 80 percent of the
minerals and the distribution supply of these resources.
And it is not just me saying it, the Department of Defense
issued a full report about this. And the International Energy
Agency also said that, ``The current production of many energy
transition minerals is more geographically concentrated than
that of oil and gas.''
So the dependency on minerals from China would be greater
than that of any kind of dependency we have on oil and gas from
others.
Mrs. Rodgers. Thank you. Thank you. I just urge this
committee once again to recognize the wake-up call that we are
experiencing right now, and make sure that we are focused on
what reality is and the facts are. Thank you.
I yield back.
Mr. Rush. The gentlelady yields back. The Chair now
recognizes Mr. Peters for 5 minutes.
Mr. Peters. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I first want to say we should act quickly to prohibit the
imports of crude oil, petroleum products, and other energy
products from Russia. We have to continue working with our
allies to counter Putin's aggression in Ukraine, and I
encourage my colleagues to support this move. Recognizing that
banning Russian oil imports could further increases prices at
the pump, we can't continue to finance the Russian Government
through energy purchases.
And that calls on us to think about what energy and--energy
independence and energy security means. It is very clear to me
that the U.S. cannot drill its way out of this crisis. The U.S.
became the largest oil producer in the world. And instead of
price and geopolitical stability, we are experiencing similar
volatility.
And I want to say there is plenty of permitted but unused
capacity, both in oil and gas. And that is a market issue. That
is not a government issue. It is not that the government is in
the way of that, it is just the market has not drawn those
investments in a way that is producing like my colleagues
across the aisle would like to see.
I think that the point is here that we can't be too reliant
on oil and gas or any one source of energy. We have to
diversify for our security. Today we are talking about EVs,
which is part of that diversification. That is very important.
But we should keep in mind that we should be looking at
hydrogen, biofuels, storage, renewables, solar, wind, hydro,
geothermal, nuclear. I would agree to look at permitting,
everything to diversify our energy sources so we are not put
into this squeeze.
Diversification is good for the United States. We shouldn't
just look to oil and gas to solve our problems. I think we
should have learned that lesson by now.
Today we are focusing on electric vehicles. That will play
a fundamental role in reducing our reliance on volatile oil
markets, lower costs for Americans, and mitigate climate
change. In San Diego and in Southern California we are leading
the Nation in deploying electric vehicles. And our region is
home to innovative companies, including Beam, which produces
the only charging system that is 100 percent renewable,
movable, and grid independent. Its charging system is
manufactured in California, provides a unique opportunity to
expand EV charging because it can be deployed quickly, without
additional electric work or construction. Those are the kinds
of innovations we should all be supporting on this committee.
The historic Bipartisan Infrastructure Investment and Jobs
Act, which we passed last year, will help expand electric
vehicle infrastructure across the Nation. And I think that is
all to the good.
Ms. Powers, State and local governments have large fleets
that have to be electrified. And for context, the city of San
Diego has a fleet of over 4,500 vehicles and equipment. Most of
the funding in the infrastructure bill is, for ``publicly
accessible charging,'' which is necessary to make electric
vehicles available to more Americans. But electrifying public
fleets will also have tremendous benefits, including reducing
pollution in environmental justice communities, and saving
taxpayers money on fuel costs.
How do you think the Federal Government can help states and
local governments electrify their fleets, and how can funds
from the infrastructure bill help that?
Ms. Powers. Well, thank you for the question. It is an
excellent point. You are correct, that much of the funding in
the Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act is directed at the
infrastructure. But we are seeing tremendous progress from the
states and the private sector in electrifying their fleets.
Most states have a requirement to transition their
government fleets to alternative fuels or electric vehicles at
some point in the next ten years. And we are seeing them work
increasingly with the private sector. There are announcements,
it seems like, every day with private-sector companies who are
transitioning to zero-emission vehicles, be they battery
electric or even hydrogen announcements recently.
There are, I think, several opportunities. One is that
states can increase the number of vehicles that are purchased
within their fleets and, again, work directly with the private
sector to try to increase procurement of zero-emission
vehicles. And then NASEO is also supportive of other tax
credits and incentives that can directly incentivize the
purchase of alternative fuel and electric vehicles.
In an analysis that NASEO did in partnership with Cadmus
last year, saw that vehicle purchase incentives were the most
effective direct incentive to increase electric vehicle
adoption. That, paired with infrastructure investments, can
help to radically accelerate the transition to zero-emission
vehicles.
Mr. Peters. OK, I guess there is some limit to the utility
of tax deduction for public fleets. So I would maybe ask to
think more about how we can get the Federal Government to work
in partnership with the State and local governments. I would
love--if there is more direct investment, we would love to hear
your ideas about that, maybe in the future.
And Mr. Holycross, real briefly, considering the global
competition for dominance of electric--the electric vehicle
market, how do you think the United States can make sure that
U.S. companies striving to be EV leaders can continue to lead
the world?
Mr. Holycross. Well we have to--we--yes, no, we--it is real
important that we have the capacity to build and assemble, and
do the research and development here in America. But we also
have to have the signals from the industry, and the commitments
that--to build out the capacity, so that we can do it across
the whole value chain. And that is why we are proud of the
commitments that we have made.
We are all in on this. This is not about rushing to green.
These are the products that customers are demanding from us,
and we need to provide that bridge for them to help with the
access and affordability that we have talked about.
Mr. Peters. Mr. Chairman, I apologize for going over my
time. I yield back.
Mr. Rush. The gentleman yields back. The Chair now
recognizes Dr. Burgess for 5 minutes
Mr. Burgess. And thank you, Chairman Rush. You know, I just
reflect back in 2008, in this very room, we had a hearing on
high energy prices, high gas prices. And although the reasons
were different then than today, the effect of those high prices
was a recession that followed less than a year after. And I do
worry that, as we are in this room again talking about high
energy prices, the follow-on from those high energy prices may
be a very disruptive effect on the economy.
And in so many ways this hearing almost seems--has an aura
of unreality about it. We are talking about things that are
almost inconsequential, given the--what we are facing worldwide
today. And the Russian attack in Ukraine is being almost
entirely funded on them selling gas and oil to the rest of us.
And it wasn't that way just a couple of years ago, and so you
have to ask yourself, what happened? Did we run out, and we now
have to get it from Vladimir Putin? But the answer, of course,
is we didn't run out. We just chose not to use our own energy
any more.
Mr. Pyle, I was struck by some of the things that you said
in your testimony. It is almost like this is a--self-inflicted
would be too strong a term, but it is like it is a voluntary
descent into an energy crisis, when there is no real
restriction on the resource that is causing it. But we have,
instead, electively pursued a course that has now led us to a
crisis in producing energy for our citizens. Is that a fair
assumption?
Mr. Pyle. It is. I mean, we just need to recognize that the
oil and gas industry has a role to play in the electricity--
sorry, in the energy future. We can't just ignore the laws of
the properties. These resources are dense. The reason that they
dominate our energy consumption is because of how practical and
effective that they are.
And to dismiss them, demonize the industry, blame them,
turn around and, you know, wag the finger at them for hoarding
prices, or doing, you know, things that they are not doing,
sends--yet again, as I mentioned, sends a strong signal that
the leaders, the White House, Europe, for the last 10, 15 years
or so, have worked--made it really clear that they want to
eliminate these sources of energy in the conversation.
And so--and you compound that pressure from investor
pressure, institutional pressure, and you look at the long-time
horizon to generate returns. And it is not really shocking to
me that they are not following the price signals like they have
in the past.
And so I think we need to have a sort of a more realistic--
have a conversation about energy reality, in addition to the
discussions about the environment and the climate.
Mr. Burgess. And not that those things aren't important
because, of course, they are. But the very real crisis today
that is going on half a world away, and what our constituents
are feeling as they go to purchase the energy that they need to
go about living their lives, and working in their jobs, and
supporting their families--now, in Texas we do have kind of a
unique situation, because so much energy is concentrated in the
Permian Basin. You do need a way to get it to other places,
where it can be marketed and sold and used.
And that is why the difficulty in permitting natural gas
pipelines has been so troublesome. Permian Basin will get a lot
of criticism for flaring and venting at the site of production,
but it is also difficult to get that stranded resource to a
place where it is either utilizable by a population center, or
can be exported.
So can you just speak very briefly to the permitting of the
type of facility that could help with that?
Mr. Pyle. Well, I mean, first and foremost, pipelines are
the safest way to transport these materials. That is clear,
that is evident. It is also more affordable, once the pipelines
are built. It is also easier to contain any damages or liquids
or anything from leaks or from spills when you can contain
those pipelines.
So the idea that pipelines are somehow, you know, dangerous
and, you know, unnecessary, you know, that started a long time
ago, and we really need to get out of that idea, to get out of
the idea that we shouldn't be permitting pipelines, because we
have these resources, we are going to continue to need these
resources.
All the renewables, wind and solar, needs a--needs to be
backed up. And in most cases, it is backed up by natural gas.
So even if we turn the entire grid into wind and solar, we are
still going to need that natural gas to back it up. So we need
to move it around no matter what.
Mr. Burgess. Thank you for your--all of our witnesses, for
your testimony today.
And I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Rush. The gentleman yields back. The Chair now
recognizes for 5 minutes Mr. Doyle for questioning the
witnesses.
Mr. Doyle. Thank you, Chairman Rush and Ranking Member
Upton, for holding this hearing.
Americans are concerned over rising gas prices, and I share
that concern. However, the solutions I often hear from my
colleagues across the aisle are not serious proposals. You
know, we continue to hear about how we were energy independent
back in 2019 and 2020. We were, and I support ensuring that we
get back to producing more energy than we consume.
But that doesn't mean we aren't tied to the global market.
In 2020, despite being the world's largest producer of
petroleum, and a net exporter, we still imported about 8
million barrels of petroleum a day. So being energy independent
doesn't mean we are unaffected by the rest of the world.
Additionally, the idea that we can just drill enough to not
only meet our own rapidly growing needs, but to also make up
for a loss of Russian oil and gas in the global market, is a
fantasy. At our peak, we produced 18 million barrels of
petroleum per day, while the Russians produced 11 million
barrels. That would be a huge gap to make up, no matter what.
And yet, with oil prices well over $100 a barrel, we still see
oil companies not producing on approved leases, while bragging
about how much money they will return to their shareholders due
to how--high oil prices.
And that is why this hearing is so important. Despite being
the world's largest producer of petroleum, we are still subject
to price fluctuations of a global market influenced by bad
actors like Putin, the Iranians, and other countries in
unstable regions. We should be investing in electric vehicles
to free ourselves of this dependency. American consumers should
not be affected by the actions of unfriendly nations.
And yes, we will need to build a U.S. supply chain of
materials and manufacturing. But we can do that, and we can do
it together, as Representatives McKinley, Veasey, Dingell and I
did, when we included $6 billion for battery materials
processing and manufacturing grants in the bipartisan
infrastructure bill. And I am happy to work with any of my
colleagues on solutions to build that supply chain.
So I would urge my Republican colleagues to stop with the
misleading talking points, and work with us to build a future
where we dominate the global EV market, grow U.S.
manufacturing, protect Americans from volatile markets, and
still produce energy for use around the world.
Mr. Holycross, let me ask you a question. Given Ford's
investment in EV manufacturing, battery cell manufacturing, and
partnering with Redwood for recycling, can you expand on the
potential for a U.S. domestic supply chain?
And how can we on this committee help companies like yours
better create a domestic supply chain?
Mr. Holycross. Yes, the domestic supply chain is one of the
key elements of all of this.
And you know, in terms of our overall message around moving
faster, this is what it--really is about. We have started, in a
number of ways, to bring more manufacturing and R&D back into
the U.S., starting to more vertically integrate, whether it is
with electric vehicles or others, with motors, trans-axles,
other components, as well. And we are proud of the investments
that we have made and are continuing to make, as I highlighted
in the testimony.
But we do need to do more, and we need to do it with
urgency. And you know, and as members of the global community,
we are very concerned about the Russian invasion of Ukraine,
and the safety and security of the Ukrainian people. And as the
employer of many Ukrainian nationals not just in the U.S., but
elsewhere, we need to take care and use this opportunity, as
well, to recognize that we do need to move fast. The price of
inaction is worse.
And so, while we are continuing to move to do more at home,
the policies in the infrastructure bill that help continue to
provide incentives for infrastructure development, the purchase
incentives, the incentives for R&D, the incentives for
upskilling American workers to couple the investments that we
have made in that space--over $500 million to help retrain the
workforce--we need to partner with governments to increase and
move faster in these respects, so that we are not just
competitive with other countries, like China and Europe, but
also so that we can address the broader issues around climate
change and the environment.
These can all work complementary, and do it in a fashion
with products and services that customers are demanding, not
because they are being imposed on them. And that is how we are
going to ultimately solve this and work together.
Mr. Doyle. Well, thank you very much, and I think we on the
committee look forward to helping you do that.
I see my time is expiring, and I yield back.
Mr. Rush. The gentleman's time has expired. The Chair now
recognizes Mr. Latta for 5 minutes.
Mr. Latta, you are recognized.
Mr. Latta. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thanks to our
witnesses for appearing before us today.
I just want to echo what my colleagues on the Republican
side have said today, that this hearing--we should be talking
about, not on the EV side, but with the unprovoked attack of
Russia on Ukraine, and what is happening across the world with
that attack.
You know, when you look back, we have seen American oil
prices really affecting the consumer out there, you know,
gasoline being up over $1, and it is going to be up a lot more
by the time I get home this weekend. And you know, when the
President is going around asking OPEC and the Russians to
increase production, I find that a real travesty.
It is also important, I believe, that we have missed an
opportunity because, again, we need to be talking about making
sure that Russia does not have the means out there to attack
the Ukraine, and making sure that we ban their imports. And
that is one of the things my legislation did--does that I
introduced last week. It also makes sure that, you know, the
President can't stop hydraulic fracturing or the oil and gas
leases that we have to have out there to make sure we get
things done.
But they also--the legislation does something we have
talked about for a long time, and all-of-the-above energy
policy in this country, and we want to make sure that we don't
limit the access to all domestic sources, and that includes
fossil fuels, renewables, and nuclear and biofuels. So I think
it is important--those are the things we should be talking
about today.
And if I could start my questioning with you, Mr. Pyle,
because I think it is really important, because when I read
your testimony--you know, we have talked about a lot of these
things in this committee, and one of the things is that, you
know, as you broke things down as to what could--you know, we
are going to have to be doing--and I agree with you, that I
don't think the Federal Government should dictate to the
American consumer out there if they are going to drive a fossil
fuel or an electric car. Let the choice be to the consumer to
fit their needs of their family, their business, and how they
want to get around this country.
But you know, in some of the graphs that you have out
there--and again, this is something we have been talking
about--these graphs are important because, when you are talking
about our supply chain, and how we are going to get that across
the country--but let me just start with one of the things you
have in your testimony.
The transmission system that--we are going to have to have
35 to 100 percent larger than we have today by the year 2050.
So the question becomes--is--that you kind of talk about--is on
that supply chain, where are we going to get the materials,
where are we going to get the--you know, the rare earth
minerals? Where are we going to get that skilled workforce? And
also, as has been commented upon, you know, the permitting?
But one other thing, before you do say that, because when
you talk about the permitting--because again, we have been
talking about how we are going to get the minerals to be able
to have--in these batteries. And it is great that we are going
to be able to recycle, but we are going to have to have the
minerals to begin with. And when you look at that--how China
dominates right now, everything across the world when it comes
to the supply chain, and then you also comment in your
testimony that it is going to take a--at least a decade, a
decade, to permit a mine.
So, you know, I would like you to just comment on that. I
am sorry I threw a lot of things at you at one time.
Mr. Pyle. Thank you. Well, I mean, Elon Musk was referenced
earlier about his tweet about needing oil and gas production,
ironically. But he also said that we need to double our
electricity generation if we are going to go all-electric for
vehicles. And that is a huge increase in our generation
capacity at the same time we have been----
Mr. Latta. Well, how are we going to double--you know,
again, how are we going to double that?
That is important, because, again, if we are going to get
these charging stations out there, and the lines to them, how
are we going to double that?
Mr. Pyle. That is another great point. And if you look at
how difficult it is to get transmission built in this country--
in Maine, in the last election, the voters rejected by 60/40 a
transmission line going from Canada into Massachusetts. They
didn't want it to go through their State. This is not a unique
situation.
The Clean Line, for example, that would have run through
the Southeast, has also had difficulty getting permission to be
built. So if we are serious about this, if we are very serious
about this, then Congress has to streamline the regulations and
the impediments to getting stuff built here. And I don't see
any movement on that issue. I have seen the Administration
reject a mine in Minnesota, for example, that would have
provided some of these critical materials.
So which is it? Which way are we going to have it?
Mr. Latta. Well, because----
Mr. Pyle. If we want to do this, we have got to change
these laws.
Mr. Latta [continuing]. My last 17 seconds because, again,
thinking about on the supply chain, OK, if we are going to
have--you know, these transmission towers are steel. Where are
we going to get the steel from? How are we going to generate
the power to get the steel to be able to build those generation
lines across the country?
I am sorry, I have you, like, two seconds left.
Mr. Pyle. And it is all part of the same thing. We need
to--if we are serious about building out clean energy, then all
the impediments to infrastructure projects that are in place
aren't going away just like that. They have to be changed. The
laws have to be changed in order for us to do that.
Mr. Latta. Well, thank you very much.
And Mr. Chairman, I yield back the balance of my time.
Mr. Rush. The gentleman yields back. The Chair now
recognizes Mr. McNerney for 5 minutes.
Mr. McNerney. Well, I thank the Chair for today's hearing,
and the witnesses. The hearing should show how EVs can be a
future part of our transportation system.
The tragedy in Ukraine should not prevent us from
discussing solutions that reduce our dependance on foreign oil,
especially Russian oil, the oil that has given them the
resources to finance international aggression. EVs are a part
of the solution. And given the long fossil fuel vehicle
relation to the Federal Government, we owe it to the American
people to help buildup an EV infrastructure so that Americans
will have a real choice in the vehicles they purchase and use.
As Mr. Peters noted, several Democratic members of this
subcommittee wrote a letter to the American refiners asking
them to stop importing Russian oil. And the response from them
was very positive.
And electric vehicles hold significant promise between
reducing greenhouse gas pollution, reinvesting in American
manufacturing, and reducing our dependance on volatile foreign
oil supplies, including from Russia. We now have an opportunity
to redesign the future.
Mr. Holycross, in your testimony you mentioned a new
partnership that would allow Ford to develop a closed loop
supply chain network for recycled batteries. What materials
will Ford be able to recover through this supply chain?
And, by your estimate, how much raw material could be
offset through these recycled streams?
Mr. Holycross. Yes, again, the partnership with Redwood and
the opportunity to recycle these materials from batteries,
whether it is in the existing production process or recapturing
the vehicles at the end of their useful life, the opportunity
there is significant.
But you know, the urgency around also the original supply
of where those materials come from, we share the same concerns
that have been raised. And we will be able to get access to
different types of materials and different types of chemistries
with the continuing research that we do so we have more of a
diversification of options. That will certainly help, not just
in terms of where we are dependent upon them from, but also how
we can ultimately harvest those materials in different ways, as
well.
So again, a lot of the constraints that were talked about
to be able to do that domestically, we share those concerns and
want to partner to continue to make that a reality. And we
think the first steps by the Administration are a key piece of
that.
So the opportunity to recycle and reuse is a big part, but
it is going to take some time for us to get to large volumes of
vehicles in the population to be able to do that at scale. But
once we do, it is a tremendous opportunity, in terms of the
dependance that will ultimately, you know, be required for, you
know, how we still harvest virgin materials.
So we are looking forward to it, but we need the actions in
the interim, as well, to----
Mr. McNerney. Well, it is not just about--from what you are
saying, it is not just about recycling materials, but it is
also about developing new materials that can be used in
batteries through innovation, and to reduce the need for those
very specific rare Earth materials and so on, so----
Mr. Holycross. That is right. Thank you.
Mr. McNerney. Thank you.
Ms. Powers, the Biden Administration has set an ambitious
target for EVs: 50 percent for all new vehicle sales by the end
of the decade. In your opinion, will a combination of
government and private industry investment be enough to reach
that target in 8 years?
Ms. Powers. Thank you for the question. I think that the
Federal policies build on a strong history of State policies.
The ZEV mandate--or, excuse me, the ZEV standard is now in
place in, I believe, 10 to 12 states, with other states
adopting vigorous electric vehicle and electric vehicle
infrastructure deployment standards.
In addition to that you are seeing announcements from
private companies every day. I can't remember the number off
the top of my head, but in the Super Bowl there were five or
six different electric vehicle advertisements, which is a huge
uptick from just a few years ago. And this is showing that it
is not just the states and the Federal Government who are
setting ambitious standards, but the private sector, who is
proactively making decisions and, in some cases, responding to
these measures to make sure that there are enough electric
vehicles to meet the growing demand of the population.
Mr. McNerney. Well, I am glad you brought up these Super
Bowl advertisements. Those are always entertaining and helpful.
With--where could future investments or technical
assistance be better targeted to fill in the gaps that we may
be seeing?
Ms. Powers. That is a great question. Right now the
majority of the infrastructure dollars through the
Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act is targeted at Federal
highway corridors, which is needed, building out the backbone
for electric vehicle infrastructure investment.
There is also a strong need for community charging
investment at multi-unit dwellings and at workplaces. The vast
majority of EV drivers charge at home or at work in order to
make sure that people who are going to buy these cars--not just
now, but in 5 or ten years from now, when new vehicles are on
the used car market--in order for people to be able to purchase
those cars, they will need a place to charge. Targeting
investment there would be helpful, as would continued technical
assistance to help raise the level of understanding and
awareness of these vehicles.
Lots of fleets, once they learn about different electric
vehicle options, they do--they crunch their numbers and see
that they will save money over the life of the vehicle, and it
is an easy switch. But it is getting that initial interaction
to learn about the benefits of electric vehicles that are
needed.
Mr. McNerney. Well, thank you.
I yield back.
Mr. Rush. The gentleman yields back. The Chair now
recognizes the gentleman from the great State of West Virginia,
Mr. McKinley, for 5 minutes.
Mr. McKinley. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you for
your leadership in this committee.
Listen, I would like to reinforce what former chairman Fred
Upton was--how he said it in his opening remarks. Let's go back
and--war has broken out in Ukraine. Inflation is at a 40-year
high. Gas prices $5, $6, $7 a gallon, and fentanyl is pouring
across the southern border in this country, killing nearly 300
people a day in America.
So with all this going on, I find it incredible that the
Democrats are trying to divert our attention from these crises,
and having a hearing on electric vehicles today, and tomorrow
Daylight Savings Time. Seriously? Are they tone deaf to what is
going on in America and around the world?
Mr. Chairman, this powerful and influential committee
should be talking about issues that matter to Americans today.
It is affecting our lives.
Energy security is national security. We have had testimony
time and time again about that. And the U.S. cannot let Russia
continue to manipulate the energy supply, the energy market. By
increasing our energy production, the U.S. could be providing
access to a reliable and affordable supply of energy at home
and to the allies abroad.
So to Mr. Pyle, Europe's premature rush to green has raised
serious concerns about the huge increases in costs to
consumers, and concern for that. And so consequently, last fall
Reuters reported that rising gas prices have led to the
European utilities switching from gas back to coal and--for
power. And all indications point to that is going to continue,
that trend is going to continue. And according to Reuters, in
2021 Russia imported 31--or exported 31 million tonnes of
thermal coal to Europe.
Now, keep in mind that the stock market today in Europe is
at nearly $450 a ton, nine times--think of it--9 times what it
was in 2020. So the IEA has recommended that we--that switching
fuel back to coal could wean Europe off Russia's energy.
So my question to you is, so to do that, should Russia
import coal produced in America----
Voice. This meeting is being recorded.
Mr. McKinley [continuing]. Or Australia or South Africa?
Mr. Pyle. Well, I think that leads to a larger point, and
that is that we----
Mr. Rush. Will the gentleman suspend?
Mr. Pyle. When people are hurting, when we talk about the
prices that you are mentioning, Europe is----
Mr. Rush. Will the gentleman suspend? There is something
going on with the sound. Can you stop?
[Pause.]
Mr. Pyle. Can you hear me? OK.
Mr. McKinley. Can we restore some of the seconds we lost
with that interruption?
Tell him to turn his mike off when we are not speaking.
Mr. Pyle. Still working? OK.
Mr. Rush. Stop speaking for me. How much time does the
gentleman have remaining?
The gentleman will proceed. We will give the gentleman
another two--another--can the staff tell--inform me of the
amount of time that the gentleman has remaining?
[Pause.]
Mr. McKinley. So, Mr. Pyle?
Mr. Pyle. Yes.
Mr. McKinley. Let me rephrase my question to you.
Mr. Pyle. Please do, Congressman.
Mr. McKinley. My question, primarily, was should we----
Mr. Rush. Will the gentleman suspend?
Mr. McKinley. Should Europe import----
Mr. Rush. The gentleman has 1-minute 20 seconds remaining.
Mr. McKinley. Should Europe import coal from America, or
Australia, or South Africa, or other nations?
And second, what steps should the United States take to
supply that available coal?
Mr. Pyle. Well, Europe should secure diversified supplies
of coal. I would like them to secure it from America, because
we do process and mine here in the safest, most----
Voice. I can't hear what----
Mr. Pyle [continuing]. Most environmentally responsible
manner possible.
But the overall point is this. They--Europe has put--in the
rush to green, Europe has put themselves in a precarious
situation. And they need to diversify their supply, and that
includes coal, absolutely.
Mr. McKinley. Thank you, and I yield back the time.
Mr. Upton. Well, wait, wait, wait. There is no audio coming
from the stream, so we are going to suspend here for a moment.
I am getting----
Voice. And we are going to let Mr. McKinley go again.
Mr. Upton. We are going to let you go again. You get to ask
your question yet a third time. But you have got to hold until
we get the audio for the hearing.
So if you just suspend, we are going to get this thing
fixed, and then we will come back to Mr. McKinley.
Yes, you get that extra Daylight Savings Time hour.
Mr. Rush. We will stand in recess until we are able to
receive audio, and that is suspended right now. We are not
getting audio, so the Chair will suspend and recess until such
time as we can get the audio restored.
Please stand by. Please stand by.
[Recess.]
Mr. Rush. The audio has been restored. I will now--and Mr.
McKinley had to leave, so we going to look for the next
Republican member for questioning, and that would be Mr.
Griffith from Virginia.
Mr. Griffith, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Griffith. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Today we are having
a hearing that is titled, ``Charging Forward: Securing American
Manufacturing in our EV, Electric Vehicle, Future.'' Charging
forward. Really?
Right now, when Americans in the world hear the phrase
``charging forward,'' we think of Russia charging across
borders, and we think of Russia charging into Ukraine cities. I
know this hearing was planned before the invasion of Ukraine,
but we should be flexible and able to adapt to the issues of
today.
When it comes to electric vehicles, the majority is, in
fact, tone deaf. In a peaceful world, this would be a fine
hearing. But it is not a peaceful world. It is a world where
permanent--a permanent member of the U.N. Security Council has
put his vast nuclear weapons stockpile on alert, and has
invaded a sovereign nation. It is not 2050, it is 2022. And
while we can imagine a future, in order to get to that future
we must focus on today. And today that world is facing burning
cities, millions of refugees, and a Russia that wants to
rebuild its 19th century empire, and they want to do it by the
force of arms.
We should focus on what we can do today. This is the Energy
policy committee of the U.S. Congress. We should be talking
about nuclear energy use and its expansion in order to combat
Putin's threats with tactical nuclear weapons.
We should be talking about expanding offshore energy,
including oil and natural gas, to combat and weaken the efforts
of Russia on the coast and the coastal islands of Ukraine.
We should be talking about the permitting of new oil and
gas wells on both private and public land, which the Biden
Administration has essentially stopped. And by doing so, we
will not permit Putin to take over the public and private lands
of Ukraine.
We should not permit Putin and Russia to have a monopoly on
reliable energy in Europe and, by controlling the levers of the
European economy, attempt to control European foreign policy.
This is a time for action on the world scene, but we are
not taking action on the world scene. We are talking about
electric vehicles. Disappointing.
And to my colleagues who say that electric cars don't need
oil or gas, have my friends forgotten where our electricity
comes from today? Today it is still coming from mostly fossil
fuels: oil, natural gas, and coal. And until this morning, we
have been sending millions of dollars to Russia to have enough
to keep our economy going and to allow them to buy missiles to
burn the cities in Ukraine.
Now I would prefer to talk about those issues and lots of
others to make sure that our Nation is prepared and ready today
to provide our people with their energy needs, and to help our
allies in Europe. But the topic is electric vehicles, so let me
turn to that one.
I would like to enter into the record an Axios article
entitled, ``The Cold Hard Truth About Electric Vehicles in
Winter'' from March 4, 2022. And I believe that the majority
has seen that.
Mr. Rush. With no objections, so ordered.
[The information appears at the conclusion of the hearing.]
Mr. Griffith. The--thank you. The article states that the
AAA found that freezing temperatures can cut electric vehicle
range almost in half. Most electric vehicles on the market
today do not have sufficient range on a single charge to get me
from one end of my district to the other, even on a warm day.
I recently took a trip to Pennington Gap last summer, 209
miles from where I was to Pennington Gap. That is not the whole
district--about 300 miles long. And yet, this article says
that, in cold weather, that range that wouldn't get me there
then would be even less.
So Mr. Pyle, does--is there--if I got stopped somewhere, if
I ran out of power halfway there or three-fourths of the way
there, is there a portable charging that exists, or would we be
waiting on hundreds of tow trucks to clear--to get to those
electric vehicles? And do those portables exist?
And also, can you get a spare battery to carry in the car
so that, if I run out, I can just get out of the car and change
the battery and put a new one in?
Mr. Pyle. I am afraid we are not quite there yet, although
I have heard that there are some mobile charging stations that
are operating, correct me if I am wrong, but on diesel in a lot
of cases. So----
Mr. Griffith. All right. My time is up. I yield back.
Mr. Rush. The gentleman yields back. The Chair now
recognizes the gentleman from the State of New York, the
chairman of the Energy--the Environment Subcommittee, Mr.
Tonko, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Tonko. Hey, thank you, Mr. Chair.
Ms. Powers, thank you for explaining State energy offices'
years of experience supporting EV infrastructure deployment and
fostering interState cooperation. While much of the bipartisan
infrastructure law's funding for EBSC will be distributed
through State transportation offices, how are State energy
offices working with their transportation counterparts to
ensure this funding is administered effectively?
Ms. Powers. Thank you for the question and, Mr. Tonko,
thank you for your support of the State energy program, as well
as your leadership on the SEP and WEP Dear Colleague letter.
There are a number of ways. One, the State energy offices,
as you know, have long led infrastructure investment, as well
as EV program development in many of the states, but have been
working closely with their State departments of transportation
for years to make sure that these investments are made, both in
partnership with their DoTs.
And so recently, as I mentioned, NASEO, as well as our
counterpart, AASHTO for the State DoTs, signed a memorandum of
understanding. Our members--and that really signifies that our
members will be working together more and more in the coming
years.
Energy offices have expertise in energy policy, program
development, and have, again, long led EV infrastructure
program implementation. The State DoTs, of course, lead
infrastructure investments along the roadways, lead in EV
signage, et cetera. We are seeing collaboration between State
energy offices and State departments of transportation across
the country.
The State of Nevada, the State DoT, is working hand in hand
with the Governor's office of energy to support the development
of the Nevada Electric Highway.
In Colorado the State energy office is working with their
department of transportation, as well as their environment
agency, to make sure that the three pillars of electric
vehicle--transportation electrification, excuse me, is done in
a holistic manner.
In Florida, the State department of transportation has
developed the Electric Vehicle Infrastructure Master Plan,
while the State energy office is leading their alternative
fuels planning, and also developed a state--excuse me, a
electrification evacuation roadmap.
So there are examples across the country, and we look
forward to continuing to leverage the expertise of the energy
office to help with State DoTs as they invest in infrastructure
through the Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you. And similarly, the Federal DoE and
DoT have established a joint office to help implement the law.
And so what has--Ms. Powers, what has been your experience
working with this new office?
Ms. Powers. Absolutely, it has been a bright spot in the
Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act implementation. The
Department of Energy and Department of Transportation hit the
ground running as soon as the legislation was passed, and
worked to set up the Joint Office. Those two agencies, through
the Joint Office, issued RFIs early on to get input on how
programs should be built.
And just last month, the Joint Office, on behalf of FHWA,
issued the guidance for the National Electric Vehicle
Infrastructure Program. The Joint Office has already set up a
technical assistance arm, where the states are beginning to ask
questions and work directly with the Federal Government to get
questions answered on the guidance, as well as helping to
figure out how the Infrastructure Act programs can build on the
existing work of these states.
Mr. Tonko. Well, thank you. And I strongly believe that it
is critical that State energy offices are involved in EV
infrastructure buildout, especially since greater EVs will put
new demands on our electric distribution system.
And Ms. Powers, what are the unique capabilities of State
energy offices that can help support the grid planning and
other activities necessary to ensure a successful EV
transition?
Ms. Powers. Absolutely. A State energy office leads their
state's comprehensive energy planning, energy emergency, and
resilience planning, as well as, in many cases, their EV plans.
They work hand in hand with utilities, often interact with
their public utilities, commissions, and other partners, and
they have a thorough understanding of what the electric system
needs are in their State, where the fuel is coming from, and
also what is most appropriate for electric vehicle
infrastructure investment.
And so their expertise on the grid and electric system
side, when paired when (sic) the needed expertise for electric
vehicle infrastructure investment makes for a perfect
combination with the energy offices.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you. And it is a top priority for me and
for the Biden Administration that EV infrastructure is publicly
available in under-served and disadvantaged communities. What
experience do State energy offices have developing and
implementing programs that ensure funding is distributed
equitably, so that low-income and rural communities are not
left behind in this transition?
Ms. Powers. That is a great question. And so energy offices
often lead energy stakeholder engagement activities in their
states. They are seen as the glue to help State agencies and
other arms of government interact, and also with the private
sector partners and municipalities and other stakeholders on
the ground.
More and more with electric vehicle programs in the states,
we are seeing energy offices, as well as their other agencies,
reach out to community-based organizations and other critical
on-the-ground partners to make sure that they understand what
the needs of the community are before the program is made. And
so this is--a critical difference is that, in the last few
years, states have increasingly paid attention to how to design
policies and programs from the ground up.
We see an excellent example in Washington State, where the
Washington department of commerce, the State energy office,
they are working hand in hand with their department of
transportation. They issued the electrification of
transportation system grants in, I believe, late 2020, and that
program was designed to support electrification in
disadvantaged communities. The State worked hard to make sure
that they were engaging with community-based organizations and
other communities throughout the State, and they built a
program that did small things but important things like waive
the match requirements for low-income areas, and also making
sure that they were prioritizing investment in disadvantaged
areas.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you for the input.
And with that, Mr. Chair, I yield back.
Mr. Rush. The gentleman yields back. The Chair now
recognizes the gentleman from Ohio, Mr. Johnson, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Johnson, you are recognized.
Mr. Johnson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I associate myself
with the comments made by some of my other colleagues. Eastern
Europe is on fire, a tyrant is raging through the Ukraine, and
it is absurd to me that we are spending our time today talking
about electric vehicles, rather than how we use America's
energy resources to hold him at bay and to address the
skyrocketing inflation here at home for the American people.
But here we are.
What has been made very, very clear is that energy security
is national security. We see it playing out. What we are seeing
in the Ukraine is a direct result of Vladimir Putin using
Europe's dependance on Russian oil and gas against them. In
response, we hear some of our Democratic colleagues and the
hopelessly naive at the White House call for a shift to an
electrified, green, renewable economy to take on Putin as a
solution to reducing our dependance on Russian oil. How absurd?
Sounds great, but here is the problem: the United States is
currently dangerously dependent on Communist China for
batteries, magnets, and the sourcing and processing of critical
minerals and rare Earths, all of which are essential for
electric vehicles, charging stations, and other electrified
energy infrastructure.
So just to get this straight, the White House plan is to
reduce our dependance on Russian oil and gas by increasing our
dependance on Xi Jinping and the Communist Chinese Party,
given--give me a break. You call that an improvement? For
crying out loud.
Have we learned nothing from what is going on in Europe?
Dependance on your adversaries for critical things like energy
can have disastrous consequences.
Mr. Chairman, I would like to enter into the record a
September 2010 New York Times article entitled, ``Amid Tension,
China Blocks Vital Exports to Japan,'' if we could get that in
the record, please.
[Pause.]
Voice. So ordered.
[The information appears at the conclusion of the hearing.]
Mr. Johnson. First to Mr. Holycross, in 2010, in a dispute
over contested fishing waters, China announced it would
completely halt exports of critical rare Earth elements to
Japan. It is clear that China is able and willing to leverage
their stranglehold on these resources to force their will on
other countries. They have done it.
So let's say, in a dispute with the United States, China
cuts off the export of these rare Earth critical minerals,
processing of rare Earths, or magnets to us. Will Ford be able
to keep production of EVs going? Do you have a plan for a
scenario such as that?
Mr. Holycross. Yes, the notion around the points raised on
energy security being key for national security, we absolutely
agree with, and the diversification of metals and where they
come from is first and foremost for us in our strategy and how
we are going to get to the targets that we have we have talked
about, in terms of number of EVs. And it reinforces the
importance of having those options and the supply chain in the
U.S.
And for our part, having the strong signal to the market
and to the country around the capacity that we provisioned for
the volumes we do is what will, hopefully, spur the policies
that are needed so that those minerals and those materials can
also come from the U.S. and other places that we are less
dependent upon.
The recent events around interruptions in the supply chain,
including semiconductors and others, has reinforced the
importance to all of us on diversifying our supply. And so we
are prepared to continue to make those investments here in the
U.S., and we need the policies to help----
Mr. Johnson. OK. Well, thank you. Now to Mr. Pyle.
In your testimony you mentioned the transition to a green,
electrified economy. Is our grid ready for that? Can it handle
that?
Can you expand on why the electric grid will perhaps need
to be doubled in size?
How much will that cost, and who will have to pay for that?
Mr. Pyle. A lot of questions, and I probably don't have the
specific answers to all of them. But I will say generally----
Mr. Johnson. Can you get back to us?
Mr. Pyle. I can, absolutely.
Mr. Johnson. Thank you.
Mr. Pyle. With specific numbers. I can say, generally,
that, clearly, we are not ready, because you have seen
disruptions already in areas of the country where we are moving
down the road of transitioning our electricity system to
renewables. You see it in California, you saw it in Texas.
So I would say that we are a long way away from that very
thing.
Mr. Johnson. And how much will it cost?
Mr. Pyle. I don't have the--it is----
Mr. Johnson. OK, if you could----
Mr. Pyle. It is in the multiple billions, but I don't have
the specific numbers.
Mr. Johnson. OK.
Mr. Pyle. But we will get them for you.
Mr. Johnson. All right.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Rush. The gentleman yields back. The Chair now
recognizes the lady--gentlelady from the great State of
Washington, Ms. Schrier, for 5 minutes.
Ms. Schrier. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you to our
witnesses.
Let me first just say for the record that I am aligned with
my Republican colleagues that, at this particular moment of
high prices and global uncertainty and shortages, we do need to
be increasing domestic oil supply. We are just really limited
when it comes to substantive policy solutions that can offer
meaningful solutions in the short term. And people are hurting
now, and we need to bring down the price of gas now.
This is one of the reasons I recently introduced the Gas
Prices Relief Act with a number of my Democratic colleagues,
including my fellow subcommittee member, Mr. O'Halleran. And
this legislation would suspend the 18.4 cent Federal gas tax
until January 1st, 2023.
In addition to lowering prices and putting cash in
Americans' pockets when they really need help, American
businesses will also benefit by a reduction in shipping costs.
Now, additionally, the U.S. can increase oil production in
the short term to help displace Russian oil without further
burdening the American public on gas prices. The U.S. is a
short supply producer, and can ramp up domestic production
fairly quickly.
We can hold two ideas in our head at the same time, we are
capable of that: increasing production to meet today's demand,
while also planning and making the proper investments toward a
clean energy future. Now, this is a future where we reduce our
reliance on oil, and insulate ourselves from the whims of the
global oil market. Heck, the oil companies, they themselves are
investing in solar and wind and carbon capture, because they
know that we are headed in that direction, and that we will be
less reliant on fossil fuels.
So these are pragmatic conversations, as most Americans
don't drive electric cars.
I also want to note that most trucks run on diesel. In
fact, our entire economy right now is really heavily fossil
fuel-dependent. Gas where I live costs 4.59 a gallon. It is
even more expensive in other parts of the country.
So that being said, I want to turn my attention to trucking
and electric vehicles, which is the topic of today's
conversation. Our medium and large trucks represent seven
percent of the vehicles on the road, but produce 26 percent of
the pollution. And one truck can have the same CO2 reduction
potential as 9 or 10 cars. Look at the number of hours that
they are on the road.
Within the Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act is $7.5
billion to build out the national network of EV chargers. Those
were very useful to my family on a many-thousand-mile road trip
in an electric vehicle.
As Mr. Holycross pointed out, for customers to make this
transition they need to know that they will be able to charge
their vehicles along the way, wherever they live. And while
this is very true for car owners, this is especially important
for commercial truck drivers, who can't just drive to their
local grocery store and charge up. When DoE administers these
charging funds, they really need to be thinking about the heavy
duty trucking side.
I would just love to hear from our panelists about how best
to roll this out successfully. And I would love to start with
you, Mr. Holycross, and then Ms. Powers, if you could go in
that order.
Mr. Holycross. Sure, it is--you raise a very important
point with respect to the commercial vehicle market.
As you said, these customers are unique, in terms of their
needs and what capabilities they are looking for in vehicles,
and certainly the use cases and where they travel and how they
travel. And that is what we are very proud of, in terms of
where we are targeting our initial electrification efforts with
respect to our F-150 pickup, and also our E Transit commercial
van franchise.
So by knowing these customers, because of having nearly
half of the market, we are working with them for a one-stop-
shop through our Ford--dedicated Ford Pro commercial vehicle
business to provide those solutions that they need. But we do
need the enabling policies, as you mentioned, to be able to
help with access and affordability, and to move faster, so that
they can continue to do all the work and perform the tasks that
they need that they are already seeing the vehicles are fully
capable of delivering. Yes, the fully electrified ones, the
same capability for the work that needs to be done as their
internal combustion engine parts.
So in terms of deployment and how we roll this out, we can
be very targeted, based on what we know of the customers in
this segment, the leadership we have, on what use cases and how
we deploy the funds and resources available for this. And the
more that customers continue to see these capabilities, they
will understand that that is where this is, you know, beyond
just a question of performance.
Ms. Schrier. I need to yield back, but, Ms. Powers, I would
love to see a written response about how we deal with
commercial trucking and charging stations.
Thank you very much, I yield back.
Mr. Rush. The gentlelady yields back. The Chair now
recognizes the gentleman from Indiana, Mr. Bucshon, for 5
minutes.
[Pause.]
Mr. Rush. Mr. Bucshon, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
[Pause.]
Mr. Rush. Mr. Walberg, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Walberg is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Walberg. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I wish you were
here, and I wish all the rest of our colleagues were here in
the room.
I thank the witnesses for being here.
Mr. Holycross, I wish that you had taken the opportunity to
join us driving your electric F-150, parking it out front of
the building here, and coming on in here as the electric
vehicle guy from Ford Motor Company. I hope it was your idea,
but it didn't come as a result of not having a charging
station. Ms. King could help you with that. I do thank you for
being here in this hearing, though it seems to be a bit tone
deaf in the idea of what we are going on--in the world today
(sic).
The brutal war that Russia is waging in Ukraine really
should serve as a wake-up call to any Americans who have let
their guard down, and failed to consider how energy security
translates to national security. America's vast oil and gas
resources as part of an all-of-the-above energy plan are a
strategic weapon against dictators like Putin.
We can produce a lot more energy here at home. And in doing
that, I think we have proved that we can reduce greenhouse gas,
as well. In fact, we have done it, more than the next 12
developed countries combined, in our reduction of greenhouse
gases. That has come as a result of using clean natural gas,
and we shouldn't forget that.
And while I State that, even though it has been stated here
a couple of times today that there is something that we could
call carbon free, there is no such thing as carbon free in any
of our energy today. That is a myth when we look at lifetime
costs of producing even electric energy.
We need to modernize our pipelines, our infrastructure, our
processes for the fight that lies ahead with people like Putin.
This war isn't going to be over any time soon. We also have to
be realistic, and lessen our dependance on China, which
controls 90 percent of the world's critical minerals.
Mr. Pyle, I recently traveled to the European Union with
the Conservative Climate Caucus. I found that, in their rush to
reduce emissions, traditional energy baseload sources like
nuclear and natural gas have been discarded without adequately
replacing them. In your testimony you highlight similar
findings. This under-investment in natural gas in the EU has
led to an unsustainable dependance on Russian oil and gas, and
has exacerbated the current energy crisis.
I see natural gas as a key enabler of our energy
independence, as well as our short-term and long-term emission
reductions. It is a cleaner burning fuel and, combined with
innovative technologies, it can allow us to reduce emissions in
an affordable way without abandoning the existing
infrastructure and raising consumer prices.
Mr. Pyle, what steps should the United States take to
ensure that we do not repeat the natural gas mistakes of the
EU?
Mr. Pyle. First, do no harm. I think the policies, or the
non-policies, the reversal of, the elimination of, some of the
restrictions on our ability to both produce and move and export
these resources is the wrong approach.
I think that the idea that FERC could abandon its mission
and create policy statements that would make it virtually
impossible to build new pipelines is the wrong approach.
I think that we need to recognize the tremendous value of
this energy resource, not only for the affordable and reliable
electricity that it generates, but for the multiple uses of
natural gas: fertilizer, plastics, all of the multiple uses
that are in this room everywhere that we depend on.
Those are important first steps.
Mr. Walberg. I am glad you brought up those aspects, as
well, because we will soon find out, with the growing season
coming to the United States, to Michigan, we don't have the
fertilizer. Right now it is not simply that the farmers know
that the fertilizer costs are going up exponentially; they
can't get it. They can't even order it, because the producers
don't know how to get it to them, or when they can get it to
them.
Mr. Pyle, what regulatory changes do you recommend to
ensure that the U.S. is able to remain energy independent?
Mr. Pyle. We need to continue the lease--we have to restore
the leasing process on Federal lands. It is an important
strategic asset that we have that we are not utilizing.
We need to reverse the policies that have led to this sort
of freeze, if you will, or this concern about the regulatory
and financial pressures that have been put on the industry. We
have nominees for positions in the Federal and banking and
finance that are openly, actively hostile to investing in oil
and gas. We can't have that, especially now.
Mr. Walberg. Yes.
Mr. Pyle. Those are just a few things we should start with.
Mr. Walberg. I thank you, and I yield back.
Mr. Rush. The gentleman yields back. The Chair now
recognizes the gentlelady from Colorado, who is the chairman of
the Oversight and Investigations Subcommittee, Ms. DeGette, for
5 minutes.
Ms. DeGette. Thank you so much, Mr. Chairman, and thank you
for holding this hearing.
A few weeks ago I had a meeting with the auto dealers from
my district, from Colorado, and they are very, very excited
about the prospect of electric vehicles. And they are very, and
they are bullish on it. They all themselves drive electric
vehicles, and they are really looking forward to it.
But in places like Colorado, of course, one of the
impediments that we face is it is a big State with a lot of
geographic diversity. And we want to make sure that people who
buy these vehicles can charge them up, which is why this is
such an important hearing.
I have a couple of questions, but before I do that, I have
been listening to my colleagues on the other side of the aisle
talking about their extreme interest in drilling oil and gas,
given the current crisis in Ukraine. And I will say that we
all--I totally support independence from Russian oil, and I
think the world should get independent from Russian oil. But I
don't think that it--that should be an excuse for us to give up
our long-term energy plans, which includes moving toward
electric vehicles.
And I am always shocked at how Congress seems to lurch from
crisis to crisis without a long-term energy plan. And I have
been trying for several years now to work with my colleagues on
the other side of the aisle on a long-term energy plan.
In the short run we are going to have to figure out how we
can get more oil and gas for our constituents at reasonable
prices. That would mean, obviously, increasing domestic
production where we can, and seeing what we can do.
I would suggest that the other thing we could do is look
and see, as we do any time we have a crisis like this, at
whether the oil and gas companies are engaging in price
gouging. I don't see why we would not look at that, as well as
everything, because, according to media reports, American oil
producers have not said they are going to increase domestic
production, but rather they are saying that they are going to
take their profits from high prices and give them back to their
shareholders.
Occidental Petroleum said its intent is to ``follow our
cash-flow priorities and capital framework that we will share
with you today. We have no need and no intent to invest in
production growth this year.''
Meanwhile, Pioneer Natural Resources said, ``We are not
going to change, I said, at $100 oil, $150 oil, we are not
going to change our growth rate. We think it is important to
return cash back to the shareholders,'' et cetera.
And so, as part of any kind of domestic production plan, I
am going to suggest that we also look and see if these
producers are price gouging or, in fact, if they can enter in
to this strong commitment that we have all made to try to
increase domestic oil and gas in the short run, while we
implement our long-term energy plan.
Now to that end, Ms. Powers, I loved your testimony today
for one reason: you focus on Colorado. People in my district
are interested in electric vehicles, as I said. But charging is
not so easy in many neighborhoods. And of course, that is one
of the challenges. So my question is, what recommendation do
you have for states that want to ensure that low-income and
under-served areas are not left out of the transition?
Ms. Powers. Thank you for the question. One of the things
that we have been seeing from states, again, in recent years,
is increased stakeholder engagement at the very beginning of
the process, who talk to the communities to see if they want
charging, where they would like charging, what type they would
like.
It might be that, if there are lots of multi-unit dwellings
within a community or a neighborhood, the community may want
for there to be DC fast-charging stations, so that they can
drive their car, plug in, and then go home to their apartment
building. Other places, the communities are farther apart, and
so it might make sense to increase charging at home.
There has been a lot of work in recent years to also focus
on transportation electrification along those key corridors, so
that communities that are spaced further apart can make sure
that they can drive the 30, 40, or 50 miles to the nearby town
where the grandmother is, et cetera. There are a lot of those
trips.
And so I would say that No. 1 is to start with stakeholder
engagement, to make sure that you are talking to community-
based organizations and to others, so that you know where the
stations could go.
Ms. DeGette. And also so that they would be affordable for
people to be able to pay.
Ms. Powers. Absolutely, and that is one thing that we are
seeing in more states, is that there may be assistance provided
based on income level for EV charging stations. We are seeing a
number of states that are offering tiered rebate structures for
the vehicles themselves. And so, if you are a low or moderate-
income household, you qualify for a higher amount of a vehicle
rebate. And there are similar programs in place for some EV
charging station incentives, as well.
Ms. DeGette. Great, thanks.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Rush. The gentlelady yields back. The Chair now
recognizes the gentleman from South Carolina, Mr. Duncan, for 5
minutes.
Mr. Duncan. Mr. Chairman, thank you, and I look forward to
having you back in the committee room.
There is a lot of fallacies in the conversation that the
gentlelady from Colorado just made, and I would love to have a
debate about oil and gas production, about exploration cost,
what it takes to open up a well, get a well back online, and
all the costs factored in from a barrel of crude oil all the
way to a finished product that meets the demands of our
consumers. But this hearing is about EV.
And you know, how tone deaf can we be? How tone deaf can
this Administration be to travel to Texas to--at the same time
announce a ban on Russian oil and gas, and appeal to the Saudi
Arabia oil producers for increased production, while continuing
to do great harm to the U.S. energy sector in Texas?
We are blessed with energy resources here in America, but
we seem to be cursed with liberal politicians who don't
understand a simple fact, and that fact is this: energy
security is national security. And unfortunately, the Biden
Administration fails to recognize that, and we are playing it
out right now. We are going to ban Russian oil, but not allow
American energy production to ramp up, and we are canceling
offshore leases, onshore leases. We have the methane rule that
hurts oil and gas production.
On the most tragic stage, we are witnessing energy being
used as a political weapon. Russia is a gas station
masquerading as a country, and we continue to play into Putin's
hand as the Biden Administration undercuts U.S. energy
production. If what is going on in Europe does not send a wake-
up call to the Biden Administration and the Democrats, I don't
know what will.
President Biden finally announced a ban on U.S. import of
Russian oil, and I have to ask, how is New England going to
meet their energy needs, because they don't want a pipeline
from the Marcellus shale up there to bring natural gas that we
produce here up to New England, so they will import natural gas
to New England. Russian LNG ships--Russian LNG burns a lot
dirtier, as far as air quality, than U.S. natural gas. We have
seen Russian LNG ships in the Boston Harbor. We are not going
to see that any more. We don't have a pipeline coming from
Marcellus to bring natural gas to New England. How are they
going to heat their homes?
A question for the EV panelist, rhetorically, is how are
they going to provide the electricity needed for your electric
vehicles in New England if you don't have natural gas to go on
the natural gas powered power plants? Because you are not going
bring it from Russia now, and you are definitely not going to
bring it from Marcellus, because they don't want fracked gas.
They are in a pickle. New England is going to have a rude wake-
up call.
Everyday Russian energy sales generate hundreds of million
dollars for Vladimir Putin for his war effort, but he is one of
the wealthiest, if not the wealthiest man on the planet. A lot
of that comes from oil and gas generated in Russia. We buy it
from him, so we are lining his pockets and paying for his
imperialistic move in Ukraine.
As Russia's war on Ukraine continues, U.S. natural gas
prices will increase, particularly in the Northeast, as I
mentioned. Biden's FERC appointees recently voted to use
climate change in their assessment of future natural gas
pipelines, making it even more difficult to build the pipelines
that might be necessary in New England, or the pipelines
necessary in South Carolina to provide the natural gas there.
The gentlelady from Colorado talked about long-term energy
plan for the nation--and I am with her, let's plan on it--but
every time we talk about it, they go to this green initiative,
the Green New Deal, versus looking at increasing oil and gas
production in this country, advanced nuclear technology,
expediting the permitting process for nuclear power plants to
be built in this country to provide the electricity that is
needed for EV.
Let's talk about some other costs with regard to electric
vehicles. It costs about 70 to $150,000 per charging station
for convenience stores. We are going to run those across the
country, maybe the price will come down because of the number
we are going to put in, but if convenience stores are going to
put that in and provide that for their customers that have
electric vehicles, that is a huge cost for them.
Each charging station--each charging station--uses more
power than it takes to power the whole convenience store for
one charging station. Who is going to pay for that? The
convenience stores have to buy that power on retail prices, so
they are paying retail. What you and I pay for at home, they
are having to pay that retail price. They are not getting it at
a wholesale cost. Oil and gas works for them because they buy
refined products at a wholesale price, and sell it at retail
price. They can't pay retail for electricity and sell it at
retail prices. That means higher costs for the consumers when
they are charging out of the convenience stores with the cars
that you are wanting to sell. This is a huge trickle-down.
Today we ought to be talking about how we can make America
independent from these foreign sources of energy. In 1978 Jimmy
Carter created the Department of Energy to lessen or end our
dependance on foreign energy, so we could be energy
independent. We are more dependent today than we were in 1978
on foreign sources of energy. And it is exacerbated by the war
in Ukraine. If we want to talk about energy policy, let's talk
about the failures of the Department of Energy to do its
mission.
With that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
[Pause.]
Mr. Rush. The Chair now recognizes my friend from North
Carolina, Mr. Butterfield, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Butterfield. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I thought I had
lost you for a moment, but it is good to see you, and it is
good to see all of my colleagues this afternoon. And thank you,
Mr. Chairman, for convening this very important hearing on a
very important topic, I might say.
Thank you to the witnesses for your testimony, as well. I
will start with the vice president of Ford Motor Company.
And Mr. Holycross, it is good to see you today, sir. Mr.
Holycross, in the State of the Union address last week,
President Biden has said some very nice things about Ford Motor
Company's decision and General Motors decision to invest in EVs
and support domestic manufacturing in Kentucky, Tennessee, and
Michigan. These investments will undoubtedly create many
manufacturing jobs and bring economic vitality to regions where
the plants will be built.
Similarly, in my State of North Carolina, Toyota has
committed to building its automotive battery manufacturing
plant that would be capable of producing lithium batteries for
200,000 vehicles, with the intention to expand capacity to
support 1.2 million vehicles per year. This is nearly $1.3
billion in investment that will create 1,750 new jobs in the
State.
And so my question is, what further steps can Congress take
to ensure that all regions are part of this industry-wide
transition?
And how can states like my State, North Carolina, take on
more leading roles in aiding such efforts?
Mr. Holycross. Well, thank you very much, Congressman. It
is a pleasure to be here with all of you today.
You know, even before the investments that we have recently
announced in Tennessee and Kentucky, as you noted, Ford
produces currently--and has produced--more vehicles in this
country than any other auto OEM. We employ more auto workers
than any other auto company. Eighty percent of what we build
here is sold here, and we don't intend to cede that leadership
to anyone.
But if we are going to continue that leadership, even
beyond the investments that we have made most recently, the
over $11 billion investment in Tennessee and Kentucky, the
investments in Michigan to expand our Dearborn Rouge complex
and the Electrification Vehicle Center there, we are going to
have to continue to accelerate the pace of the work that has
been done in the infrastructure legislation and some of the
other provisions that are being proposed.
We want to continue to do that work in this country,
including the research and development, to be able to support
the training and skills that are needed for this transition so
that we do not leave anybody behind, and we have access and
the----
Mr. Butterfield. Thank you. Let me move over briefly to Mr.
King.
Thank you so much for your testimony today, as well. Ms.
King, the Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act provides $7.5
billion in EV charging infrastructure development, which is a
momentous investment toward achieving American energy
independence and revitalizing American manufacturing. However,
putting marginalized communities first is also an important
pillar of the President's clean energy agenda, and a priority
that I absolutely share.
That is why I believe it is equally important to ensure
equity--that is, equity in the distribution of these funds, and
the creation of an effective consumer education campaign to
communities that I care about, low-income communities and
disadvantaged communities. And so, Ms. King, are there consumer
education campaigns that you have found to be effective to make
these communities more aware of the benefits of EV ownership,
the availability of EV charging, and the opportunity for job
creation?
Ms. King. Thank you for the question. That is exactly what
Dunamis is undertaking with our local, State, and private
partnerships with automotives, as well as with the utility
companies in the State.
It is absolutely imperative that we do not leave this
portion of the community behind as we are implementing the
infrastructure law.
We believe that apprenticeship programs through community
partnerships, the $2.5 million in grant opportunities, where we
can have demonstration projects, pilot programs in order to
educate these communities about the benefits of electric
vehicles, the benefits that they can partake in as it relates
to not only driving in an EV, but also with respect to building
them, and building the EV infrastructure that it is going to
take in order to implement this EV growth throughout the
country as a whole.
And so creation of apprenticeship programs with non-profit
organizations like Focus Hope, partnerships with the city of
Detroit that we are undertaking right now in Detroit Economic
Service Corporation that is going to assist us in identifying
community residents to transfer over those that are under-
employed or unemployed and that have technical skills that can
be trained in this industry, we are now developing those
programs out----
Mr. Butterfield. OK.
Ms. King [continuing]. To ensure that we can target these
communities.
Mr. Butterfield. I thank both of you for very thoughtful
responses.
I yield back, Mr. Chairman, yes.
Mr. Rush. The gentleman yields back. The Chair now
recognizes the gentlelady from the great State of Arizona, for
5 minutes.
Mrs. Lesko. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
As the Chairman said, I am from Arizona. Arizona is a
leader in electric vehicle manufacturing. We have Lucid Motors,
which is manufacturing electric vehicle cars in Casa Grande,
Arizona, south of Phoenix. We have Nikola Motors, which is
producing electric vehicle semi trucks in Coolidge, Arizona,
which is southeast of Phoenix. We have ElectraMeccanica, which
is manufacturing three-wheel electric vehicles in Mesa,
Arizona. We have KORE Power, which is a manufacturer of lithium
ion batteries in Buckeye, Arizona, and so on and so forth. So
we are quite a leader in Arizona.
It is estimated that converting standard vehicles to
electric vehicles would require a 30 percent increase in power
generation on our electric grid.
In addition, electric vehicles need four times as much
copper than standard vehicles and, according to the
International Energy Agency, at least 30 times as much lithium,
nickel, and other key minerals will be needed for electric
vehicles by 2040.
And in fact, just today, from CNBC, it says nickel surge
just raised the input costs for an electric vehicle by $1,000,
Morgan Stanley estimates.
So as we have heard today from my other colleagues, instead
of the Biden Administration increasing U.S. oil and gas
production, and increasing U.S. mining of these critical
minerals that are needed not only for the vehicles themselves,
but for the storage, the batteries, instead he stopped the
Keystone pipeline, he has stopped permitting of--or oil and
U.S. oil and gas production here in the United States. And it
is just unconscionable to me that he is now calling on
dictatorships, Iran, Venezuela to increase their oil and gas
production.
Just last week I visited a proposed mine in Arizona,
Resolution Copper Mine. It is in Representative O'Halleran's
district. And they have invested $2.3 billion in Arizona for
this mine. During the Trump Administration they gave the green
light to go ahead with this copper mine, which will produce, at
full blast, 25 percent of U.S. copper production in the United
States. And the Biden Administration has put it on hold.
So, Mr. Pyle, how in the world are we supposed to put all
these electric vehicles on the grid, while at the same time the
Biden Administration is cutting down oil and gas production
here in the United States, and instead calling on dictators,
and then also calling on China and other dictators for all the
minerals that are needed? How in the world is that going to
work? I don't think it is going to.
Mr. Pyle. It is a very simple answer: it is not. If you say
you are for increasing electric vehicles, you have got to back
that up with policies that enable us to get off of our
crippling--what would be crippling dependance on China.
And Russia is a threat. There is no doubt about that in my
mind, in anyone's mind. But China is a bigger threat, and that
has to be addressed if we are going to march down this road.
Mrs. Lesko. Yes. Mr. Pyle, isn't most of the lithium
processed in China?
Mr. Pyle. Yes. As I mentioned in my testimony, the DoE--
DoD, I should say--issued a report entitled, ``Securing Defense
of Critical Supply Chains,'' and it lists lithium as 94 percent
dependent on China. It is DoD, it is not my numbers.
Mrs. Lesko. So I hear some of my Democratic colleagues
saying they want to increase oil production. I heard the other
night at the State of the Union that President Biden wants to
buy American. So let's do it. Let's introduce legislation
together. Let's encourage our President to do that, instead of
empty rhetoric. Let's do it. Let's do the mining in the United
States of America. Let's do oil and gas production in the
United States of America. We can do it, and we should do it.
And with that, I yield back.
Mr. Rush. The gentelady yields back. The Chair now
recognizes the gentlelady from California, Ms. Matsui, for 5
minutes.
Ms. Matsui. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, and I want
to thank the witnesses for being here today.
Now, as we know, transportation is the most polluting
sector of our economy, and the devastating Russian war in
Ukraine is a critical reminder of why we must end our
dependance on fossil fuels and transition away from internal
combustion engines. For this reason I have always been a long-
time champion of strong Federal tailpipe emission and fuel
economy standards, which are critical to reducing
transportation emissions and expediting EV adoption.
The next step in this fight is to ensuring the adoption of
electric vehicles in communities nationwide. A crucial
challenge and a critical challenge to the development of a
domestic EV supply chain is a global semiconductor shortage.
Last December the Department of Commerce reported that the
United States will not meet the Biden Administration's 2030
electric vehicle adoption goals without urgent investment in
domestic semiconductor manufacturing.
The CHIPS Act, which is bipartisan legislation to establish
a roadmap to reassert American leadership in the semiconductor
industry, will give the Commerce Department powerful tools to
boost domestic semiconductor manufacturing.
Mr. Holycross, yes or no, is the current semiconductor
shortage hindering your company's ability to meet demand and
our Nation's goals for electric vehicle adoption?
Mr. Holycross. Well, thanks for the question. Certainly,
the supply disruptions have presented challenges for us, and
has required, you know, very detailed, you know, day-to-day
management of how we continue to assemble vehicles, and produce
them, and provide them in the quantities desired.
Our announcements around our electrification build-out of
our capacity and meeting the demand that customers have shown
for these exciting products I described earlier is a big
priority for us. And so it reinforces the critical discussion
we are having today around the complement of policies that have
to come together so that we can ensure we don't have these
disruptions going forward, and that we can have the security in
the domestic supply chain to make sure we can meet the future
demand for the capacity that we have invested in and are
planning for.
We are making the long play, we are making the commitment.
We intend to lead, and that signal for the market is,
hopefully, what is going to drive the additional policies that
are required to bring this home, and to ensure we don't have
the challenges that we have had right now.
Ms. Matsui. Well, thank you very much.
Lifetime ownership costs of EVs are lower than those of
internal combustion vehicles, as the average EV driver will
spend 60 percent less on fuel than a traditional internal
combustion engine driver. Last December I co-led a letter to
auto manufacturers with my colleague, Peter Welch, highlighting
the importance of EV affordability for low and medium-income
communities.
Mr. Holycross, yes or no, is your company working on the
development and production of more affordable electric models?
And can you tell us more about these plans, if you are
doing so?
Mr. Holycross. Thank you. That is exactly the heart of our
strategy, and what makes us unique in the industry, in terms of
what we are doing right now, not five years from now, not ten
years from now. These vehicles that we are electrifying are the
most iconic nameplates, right in the heart of the market, both
on the retail and the commercial level.
The F-150 Lightning, and the excitement that has been
generated for that, we are seeing incremental--this is not
substitutional--incremental growth. With a starting price under
$40,000, this vehicle is going to appeal to a wide array of
customers. And the work that we need to do to get them into
more areas across the country, so that they are affordable and
we can realize the true benefits that they provide in terms of
environmental benefits, is first and foremost for us.
And so the provisions in the infrastructure package and
others that are on the table for incentives will definitely
serve these customers well, make them--help make them
affordable.
Ms. Matsui. Thank you very much.
Advancements in battery technology have led to a new era of
EVs with longer range and higher performance, yet those who
live in multi-unit dwellings, as well as lower wealth and
disadvantaged communities are still largely excluded from EV
adoption.
Ms. Powers, how can states best utilize funding from the
bipartisan infrastructure law to ensure that under-served
communities can have appropriate access to EV charging
infrastructure?
Ms. Powers. Thank you for the question. Under the
Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act, there is $2.5 billion
for a charging and fueling infrastructure program, and 50
percent of that is set aside for community charging and
fueling. And so that is--funding will be awarded on a
competitive basis to states, municipalities, and others. And it
is with those funds that you can really make a difference on
multi-unit dwelling infrastructure investment, as well as at
low and moderate-income communities.
There is--also will be work through the National EV Formula
program to place DC fast chargers primarily along highways. But
there will be an option, once the corridors are built out, for
states to invest those dollars in the communities themselves.
Ms. Matsui. OK. Well, thank you.
Mr. Chairman, I lost my clock, so I don't know how much
time I have left.
Mr. Rush. So did I, and I don't have a clock, so I am going
to rely on members being honorable and respectful of the time.
So the gentlelady yields back. Mr. Pence, you are
recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Pence. Thank you, Chairman Rush and Ranking Member
Upton, for holding this hearing, and thank you to the witnesses
for appearing here today.
Let me acknowledge my support for the people of Ukraine. I
call on this Administration to admit its role in mishandling
this crisis, and now the problem with the energy crisis. But
today let's discuss the facts about the next administration's
failure, EVs.
Efforts to enforce the electrification of our
transportation industry is another part of the majority's
complex equation for a green economy that is just not rooted in
reality. After spending my career in the liquid fuel
distribution industry, I know how to ensure fuel supply meets
consumer demand. This issue is seemingly overlooked by my
colleagues.
Whether adapting to new peaks or meeting increased
generation needs, our current distribution infrastructure
cannot deliver the amount of power necessary to sustain a rapid
expansion of EV networks. The ambitious estimates of EV sales
being discussed today will require locations to install
charging stations that are powerful enough to provide a
convenient and fast refueling option for traveling consumers.
Major highways across the country will experience sustained
peak demands throughout the day that could far exceed the
capabilities of current infrastructure, and I am talking about
the delivery of the electricity to the location. This problem
becomes compounded by the efforts of the majority and the Biden
Administration to inhibit and price out reliable, dispatchable,
and current baseload power supplies like the coal plants and
the natural gas pipelines in Indiana.
I support the advancement of American innovation, but the
solutions to meet ambitious climate targets haven't proven to
be fully scalable or cost effective yet. Both PJM and MISO, who
oversees reliability for 100 million Americans, have
acknowledged that the goal of a carbon-free power sector by
2035 is not realistic. We need to know what is really possible
before we start sending money out the door. That is why I am
working on legislation that requires agencies in the Joint
Office of Energy and Transition to certify that the capacity of
electricity distribution can meet demand before allocating
finite taxpayer resources.
Mr. Pyle, the EV infrastructure program includes $14
million for the State of Indiana. Let's talk about the facts of
charging stations. What is the cost of a charging station?
Mr. Pyle. I don't have that number off the top of my head,
sorry.
Mr. Pence. How fast are they?
Mr. Pyle. They are not fast at all.
Mr. Pence. OK.
Mr. Pyle. Not yet, anyway.
Mr. Pence. Ms. Powers, what is the cost of a charging
station?
Ms. Powers. It varies, depending on the level of power that
is required. I believe one of the representatives earlier said
that, for a DC fast charger, it can range from 50,000 to
$150,000.
Mr. Pence. For a charger. But it probably depends on how
much electricity comes to that location, correct?
Ms. Powers. That is correct. And also the level of
readiness for the electric system support structure around it.
Mr. Pence. So I have estimates where I used to work. In
Europe it--sometimes it costs a million and a quarter to
deliver that power there.
And in your testimony earlier you talked about we have to--
it has got to be shorter distances on the interstates, as
people travel longer distances. Maybe in cities it is not as
important. But, you know, at $14 million, that means they can
put about 14 charging stations into the State of Indiana, with
6 million people. So if we are starting to do the numbers here,
OK, 600,000 divided by 4, so we have 150,000--in a few years--
electric cars with 14 charging stations, if we use the money
that we are getting from the Federal Government.
Ms. King, how much do your charging stations cost?
Ms. King. Thank you for the question. Our charging stations
are priced competitively in the marketplace for----
Mr. Pence. And I mean right now. If I wanted to buy a
charging station from you, how much would it cost?
Ms. King. Well, you couldn't buy one right now. We are
going into production this summer----
Mr. Pence. OK, thank you. How fast will your charging
stations be?
Ms. King. Our charging stations for level 2, they usually
charge a vehicle within four to six hours. For the DC fast
charger models that will be produced in 2023, they can charge
your car up to 20 minutes. Twenty to forty minutes is----
Mr. Pence. Right. Thanks, Ms. King. The fastest they have
in Europe is 24 minutes for a full charge.
And I thank you all for being here.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Rush. The gentleman yields back. The Chair now
recognizes the Ms. Castor of Florida.
Ms. Castor, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Ms. Castor. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I believe the future
is electric, and it is going to be tied to lower-cost clean
energy. And that will--that is what, ultimately, is going to
help lower costs for families and businesses alike.
And Mr. Holycross, it is very heartening to see the private
sector here in America--American automakers, auto workers--
working together, making massive investments in the clean
energy future.
I mean, the investments of Ford and GM alone across the
country recently are just incredible. And together we are going
to out compete China. I know we will.
Ms. Powers, when we are talking about getting the EV
charging infrastructure out, I am very concerned that there
will be roadblocks at the State and local levels, that there
will be additional charges, barriers, utilities will try to
control the market, while Ms. King has pointed out it is very
important to have as widespread uptake accessibility,
affordability of these charging stations as possible.
In the bipartisan infrastructure law we did provide some
direction requiring states to update utility rates to ensure
that the charging infrastructure is accessible and affordable.
What else does Congress need to be doing in the coming months
and years to make sure that it is not--there aren't barriers to
deployment?
Ms. Powers. Thank you for the question. As you mentioned,
there are some barriers at the State and local level to
efficient infrastructure rollout, but the states are working
hand in hand with municipalities and utilities, streamlining
soft permitting costs for charging stations, working with
utilities to explore alternate rate cases, and/or paired with
battery storage or onsite generation. These are all things that
are being resolved at the local level.
The Federal Government can assist by helping to support
those dialogs, looking--investing in research and deployment
programs that could help to test new and creative solutions,
particularly on the utility side. Utilities are a critical
partner in the EV infrastructure rollout. Their rates will
determine how expensive it is to charge your vehicle, and
states are working hand in hand with them to resolve those----
Ms. Castor. I think it is going to be something for us to
keep a close eye on, moving down the road.
Mr. Holycross, the House passed very significant tax
credits that would make the next electric vehicle that families
are dying to buy--they want an electric car or truck, they want
to bypass the gas station right now. Those tax credits will
make it cheaper for families to afford the EV. They will also--
an EV will also reduce the demand for oil, promote energy--
American energy security, cleanup the air, help Americans avoid
price spikes over time.
Where do you rank these tax credits for consumers and
affordability on your to-do list here for Congress?
Mr. Holycross. Thank you for the question. It is absolutely
one of the highest priorities.
But obviously, with the announcements that we have made,
and the vehicles that we are looking to get into these
customers' hands, and the wide range of customers they can
satisfy--action and opportunity--make these more affordable
faster, so that we can have these vehicles, just like the
legacy of our company, for the many, versus the few.
So with the kind of scale that we can get to, with the
capacity we have invested in, that is going to, obviously, help
the affordability. Same thing on the infrastructure, by the
way: the faster the chargers come, the more the costs are going
to come down. Then we can use the opportunity for the
incentives in the policies to help bridge and keep us on this
path, and give us confidence in the market to continue these
investments.
Ms. Castor. Thank you very much. And while we were sitting
here in this committee meeting today, President Biden did
announce that he is targeting the artery of Putin's Russian
economy by banning oil--banning imports of Russian gas and oil.
That is a very important step. The Congress should followup
through legislation.
The European Union also--marching ahead with us also on a
track to reduce Russian oil and gas imports, ultimately cease
them so they are not dependent on it. What the EU is doing, as
well, is they are revising their energy strategy to do more
energy efficiency, cut gas consumption, shift to
electrification. And we must do that, too, for our own national
security interests and economic interests.
And I know there has been a--some discussion about--boy,
the--we ought to just drill, baby, drill, and that will be the
answer to everything. American oil and gas production is at
fairly high levels, but there are 9,000 approved U.S. drilling
permits currently sitting dormant. So it is not really a
government problem, it is a private--it is a--it is the oil and
gas sector problem.
And I am going to offer a unanimous consent request to put
in the record what the leading public-traded independent oil
and gas producers in the U.S. are saying. They are saying--
here, the--Continental saying they are going to keep production
firmly in check. The Devon Energy, ``No, we are not going to
drill, we are going to take the value over the pursuit of
volume,'' because they are making enormous profits off the
backs of American consumers. Pioneer said, as 100----
Mr. Rush. The gentlelady's time----
Ms. Castor [continuing]. They said, ``We are going to--we
are not going to change our growth rate. It is important to
return cash back to the shareholders.'' So I offer that--the
Argus Media Report for unanimous consent.
Mr. Rush. The gentlelady's time has expired. The gentlelady
yields. The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from----
Ms. Castor. And Mr. Chairman, did you accept my UC request?
Mr. Rush. Hearing no objections, so moved.
[The information appears at the conclusion of the hearing.]
Ms. Castor. Thank you.
Mr. Rush. Right. Mr. Welch of Vermont, you are recognized
for 5 minutes.
Mr. Welch. Thank you very much. Thanks very much, Mr.
Chairman. By the way, I really appreciate you pushing ahead, no
matter what, even in these incredibly perilous times.
Mr. Chairman, I would like to request permission to submit
a statement for the record by the Zero Emission Transportation
Association.
Mr. Rush. Hearing no objection, so ordered.
[The information appears at the conclusion of the hearing.]
Mr. Welch. And I thank you so much for this hearing. We
want to reduce dependance on fossil fuel energy. And that means
we have got to attack and find practical ways to do that.
The autos are about 30 percent, nationally, of our carbon
emissions. In Vermont it is even higher, 40 percent. Electric
vehicles, obviously, can really make a difference, but those
have to be affordable and reliable, and that means we have to
have charging stations. And that is--in Vermont, Mr. Chairman,
there is a lot of multi-family buildings. I know that is true
in Chicago, rental housing or folks in rural areas, where the
charger installation issues can be more difficult and
expensive.
And what I want to ask about--would be really helpful to
folks, like, in Burlington, or other urban areas in Vermont--
and I am going to be introducing very soon the Equitable Access
to Supply Equipment Act, which establishes a competitive grant
program for states that seek flexible funds to install publicly
accessible EV chargers.
I would like to ask Ms. King, from your perspective as a
leader in manufacturing and servicing of EV chargers, can you
speak to how the money in the infrastructure bill allocated for
community charging and further funding through my EASE Act for
EVs can help accelerate charging deployment in areas that have
less access to private charging?
Ms. King. Thank you for that question. I believe that the
moneys that are allocated in the infrastructure law is able to
deploy electric vehicle charging stations in communities that
are under-served and under-represented by a few things.
First, partnerships, as my other witness has stated, with
local and State governments; utility companies, to ensure that
those communities that use mobility, and the way that they use
mobility, is addressed. So home charging stations will be very,
very, very integral in the way that communities use their
charging stations, or use their electric vehicles.
Also, public transportation, and having electrification
through public transportation is very important, because those
communities utilize mobility through the use of public
transportation often.
Multi-family housing also is very key with respect to how
these communities, usually communities of color or low-income
communities or rural communities, will be able to access this
technology.
Mr. Welch. Thank you.
Ms. King. Ride share programs is another way that you can
also access, through ride share programs in those communities.
Mr. Welch. Thank you very much.
Ms. Powers, can you please elaborate on how flexible funds
through the infrastructure bill and my bill can help states
accelerate existing programs and partnerships that meet some of
these unique challenges that Ms. King is talking about that are
associated with charging their states and regions? Thank you.
Ms. Powers. Thank you for the question. The Infrastructure
Act, the charging funds will flow through the State departments
of transportation. But as mentioned, there are active
partnerships between the State DoTs, as well as their energy
offices and environmental counterparts to build on existing
programs.
The Infrastructure Act funding will go a long ways toward
building out EV infrastructure in rural areas of the country.
There is a strong emphasis on highway corridors and interstates
that will help to connect rural and remote areas. There is some
flexible funding, as well, again, through the charging and
fueling infrastructure program----
Mr. Welch. Thank you----
Ms. Powers [continuing]. And additional funds would go a
long ways----
Mr. Welch. Yes. I am just sorry--I really appreciate that.
I may interrupt you there, because I do want to get one
question in.
Mr. Holycross, we are excited about what Ford is doing.
Thank you. It is really terrific. Can you explain how Ford is
planning to invest in EVs that are affordable, affordable for
every American?
Mr. Holycross. By going right into the heart of the market,
and where our leadership is today. So the F-150 pickup, the
best selling vehicle in the country for the last 45 years,
electrifying that first, with a starting price under $40,000.
That is the heart of this. Nameplates like Mustang that
resonate with customers. That is where this is going to be.
But in order to get to the kind of scale beyond what we
have already committed to and planned for, to make these
affordable and accessible, we are going to need the
continuation of these complementary policies that have come
along.
So we are excited to be here today and, you know, providing
these for the many versus the few, and seeing the benefits that
will be realized.
Mr. Welch. Well, thank you very much. Thank you, I want to
thank all the witnesses.
I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Rush. The gentleman yields back. The Chair now
recognizes Mr. Schrader of Oregon for 5 minutes.
Mr. Schrader. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, and
welcome, all the witnesses, to the hearing.
A couple of comments first. One, a pushback on a lot of the
complete misinformation put out by my good friends and
colleagues across the aisle here. I mean, the idea that the
energy crisis that we are facing, the turmoil tragedy in the
Ukraine can be answered just by turning a spigot and drilling a
few more wells is completely erroneous.
America has increased its oil rig count dramatically in the
course of the last few years. I mean, just in the last year or
so we are up 40 percent in the rigs that are out there right
now. Natural gas production is at an all-time high right now in
the United States of America. We are the biggest producer of
oil and gas in the world. But I think we are fooling ourselves
if there--if we think we are going to be able to dominate the
world market. There are a lot of other players: OPEC, you know,
Russia, Venezuela, other countries out there.
Is it smart for us to double down on polluting the planet,
when there are alternate resources, other avenues for our
transportation sector that we should be looking at?
You know, the transportation sector is, what, 30 percent of
the emissions in our world right now? Let's start going after
that.
I don't agree that America cannot walk and chew bubble gum
at the same time. Yes, let's make sure that we build our LNG
capacity to handle, you know, all the production that we have.
Right now Secretary Granholm says we are at capacity. There is
plants being built, as we speak. I have colleagues who are
going to talk about that in a little bit. But let's also build
for the future.
I mean, that is what it is all about. How do we decrease
the dependance that Mr. Pyle keeps talking about Europe's on,
you know, with their fossil fuels? It is to start to build out
an electrical network. And that is what this hearing is about.
This is about making it real. This is about making it real.
Mr. Holycross, a question for you. When did the President
of the United States call you and said you had to produce only
electric vehicles? When did he tell you that it was the policy
the Federal Government that it was only going to require Ford
and GM and everyone else just to produce electric vehicles?
When did he call you?
Mr. Holycross. The electric vehicles we are providing are
not being imposed on our customers. They are demanding these.
Mr. Schrader. Oh, well----
Mr. Holycross. It is not an imposition.
Mr. Schrader [continuing]. That is very different from what
we heard here today.
Mr. Holycross. It is--this is a----
Mr. Schrader. I am sorry to interrupt. It was a rhetorical
question. You answered it very well. Thank you very much.
You know, this is the consumer that is driving this. You
know? Ford, GM great American companies, iconic, but they are
listening to the consumer. It is not Joe Biden. It is not
Trump. It is not Obama. They are listening to the consumer.
That is what America is all about. And the future of this
country, the future of the world is electrification, you know?
Let's be honest, folks, we have got to get after this in a
serious way.
And I think it is the partnership that we are seeing with
the Federal Government stepping up, hopefully working with our
friends, Ford Motor Company, to make this actually happen in a
timely manner, that is what it is all about. It is about doing
that while we deal with our media crises at this very point in
time.
So I am sorry to cut you off, Mr. Holycross. You can go
ahead and expand a little bit on your comments there. And I
also want to make sure that it is affordable for Americans. I
think Mr. Welch alluded to that, but I want to make sure you
have a strategy to make sure the electric vehicles are
available to everyday Americans.
Mr. Holycross. Well, that is absolutely our legacy at Ford,
in terms of what we have been able to provide in terms of
affordability and transportation for the masses.
And, you know, look, the importance of understanding the
performance of these vehicles, as well, being able--having the
capability to do everything that these customers today demand,
and no compromises, not in question.
In addition, these are digitally connected vehicles. They
have the software capability to provide a whole new array of
services to these customers, especially commercial vehicle
customers
[inaudible] these vehicles to get their work done. These
are small business owners, electricians, plumbers. These
vehicles
[inaudible] right in the heart of satisfying those, and
affordability is a big issue, cost of ownership.
But if we are going to truly accelerate the pace, realizing
the benefits this transition can make, both for our economic
security, our national security, you need to have the
complementary measures, in addition to the emissions standards
and other things that have been put in place, that we fully
support, and have consistently. So this is a real inflection
point, as indicated in our testimony, and we are looking
forward to continuing to partner with the government to make
this happen at an even faster pace.
Mr. Schrader. Very good, yes, I think it is an inflection
point.
Ms. King, real quick, how do we make sure that minorities,
people of color can actually afford these cars?
Ms. King. I think that one thing the industry needs is
incentivizing. I think that rebates, incentives in order to
ensure that they are able to afford the vehicle and the EV
infrastructure that is needed to charge the vehicles is what
new adopters are going to need.
Mr. Schrader. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Rush. The gentleman yields back. The Chair now
recognizes the gentlelady from New Hampshire, Ms. Kuster, for 5
minutes.
Ms. Kuster. Thank you so much, Mr. Chairman, and thank you
for hosting this important hearing on electrification of our
transportation system.
I think one of the major drivers going forward from this
inflection point will be the cost of gasoline, and that
families need to have a reliable vehicle that they can afford
not just to purchase, but to keep on the road. And so I want to
commend our witnesses here for their leadership in meeting the
consumer demand, and thank you to Mr. Schrader for correcting
the record, that this is driven by consumer demand.
So this hearing is especially timely as we begin to
consider legislation to halt the importation of crude oil from
Russia in the wake of its unprovoked and unwarranted illegal
invasion of Ukraine. This is a policy that I support, and I
look forward to working with my colleagues on both sides of the
aisle.
While we consider short-term remediation efforts, we must
start thinking about what a clean energy transportation economy
will look like, and how we can advance policies to achieve this
goal. We must ramp up our Federal investments for an
electrical--electric vehicle future. And to facilitate the
wide-scale adoption of electric vehicles, we need to expand
access to public charging stations. It is a matter of providing
peace of mind to drivers taking long trips, and to those
without access to residential charging.
The Infrastructure Investments and Jobs Act provides a
critical $7.5 billion investment toward developing a nationwide
public charging network. We need to ensure that this charging
network meets the needs of Americans across the country,
including those in rural communities like my district in New
Hampshire.
Ms. Powers, can you elaborate on some of the challenges to
expanding public charging in rural communities?
And how can State and Federal agencies partner to overcome
these obstacles?
Ms. Powers. Thank you for your question.
The electric service needs in rural communities are unique
and can be challenging, particularly since, in many cases,
charging stations will be placed along highways and roadways.
It will depend on the area of the country, but making sure that
there is adequate electric service and reliable service for
those chargers will be critically important.
The Federal Government is already doing quite a bit through
the Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act with that five
billion national EV formula program, again, which will be
invested along interstates and highways a lot in the rural
areas, and continuing to engage with states, as well as
utilities across the country, to try to better understand the
unique challenges and specific areas of the country. A rural
community in Vermont is different than a rural area in Montana,
and so being able to have customized solutions for different
states will be important.
Ms. Kuster. Thank you so much. It is clear we need to
continue to address the unique challenges, as you say, facing
rural communities all across the country.
Now, shifting focus to public charging more broadly, one of
the primary challenges facing this industry is demand charges.
Demand charges are charges levied by electric utilities as a
means to recoup the costs they incur to meet peak energy
demands. However, many electric vehicle charging service
providers are paying high demand charges that do not accurately
reflect their demand on the electric system.
This is for Ms. Powers and Ms. King: Can both of you speak
to the impact of high demand charges on charging service
operators, and how these impacts affect consumers more broadly?
Ms. Powers. I could start. Demand charges can be a
significant obstacle to electric vehicle infrastructure
investment. Demand charges will often drive up costs
significantly, sometimes to the tune of thousands of dollars
per charge, even at a station. And so it is critical for
states, utilities, and others to work together to identify what
rate structures might be appropriate to enable utilities to
recover the costs that they need to ensure adequate and
reliable electric service attestation, while also making sure
that the station use becomes affordable for the consumers.
In many cases, demand charge structures were put in place
for industrial uses or other uses, and were not designed for EV
charging stations. So it will be important for utilities and
others to take a look at how they might be able to rework those
demand charge structures to more accurately captured the true
cost.
Ms. Kuster. Thank you.
Ms. King. And while I agree with Ms. Powers, I also feel
that the networking and software structure for electric vehicle
charging stations that are implemented will also help in
curbing those costs for the user. And so our software network
is designed to make sure that we are tracking and have
interactivity and connectivity with the user to ensure that
they are utilizing their chargers at peak times to ensure that,
if there are cheaper rates, less expensive rates, then our
chargers will be able to educate the driver to say, ``You need
to charge during this time period.''
And so that also offsets the high cost of charging during a
peak rate, where you can charge lower, particularly when you
are charging at home.
Ms. Kuster. Great, that is very helpful, thank you.
And with that, my time is up, I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Rush. The gentlelady yields back. The Chair now
recognizes the gentlelady from California, Ms. Barragan, for 5
minutes.
Ms. Barragan, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Ms. Barragan. Thank you. Thank you, Chairman Rush, for
holding this important hearing on transforming our auto
industry to electric vehicles, and the investments the Biden
Administration and Democrats in Congress are making and need to
build on.
We have seen in the last two weeks how important it is to
aggressively transition our transportation system away from
fossil fuels. This transition is about environmental justice.
It is about climate, and it is about our national security.
Every electric vehicle we can make and sell in America is one
less vehicle at the mercy of increasing oil prices and relying
on oil from Russia.
I also want to take an opportunity to echo the comments
from my colleague, Mr. Schrader. About 95 percent of the
comments I completely agreed with, and appreciate his voicing a
lot of the responses to what we are hearing on the other side.
I also want to thank my colleagues and our witnesses today
for being here, and for talking about
[Audio malfunction.]
Ms. Barragan [continuing]. The importance of the
communities----
[Audio malfunction.]
Ms. Barragan. I represent California's 44th district in
the----
[Audio malfunction.]
Ms. Barragan [continuing]. Aware we often have to reach out
to folks to educate them about electric vehicles, but we also
have to make sure it is affordable.
I recently introduced a bill called the EVs for All Act to
provide grants for electric vehicle car sharing programs at
public housing authorities. It is modeled after a successful
program at Rancho San Pedro in my district for residents who
can't afford a car, but still want to take part in the electric
vehicle future. As Federal resources for EV charging go out, I
hope State and local governments prioritize innovative
approaches to EV access in low-income communities and
communities of color.
Ms. King, my first question is for you. In your testimony
you talked about how workforce development will be needed to
meet the demand the infrastructure law will create for the EV
charging equipment your company manufactures. How can Congress
support efforts to connect economically disadvantaged
communities with these workforce development opportunities, and
where there are proposed workforce investments in the House-
passed Build Back Better Act that would help?
Ms. King. Thank you for the question. I believe that one of
the key factors that can be available is workforce development
training programs, apprenticeship programs, pre-apprenticeship
programs that can be provided for communities of color, low-
income communities, rural communities so that they can learn
trades, skills that will transfer over to this EV
infrastructure industry. We are hiring from within the
community to ensure that we have the ability to train. We have
received funding from local initiatives, local and State
initiatives, in order to start those apprenticeships and
training programs.
The second thing that I think that should be available are
other more holistic aspects like child care, like--for that
workforce. In order for people to get into the workforce, one
of the key barriers is child care for low-income communities.
And so things that help the community to become engaged in
workforce development, in addition to the training for the
technical skills that would be related to the jobs that we are
going to be providing through the manufacturing industry are
very vital, and could be utilized through that Build Back
Better Act.
Ms. Barragan. Thank you.
Ms. Powers, airports will be an important part of the
transition to electric vehicles. Rental car companies are
making significant electric vehicle purchases. For example,
Hertz recently committed to purchasing 100,000 vehicles. But
these commitments need to be paired with investments in
charging infrastructure to support them.
Is the National Association of State Energy Officials
providing any guidance to State and local governments on using
infrastructure funds for installing electric vehicle charging
at airports?
Ms. Powers. Thank you for the question.
We have received questions from our members about the
viability of funds at airports, and also what other ways states
can use Infrastructure Act and other dollars to support
electrification. It is my understanding that, through the
Infrastructure Act community charging grants, one of the areas
that is eligible would be airports, as long as--publicly
accessible location. And so that is one option.
But states are also looking to see what other opportunities
there are to electrify different areas of airports, not just
putting in charging stations, but some of the airport ground
support equipment. The Volkswagen settlement, for example, was
used by some states to help electrify some of that airport
ground support equipment and other aspects of airports.
Ms. Barragan. Thank you.
Mr. Holycross, in the last 10 seconds, what role do you see
for mobile charging as part of the EV charging infrastructure
in areas where stationary charging units can't go easily?
Mr. Holycross. Mobile charging has the opportunity to be
part of one of the many solutions, and that capability we are
working to have our vehicles provide, as well, whether it is
mobile charging, bidirectional charging to power work sites and
homes. We absolutely see that as part of the array of solutions
here.
Ms. Barragan. Thank you.
And with that, I yield back.
Mr. Rush. The gentlelady yields back. And now the chairman
recognizes the gentleman from Virginia, Mr. McEachin, for 5
minutes.
Mr. McEachin is not here. Ms. Blunt Rochester is recognized
for 5 minutes.
The Chair now recognizes Mr. O'Halleran from Arizona for 5
minutes.
Mr. O'Halleran. Thank you, Chairman Rush, for holding
today's important meeting. It comes at a time when we need to
be thinking seriously about how to ensure our economy is not
thrown into disarray every time a tyrant lies to the world.
It is also a time for us to start to understand that we are
in a situation because we haven't rushed forward and
diversified enough in our energy portfolio. We haven't taken
advantage of the sun and the wind and the other aspects that a
diversified portfolio would be--would allow us to have.
And in talking about diversified portfolios, I want to
point out a couple of things here. It is interesting to me
that, you know, there is already 9,000 permits that are already
approved, and half of them for oil and gas, and half of them,
oil and gas pipelines, are going unused.
Additionally, offshore, the fossil fuel industry has over
26 million acres of public land under lease, of which 53
percent is being used to produce oil and gas. The rest is not.
Offshore--onshore, that was. Offshore there are 2,078 active
leases that can--companies could--covering 11 million acres--
could use, and nearly 75 percent of those are not producing oil
or gas. I would just ask the companies why they are not doing
that, if they are so concerned about making sure we keep the
price of oil down for the American public.
On liquefied natural gas, I would like to bring up the
following. There are three new LNG projects ongoing right now--
two in Louisiana, one in Corpus Christi, Texas--that would
increase export capacity by about a third by mid-decade. Plants
already under construction should lift peak U.S. capacity to
13.9 billion cubic feet per day by the end of this year,
estimates from the U.S. Energy Information Administration. That
is a figure surpassing Qatar and Australia, who are now the two
largest LNG exporters in the world.
New LNG liquefaction trains in Louisiana, both of them, are
due to be in service prior to the end of the year. They were
permitted in October of last year. That will bring our LNG
terminals, combined, 261 billion cubic feet per year. I was
trying to wonder why we hadn't heard too much about LNG, or
pipelines, when it comes to that, because 50 percent of our
pipelines in America are unused today. So it makes me just
wonder--we should have a more thorough discussion.
And I agree with that earlier discussion that we need a
national plan now, rather than later. It is important.
I would like to point out that Arizona's 1st congressional
district is a great example of what needs to be replicated
across this country. Lucid Motors, an electronic vehicle
startup, established the first factory in North America, built
from the ground up for electric vehicles. The factory employs
1,200 in Casa Grande, Arizona, and plans to employ 6,000 by
2030, and has an economic impact of $81 billion on the broader
community.
The transition to green energy is a huge opportunity for
economic revitalization, good-paying American jobs, and also to
build a future where America is independent and secure. We
don't have to depend on the tyrants of the world. We don't have
to depend on other countries.
The energy market is a global market. The pricing mechanism
is a global pricing mechanism. To diversify your portfolio away
from the costly elements is a good idea, not a bad idea. And
that is why we are seeing so much of what Mr. Schrader had
commented on about why the demand is going up across our
Nation, and why the car companies across the Nation and the
world are moving in that direction, away from carbon and toward
the sun and the wind and the other elements that will bring
about tremendous amount of jobs within our country. And we are
going to be able to do that because we have started to invest
in it.
And we talked a lot today about the grid. The grid is
something that is meaningful. And before I get lost here I want
to commend Ford's commitment on clean energy and impact. Could
you, Mr. Holycross, identify, for example, using aluminum on
certain components to make vehicles lighter, increases battery
range, could you comment on how that will help us?
Mr. Holycross. Absolutely, I mean, reducing the weight of
vehicles, whether they are electric vehicles or internal
combustion engine vehicles, helps the efficiency of the
products and use less energy.
Look, we have gone to fully aluminum intensive bodies on
our full pickup line, our F-150's, our super duty F-Series
full-size SUVs taking more than 700 pounds of weight,
increasing the efficiency, reducing the operating costs for
customers. And so, as we look at electric vehicles and the
opportunities there--greater use of aluminum, other lightweight
materials--it is absolutely integral to our strategy.
But again, as we talk about the need to secure a supply
chain not only for the raw materials that are needed for
batteries, but for the broader components of the vehicles, it
is also an imperative on us to make sure we secure that supply.
Mr. O'Halleran. And I have to yield. And before I do I just
want to point out that----
Mr. Rush. The gentleman's time----
Mr. O'Halleran [continuing]. We would love to ship more to
Europe. They don't have the capacity to take it.
Mr. Rush. The gentleman's time----
Mr. O'Halleran. And I yield.
Mr. Rush. The gentleman's time has expired. The Chair now
the gentlelady from Delaware, Ms. Blunt Rochester, for 5
minutes.
Ms. Blunt Rochester. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for
recognizing, and Ranking Member Upton, holding this hearing,
and thank you to all of the witnesses for your testimonies
[inaudible].
The transportation sector accounts for almost one-third of
our Nation's greenhouse gas emissions. By transitioning to
electric vehicles, the auto industry can play an important role
in overcoming the impacts of climate change. Not only can EVs
help lower greenhouse gas emissions and improve our air quality
across the country, but this transition is an opportunity to
transform our domestic manufacturing and supply chain network
in the transportation industry.
Mr. Holycross, today I have heard a lot of my colleagues
mention that EV manufacturing is heavily dependent on foreign
manufacturing, especially in China and foreign-sourced
resources and materials--minerals. Yet in the past two years
alone, American demand for electric vehicles has nearly
quadrupled. We have an opportunity to expand our domestic
manufacturing in EVs to remain competitive in the market, and
increase good-paying jobs here at home.
The House-passed America Competes Act includes a bipartisan
supply chain subtitle that I have led with Representatives
Malinowski and Kinzinger, Dingell, Kelly, Wild, and Bourdeaux
to create an office within the Department of Commerce to
oversee and strengthen our supply chains.
And I want to just ask you a few questions, and I might
have to do something for the record, but can you share with us
why expanding American manufacturing of EVs is so critical to
our competitiveness in the EV market and as a nation?
Mr. Holycross. Absolutely. It is one of the biggest, you
know, aspects of our strategy at Ford, to be able to continue
to do all that research and development here in this country,
to incentivize the technical know-how, and transition our
workforce to be able to support it, as well, so that we can
compete with Europe and China, who have been moving, you know,
as fast, if not faster, in this space.
So as much as it is around securing domestic supply of
materials and manufacturing capacity, which we have already and
will continue to invest in, it is about our competitiveness as
a country and as an industry, domestically, to be able to
develop the skills and invest for the future of our workforce.
Ms. Blunt Rochester. Great. And you highlighted in your
written testimony that Ford is building two environmentally and
technologically advanced campuses. How are Ford's existing
domestic manufacturing facilities already equipped to support
the transition to electrical vehicles?
And what are the--what is necessary to retool and re-equip
existing facilities?
Mr. Holycross. Yes, you know, as you mentioned, it is--as
much as this has been about incremental investment in new
capacity for the plants that we have announced in Tennessee and
Kentucky, when we talk about the technology that is going into
these facilities, while they are producing zero-emission
vehicles, these facilities are working to have the
manufacturing operations be carbon neutral, as well. So the
power that goes in, the electricity to run these facilities,
can come from renewable resources. So we are demonstrating that
the capability of these new energy sources isn't just on the
vehicles, it is on the manufacturing side.
And look, we moved fast more than twice now in Dearborn, in
our Rouge complex, to add capacity, incremental capacity for
the F-150 Lightning, building out an all-new, environmentally
sound electrification vehicle center that is fully carbon
neutral, running on renewable electricity with more efficient
equipment. So this is as much about the vehicles as it is the
manufacturing and the realization of what we can do,
technologically and environmentally.
But if we are going to continue to progress that, we need
to continue to invest in training the workforce. And our over
$500 million investment so far in reskilling and moving these
folks into the new jobs that are critical for this transition
is absolutely critical. We can't leave folks behind. We have to
be able to move them to be able to compete.
Ms. Blunt Rochester. You are singing my song. As the co-
chair of the bipartisan Future of Work Caucus, and founder.
I have some more questions that I will send to you.
[The information appears at the conclusion of the hearing.]
Ms. Blunt Rochester. But Ms. Powers, you know, across the
globe people are taking steps to modernize and electrify our
transportation sector. And, you know, I know earlier this year
I introduced H.R. 1495, the Open Back Better Act, which you
mentioned in your testimony, and I want to thank NASEO for
their support of this legislation.
How--what can we learn? What approach can we take from Open
Back Better that we can put in the EV space, particularly with
private partnerships?
Ms. Powers. Absolutely, thank you for the question.
Public-private sector partnerships are, of course, critical
to make electric vehicle infrastructure rollout and
transportation electrification a success.
States and government are, of course, trying to incentivize
early market to help fill the gaps, but it is important to be
able to work with private companies, OEMs, utilities, et
cetera. You know, one of the things that we also like to
stress, and that we hear from the states, is the importance to
link resilience to any kind of transportation electrification
planning. One of the reasons so many states are interested in
investing in electric vehicles is to diversify the fuel supply
in their State, so that the vehicles aren't wholly reliant on
one source of energy.
Ms. Blunt Rochester. Thank you so much.
Thank you for your patience, Mr. Chairman, and I yield
back.
Mr. Rush [continuing]. Yields back. And now that concludes
our members of the subcommittee. And now there are some members
who have asked to waive on to this subcommittee.
The Chair will now recognize Mr. Cater, who has waived on
from Georgia.
Mr. Carter, you are waived--you are recognized for 5
minutes.
Mr. Carter. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate the
opportunity to waive on this committee, and I thank all of the
witnesses here today.
I have only been here for about the last 45 minutes, and I
have to tell you that I am appalled at some of the things that
I have heard from the other side of the aisle about our lack
of--the ability to have energy independence. I am reminded
that, just a little over a year ago, we had indeed achieved
energy independence in this country. We had--in fact, we had, I
think arguably, achieved energy dominance. We actually passed
legislation in the last session where we could export oil. That
had never been done--it had been years, decades before we had
done that--since we had done that.
So, you know, to make the argument that there is no way we
are ever going to be energy independent, I think, is a fallacy.
And I have to say that I take offense to that, because, you
know, if we have learned anything about what has happened over
in Ukraine--and I certainly hope we have, and certainly all of
us are united behind the Ukrainians, and want to do everything
we can to help them.
But at the same time--and I will add that I applaud the
President's move today to stop buying oil from Russia here in
the United States. That is a good move, something we have been
calling for ever since this started, even before this started.
So that is--I am glad that he has finally understood the
importance of us doing that, and being self-sufficient with
oil.
I have to tell you, though--I want to ask you, Mr.
Holycross. You were asked a question by one of my colleagues on
the other side of the aisle earlier if the President called you
and asked you--or told you to build electric vehicles, and you,
I believe, responded, no, he did not. And I believe you. Is
that true?
Mr. Holycross. Yes, the electric vehicles that we are
producing today--have announced are in even higher demand than
we anticipated early on from the market.
Mr. Carter. So you would say it is consumer-driven, and I
believe that is what you answered. Let me ask you. Do you think
the subsidies that have been offered by the Federal Government
have had anything to do with that, as well?
Mr. Holycross. Well, they certainly can help, when we talk
about affordability and accelerating the pace that we get these
vehicles into consumer hands. So yes, we are supportive----
Mr. Carter. But let me ask you, Mr. Holycross--and I mean
this sincerely, I am not trying to be cute or anything here--
but how many gas stations did the Federal Government build when
Ford first put out the Model T?
Mr. Holycross. Well, you know, the infrastructure around
gas stations and--you know, the--over 120 years ago, as we
introduced vehicles to the masses, the key thing for us has
been that you get out of this chicken-and-egg
[inaudible] about what needs to come first. And that is
what we did 120 years ago----
Mr. Carter. I understand, I understand. But we had to have
gas stations back then, and----
Mr. Holycross. Yes.
Mr. Carter. And I am taking your answer as being none, the
Federal Government did not subsidize any gas stations when the
Model T first came out.
Why is it that today, if it is being consumer-driven, as
you say, and that your company and the other companies building
these EVs--and don't get me wrong, I am all for electric
vehicles, I think it is great. But I have to make the point
that this is a result, largely a result, of the subsidies that
are being offered by the Federal Government.
Why should the Federal Government be funding EV charging
stations?
Mr. Holycross. Well, again, I think it is to accelerate the
pace that we get these vehicles into customer hands for the
variety of benefits we have been talking about today, both in
terms of our competitiveness as a country, the competitiveness
of our local industry for manufacturers like us that employ
more workers, hourly workers to build vehicles and sell more
vehicles in this country. This is all about sustaining that
leadership, and meeting the demand----
Mr. Carter. But----
Mr. Holycross [continuing]. These vehicles driving from
customers.
Mr. Carter. Understood. But if it is consumer-driven, as
you have indicated, then why isn't Ford willing to put down the
necessary investment for its own products like EV--the electric
vehicles?
Mr. Holycross. Well, we are making huge investments, both
in the vehicles and in partnerships to help increase
infrastructure and all the other services that have to come
along in the broader ecosystem to make these vehicles really
provide the benefits for society----
So we are providing those investments----
Mr. Carter. Thank you, Mr. Holycross. I appreciate your
responses, and I understand where you are coming from. But at
the same time, I have to make the point that this
Administration, from the get-go, from day one, declared war on
fossil fuels. Exactly. That is what happened.
Now, look, I am all for renewable energy, I am all for
electric vehicles. But at the same time, this war on fossil
fuels has to stop. We have to adopt a all-of-the-above type
energy strategy. Fossil fuels has a place in the future here.
We are never going to be able to achieve what we are trying to
achieve without making sure that fossil fuels are utilized.
Mr. Rush. The gentleman----
Mr. Carter. We are--already, we have decreased emissions--
--
Mr. Rush. The gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. Carter [continuing]. In this country, more than--in the
last decade, than the next 12 countries combined, while still--
--
Mr. Rush. The gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. Carter [continuing]. Growing our economy. We can do it.
Mr. Rush. The gentleman's time has----
Mr. Carter. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I yield back.
Mr. Rush [continuing]. Expired. The Chair now recognizes
Dr. Ruiz from California.
Dr. Ruiz, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Ruiz. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for holding this
important hearing. I am especially excited for this hearing
today because of what it means for my district and the Salton
Sea.
As you know, electric cars around the globe use lithium ion
batteries, and mainly get their supply from countries like
Australia, Chile, and China. However, right under our noses
there is a potentially massive supply of lithium, right here in
the United States. And that is underneath the Salton Sea. In
fact, the world's fifth largest lithium deposit is under the
Salton Sea. This lithium deposit presents an incredible
opportunity to transform our region and our entire nation into
a global leader in clean energy production. The area is
appropriately nicknamed Lithium Valley because of its
incredible potential to power our clean energy future, and to
manufacture the batteries that we need.
With the lithium underneath the Salton Sea we can help end
our Nation's dependance on foreign oil with clean energy
technology. That means we won't be dependent on countries like
Russia, who clearly doesn't share our values. The lithium
deposit under the Salton Sea also means good-paying clean
energy jobs that will stimulate our local economy and move our
Nation forward toward our clean energy future.
So I am dedicated to ensuring that the benefit of this
lithium extraction goes back to the communities and working
families, where it is needed and, frankly, where it belongs.
Mr. Holycross, in your testimony you stated the need to
strengthen our domestic supply chains for batteries. Do you
include lithium in that assessment?
Mr. Holycross. Absolutely.
Mr. Ruiz. Thank you. And also, you note in your testimony
that there is soaring demand and excitement for electrical
vehicles. Assuming these vehicles use lithium batteries for
power, does the U.S. currently extract, process, and recycle
enough lithium to support a robust, domestically sourced
battery manufacturing industry?
Mr. Holycross. No, we are going to need to continue to
accelerate the pace of having more supply, domestically. And
that is why we are hopeful that, with the signals we have sent,
with the capacity we have planned for the vehicles, that that
will reinforce the importance of the policies to increase the
supply of materials you indicate.
Mr. Ruiz. Thank you. And it is also critically important to
ensure that communities' environmental health is protected. And
the lithium that could be extracted from the Salton Sea is a
byproduct from the brine, the fluid, the brine that geothermal
companies use to generate geothermal energy. So there is no
breaking new ground in this.
But how can policy expand the domestic supply chain for
batteries and their materials in ways that protect public
health and the environment?
Mr. Holycross. Well, it is what you said, and it is also
utilizing the best practices that companies like Ford have had
in place for some time, in terms of how to responsibly do this,
how to make sure we partner with our supply chains to ensure
that this is done in the most environmentally and socially
responsible way, by investing in the new technologies to
extract these materials and to create the kinds of jobs that
you spoke about, so that it is equitable, and it is also
providing access to the broader economy to participate in this.
So we are excited about the opportunities you have
highlighted, and it is all about exactly how we do this in the
most responsible way.
Mr. Ruiz. Well, I would like to continue to discuss this
further with you, and potentially visit the Salton Sea with
your company and other companies. This is going to require a
very large public and private partnership in order for us to do
that.
The important part here is to make sure that the
communities are involved, that there is community-benefit
projects and investment, and that labor and working families
are at the table, so that we can maximize the value for
everybody in the area. It is an economically depressed area,
but we have cheap electricity, and we have a labor pool that is
willing to work, and they have proven themselves as being very
hard-working families. And so this is a great opportunity.
Look, the President, in his address to the Nation, said
that we need to stop our dependency and buying batteries from
China, and produce them here. Having the fifth largest lithium
deposit underneath the--in the world--underneath the Salton Sea
can make us the second largest lithium exporting country, even
using the lithium for our own battery production needs.
So this is a great opportunity, Chairman, and I think we
should pursue it, and have more hearings on it. And with that I
yield back my time.
Mr. Rush. The gentleman yields back. The Chair now
recognizes the gentleman from Pennsylvania, Mr. [inaudible] for
five [inaudible].
Mr. Joyce. First I want to thank Chairman Rush for allowing
me to waive on to this subcommittee hearing, and thank you to
our witnesses for appearing today.
As we have all heard from many of my colleagues, America is
in the midst of an energy crisis created by the Biden
Administration. Just a year ago, our Nation was energy
dominant. And for the first time since 1952, the country was a
net energy exporter. Under President Biden, unfortunately,
those circumstances have reversed. Energy prices are
skyrocketing, and his Administration has given violent
dictators like Putin the tools to continue to damage our
economy right here.
What America needs, we need more affordable and more
reliable baseload power. We need to invest in innovative
technologies that take advantage of the energy reserves that
are beneath the feet of my constituents, so that we can keep
our natural gas and coal power plants online. We need to find
ways to incentivize industries to improve the grid, and develop
greater efficiencies, instead of punishing them with taxes and
penalties.
As we move farther into this decade, America's energy needs
are only going to continue to grow. Electric cars and their
sales are up 17 percent from 2016 to 2020. And that growth
comes with a strain on our electric grid. If my colleagues
across the aisle are serious about a move to electric vehicles,
then we need to talk about improving the electric grid.
We need to talk about how to incentivize companies to
modernize their infrastructure and build more transmission.
We need to talk about enabling domestic mining of essential
mineral commodities that are used in battery and electric
vehicle technology. For example, it shouldn't take a decade to
obtain mining permits for the Thacker Pass lithium project in
Nevada.
Last, we need to end the war on pipelines, so that places
like the natural gas fields in my home State of Pennsylvania
can once again flourish.
Let me make this point. I am dedicated to re-energizing our
Nation, and lead a reinvigorated American economy into the
future using the resources that are present right here.
My first question is for you, Mr. Pyle. We recognize that
widespread adoption of electric vehicles would substantially
increase demand for electricity. Do you agree that a
diversified generating portfolio and strong transmission and
distribution infrastructure are critical to producing and
moving that electricity to charge these electric vehicles?
Mr. Pyle. Absolutely, 100 percent.
Mr. Joyce. Mr. Pyle, are we doing enough, both in the short
term first, and the long term, regarding policies that are
needed to build that generation, to build that transmission,
and enhance that distribution to power these electric vehicles?
So short term and long term.
Mr. Pyle. In the short term, no. In fact, I think we are
going the wrong way. We are decommissioning baseload
generation, nuclear, coal, et cetera.
I hope that, in the long term, we recognize that we cannot
abandon those sources while we are adding intermittent
renewables.
Mr. Joyce. So as we decommission and shut down coal power
plants and nuclear plants, are we moving backward? Is that what
you are telling us here today?
Mr. Pyle. Absolutely. Look what is happening in California.
Their electricity system is not reliable there, period.
Mr. Joyce. How can we ensure that the grid can adequately
accommodate the increased demand that we are placing on it
today?
Mr. Pyle. I think we need to recognize that, unless we are
able to streamline rules and regulations that prevent us from
building practically anything meaningful in this country, those
who wish to bolster our transmission system are not dealing in
reality. We have got to streamline these laws.
Mr. Joyce. And is dealing in reality, as you so adequately
put it, is dealing in reality utilizing those sources that are
under our feet, the natural gas, the coal that are under the
feet of my constituents in Pennsylvania?
Mr. Pyle. Utilizing and getting them--moving them around
through pipelines, absolutely.
Mr. Joyce. That point, I think, is necessary to conclude my
conversation with you here today, to utilize the pipelines in
moving those sources around. Thank you for your comments.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I yield the balance of my
time.
Mr. Rush. The gentleman yields back. It is now the
[inaudible] or to recognize the lady from the great State of
Michigan, Mrs. Dingell, for 5 minutes.
Mrs. Dingell. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you,
Ranking Member Upton, for holding today's important hearing on
charging forward, securing American manufacturing in our EV
future, which is critical to not only make this
transformational shift to a clean transportation system, but to
lead the world.
The future of the auto industry is electric. We know this,
and I am really proud that my home State of Michigan, which put
the world on wheels, is leading the way on this already, as
well. I am very honored that Ford, headquartered in my
district, is here today to highlight its commitment as an
industry leader.
Ford recently announced a new global battery center in
southeast Michigan
[inaudible] which is going to be built in my current
district, the all-electric F-150 Lightning, which shows that
electric vehicles are real. They have performance, and owners
want them.
As matter of fact, when you lose electricity, it can power
your house for several days. I love this. I am on that waiting
list with everybody else.
In August of last year I was proud to work with the
Administration and major OEMs and labor, as the President
announced his ambitious new target to make half of all the new
vehicles sold in 2030 zero-emission vehicles. And with this
landmark announcement, with more and more EVs expected to hit
the road over the coming years, it is critical that we get
these policies right so this transition is swift, and supports
a strong American-built workforce.
At the end of last year, through the President's
leadership, Congress was also able to come together and pass a
strong bipartisan infrastructure legislation, which will help
us accelerate this buildout of a nationwide network of EV
charging stations, as well as support the manufacturing of
domestic EVs and batteries.
Going all electric poses great opportunities and a great
challenge for this industry, American workers, and our
competitiveness around the world. And as we see rising energy
costs as a result of the Russia-Ukraine conflict, it is clear
we need to act faster to transition to electrification to
mitigate the harms of future energy crises.
Let me start with Mr. Holycross, who is a constituent and
someone I have worked a lot with. Last week Ford announced that
it would reorganize its businesses into two divisions: one for
its electric vehicle business and one for its internal
combustion engine business.
Can you share with this committee more details on Ford's
decision to make this move?
And will this move help Ford meet its 2030 electric vehicle
production goals?
Mr. Holycross. Well, thank you, Congresswoman Dingell, and
thank you for your advocacy and all your support.
The answer is absolutely, it will not only help us meet our
goals that we have outlined for 2030, but it is going to help
us move faster now. And that was really the critical point in
taking this action now, and organizing the company the way that
you talked about between our electric vehicle business we are
calling Ford Model E and the internal combustion engine
business, which is still a big element of our portfolio, the
Ford Blue business.
We have to be able to move quickly to get these vehicles in
the hands of customers, work through the supply base. These are
very different products right now. The materials, the
infrastructure is different, and we need to have folks that are
dedicated to working on this to be able to go at the pace we
need to meet customer demand and to increase our
competitiveness as a country.
So it is all about how we go faster, how we have dedicated
resources and recognition of the differences that these
products require, the services, the way the vehicles are
distributed. This is all an important element that we need to
get ahead of, in terms of what it is going to take to get to
those 2030 targets, while at the same time continuing to
improve the efficiency of our internal combustion engine
products that will continue to serve customers, especially in
the commercial vehicle space, for the foreseeable future.
So it is twofold to help us support our long-term and our
near-term goals.
Mrs. Dingell. Thank you. Mr. Holycross, I need to ask you
another question, and I am probably going to put some questions
for the record. But in your testimony you make clear we need to
strengthen our domestic supply chains for core elements like
batteries and semiconductors.
And I also--a number of my colleagues have brought up the
issue of minerals for the batteries. How are OEMs addressing
the looming supply chain challenges on critical minerals, and
what more can Congress do to help?
Mr. Holycross. Yes, it is definitely a huge priority for
us.
And one of the things that we are doing is continuing to
make sure we have the technology to diversify all the different
types of minerals that can be used in batteries. So we are not
entirely dependent upon, you know, the minerals that are
predominantly used today.
Yes, lithium is a big part of it. We have talked about the
opportunities for increased access for lithium, both
domestically as well as the sources that we have today.
Nickel and cobalt and some of the other minerals that we
know come from conflicted areas, and have challenges in terms
of how they are harvested, we are continuing to advance and
invest in technology. You mentioned Ford Ion Park, our Battery
Center of Excellence, which is partnering with people in the
industry to have more arrays of chemistry for batteries into
the future.
But look, if we are going to be able to meet the demands,
and not be dependent upon some of these sources we have talked
about today, it is going to be about increasing the access to
those minerals domestically, and doing it in the most
responsible way we know how, both environmentally and socially.
So all the policies that we have talked about today that
are working their way through are so critical for us to be able
to do that. But it is up to us to continue to invest in the
technology to make sure we can offer a variety of solutions for
batteries and the other technologies required for electric
vehicles.
Mrs. Dingell. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I am sorry, we are
out of time. I yield back.
Mr. Rush. The gentlelady yields back. And by yielding back,
that concludes the witness questioning.
I would like to thank our witnesses, each and every one of
you, individually, for your participation in today's hearing.
And I also want to remind members that, pursuant to
committee rules, they have ten business days to submit
additional questions for the record to be answered by the
witnesses who have appeared before us today. I ask each witness
to respond promptly to any such questions that you may receive.
Before we adjourn, I want to request unanimous consent to
enter into the record a total of 24 documents that have been
reviewed by staff on the Democratic side and the Republican
side, so there is bipartisan agreement, and I request unanimous
consent to enter into the record these 24 documents that have
been agreed upon.
With that, and without any objections, they are ordered.
[The information appears at the conclusion of the hearing.]
Mr. Rush. And at this time, the subcommittee now stands
in--to be--stands adjourned. The subcommittee is adjourned at
this time. Thank you.
[Whereupon, at 2:19 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]
[Material submitted for inclusion in the record follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
