- THE CLEAN FUTURE ACT AND ENVIRONMENTAL JUSTICE: PROTECTING FRONTLINE COMMUNITIES

[House Hearing, 117 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

THE CLEAN FUTURE ACT AND ENVIRONMENTAL JUSTICE: PROTECTING FRONTLINE
COMMUNITIES

=======================================================================

VIRTUAL HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON ENVIRONMENT AND CLIMATE CHANGE

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED SEVENTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

APRIL 15, 2021

__________

Serial No. 117-21

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Published for the use of the Committee on Energy and Commerce

govinfo.gov/committee/house-energy
energycommerce.house.gov

________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

47-095    WASHINGTON : 2022

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE

FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey
Chairman
BOBBY L. RUSH, Illinois              CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington
ANNA G. ESHOO, California              Ranking Member
DIANA DeGETTE, Colorado              FRED UPTON, Michigan
MIKE DOYLE, Pennsylvania             MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas
JAN SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois             STEVE SCALISE, Louisiana
G. K. BUTTERFIELD, North Carolina    ROBERT E. LATTA, Ohio
DORIS O. MATSUI, California          BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky
KATHY CASTOR, Florida                DAVID B. McKINLEY, West Virginia
JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland           ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois
JERRY McNERNEY, California           H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia
PETER WELCH, Vermont                 GUS M. BILIRAKIS, Florida
PAUL TONKO, New York                 BILL JOHNSON, Ohio
YVETTE D. CLARKE, New York           BILLY LONG, Missouri
KURT SCHRADER, Oregon                LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana
TONY CARDENAS, California            MARKWAYNE MULLIN, Oklahoma
RAUL RUIZ, California                RICHARD HUDSON, North Carolina
SCOTT H. PETERS, California          TIM WALBERG, Michigan
DEBBIE DINGELL, Michigan             EARL L. ``BUDDY'' CARTER, Georgia
MARC A. VEASEY, Texas                JEFF DUNCAN, South Carolina
ANN M. KUSTER, New Hampshire         GARY J. PALMER, Alabama
ROBIN L. KELLY, Illinois, Vice       NEAL P. DUNN, Florida
Chair                            JOHN R. CURTIS, Utah
NANETTE DIAZ BARRAGAN, California    DEBBBIE LESKO, Arizona
A. DONALD McEACHIN, Virginia         GREG PENCE, Indiana
LISA BLUNT ROCHESTER, Delaware       DAN CRENSHAW, Texas
DARREN SOTO, Florida                 JOHN JOYCE, Pennsylvania
TOM O'HALLERAN, Arizona              KELLY ARMSTRONG, North Dakota
KATHLEEN M. RICE, New York
ANGIE CRAIG, Minnesota
KIM SCHRIER, Washington
LORI TRAHAN, Massachusetts
LIZZIE FLETCHER, Texas
------

Professional Staff

JEFFREY C. CARROLL, Staff Director
TIFFANY GUARASCIO, Deputy Staff Director
NATE HODSON, Minority Staff Director
Subcommittee on Environment and Climate Change

PAUL TONKO, New York
Chairman
DIANA DeGETTE, Colorado              DAVID B. McKINLEY, West Virginia
JAN SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois               Ranking Member
JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland           BILL JOHNSON, Ohio
YVETTE D. CLARKE, New York           MARKWAYNE MULLIN, Oklahoma
RAUL RUIZ, California, Vice Chair    RICHARD HUDSON, North Carolina
SCOTT H. PETERS, California          EARL L. ``BUDDY'' CARTER, Georgia
DEBBIE DINGELL, Michigan             JEFF DUNCAN, South Carolina
NANETTE DIAZ BARRAGAN, California    GARY J. PALMER, Alabama
A. DONALD McEACHIN, Virginia         JOHN R. CURTIS, Utah
LISA BLUNT ROCHESTER, Delaware       DAN CRENSHAW, Texas
DARREN SOTO, Florida                 CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington
TOM O'HALLERAN, Arizona                  (ex officio)
FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey (ex
officio)
C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hon. Paul Tonko, a Representative in Congress from the State of
New York, opening statement....................................     2
Prepared statement...........................................     3
Hon. David B. McKinley, a Representative in Congress from the
State of West Virginia, opening statement......................     5
Prepared statement...........................................     6
Hon. Frank Pallone, Jr., a Representative in Congress from the
State of New Jersey, opening statement.........................     7
Prepared statement...........................................     8
Hon. Cathy McMorris Rodgers, a Representative in Congress from
the State of Washington, opening statement.....................     9
Prepared statement...........................................    11

Witnesses

Mildred McClain, Ph.D., Executive Director, Harambee House and
Citizens for Environmental Justice.............................    13
Prepared statement...........................................    15
Submitted questions for the record \1\                          217
Angelo Logan, Policy and Campaign Director, Moving Forward
Network........................................................    17
Prepared statement...........................................    19
Submitted questions for the record \1\                          220
Elizabeth Yeampierre, Executive Director, UPROSE, and Cochair,
Climate Justice Alliance.......................................    25
Prepared statement...........................................    27
Submitted questions for the record \1\                          223
Derrick Hollie, President, Reaching America......................    31
Prepared statement...........................................    33
Shay Hawkins, President, Opportunity Funds Association...........    35
Prepared statement...........................................    37
Adrienne Hollis, Ph.D., Senior Climate Justice and Health
Scientist, Climate and Energy Program, Union of Concerned
Scientists.....................................................    40
Prepared statement...........................................    42
Answers to submitted questions...............................   227

Submitted Material

H.R. 1512, the Climate Leadership and Environmental Action for
our Nation's Future Act, submitted by Mr. Tonko \2\
H.R. 501, the Climate Smart Ports Act, submitted by Mr. Tonko \2\
H.R. 516, the Environmental Justice Mapping and Data Collection
Act of 2021, submitted by Mr. Tonko \2\
H.R. 861, the Alerting Localities of Environmental Risks and
Threats Act of 2021, submitted by Mr. Tonko \2\
H.R. 862, the Climate Action Planning for Ports Act of 2021,
submitted by Mr. Tonko \2\

----------

\1\ Dr. McClain, Mr. Logan, and Ms. Yeampierre did not answer submitted
questions for the record by the time of publication.
\2\ The information has been retained in committee files and is
available at https://docs.house.gov/Committee/Calendar/
ByEvent.aspx?EventID=111450.
H.R. 2021, the Environmental Justice for All Act, submitted by
Mr. Tonko \2\
H.R. 2394, the Climate Justice Act of 2021, submitted by Mr.
Tonko \2\
H.R. 2396, the Ensuring Safe Disposal of Coal Ash Act, submitted
by Mr. Tonko \2\
H.R. 2397, the Protection from Cumulative Emissions and
Underenforcement of Environmental Law Act of 2021, submitted by
Mr. Tonko \2\
H.R. 2431, the Voices for Environmental Justice Act, submitted by
Mr. Tonko \2\
H.R. 2434, the Environmental Justice Act of 2021, submitted by
Mr. Tonko \2\
Letter of April 15, 2021, from James A. Williams II, Vice
President of Government Affairs, Environmental Technology
Council, to Mr. Tonko and Mr. McKinley, submitted by Mr. Tonko.    97
Letter of April 2021 from Abigail Ross Hopper, President and
Chief Executive Officer, Solar Energy Industries Association,
to Mr. Pallone and Mrs. Rodgers, submitted by Mr. Tonko........   101
Policy statement of the Solar Energy Industries Association,
April 13, 2021, submitted by Mr. Tonko.........................   102
Letter of April 14, 2021, from Christine Santillana,
Earthjustice, et al., to Mr. Pallone and Mrs. Rodgers,
submitted by Mr. Soto..........................................   112
Letter of April 15, 2021, from Diane VanDe Hei, Chief Executive
Officer, Association of Metropolitan Water Agencies, and Adam
Krantz, Chief Executive Officer, National Association of Clean
Water Agencies, to Mr. Tonko and Mr. McKinley, submitted by Mr.
Tonko..........................................................   115
Letter of April 15, 2021, from Dan Hartinger, Director,
Government Relations, The Wilderness Society, to Mr. Tonko and
Mr. McKinley, submitted by Mr. McEachin........................   117
Letter of April 14, 2021, from Senator Tammy Duckworth, et al.,
to Mr. Pallone and Mrs. Rodgers, submitted by Mr. McEachin.....   120
Report of the United States Commission on Civil Rights,
``Environmental Justice: Examining the Environmental Protection
Agency's Compliance and Enforcement of Title VI and Executive
Order 12,898,'' September 2016, submitted by Mr. Tonko \2\
Letter of April 14, 2021, from Julia Olson, Executive Director,
Our Children's Trust, to Mr. Pallone and Mrs. Rodgers,
submitted by Mr. Tonko \2\
Letter of April 14, 2021, from Mario Cordero, Executive Director,
Port of Long Beach, to Mr. Pallone, submitted by Mr. Tonko.....   122
Article of April 2, 2021, ``Biden's green energy plans clash with
pledge to create union jobs,'' by Rebecca Rainey and Eric
Wolff, Politico, submitted by Mr. McKinley.....................   123
Article of April 13, 2021, ``Secrecy and Abuse Claims Haunt
China's Solar Factories in Xinjiang,'' by Dan Murtaugh, et al.,
Bloomberg, submitted by Mr. McKinley...........................   129
Dissenting Statement of Commissioner Gail Heriot to the U.S.
Commission on Civil Rights' Report ``Environmental Justice:
Examining the Environmental Protection Agency's Compliance and
Enforcement of Title VI and Executive Order 12,898,'' Research
Paper No. 17-247, 2016, submitted by Mr. McKinley \2\
Letter of April 14, 2021, from James C. McCurry, Jr., Chief
Administrative Officer, Georgia Ports, to Mr. Pallone and Mrs.
Rodgers, submitted by Mr. Carter...............................   144
Letter of April 14, 2021, from Michel J. (Mike) Paque, Executive
Director, Ground Water Protection Council, to Mr. Tonko and Mr.
McKinley, submitted by Mr. McKinley............................   147
Letter of April 15, 2021, from Dan Naatz, Executive Vice
President, Independent Petroleum Association of America, to Mr.
Tonko and Mr. McKinley, submitted by Mr. McKinley..............   150
Letter of April 12, 2021, from R.C. Klipsch, Mayor, City of
Petersburg, IN, to Mr. Tonko and Mr. McKinley, submitted by Mr.
McKinley.......................................................   162
Article of April 6, 2021, ``The wage gap that threatens Biden's
climate plan,'' by Kelsey Tamborrino, Politico, submitted by
Mr. Johnson....................................................   163
Letter of April 14, 2020, from Mayor Louise Carter-King, City of
Gillette, WY, to Mr. Tonko and Mr. McKinley, submitted by Mr.
McKinley.......................................................   170

----------

\2\ The information has been retained in committee files and is
available at https://docs.house.gov/Committee/Calendar/
ByEvent.aspx?EventID=111450.
Articles, ``Structural Fill: Conserving Natural Resources Through
Projects Featuring Rigorous Engineering Standards'' by John
Ward and ``How Well Do You Know CLSM?'' by Thomas H. Adams, Ash
at Work, Issue 2, 2019, submitted by Mr. McKinley..............   172
Report of the Council of Economic Advisers, ``The Impact of
Opportunity Zones: An Initial Assessment,'' August 2020,
submitted by Mr. McKinley \2\
Fact sheet of the American Coal Ash Association, ``Coal Ash
Regulation and `Unencapsulated' Beneficial Use,'' April 12,
2021, submitted by Mr. McKinley................................   180
Letter of August 31, 2019, from Vi Waghiyi, Environmental Health
and Justice Director, and Pamela Miller, Executive Director,
Alaska Community Action on Toxics, to Rep. Raul Grijalva and
Mr. McEachin, submitted by Mr. McEachin........................   182
Letter of August 30, 2019, from Amanda Heier, President and Chief
Executive Officer, Breast Cancer Prevention Partners, to Rep.
Raul Grijalva and Mr. McEachin, submitted by Mr. McEachin......   184
Statement of Black Millennials for Flint, February 27, 2020,
submitted by Mr. McEachin......................................   187
Statement of the Chesapeake Bay Foundation, November 15, 2019,
submitted by Mr. McEachin......................................   190
Letter of August 30, 2019, from Judith Robinson, Executive
Director, Coming Clean, to Rep. Raul Grijalva and Mr. McEachin,
submitted by Mr. McEachin......................................   191
Statement of Creation Justice Ministries, February 27, 2020,
submitted by Mr. McEachin......................................   194
Statement of Earthjustice, February 27, 2020, submitted by Mr.
McEachin.......................................................   196
Statement of the Environmental Defense Fund, February 28, 2020,
submitted by Mr. McEachin......................................   198
Statement on H.R. 5986, the Environmental Justice for All Act, by
Virginia Interfaith Power & Light, et al., submitted by Mr.
McEachin.......................................................   200
Letter from Moving Forward Network to Rep. Raul Grijalva and Mr.
McEachin, submitted by Mr. McEachin............................   202
Statement of the National Wildlife Federation, Feb. 27, 2020,
submitted by Mr. McEachin......................................   209
Statement of the Sierra Club, February 27, 2020, submitted by Mr.
McEachin.......................................................   210
Statement of the Union of Concerned Scientists by Adrienne
Hollis, Senior Climate Justice and Health Scientist, February
27, 2020, submitted by Mr. McEachin............................   211
Statement of the Western Environmental Law Center, February 27,
2020, submitted by Mr. McEachin................................   212
Letter of April 11, 2021, from Donald ``Happy'' Mobelini, Mayor,
City of Hazard, KY, to Mr. McKinley, submitted by Mr. McKinley.   213
Letter of April 11, 2021, from Donald ``Happy'' Mobelini, Mayor,
City of Hazard, KY, to Mr. Tonko, submitted by Mr. McKinley....   215

----------

\2\ The information has been retained in committee files and is
available at https://docs.house.gov/Committee/Calendar/
ByEvent.aspx?EventID=111450.

THE CLEAN FUTURE ACT AND ENVIRONMENTAL JUSTICE: PROTECTING FRONTLINE
COMMUNITIES

----------

THURSDAY, APRIL 15, 2021

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Environment and Climate Change,
Committee on Energy and Commerce,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 10:30 a.m., via
Cisco Webex online video conferencing, Hon. Paul Tonko
(chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Members present: Representatives Tonko, DeGette,
Schakowsky, Sarbanes, Clarke, Ruiz, Peters, Dingell, Barragan,
McEachin, Blunt Rochester, Soto, O'Halleran, Pallone (ex
officio), McKinley (subcommittee ranking member), Johnson,
Hudson, Carter, Duncan, Palmer, Curtis, and Rodgers (ex
officio).
Staff present: Jeffrey C. Carroll, Staff Director;
Jacqueline Cohen, Chief Environment Counsel; Adam Fischer,
Professional Staff Member; Waverly Gordon, General Counsel;
Tiffany Guarascio, Deputy Staff Director; Anthony Gutierrez,
Professional Staff Member; Caitlin Haberman, Professional Staff
Member; Perry Hamilton, Clerk; Zach Kahan, Deputy Director
Outreach and Member Service; Rick Kessler, Senior Advisor and
Staff Director, Energy and Environment; Mackenzie Kuhl, Digital
Assistant; Brendan Larkin, Policy Coordinator; Dustin J.
Maghamfar, Air and Climate Counsel; Elysa Montfort, Press
Secretary; Kaitlyn Peel, Digital Director; Tim Robinson, Chief
Counsel; Chloe Rodriguez, Clerk; Kylea Rogers, Staff Assistant;
Nikki Roy, Policy Coordinator; Andrew Souvall, Director of
Communications, Outreach and Member Services; Rebecca
Tomilchik, Policy Analyst; Sarah Burke, Minority Deputy Staff
Director; Michael Cameron, Minority Policy Analyst, Consumer
Protection and Commerce, Energy, Environment; Nate Hodson,
Minority Staff Director; Peter Kielty, Minority General
Counsel; Mary Martin, Minority Chief Counsel, Energy and
Environment; and Michael Taggart, Minority Policy Director.
Mr. Tonko. The Subcommittee on Environment and Climate
Change will now come to order.
Today the Subcommittee on Environment and Climate Change is
holding a hearing entitled ``The CLEAN Future Act and
Environmental Justice: Protecting Frontline Communities.''
Due to the COVID-19 public health emergency, today's
hearing is being held remotely. All Members and witnesses will
be participating via video conferencing.
As part of our hearing, microphones will be set on mute for
purposes of eliminating inadvertent background noise. And
Members and witnesses, you will need to unmute your microphone
each time you choose to speak.
Documents for the record can be sent to Rebecca Tomilchik
at the email address we have provided to staff. All documents
will be entered into the record at the conclusion of today's
hearing.
The Chair now recognizes himself for 5 minutes for an
opening statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. PAUL TONKO, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF NEW YORK

The Subcommittee on Environment and Climate Change is
hoping, as I indicated--this discussion on the CLEAN Future Act
as it relates to environmental justice, and protecting our
frontline communities. Due to all of the efforts as we continue
to move forward, and make certain that we receive all input,
recognize that all people will have a chance to enter into the
record any statements.
I believe members of this committee would agree that all
Americans should be able to have clean air, clean water, and
lives free from pollution. Unfortunately, this has not been the
case throughout our history, and it is not the case as we speak
today. And the burdens of this exposure have not been
distributed equally or randomly. Americans who have paid the
highest price for this pollution have mostly been people of
color and those of low-income communities. Their exposure to
pollution has resulted in higher rates of respiratory
illnesses, of cancer, of premature death.
And the consequences ripple out much further. For example,
impacted communities tend to have greater vulnerability to
damage and hardship caused by our climate inaction. In recent
years this subcommittee has taken a leading role in reversing
these trends, and many Members have championed efforts to right
these historic injustices and support investments, public
health protections, and pollution reductions in the communities
that need them most, regardless of race, income, or ZIP code.
Today's legislative hearing is an opportunity to examine
some of these efforts. Our focus today includes title 6,
subtitle F of title 4, and section 842 of the committee's CLEAN
Future Act.
But, of course, the CLEAN Future Act was not developed in a
vacuum. It builds on input, ideas, and provisions from many
stakeholders and Members of Congress. That spirit of
partnership has made the CLEAN Future Act much stronger. And it
is my hope that these improvements will continue today and in
future hearings.
In addition to the CLEAN Future Act, today's hearing will
look at 10 bills to address aspects of environmental justice.
So I do want to recognize and thank subcommittee members
DeGette, Clarke, Ruiz, Barragan, McEachin, and Blunt Rochester
for their work on these bills and commitment to putting
environmental justice at the heart of our subcommittee's work.
I share their commitment and look forward to working with all
of our members to make certain the 117th Congress isn't merely
a Congress for climate action, but a Congress for just and
equitable climate action.
And I have been pleased that, starting with President
Biden's Executive order on tackling the climate crisis at home
and abroad, that the administration has made a commitment to
enhancing environmental justice.
But these goals will not be achievable unless we act
through an inclusive process that allows community
organizations and people most affected by pollution to be
involved. This means having community voices in the
development, the consideration, the implementation, and
certainly the enforcement of our Nation's environmental laws.
Today's hearing is part of that.
In that spirit I welcome our witnesses, and I thank the
many environmental justice advocates who have taken time to
meet with Members and our staffs to share your perspectives,
because our goals depend on listening to the communities that
have faced these disproportionate impacts and have been shut
out of participation in processes for decades.
No one bill will undo the generations of injustices,
racism, and discrimination against frontline communities. That
is why we need a comprehensive strategy that deals with
disproportionate impacts and supports the revitalization of
communities which will come from reducing and remediating
pollution. That is why today's hearing includes coal ash
protections, lead service line replacements, brownfield and
Superfund remediations, and traditional air pollutants.
We will also consider legislation to reduce emissions,
emissions from ports to deploy air pollution-monitoring
infrastructure, and build capacity of community-based
organizations to enable greater participation in environmental
and infrastructure decisionmaking processes.
These bills also propose ways to strengthen and improve
public participation, codifying Executive Order 12898 and its
requirements for integration of environmental justice across
Federal agencies, requiring EJ training of Federal employees,
and meetings between EPA and community groups to improve
collaboration and communication.
Finally, the CLEAN Future Act, much like the Biden
administration's commitment, requires that 40 percent of funds
made available be used to support activities directly
benefiting environmental justice communities. So I look forward
to today's discussion and yield back my time.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Tonko follows:]

Prepared Statement of Hon. Paul Tonko

I believe members of this committee would agree that all
Americans should be able to have clean air, clean water, and
lives free from pollution.
Unfortunately, this has not been the case throughout our
history, and it is not the case today.
And the burdens of this exposure have not been distributed
equally or randomly.
The Americans who have paid the highest price for this
pollution have mostly been people of color and low-income
communities.
Their exposure to pollution has resulted in higher rates of
respiratory illnesses, cancer, and premature death.
And the consequences ripple out much further. For example,
impacted communities tend to have greater vulnerability to
damage and hardship caused by our climate inaction.
In recent years, this subcommittee has taken a leading role
in reversing these trends.
Many Members have championed efforts to right these
historic injustices and support investments, public health
protections, and pollution reductions in the communities that
need them most, regardless of race, income, or ZIP code.
Today's legislative hearing is an opportunity to examine
some of these efforts.
Our focus today includes Title 6, Subtitle F of Title 4,
and Section 842 of the committee's CLEAN Future Act.
But of course, the CLEAN Future Act was not developed in a
vacuum.
It builds on input, ideas, and provisions from many
stakeholders and Members of Congress. That spirit of
partnership has made the CLEAN Future Act much stronger, and it
is my hope that these improvements will continue today and in
future hearings.
In addition to the CLEAN Future Act, today's hearing will
look at 10 bills to address aspects of environmental justice.
I want to recognize and thank subcommittee members DeGette,
Clarke, Ruiz, Barragan, McEachin, and Blunt Rochester for their
work on these bills and commitment to putting environmental
justice at the heart of our subcommittee's work.
I share their commitment and look forward to working with
all of our Members to make sure the 117th Congress isn't merely
a Congress for climate action, but a Congress for just and
equitable climate action.
And I have been pleased that starting with President
Biden's Executive Order on Tackling the Climate Crisis at Home
and Abroad, the administration has made a commitment to
enhancing environmental justice.
But these goals will not be achievable unless we act
through an inclusive process that allows community
organizations and people most affected by pollution to be
involved.
This means having community voices in the development,
consideration, implementation, and enforcement of our nation's
environmental laws.
Today's hearing is part of that. In that spirit, I welcome
our witnesses, and I thank the many environmental justice
advocates who have taken time to meet with Members and our
staffs to share your perspectives.
Because our goals depend on listening to the communities
that have faced these disproportionate impacts and have been
shut out of participation in processes for decades.
No one bill will undo the generations of injustices,
racism, and discrimination against frontline communities.
That is why we need a comprehensive strategy that deals
with disproportionate impacts and supports the revitalization
of communities, which will come from reducing and remediating
pollution.
That is why today's hearing includes coal ash protections,
lead service line replacements, brownfield and Superfund
remediations, and traditional air pollutants.
We will also consider legislation to reduce emissions from
ports, to deploy air pollution monitoring infrastructure, and
build capacity of community-based organizations to enable
greater participation in environmental and infrastructure
decision making processes.
These bills also propose ways to strengthen and improve
public participation, codifying Executive Order 12898. and its
requirements for integration of environmental justice across
Federal agencies, requiring EJ training of Federal employees
and meetings between EPA and community groups to improve
collaboration and communication.
Finally, the CLEAN Future Act, much like the Biden
administration's commitment, requires that 40% of funds made
available be used to support activities directly benefitting
environmental justice communities.
I look forward to today's discussion and yield back my
time.

Mr. Tonko. And I now recognize Mr. McKinley, our ranking
member of the Subcommittee on Environmental and Climate Change.
Representative McKinley, you are recognized for 5 minutes
for your opening statement, please.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. DAVID B. McKINLEY, A REPRESENTATIVE
IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF WEST VIRGINIA

Mr. McKinley. Thank you, Chairman Tonko. Chairman, recently
I read an article citing the World Health Organization's
definition of poverty. But their measurement of poverty simply
in terms of per capita income seems inadequate. According to
the article, among the poor, poverty is better understood in
terms of shame, powerlessness, hopelessness, and humiliation.
This hearing on environmental justice is central to an
agenda to eliminate fossil fuels from the power sector by 2035,
the consequences of which will leave workers, families,
children, and entire communities in poverty. Mr. Chairman,
where is the justice in that?
Think about it. Extremism is spending years shaming coal
miners and oil field workers, blaming them for causing
wildfires, flooding and droughts, hurricanes, low-birth-weight
babies, premature deaths, as you just mentioned, and asthma.
And in this new environment, fossil fuel workers feel
powerless, as liberal Democrats and administration team up to
take away their lifelong jobs. And when their jobs are lost and
there are no other opportunities in their area, hopelessness
will take hold.
Will they have to move away? Will they leave their home,
their community, their church, their support base?
And their house is typically, Mr. Chairman, their biggest
asset. So who will buy a house in a dying community?
We have asked for these letters to be introduced into the
record.
And then finally, coal miners and oilfield workers have
produced a reliable, dependable income for their families. Now
they are going to be humbled into welfare and food stamps and
waiting for transition jobs that, historically, never
materialize. Workers will be losing their dignity, not for what
they did, but for what Government did to them.
And the cruel irony of all this is, as America dismantles
its fossil fuel economy, the rest of the world is expanding its
use of coal, natural gas, and oil and emitting greenhouse gases
at an alarmingly increasing rate. So by eliminating jobs in
fossil fuels, Congress will be sentencing American workers all
across the country into poverty. How is that outcome any
different than the injustices created in the past?
So maybe it is time, Mr. Chairman, that the men and women
of Government lose their sanctimonious attitude and walk in the
shoes of these families who are about to experience poverty,
all in this guise of justice.
Oh, yes, Mr. Chairman, the workers will be offered
unrealistic promises about just transition into jobs in the
renewable sector. But even former Secretary Menezes has
concluded that new replacement jobs and the green jobs will pay
significantly less and will have an impact on their families.
And workers in the coal and natural gas industries are well
aware of how Government injustices in the past betrayed their
fellow workers in steel, electronics, and textiles.
Look, fossil fuel workers simply want to keep their jobs,
not get a Government handout or a Government program. This
misguided congressional pursuit of environmental justice will
not--will no doubt create poverty, causing shame,
powerlessness, hopelessness, and humiliation to hardworking
Americans. So instead of perpetuating another generation of
injustice, wouldn't it be more respectful to accomplish our
mutual objective in reducing carbon emissions by using
innovation, and research, and advancing efficiencies,
renewables, nuclear, and batteries?
So, look, poverty is poverty, Mr. Chairman. Injustice is
injustice, whether it is in an urban area or in a rural
community.
Paul, I know you. If you can prevent poverty for just one
family in your district in New York, I am confident you would
fight like hell on their behalf. So I am confused. Why is the
rest of your party turning a deaf ear to the pleas of men,
women, and children with fossil fuel jobs and subjecting whole
communities to poverty? Is that what Democrats call
environmental justice?
Hurting working families is not a justice that any of us
should embrace.
Thank you, and I yield back the balance of my time.
[The prepared statement of Mr. McKinley follows:]

Prepared Statement of Hon. David B. McKinley

Recently I read an article citing the world health
organization's definition of ``poverty.'' But their measurement
of poverty, simply in terms of per capita income, is
inadequate.
According to the article: among the poor poverty is better
understood in terms of, shame, powerlessness, hopelessness and
humiliation. This hearing on environmental justice is central
to an agenda to eliminate fossil fuels from the power sector by
2035.
The consequences of which will leave workers, families,
children and entire communities in poverty. Where is the
justice in that?
Think about it extremists have spent years shaming coal
miners and oilfield workers, blaming them for causing:
wildfires, flooding and droughts, hurricanes, low birth weight
babies, premature cancers, and asthma.
In this new political environment, fossil fuel workers feel
powerless as liberal Democrats and the administration team up
to take away their life-long jobs.
When their jobs are lost and there are no other
opportunities in their area hopelessness will take hold. Will
they have to move away to find work? Leave their family? Their
community? Their church? Their house is usually their largest
asset, but who will buy a house in a dying community?
And finally coal miners and oilfield workers have provided
a reliable, dependable income for their families. Now they will
be humbled into welfare and food stamps. and waiting for
transition jobs that historically never materialize. Workers
will be losing their dignity not for what they did but rather
for what their Government did to them.
And the cruel irony of all of this--as America dismantles
its fossil fuel economy the rest of the world will be expanding
its use of coal, natural gas, and oil and emitting GHGs at an
alarming pace.
By eliminating jobs in fossil fuels Congress will be
sentencing Americans all across the country to poverty. How is
that outcome any different than the injustice created in the
past? So maybe it's time for the men and women of Government to
lose their sanctimonious attitude and walk in the shoes of
these families who are about to experience poverty, all in this
guise of justice
Oh, yes, workers will be offered unrealistic promises about
a ``just transition'' into jobs in the renewable sector. But
even former Sec. Menezes concluded that new, replacement
``green jobs'' pay significantly less. And workers in coal and
natural gas industries are well aware of how Government
injustices in the past betrayed fellow workers in: steel,
electronics, and textiles.
Look, fossil fuel workers simply want to keep their jobs,
not get a Government program or a handout. This misguided
congressional pursuit of environmental justice will no doubt
create poverty causing shame, powerlessness, hopelessness, and
humiliation to hard working Americans.
So instead of perpetuating another generation of injustice
wouldn't it more respectful to accomplish our mutual objective
of reducing carbon emissions by using innovation and research
and advancing efficiencies, renewables, nuclear, and batteries?
Look, poverty is poverty, injustice is injustice. Whether
it's in an urban area or rural community. Mr. Chairman: if you
could prevent poverty for just one family in your district, I'm
confident that you too would fight like hell in their behalf.
So, I'm confused. Why is the rest of your party turning a
deaf ear to the pleas of men, women, and children with fossil
fuel jobs and subjecting whole communities to poverty? Is that
what Democrats call ``environmental justice''? Hurting working
families is not a ``justice'' that any of us should embrace.
Thank you and I yield back

Mr. Tonko. Representative McKinley yields back, and now the
Chair recognizes Representative Pallone, the chair of the full
committee of Energy and Commerce, our overtime, hardworking
chair. We recognize him for 5 minutes for his opening
statement.
Welcome, Chairman Pallone.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. FRANK PALLONE, Jr., A REPRESENTATIVE
IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF NEW JERSEY

Mr. Pallone. Thank you, Chairman Tonko. Today we continue
this committee's important work on environmental justice, as we
examine 11 bills that address the pressing needs of
environmental justice communities. And for far too long, low-
income communities and communities of color have borne the
brunt of air pollution, exposure to contaminated sites, and
unsafe water.
Environmental injustice can be attributed to many things,
from intentionally racist policies like redlining that lead to
vulnerable communities being excluded from siting and
permittiing decisions, to unequal investment in these
communities. And climate change and deteriorating
infrastructure are exacerbating these problems and this
inequality.
So it is time for Congress to act. As Chairman Tonko said,
we must address the overlapping crisis facing our Nation,
including inequality, climate change, and the economic downturn
caused by this pandemic. And as President Biden has said, we
need to build back better, and that means building back
cleaner, healthier, and with greater equity.
So I believe the 11 bills before us today can help us do
exactly that.
One of the bills is H.R. 1512, the CLEAN Future Act, which
I introduced last month with Chairmen Tonko and Rush and
several other committee members. And the CLEAN Future Act is a
comprehensive and ambitious plan to combat the climate crisis
and achieve net-zero greenhouse gas pollution by no later than
2050. And environmental justice is the key component of the
CLEAN Future Act and must be a focus of our efforts to address
climate change and infrastructure.
But many of the environmental justice provisions in the
CLEAN Future Act are reflected in President Biden's American
Jobs Plan. Both proposals prioritize investments for
environmental justice communities and basically commit 40
percent of investments to directly benefiting these
communities. And both proposals seek to clean up the sectors of
our economy like the ports that not only increase the amount of
carbon in the atmosphere but also add to the amount of
hazardous air pollutants concentrated in environmental justice
communities. And both policy proposals make the long-overdue
investments in cleaning up Superfund sites, replacing lead
service lines, and updating the energy grid.
Now, the other bills we are going to hear about today focus
on important environmental justice topics, including climate
justice, port climate readiness, cumulative impact assessments,
and the tools available to identify environmental justice
communities. And many of these bills align with the American
Jobs Plan and can help us make that plan a reality.
So I want to thank my colleagues for their engagement and
help in refining and expanding the environmental justice
provisions of the CLEAN Future Act. And I also commend them for
their leadership on the other bills that we are developing or
that we are discussing today.
All these bills reflect thoughtful stakeholder engagement
with communities of color and low-income communities, and I am
proud to continue that engagement with today's hearings.
But I also want to thank our witnesses who are leaders and
experts in environmental justice communities. We are fortunate
to have this panel with us today, and I hope we can have a
constructive dialogue and work with these stakeholders to enact
needed change.
But let me just emphasize, if I can, Chairman Tonko, that
environmental justice can and should be a bipartisan issue.
Many of us were excited to pass environmental justice
provisions out of the House as part of last year's energy bill.
And although we did get about half of that energy bill in the
final omnibus, we were disappointed because we couldn't find
the bipartisan support we needed to get the environmental
justice provisions included in that omnibus bill.
So I hope we can find common ground and build on support,
because I know that these problems that exist in environmental
justice communities, you know, are throughout the country, not
just in Democratic districts. In fact, I always point out that,
when we did a brownfields bill, I don't know, 20 years ago now,
it was with Congressman Gillmor, and it was with--it was when
my former Governor, Whitman, was the EPA Administrator and
George Bush was President. So there is no reason that this
can't be bipartisan.
And also, this--the notion of building back better does
require bold action, and a focus on the communities most in
need. So I think the bills before us today are a good start. I
thank Chairman Tonko for calling this important hearing, and I
look forward to working together to see environmental justice
provisions enacted into law.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Pallone follows:]

Prepared Statement of Hon. Frank Pallone, Jr.

Today we continue this committee's important work on
environmental justice, examining 11 bills that address the
pressing needs of environmental justice communities.
For far too long, low-income communities and communities of
color have borne the brunt of air pollution, exposure to
contaminated sites, and unsafe water. Environmental injustice
can be attributed to many things, from intentionally racist
policies like red-lining that lead to vulnerable communities
being excluded from siting and permittiing decisions, to
unequal investment in these communities. Climate change and
deteriorating infrastructure are exacerbating these problems
and this inequality.
It's time for Congress to act. We must address the
overlapping crises facing our Nation, including inequality,
climate change, and the economic downturn caused by this
pandemic. As President Biden has said, we need to build back
better, and that means building back cleaner, healthier, and
with greater equity. I believe the 11 bills before us today can
help us do that.
One of the bills is H.R. 1512, the CLEAN Future Act, which
I introduced last month with Chairmen Tonko and Rush and
several other committee members. The CLEAN Future Act is a
comprehensive and ambitious plan to combat the climate crisis
and achieve net zero greenhouse gas pollution by no later than
2050. Environmental justice is a key component of the CLEAN
Future Act, and must be a focus of our efforts to address
climate change and infrastructure.
Many of the environmental justice provisions in the CLEAN
Future Act are reflected in President Biden's American Jobs
Plan. Both proposals prioritize investments for environmental
justice communities and commit 40 percent of investments to
directly benefit those communities. Both proposals seek to
clean up the sectors of our economy, like ports, that not only
increase the amount of carbon in the atmosphere, but also add
to the amount of hazardous air pollutants concentrated in
environmental justice communities. And both policy proposals
make long-overdue investments in cleaning up Superfund sites,
replacing lead service lines, and updating the energy grid.
Other bills we will hear about today focus on important
environmental justice topics including climate justice, port
climate readiness, cumulative impacts assessment, and the tools
available to identify environmental justice communities. Many
of these bills align with the American Jobs Plan and can help
us make that plan a reality.
I want to thank my colleagues for their engagement and help
in refining and expanding the environmental justice provisions
of the CLEAN Future Act. I also commend them for their
leadership on the other bills we are discussing today. These
bills reflect thoughtful stakeholder engagement with
communities of color and low-income communities, and I am proud
to continue that engagement with today's hearing.
I also want to thank our witnesses, who are leaders and
experts in environmental justice communities. We are fortunate
to have this panel with us today, and I hope we can have a
constructive dialogue and work with these stakeholders to enact
needed change.
Environmental justice can and should be a bipartisan issue.
Many of us were excited to pass environmental justice
provisions out of the House as part of last year's energy bill,
and were disappointed we could not find the bipartisan support
we needed to get those provisions enacted. I hope we can start
to find common ground and build that support.
Building back better will require bold action, and a focus
on the communities most in need. The bills before us are a
great start. I thank the Chair for calling this important
hearing, and I look forward to working together to see
environmental justice provisions enacted into law.

Mr. Pallone. And with that, I will yield back. Thank you,
Chairman.
Mr. Tonko. You are most welcome.
The gentleman, the chair, yields back. The Chair now
recognizes Mrs. Rodgers. Representative Rodgers serves as
ranking member of the full committee.
And Representative Rodgers, you have 5 minutes now for your
opening statement, please.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, A
REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF WASHINGTON

Mrs. Rodgers. Good morning, everyone.
Mr. Chairman, throughout these CLEAN Future Act hearings,
Republicans have stressed that, to address climate change and
the climate risk, the policies we develop must strengthen, not
weaken, our communities. You cannot build back better if you
are tearing down to do it.
Policies must recognize the vital role affordable, reliable
energy serves for expanding economic opportunity, for enabling
new work opportunities, increasing community resilience, or
expanding prosperity, for providing affordable power to homes
when we need it. We do this by building on current achievements
in energy, in environmental improvements, in economic
opportunity, not dismantling them.
We have all seen the human toll when economic opportunity
abandons communities. Witnesses in the past have outlined the
harsh economic, social, and physical harm that follows the loss
of good, blue-collar, middle-class jobs as factories pull out,
or power plants close. Whether the harm is due to lost economic
opportunity or not having the opportunity in the first place,
we should remove barriers and provide incentives to lift
economic prospects for all Americans, but especially for those
that need it the most.
The legislation before us today covers so much ground, it
is easy to overlook some of the ways the CLEAN Future Act harms
economic prospects. We have warned in previous hearings that
mandates like those in this bill will raise electricity rates,
sideline small businesses, and increase energy poverty for
those who need it.
And consider some of the provisions under review today that
would further weaken economic opportunity: section 606 of the
CLEAN Future Act prohibits new and renewed permits for projects
in census tracts identified as, quote, ``overburdened'' whether
or not the projects contribute to the burden. There is no room
here for State or local decisions, what workers or communities
want.
Amazingly, one trigger for prohibiting permits is set at
air emissions levels that are within current air quality
standards. That is not the way to foster economic opportunity
or improve public health.
Another provision, section 621, creates new regulations on
carbon capture and storage for enhanced oil recovery, a key
incentive for building out carbon capture for clean energy.
This provision duplicates existing regulations and imposes
impractical permittiing requirements that may undermine future
development of this technology and the jobs it will create.
Section 625 establishes a clear Federal role for hydraulic
fracturing and forces new requirements on State regulation of
hydraulic fracturing, a practice the States have handed--have
handled without Federal intervention for many decades.
These new changes would upend the regulatory structure that
helped drive the shale revolution, transforming American energy
security, lowering our greenhouse gas emission levels, and
providing new economic life to scores of communities around our
Nation.
And in other provisions of this bill we are looking at an
economic train wreck, not the way to help frontline
communities. We can do better than this.
We can start by recognizing the tremendous progress we have
made, as a Nation, in the terms of environmental improvements
under existing State and Federal policies. Fine particulate
matter is declining, down an average of almost 40 percent since
2000. Our air quality levels are 5 times lower than the global
average, 7 times lower than China's, well below France,
Germany, Mexico, and Russia, according to the EPA. And these
positive environmental trends will continue, as will the
economic and clean energy opportunities, if we don't block the
way with convoluted new regulatory policies.
Let's focus on incentives to economic development,
especially for under-served communities with ground-up,
bipartisan policies like opportunity zones.
I am pleased that Mr. Shay Hawkins is joining us this
morning to update us on how these policies help communities
that are in need of economic opportunity.
Mr. Derrick Hollie will remind us of the vital role of
affordable energy for economic progress, and the risk of heavy
regulation on energy.
Mr. Chairman, we can drive clean energy policies, improve
economic and environmental health, and foster prosperity for
all families. But the ingredients for success are not more
regulations, mandates, and central control that stifles
opportunity and freedom. Let's recognize and let's--let's
recognize that, and let's recognize our successes, and build on
that.
[The prepared statement of Mrs. Rodgers follows:]

Prepared Statement of Hon. Cathy McMorris Rodgers

Throughout these CLEAN Future Act hearings Republicans have
stressed that--to address climate risks--the policies we
develop must strengthen, not weaken our communities.
You cannot build better if you're tearing down to do it.
Policies must recognize the vital role affordable, reliable
energy serves for expanding economic opportunity for enabling
new work opportunities, increasing community resilience, for
expanding prosperity--for providing affordable power to homes
when they need it most.
And we do this by building on current achievements in
energy, in environmental improvements, in economic opportunity,
not dismantling them. We've all seen the human toll when
economic opportunity abandons communities.
Witnesses in the past have outlined the harsh economic,
social, and physical harm that follows the loss of good blue-
collar, middle-class jobs, as factories pull out or power
plants close.
Whether the harm is due to lost economic opportunity or not
having the opportunity in the first place, we should remove
barriers and provide incentives to lift economic prospects for
all Americans, but especially for those areas most in need. The
legislation before us today covers so much ground, it is easy
to overlook some of the ways the CLEAN Future Act harms
economic prospects.
We've warned in previous hearings that mandates like those
in this bill will raise electricity rates, sideline small
businesses, and increase energy poverty for those most in need.
And consider some of the provisions under review today that
would further weaken economic opportunity:
Section 606 of the CLEAN Future Act prohibits new and
renewed permits for projects in census tracts identified as
``overburdened''--whether or not the projects contribute to the
burdens. There's no room here for State or local decisions,
what workers and communities want.
Amazingly, one trigger for prohibiting permits is set at
air emissions levels that are within current air quality
standards. This is not the way to foster economic opportunity
or improved public health. Another provision, Section 621,
creates new regulations on carbon capture and storage for
enhanced oil recovery--a key incentive for building out CCS for
clean energy.
This provision duplicates existing regulations and imposes
impractical permitting requirements that may undermine future
development of this technology, and the jobs it will create.
Section 625 establishes a clear Federal role in hydraulic
fracturing and forces new requirements on State regulation of
hydraulic fracturing--a practice the States have handled
without Federal intervention for many decades.
These new changes would upend the regulatory structure that
helped drive the shale revolution, transforming American energy
security, lowering our Greenhouse Gas emissions levels and
providing new economic life to scores of communities around the
Nation.
Add in other provisions of this bill and we're looking at
an economic train wreck--not the way to help frontline
communities. We can do better than this.
And we can start by recognizing the tremendous progress we
have made as a Nation, in terms of environmental improvements
under existing State and Federal policies. Fine particulate
matter is declining, down an average of almost 40% since 2000.
Our air quality levels are five times lower than the global
average... seven times lower than China's and well below
France, Germany, Mexico, and Russia, according to the EPA.
And these positive environmental trends will continue, as
will the economic and clean energy opportunities, if we don't
block the way with convoluted new regulatory policies. Let's
focus on incentives to economic development, especially for
underserved communities, with ground-up bipartisan policies
like opportunity zones.
I'm pleased Mr. Shay Hawkins is joining us this morning to
update us on how these policies help communities in need of
economic opportunity. And Mr. Derrick Hollie will remind us of
the vital role of affordable energy for economic progress--and
the risks of heavy regulation on energy.
Mr. Chairman, we can drive clean energy policies, improve
economic and environmental health, and foster prosperity for
all families. But the ingredients for success here are not more
regulations, mandates, and central control that stifles
opportunity. Let's recognize that, recognize our successes and
build on them. Thank you.

Mrs. Rodgers. With that, I yield back.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you, the gentlelady yields back.
The Chair reminds Members that, pursuant to committee
rules, all Members' written opening statements shall be made
part of the record.
I now will introduce the wonderful witnesses that we have
for today's hearing. And we again thank them for joining us and
for sharing info with us.
Dr. Mildred McClain is our first witness to be introduced.
She is the executive director of Harambee House/Citizens for
Environmental Justice.
We then have Mr. Angelo Logan, campaign director, Moving
Forward Network.
Ms. Elizabeth Yeampierre--I hope I said that correctly--and
she serves as executive director of UPROSE.
And Mr. Derrick Hollie, who is founder of Reaching America.
Mr. Shay Hawkins, who is president of Opportunity Funds
Association.
And finally, Dr. Adrienne Hollis, senior climate justice
and health scientist of the Union of Concerned Scientists.
I remind all of our witnesses to please unmute as you are
called upon to share your thoughts for 5 minutes, and we will
begin now by recognizing Dr. McClain for 5 minutes to provide
an opening statement.
Dr. McClain, please unmute, and the floor is yours.

STATEMENTS OF MILDRED McCLAIN, Ph.D., EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR,
HARAMBEE HOUSE AND CITIZENS FOR ENVIRONMENTAL JUSTICE; ANGELO
LOGAN, POLICY AND CAMPAIGN DIRECTOR, MOVING FORWARD NETWORK;
ELIZABETH YEAMPIERRE, EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR, UPROSE, AND COCHAIR,
CLIMATE JUSTICE ALLIANCE; DERRICK HOLLIE, PRESIDENT, REACHING
AMERICA; SHAY HAWKINS, PRESIDENT, OPPORTUNITY FUNDS
ASSOCIATION; AND ADRIENNE HOLLIS, Ph.D., SENIOR CLIMATE JUSTICE
AND HEALTH SCIENTIST, CLIMATE AND ENERGY PROGRAM, UNION OF
CONCERNED SCIENTISTS

STATEMENT OF MILDRED MCCLAIN, Ph.D.

Dr. McClain. Good morning. I hope you can hear me, because
I can barely hear you.
Mr. Tonko. We can hear you, and----
Dr. McClain. Thank you so much for inviting me to testify
today. My name is Mildred McClain, I am the executive director
of the Harambee House/Citizens for Environmental Justice,
located in Savannah, Georgia. And we are a community-based
organization that has worked for the last 32 years with
families, organizations, communities throughout this country,
in building the capacity of regular people to have their voice
heard in environmental decision making.
I have submitted written testimony, so I just want to
highlight a couple of things this morning verbally.
There are a number of legislative proposals under
discussion today, and I am going to focus my comments on H.R.
2021, the Environmental Justice for All Act. This is a
promising start, but it is not where we want to finally end up.
It is a bill that was built up from the ground up, and that is
very, very, very important.
For far too long, environmental justice communities have
suffered the devastating impacts of having to
disproportionately bear the burdens of exposure to multiple
sources of pollution, including alarming rates of respiratory
illnesses, cancer, and premature death, as has been said
earlier. Rightly, this bill attempts to address this problem by
investing in local communities, increasing transparency, and
empowering impacted stakeholders to hold polluters accountable.
The process by which this bill was developed deserves
particular attention. Representative McEachin and Chairman
Grijalva have developed this legislation from the ground up,
with impacted communities leading and driving the development
of the bill. To address environmental injustice, the process
really does matter.
I want to pull out two important parts of the Act that are
very important, two key features, and one looks at the
cumulative impacts. Cumulative impacts requires consideration
in permittiing decisions under the Clean Air Act and the Clean
Water Act and ensures that permits will not be issued if the
project cannot demonstrate a reasonable certainty of no harm to
human health. Cumulative impacts is all about the concentration
of polluting industries in heavily burdened neighborhoods.
There must be consideration of denying a permit if there is any
chance of harm. Let us put the burden of proof on the
applicant.
Secondly, a feature that I want to uplift is the Executive
Order 12898, which codifies and bolsters President Clinton's
1994 Executive order by directing Federal agencies to develop
EJ strategies and to regularly report on implementation and
progress. It also ensures that Federal agencies include diverse
communities in public health research, data collection, and
analysis. But it is not a law, it is an order. When codified
and put into law, made a legal obligation, this allows for
accountability in Federal agencies.
The fact is many agencies do not comply with Executive
orders. Therefore, they must be required under the law. This
gives community, the public, tools to hold folks accountable.
Where agencies do not comply, the public can then complain
about noncompliance and do something about it.
A lack of enforcement of existing laws and regulations from
EPA and State permit regulators is a major component of the
challenge that needs to be addressed. That is to say, there is
often a breakdown between the regs on the books and how that
translates to improving residents' lives on the ground. The
Clinton Executive order takes steps to address this.
But as I said earlier, an Executive order can be overturned
with the stroke of a pen. That is why we need Congress to
codify agency accountability mechanisms into law, like the
Environmental Justice for All Act does with the Executive Order
12898, as well as with the recent Biden Executive order on
tackling the climate crisis at home and abroad that calls for
interagency coordination as well as accountability.
I want to just highlight one thing in my written testimony
before I close. We are calling for you to legislate consistent
and enforceable regulatory tools to end the disproportionate
and cumulative impact of multiple pollution sources and toxic
exposures on overburdened environmental justice communities. As
this committee proceeds with its work, I urge you all to be
thinking about how we can even add greater protections and
programs to the Environmental Justice for All Act, and build on
the communities' framework that is reflected in this important
legislation.
I close with a quote from Martin Luther King: ``Injustice
anywhere is a threat to justice everywhere. We are caught in an
inescapable network of mutuality, tied in a single garment of
destiny. Whatever affects one directly affects all
indirectly.'' We are Americans, and as the bill title suggests,
this is our vision: environmental justice for all.
And so I thank you for allowing me to talk today, and I
will be open for answering any questions.
[The prepared statement of Dr. McClain follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Tonko. Thank you. We thank you, Dr. McClain.
And I please ask people to stay within the 5-minute
boundaries, please. So thank you so much. We will now move to
Mr. Logan.
You are recognized, sir, for 5 minutes, please.

STATEMENT OF ANGELO LOGAN

Mr. Logan. Thank you. Good morning, Chairman Tonko, Ranking
Member McKinley, and members of the committee. My name is
Angelo Logan, and I am with the Moving Forward Network.
The Moving Forward Network is a national coalition of over
50 organizations in 20 cities committed to environmental
justice, with a focus on ports and freight transportation.
Ultimately, you cannot address environmental justice
without addressing ports and freight transportation, focusing
on self-determination, cumulative impacts, toxic exposure,
investing in EJ communities and just transition. As a major
environmental justice issue, ports and, more broadly, freight
transportation is a complex system that weaves seaports,
freight corridors, rail yards, intermodal facilities, inland
ports, and logistics centers. The communities where these
facilities are located not only contend with freight impacts
but are also inundated by a wide variety of other impacts, such
as refineries, trash incinerators, Superfund sites, and many
more. So, without a doubt, freight communities are clear
examples of the need for cumulative impact policies.
Environmental justice communities are hit first and worst
by the climate crisis. The freight system is a major source of
diesel pollution, which creates CO
2
, a major
greenhouse gas. Freight transport contributes approximately 3
billion tons of CO
2
, globally. The freight sector
accounts for roughly 9 percent of U.S. greenhouse gas
emissions. And in the next couple of decades it is expected
that oceangoing vessels alone will account for about 17 percent
of all manmade carbon dioxide emissions.
The 13 million people that live near ports and rail yards
are majority communities of color and have increased health
risk. Freight transportation alone puts African Americans at a
high risk that is three times their proportion of the U.S., and
Latinos make up two times their proportion. To that end I would
like you to consider taking the following actions.
One, advance proposals that center community voices, self-
determination, local solutions, and have incorporated a
comprehensive community process. One of the proposals before
you today, H.R. 2021, has incorporated a comprehensive,
community-led approach. The committee-facilitated Environmental
Justice Working Group resulted in the committee establishing a
statement of policy principles for this environmental justice
legislation.
Two, do not advance parts, pieces, or sections of proposals
that harm environmental justice communities. Proposals that
incorporate market mechanisms, trading schemes, biomass, and
other strategies that continue to burden EJ communities are
nonstarters, and have been strongly opposed by environmental
justice communities for many years.
Three, tackle environmental racism, address cumulative
impacts head on. Continuous permittiing of polluting facilities
in already overburdened communities perpetuate environmental
racism. Any serious environmental justice proposal must contain
a cumulative impacts policy that includes permit denials within
the strategy.
Four, invest in clean air plans, zero-emission freight
vehicles, and equipment at ports. On one hand, environmental
justice for port communities includes creating local solutions
and planning. The development of clean air plans for ports that
identify the problem, solutions, and actions. The need to
eliminate local toxic pollution and climate pollutants is
critical, and it must start with a community-led process. On
the other hand, the approach to reducing local toxic emissions
and climate pollutants must involve investing in the deployment
of zero-emission freight vehicles, equipment, and
infrastructure. Eliminating diesel pollution is critical if we
are going to protect community health and address the climate
crisis.
It is critical that both H.R. 501 and H.R. 862 include
organized labor engagement, and that investments require labor
protections. Community residents should have the right to both
a healthy environment and high-quality careers.
Five, environmental justice includes a just transition. As
polluting industries are phased out, pathways for workers in
those industries must be developed to support a transition to
new, quality careers.
Six, do not enable freight automation. Zero-emission
technologies at ports do not mean automation, nor should
technologies that would negatively impact freight--frontline
workers be supported.
Seven, require EPA to adopt regulations that reduce and
eliminate emissions from the freight sector. The following
should be the next generation of national emission standards
prioritized by EPA: national standards for heavy-duty trucks,
new standards for oceangoing vessels, national standards for
locomotive engines. These rules should include timelines and
requirements for the deployment of zero-emission technologies.
In closing, I would like to emphasize that community
engagement for developing solutions and strategies is
paramount. To that end we encourage the committee continue
engagement directly with the MFN membership. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Logan follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Tonko. Thank you so much, Mr. Logan, and next we will
recognize Ms. Yeampierre.
You are recognized for 5 minutes, please.

STATEMENT OF ELIZABETH YEAMPIERRE

Ms. Yeampierre. Buenos dias, Chair. Thank you for the
opportunity to testify before you today. My name is Elizabeth
Yeampierre, and I am cochair of the Climate Justice Alliance, a
national organization that links more than 75 organizations
across the U.S., Guam, and Puerto Rico. I am also executive
director of UPROSE--oldest Latino community organization. We
work at the intersection of racial justice and climate change
and are part of the national frontline climate justice movement
representing those most impacted by climate change.
Like climate change, the conditions of our communities are
the consequence of a long history of extraction. We share
legacies of fighting colonialism as well as race, class, and
gender oppression while advocating for environmental justice.
Our communities are the first and most impacted by the storms,
fires, floods, and droughts and are disproportionately burdened
by pollution, poverty, and systemic violence associated with
the multinational corporations driving these ecological crises.
Years of grassroots organizing and frontline community
leadership by members of New York Renews won the hard-fought
battle for New York's Climate Leadership and Community
Protection Act, the most progressive climate policy in the
Nation, paving the way for models and processes that are
community-led solutions grounded in racial justice and equity.
These community-led models serve as a foundation from which the
Federal Government can accelerate a just transition.
Congresswoman Yvette Clarke's proposal for a just--for a
climate justice working group represents an important step
forward for the prior and informed consent of frontline
communities and a just and equitable transition towards a
clean, zero-emission economy that protects and prioritizes our
communities. We applaud the bill for centering representatives
from frontline community-based organizations as advisers and
experts on matters pertaining to the impacts of climate change
and environmental pollution in our communities.
In order to transition away from fossil fuels, improve
health conditions in severely-polluted communities, and
strengthen social cohesion, we must redress past harms, create
new relationships of power that ensure the self-determination
of communities, and include the expertise of frontline
leadership.
UPROSE is located in Lenape Territory, also known as Sunset
Park, Brooklyn. It is a diverse, working-class community, where
the majority of the residents are people of color. Housing
affordability is a major crisis, with nearly half our neighbors
being rent burdened and the city undergoing extreme
gentrification that will only worsen with the expansion of
opportunity zones. It is also an industrial waterfront
community exposed to flooding from hurricanes and storm surges,
as we saw in 2012 with Superstorm Sandy.
We know the history of environmental racism led to the
disparate impacts of COVID-19, a public health crisis where
infection and death rates were significantly higher among our
people. This bill's proposed climate justice working group
would work to protect and prioritize frontline communities and
greenhouse gas emission reduction, copollutant reductions and
investments.
A set of criteria to identify climate-burdened communities
not only looks at the public health impacts but also takes on a
necessary holistic approach. This transition away from fossil
fuels in the extractive economy must be just and equitable,
redressing past harms and creating new relationships of power
for the future through reparations, living-wage jobs, and an
economic and social development that aims to address historical
harm and systemic racism.
All around the country, there are examples of frontline
communities developing projects that engage in innovative
infrastructure, further local control, and create jobs. Some of
these projects are in their early stages. My organization,
UPROSE, partnered with the New York City Economic Development
Corporation, Solar 1, and co-empowered it to create the first
community-owned solar cooperative in New York State. Projects
like these are scalable and replicable community-led models of
development and investment.
As the bearers of the historical and present-day brunt of
environmental degradation and climate change, our communities
must be at the forefront of solutions. Investment in just
development plans around the Nation through mandatory funding
for block grants earmarked for community-based organizations
and community development funds would go even further to repair
historical harm and center community innovation for water,
land, air, energy resources in both urban and rural areas as
well as Indian countries.
Our hopes are that our Government will work with us to
build a regenerative economy, and a just and equitable future.
Gracias.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Yeampierre follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Tonko. You are most welcome, de nada. And next--we
thank you, Ms. Yeampierre, and next we will welcome Mr. Hollie.
Mr. Hollie, you are recognized for 5 minutes, please, for
your opening statement.
[Pause.]
Mr. Hollie. Am I unmuted? Can you hear me?
Mr. Tonko. I can hear you.

STATEMENT OF DERRICK HOLLIE

Mr. Hollie. Greetings, Chairman Tonko, Ranking Member
McKinley, and members of the subcommittee. Thank you for the
opportunity and allowing me to speak today. I am Derrick
Hollie, president of Reaching America, an education and policy
organization I developed to address complex social issues
impacting African-American communities.
One of the issues I do the most work on is reducing energy
poverty. Energy poverty exists when low-income families or
individuals spend upwards of 30 percent of their total income
on their electric bill. I believe it would be fair to say that
many Americans who struggled with rising energy costs before
the COVID-19 pandemic are struggling even more now. And with
millions still out of work, many Americans are experiencing
energy poverty for the first time in their life. And with
moratoriums over, some folks' power is being turned off in
these same vulnerable communities that these new laws and
regulations claim to protect.
We know that communities around the country, particularly
low-income, minority, and senior citizen communities, suffer
from a lack of access of reliable energy sources and spend a
disproportionate amount of their income, much higher amounts of
their income, on electricity costs. And when this happens, it
results in energy poverty.
Eliminating energy poverty is a goal I think we are all
interested in achieving, but in working towards that goal we
need to be mindful of how policies will impact the communities
we are trying to serve. When the Government creates policies,
its first priority should be the welfare of the people,
especially those impacted the hardest. And with the uncertainty
that still exists from this virus, it would not be prudent to
eliminate safe, reliable energy sources like oil and natural
gas for unproven and unreliable renewable sources. Certainly,
not right now.
Under this current administration, the oil and gas industry
is under attack from pipelines to hydraulic fracturing, which
has revolutionized how we access our natural resources. A study
done by Shale Crescent USA shows end users have saved $1.1
trillion over the past 10 years due to increased natural gas
production that has reduced the price of natural gas in the
United States. Meanwhile, California, which is rich in its own
natural resources, increased crude oil imports from foreign
countries from 5 percent in 1992 to 57 percent in 2018.
This is a glaring example of hypocrisy, and here is why.
Just 2 years ago, booming shale production helped the U.S.
overtake Saudi Arabia and Russia to become the world's top oil
exporter for the first time ever. How can our natural resources
be worthy enough to supply the other countries and the rest of
the world but not good enough for us right here at home?
My grandfather was a Black coal miner in southwest
Virginia, and I had the opportunity to visit that area. And the
poverty that exists in rural America is different. And these
communities have never recovered from the mines that were shut
down years ago, decades ago. My fear, Mr. Chairman, is that the
same will happen to these thriving communities that have relied
on good-paying oil and gas jobs for generations. I know plenty
of Black folks in Houston, Dallas, and Louisiana who have
worked in the industry, and they are not in agreement with new
policies and regulations that will ultimately destroy their
lifestyle.
I am a licensed captain, and I fished the Atlantic, the
Gulf, and I am an environmental steward. I recognize we have to
protect our planet. However, the bottom line here is the
Federal clean energy standard that is being proposed is overly
ambitious, and it will undoubtedly raise electricity rates for
low-income, minority, rural, and senior citizen communities. It
will also put fossil fuels, including natural gas, which has
been a game changer, at a complete disadvantage.
There are also provisions in this bill concerning eminent
domain that will stop pipeline permittiing. We have more miles
of pipeline in this country than we have roads, and most people
are living and breathing just fine. I think we all agree that
American people have gone through enough. And with the
uncertainty that still exists from this global pandemic of
COVID-19, the last thing we need to do is take away good-paying
jobs and disrupt people's lifestyle more than it already has,
and is destroying an industry that we have relied on for
industries. The same industry--for centuries, excuse me.
The same industry that has allowed us to create a life that
Americans have grown to appreciate from petrochemicals,
including plastics, fibers, pharmaceuticals, and your yoga mat,
are all at risk of going away right now. We need market-
oriented energy policy that will allow America to keep
exploring and developing our own natural resources safely and
allow us to maintain our energy independence, which will
ultimately impact our national security.
Thank you, I yield my time.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Hollie follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Tonko. Thank you, Mr. Hollie, and now we will move to
Mr. Hawkins.
You are recognized, Mr. Hawkins, for 5 minutes, please.

STATEMENT OF SHAY HAWKINS

Mr. Hawkins. Thank you, Chairman Tonko. Thank you, Ranking
Member McKinley and the other members of the subcommittee, for
having me. This is my third time testifying in front of
Congress, but my second time testifying in front of this
committee. So I appreciate you having me.
My name is Shay Hawkins. I am the president of the
Opportunity Funds Association, a trade association focused on
investors, entrepreneurs, and developers in opportunity zones.
Prior to founding OFA, I was the majority staff director for
the Senate Finance Subcommittee on Energy, Natural Resources,
and Infrastructure, and I served as tax counsel for Senator Tim
Scott for South Carolina, where we developed the opportunity
zones provision based on the Investing and Opportunity Act, a
bipartisan proposal with 88 House cosponsors--44 Democrats, 44
Republicans--and 16 Senate cosponsors--8 Republicans and 8
Democrats.
Opportunity zones, according to the accounting firm
Novogradac, $15 billion have been raised into the vehicles for
opportunities on investing opportunity funds, and 3 billion of
that has been raised in the midst of this pandemic. The Council
of Economic Advisers estimates that 1 million Americans will be
lifted out of poverty over the next 10 years through this
policy.
Opportunity zones overlap 294 Native lands--I am sorry, 244
opportunity zones overlap Native lands. And, as you all know,
these are communities that are disproportionately affected by
environmental challenges. And so, as we go move forward and
look at legislation to serve frontline communities, we have to
be very careful that we don't exacerbate these disparate
impacts in these communities with unique challenges.
So, for instance, you know, when we look at Alaska Native
communities, policies that would raise oil prices or fuel
prices through additional taxation would have a disparate
impact on those folks who are dependent on air travel for
freight but also for passenger travel in a way that those of us
down here in the lower 48 just couldn't relate to. And so that
is just something that we need to bear in mind as we look for
bipartisan solutions to serve these frontline communities.
Frontline communities overlap opportunity zones, and vice
versa. We are seeing some amazing things happening in
opportunity zones. I was just down in Panama City, Florida,
where the St. Joe Company broke ground on a waterfront hotel
and stand-alone restaurant. The parcel that the hotel is built
on is city-owned, and the city will lease it to St. Joe
Company, providing an immediate benefit of revenue to the
residents of Panama City as well as 150 direct jobs created by
that project.
You know, out in San Bernardino, California, a leading real
estate investment firm, RevOZ, will be cutting the ribbon on an
11,000-square-foot office project. The facility will house San
Bernardino County's Children's Department of Behavioral Health,
and that will provide mental wellness care to some of the most
vulnerable and underserved members of that community.
And we also see operating businesses taking root in
critical industries such as clean energy. There are 475 solar
energy installations in opportunity zones, 127 wind farms have
been developed, and 15 battery plants, all providing
electricity right now.
And so I look forward to speaking more with the committee
and offering whatever I can to help these frontline communities
through investment but also through reasonable, low-cost energy
that is secure in its delivery.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Hawkins follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Tonko. Thank you, Mr. Hawkins. And now we will go to
our final witness, Dr. Adrienne Hollis.
And you are recognized Dr. Hollis, for 5 minutes, please.

STATEMENT OF ADRIENNE HOLLIS, Ph.D.

Dr. Hollis. Good morning, and thank you, Chairman Tonko,
Ranking Members Rodgers and McKinley, and members of the
subcommittee, for providing me the opportunity to testify here
today. And good morning also to my esteemed copanelists. My
name is Dr. Adrienne Hollis, and I am a senior climate justice
and health scientist at the Union of Concerned Scientists. I am
here to share my perspectives on the impacts of environmental
assaults on EJ communities.
We are in the midst of a syndemic. A syndemic occurs when a
set of two or more linked health problems affect the same group
of people at the same time and negatively compound each other's
effects. EJ communities have existed in the middle of a
syndemic for decades, facing challenges of structural racism,
environmental injustice, and climate change. Any of these
factors on their own is deadly, but together the damage is
immeasurable. Add that to existing adverse conditions in
communities that survive despite the presence of systemic
racism, where poverty exists and incomes have never been
healthy--and, in some circumstances, neither have the
communities.
We must acknowledge that the underlying factor, systemic
racism against Black, brown, Native Americans, and indigenous
peoples, affects every aspect of our lives, from education to
employment, from housing to healthcare, from the food we eat
and the water we drink to the air we breathe. We contribute the
least to environmental pollution, and yet we have the most
exposure to undrinkable water and unbreathable air. We
contribute the least to climate change, yet suffer most from
its consequences.
Let me share a perfect illustration of a syndemic. It
happened last year in western Lake Charles, Louisiana.
First, because of systemic racism, activities like
redlining, and the practice of NIMBY-ism--Not In My Back Yard--
factories and other polluting facilities were placed in EJ
communities--in this case, near the familiar Cancer Alley.
Residents have been exposed to toxic chemicals in the air,
water, and soil for years.
They--then Hurricane Laura struck. Laura's landfall was a
borderline category 5, the strongest since 1856. Hurricane
Laura devastated the area. People who could evacuated, and
those who could not stayed. Remember, this is right in the
middle of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Then a chemical fire broke out at a biolab facility and
burned for three days, sending what was thought to be millions
of gallons of chlorine gas into the nearby EJ community and
beyond. A shelter-in-place order was issued. And because of
that order and directions to keep windows and doors closed and
not use air conditioners, people may have been at an increased
risk of COVID-19 infection and adverse health effects from the
chlorine gas, on top of the danger from emissions occurring
during facility shutdowns in advance of the hurricane.
The temperature was also a sweltering 90 degrees.
The chemical fire--the chemical plant fire put residents at
risk of breathing in toxic air, which contributes to the
underlying health conditions that make COVID-19 more likely to
kill. Research has shown that Black, Latinx, Native American,
and indigenous communities in the high environmental risk areas
have higher death rates.
All of this is on top of the danger and trauma from a
climate change-fueled storm. Hurricane Laura killed 32 people
in Louisiana and was predicted to cause unsurvivable storm
surges.
This is a perfect example of the confluence of conditions
that make up a syndemic. Communities should have been made
aware of the presence of dangerous, toxic chemicals and should
have been part of any plan to address releases of toxic
substances.
Furthermore, there is no standardized Federal guideline for
keeping people safe from COVID-19 transmission during
evacuations. The final challenge with COVID-19 in communities
of color is the lack of racial and ethnic data. That data would
have been instrumental in developing policy around vaccine
administration, for example, and that way the most impacted
would have been vaccinated first. Instead, people in harm's way
have to hope that their local leadership has a plan.
It is beyond time for this country to address and alleviate
the factors that make up this syndemic. And for that reason, I
am very pleased that this hearing is occurring. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Hollis follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Tonko. Welcome, and thank you all to our witnesses. We
thank you all for your participation again in your opening
statements. We will now move to Member questions, and I will
start by recognizing myself for 5 minutes.
Mr. Logan, I want to start with you because I believe you
were named as a member of the White House Environmental Justice
Advisory Council. Do you believe the Biden administration has
properly elevated the importance of environmental justice in
its energy, environmental, and climate policies?
Mr. Logan. Thank you, Chairman Tonko. Definitely, the
administration has elevated environmental justice to a point
that we have not seen before at this level. But really, there
is a lot of work to do. And I encourage not just the
administration across all the agencies but also legislators at
the Federal level, the State level, and the local level to join
in because this is a crisis that we really need to address in
totality and as a collective effort.
So it is a good start. It is probably the best we have seen
in terms of really focusing and addressing environmental
justice, but there is a lot of work ahead of us and a lot of
learning to do, as well.
Mr. Tonko. OK, thank you. The Justice40 initiative has been
one of the priorities of this administration, and this
committee has adopted a similar requirement that 40 percent of
the investments in the CLEAN Future Act directly benefit
environmental justice communities.
So, Mr. Logan, again, do you have any thoughts on the
ongoing development of the Justice40 commitment and how we can
make sure that it is implemented in a way that leads to
meaningful engagement and investment in frontline communities?
Mr. Logan. Thank you again, Chairman Tonko. And just to be
clear, I am not representing the White House Environmental
Justice Advisory Council on this panel, so I just wanted to be
really clear about that.
There is tons of work to do in terms of that investment,
making sure that we get the amount of resources to the
communities that are in most need. So developing the mapping
tools, identifying the communities, identifying the resources,
and making sure that those resources are not leveraged through
particular mechanisms that will create more harm, in effect
zeroing out the benefits of the Justice40 communities because
of creating, basically, sacrifice zones. So there is, again, a
lot of work to do.
I think the intention is great, but there is work to do in
terms of identifying where to get those resources to what
communities that are most in need.
Mr. Tonko. Right, and Dr. Hollis and Dr. McClain, is there
anything that you would like to mention about the importance of
the Justice40 initiative?
Either of you.
Dr. Hollis. Actually, I agree with Mr. Logan. I don't have
anything to add.
Mr. Tonko. OK. And anything else from our other witness?
Ms. Yeampierre. Yes, yes, thank you--Elizabeth Yeampierre.
So I just want to say, on behalf of the Climate Justice
Alliance, that we are encouraged by the ambition in the
American Jobs Act--Plan.
With that said, we are concerned about the numerous
provisions included that debase the overarching intention of
the plan. Last year, when Congress passed its omnibus bill to
keep the Government open and functioning, nearly 10 billion was
appropriated for false solutions like carbon capture and
storage, carbon capture utilization of sequestration, and so-
called green hydrogen. And so, when we learned that President
Biden intends to double down on these fossil-fuel-backed,
unproven mechanisms, we found that troubling, because we think
of them simply as Big Oil bailouts at the expense of the
environmental justice communities that bear the brunt of the
disproportionate burden.
The other thing that is really important is that we think
that the administration has made clear the difference between
benefits and actual investments in EJ communities. Rather than
subjecting impacted communities to subjective ideas of what
qualifies as a benefit, Federal dollars should be allocated in
a way that strengthens social cohesion. So we look forward to
discussions about this, but we are really concerned, because
there is a difference between investments and benefits.
And then finally, the last thing that I would say about
that is that the 40 percent, because it comes out of New York
State's Climate Leadership and Community Protection Act, was
always intended to be a basement and not the ceiling, that 40
percent shouldn't be the goal. It should be the minimum of what
is required to address communities that have been enduring a
legacy of extraction for generations.
Mr. Tonko. Well, I know we are going to hear a lot today
about energy affordability, which I agree is important,
especially for people with high energy burdens. You mentioned
community solar. Can you give us a sense of how community solar
and weatherization projects have resulted in reduced
electricity bills for people in frontline communities?
Ms. Yeampierre. I was just----
Mr. Tonko. But do it quickly, so we are--I am running out
of time here, so just----
Ms. Yeampierre. Sure, thank you. I will try to talk fast.
You know, ours is the first community-owned solar
cooperative in the State of New York. It means that both small
businesses and residents are able to access renewable energy
and reduce their cost, which is important for low-income
communities.
We have also been able to bring offshore wind to Brooklyn
and work with NYSERDA to invest $200 million and bringing
thousands of jobs to the industrial waterfront. We are looking
at an industrial waterfront that has a history of not only
polluting and hurting us but has the possibility of building
for climate adaptation, mitigation, and resilience. And we are
seeing investments already happen as a result of local
legislation in New York City and at the State level.
With resources from the Federal level, we are talking about
the complete transformation of sectors that in the past created
environmental burdens and can be building for a future that
brings jobs, renewable energy, and also addresses issues of
health.
So those are some of the things that we are doing, and they
involve thousands of jobs.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you so much. My time is exhausted, so I
now go to--recognize Mr. McKinley, our ranking member.
Five minutes for questioning, sir.
Mr. McKinley. Thank you, Chairman Tonko. Look, in my
opening statement, Paul, I discussed the increase in poverty
and injustice as we--as the Democrats do away with fossil fuels
by the year 2035. But in so doing, we have to understand--and I
understand, when we go to renewables, we are going to be--it is
our desired long term, but it means we will be increasingly
dependent on renewables. Therefore, we need to consider the
battery storage to back them up.
So, just for the sake of this conversation today, let's
focus on the injustices involved with the supply chain for
batteries. And I would say, Paul, no one wants to see sausage
made, but they all love eating it. The same goes for batteries.
Two of the key ingredients in batteries are lithium and cobalt.
But have you ever seen how they source that material?
Here is--and CNN did an article, let me see if I--we got
that. This is an article that CNN posted of children in Congo
being forced into labor to harvest cobalt. Here is another
picture of those--in another cobalt mine in the Congo. These
are--we are continuing to have child labor, or enabling these
dictators to use child labor.
Or what about lithium? Have you ever seen the ravaging
effects of lithium? Here is a picture of a lithium mine. Look
at that, look at the depth in the community. These are ravaging
effects we are having on communities all across this world in
our pursuit of having battery storage.
So--and for those of us that have been concerned with
mountaintop mining, this is mountaintop mining on steroids. And
according to Mark Mills of the Manhattan Institute, he says we
are going to have--and he testified it--we are going to have
to--he testified that we are going to move 250 tons of earth to
produce just 1 electric vehicle battery, 250 tons. And we--and
this bill--there are 650,000 cars in the Federal fleet. So just
do the math, and it comes to about 163 million tons of dirt we
are going to have to excavate around the world.
Now, maybe this idea of doing away with fossil fuels makes
Democrats feel good. And--but keep in mind, this procurement is
not going to happen in the United States. It will happen in
other countries, kind of out of sight, Paul, away from us. We
are exporting our guilt. It seems like environmental justice
stops at the border. We don't care what is happening in other
nations, what we are doing, as long as we get ours. Shame on
us. We are devastating these countrysides of other nations to
satisfy our thirst for batteries.
So let's stop for a minute. We are creating poverty,
perpetuating child labor in China and South America, and
destroying the environments of other countries. That is
justice? Give me a break.
So if I could ask a question to Derrick Hollie. Last month
before the committee, former Secretary Moniz said we need to do
more of this mining of these critical minerals in the United
States. Do you agree with him?
[Pause.]
Mr. McKinley. Derrick Hollie, you are muted.
Mr. Hollie. Can you hear me?
Mr. McKinley. Yes, now I can.
Mr. Hollie. Yes, sir, I agree with you, and everything that
you said about the mining, and it is an absolute travesty, how
we--and you said environmental justice stops here at the
border, where we go and get everything we need from other
countries.
Mr. McKinley. Thank you. So wouldn't it make more sense to
invest in innovation here in America, so that we don't----
Mr. Hollie. Yes, sir.
Mr. McKinley [continuing]. Our fossil fuels to balance out
our needs, and do it in a cleaner way? Wouldn't that make more
sense?
Mr. Hollie. Yes, sir, it would.
Mr. McKinley. So, again, with these policies, we
understand--we have had testimony--our utility bills are going
to increase, our neighbors are going to be unemployed, we will
still have extreme weather conditions, and all the while we are
alienating other nations as we ravage their countrysides. Is it
worth it, Mr. Hollie? Is it----
Mr. Hollie. No, sir, it is not. No, sir, it is not. And we
talk about the precious minerals that we need for--to produce
the stuff that we need. We have one mine up in Minnesota right
now that produces cobalt, and environmental groups want to shut
that down. And it is just an awful travesty. It is just a
shame.
Mr. McKinley. And the President just stopped a mine, a
copper mine that we need in Arizona. I just think this is just
a hypocritical issue, in many respects on it. And I don't think
we, as a country, we are doing justice to the world by what we
are trying to accomplish here.
So I thank all of you, and I yield back, Paul, my--any
time.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you. The gentleman yields back. The Chair
now recognizes Chairman Pallone from the full committee for 5
minutes to ask questions, please.
Mr. Pallone?
Mr. Pallone. Thank you, Chairman Tonko. I wanted to focus
on the environmental justice title of the CLEAN Future Act, and
just a few examples.
With regard to Superfund, the CLEAN Future Act creates
several new requirements. First, it requires the Federal
Government to identify all Federal Superfund sites that are
vulnerable to extreme weather associated with climate change,
and to clean up all of those sites within 10 years. So let me
start with Dr. Hollis.
How can cleaning up those sites quickly protect
environmental justice communities?
Dr. Hollis. Thank you, Chairman Pallone, that is a great
question. What we found is that what--these facilities, these
Superfund sites, have been in existence for years, and they are
vulnerable to activities like climate change. We have seen
that, for example, in Port Arthur, Texas, in instances of
extreme flooding, where contaminants from the site have washed
literally down the street where communities live, increasing
their exposure and increasing the amount of cumulative exposure
to contaminants.
And we have also seen the fact that some of these
facilities, which are already unsafe, become--are exacerbated
in situations of extreme weather. And we know that the--they
have not necessarily been the focus of cleanup in years. And
for that reason, and--we need a faster cleanup. We need to
think about the communities that are located around these
facilities and how impacted they are and do our best to
mitigate that.
Mr. Pallone. Thank you. And then the CLEAN Future Act also
creates new financial responsibility requirements that
incentivize chemical facilities to adapt for climate change to
prevent toxic releases during extreme weather events like
hurricanes. And we know that these facilities are often located
in environmental justice communities.
So let me ask Dr. McClain, why is it important for
fenceline communities to prevent these releases whenever
possible?
[Pause.]
Mr. Pallone. Is Dr. McClain--were you guys able to hear my
question?
[Pause.]
Mr. Pallone. Maybe not. I don't know if they were able--
Chairman, were you able----
Mr. McKinley. We can hear you, Frank. We can hear you. I am
not sure where Dr. McClain is.
Mr. Pallone. Dr. McClain isn't there.
Mr. Tonko. Chairman Pallone, you might--we have having some
technical difficulties. You might direct your question to Dr.
Hollis, please.
Mr. Pallone. OK. Dr. Hollis, do you want me to repeat that
for you?
So under the CLEAN Future Act we create new financial
responsibility to adopt for climate change to prevent toxic
releases during extreme weather. We know that these facilities
are located often in environmental justice communities. So
could you explain why it is important for fenceline communities
to prevent these releases when possible?
Dr. Hollis. Yes, and a quick answer would be the example
that I gave earlier about the syndemic, what happened in Lake
Charles, Louisiana, when the community, which is a fenceline
community, was potentially impacted from chlorine gas, if it
had been released at higher amounts, in addition to the
exposure that communities face when facilities shut down for
either maintenance, or in anticipation of extreme weather
conditions.
So it is important that we, once again, stop that exposure.
Some of it is immeasurable. We don't know the quantity, but we
do know that people at the fenceline and in the communities are
becoming ill. Thank you.
Mr. Pallone. Thank you. The bill----
Ms. Yeampierre. May I add something to this?
Mr. Pallone. Who is that?
Ms. Yeampierre. It is Elizabeth again. May I add something
to this, please?
Mr. Pallone. Yes, but then I wanted to ask you a question
too, so we are running out.
Ms. Yeampierre. OK.
Mr. Pallone. Let me go to you next, all right?
Ms. Yeampierre. All right.
Mr. Pallone. I just wanted to mention that, under the bill,
facilities that did not adapt will pay user fees into the
Superfund Trust Fund, which supports the Superfund cleanups.
And that funding is important, because it would build on the
President's effort in the American Jobs Plan to reinstate the
Superfund tax.
But on brownfields I wanted to ask you, with regard to
brownfields, the CLEAN Future Act includes 6 billion over 10
years for brownfields redevelopment. And that has long been, as
I said before, a bipartisan issue. So what I wanted to ask Dr.
Yeampierre is--I mean Ms. Yeampierre--based on your experience,
how could this brownfields investment help environmental
justice communities build back better?
And if you want to mention the other two, that is fine, but
I wanted to ask you----
Ms. Yeampierre. Yes, so--thank you so much. So quickly, I
served as chair of the National Environmental Justice Advisory
Council and predicted that industrial waterfronts will be hit
by extreme weather events. And we saw that happen in Katrina.
We saw it happen in New York. We saw that happen in Puerto Rico
with Hurricane Maria, a place that has 23 Superfunds, a tiny
island like that. So those investments really need to work to
prevent toxic exposure, the exposure to toxics and toxicants.
These--when this happens, when a cat 5 hurricane hits one
of these islands, or one of our communities, those toxicants
and those toxics are released in the air and the ground water.
They land in people's buildings. They literally are everywhere.
And there is no baseline research to determine what the
exposure is. There is no way of comparing it.
So that resource--those resources have to be investing in
not only redeveloping those properties and using them as
vehicles for economic development in our community but
addressing the kind of environmental harm that has actually
cost lives already.
And there is a study that came out of that year--it
happened before--right after Superstorm Sandy--that documents
all of the different communities all over the United States
where that was possible. And then we saw it happen in Houston.
So I would urge you to look at that study, and make sure that
we operationalize the recommendations that came out of that
advisory group, because I always feel that we are starting from
scratch, but we have been----
Mr. Pallone. I am going to have to----
Ms. Yeampierre [continuing]. Talking about this.
But thank you so much for the question, it is an important
one.
Mr. Pallone. Thank you.
Thank you, Chairman.
Mr. Tonko. Oh, you are welcome. The gentleman yields back.
The Chair now recognizes Mrs. Rodgers, Representative
Rodgers, for 5 minutes. She is our full committee ranking
member.
So welcome.
Mrs. Rodgers. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I wanted to start
with some questions for Dr. Hollie, or Mr. Hollie.
I appreciated you outlining how important affordable energy
is for people, and especially for people most in need. And that
has been a key focus, as we are reviewing the bills before us.
My State of Washington, the State of Washington, enjoys
some of the lowest electricity rates in the country, and that
is thanks to abundant hydropower. Nearly 70 percent of our
electricity comes from hydropower, and we hope to keep it that
way. You know, it helps families and it helps us grow our
economy. It is an economic advantage to us, a competitive
advantage.
You know, but as you look across the country, low rates are
not everywhere. And in those places where not, it creates
burdens for low-income communities. A review of Department of
Energy data shows that States with the highest low-income
energy burdens are in the southeastern United States. And this
is where most of our electricity is used for heating and
cooling. Low-income households in those States use almost 40
percent more electricity than the national average for low-
income households.
The good news is that in these southeastern States they
also enjoy some of the lowest electricity rates in the nation.
So, Mr. Hollie, what happens to low-income households in
Mississippi, Alabama, Georgia, or South Carolina if climate
policies force them to pay the same rates as residents in
California or even Connecticut, where prices are nearly twice
as high?
Mr. Hollie. Yes, I can't speak--because I am not in
everyone's household, I don't know what everybody's income is,
but it will certainly drive up the electricity rates for
everyone in these communities.
And I would also add, Ranking Member, that the same--these
same communities that are screaming environmental justice are
the same communities that are being impacted by energy poverty.
Mrs. Rodgers. Well, and maybe speak a little bit to the
economic opportunities that would also be harmed if businesses
and industries had to pay those higher rates.
Mr. Hollie. No, I don't think anyone can afford these
rates. And just as a small business owner, I know how we have
been impacted right now with COVID. And so I don't think it
would be prudent to implement any of these policies that will
essentially raise the rate for consumers and business owners.
Mrs. Rodgers. So there is provisions in the legislation
before us where it would mean that projects will not be able to
get permits if they are ``overburdened,'' if they are found in
one of these overburdened census tracts, even if it doesn't
contribute to--even if they aren't the ones contributing to the
burden. So what is your view of that?
Mr. Hollie. I just think, you know, with the Federal
Government, we need to leave some of this responsibility to the
States. They know what they need in these areas. So I think
that, when we start--the Federal Government starts meddling in
the States, sometimes that creates an overburden because,
again, they know what they need down there in those States more
so than we do.
Mrs. Rodgers. Thank you.
Mr. Hawkins, the White House Council of Economic Advisers
analyzed the potential for opportunity zones last year. Can you
talk about what they estimated those impacts on poverty would
be, and how many people would be lifted out of poverty with
good-paying jobs?
Mr. Hawkins. Sure. And so the Council of Economic Advisers
estimates that over a million Americans would be lifted out of
poverty over the next 10 years as a result of this policy.
They also estimate that the residents----you know, when we
look at opportunity zones, and kind of isolate those census
tracts across the country, that the poverty rate in opportunity
zones will drop by 11 percent.
Mrs. Rodgers. That is great, that is great, I just really
appreciate your work on it too.
So the Republicans on this committee have released a
package of bills. We call it Securing Cleaner American Energy.
Mr. Hawkins. Yes, yes.
Mrs. Rodgers. It is part of our agenda, and it is focused
on creating cleaner, more affordable, more secure energy, which
is so important from a national security perspective but also
an economic perspective, and also about creating jobs and
lifting people out of poverty.
Mr. Hawkins. Sure.
Mrs. Rodgers. Would you just speak to what you see in that
bill and how you believe it may impact distressed communities?
Mr. Hawkins. Yes, I think the most exciting parts are the
parts that deal with innovation, so the CCUS Innovation Act,
the Clean Energy Hydrogen Innovation Act, those policies both
have elements where you are partnering with the loan guarantee
program at DoE and you can see that kind of across-agency
coordination that we have seen possibly--potentially, between
DoE and opportunity zones, similar to what we saw from EPA
around brownfield remediation in opportunity zones. So that--
those elements were very exciting.
Mrs. Rodgers. Yes, I completely agree. American ingenuity
leading the way, bringing down carbon emissions, creating more
opportunities.
Mr. Hawkins. Absolutely.
Mrs. Rodgers. I have exceeded my time. I yield back. Thank
you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Tonko. You are welcome.
The gentlelady yields back. The Chair now recognizes the
gentlelady from Colorado Representative DeGette, who serves as
our chair of the Subcommittee on Oversight.
So Representative DeGette?
Ms. DeGette. Thank you so much, Mr. Chairman. This is a
really important hearing, and I just want to say the name of
the hearing, because I think my colleagues on the other side of
the aisle may have forgotten about what this hearing is about.
It is called ``Protection from Cumulative Emissions and
Underenforcement of Environmental Law Act.'' And that is my
bill, and then there is a bunch of other bills that are
included in the hearing that are talking about environmental
justice, and how we clean up environmentally contaminated
sites.
In my congressional district I have some neighborhoods,
Swansea, Elyria, and Globeville. These neighborhoods are
classic environmental justice communities. They suffer from
highways going right through the middle, from railways,
refineries, other historical polluters. They are neighborhoods
full of working-class Americans who have suffered incredible
health damage and other damages from this pollution.
Now, I--so what my bill does is it requires the EPA to
develop and implement a protocol for addressing cumulative
health impacts of multiple sources of pollution.
I can understand how my colleagues on the other side of the
aisle would like to talk about renewable energy versus
traditional energy and how they would like to debate that and
how they would like to change the subject. I guess I can
understand that. But what I really can't understand is how not
either of their witnesses or one of the Members is willing to
talk about how we address cleanup of these environmental
justice areas.
Now, I must say Mr. Hawkins did talk about opportunity
zones, and he did do some good work with his former boss,
Senator Scott, on that. I support opportunity zones, but those
are about economic development. It is not talking about cleanup
of environmental contamination in these neighborhoods. And that
is what we need to talk about. And so I want to--I have some
questions, and I want to ask the witnesses about what this
hearing is about.
Dr. Hollis, I am going to start with you. When the EPA
develops a standard for a given pollutant, does the Agency
typically consider the other pollutants that a community might
be exposed to?
Dr. Hollis. No, that is not necessarily the way EPA does
their calculation when they----
Ms. DeGette. Yes.
Dr. Hollis [continuing]. Establish standards.
Ms. DeGette. OK. Now, when the EPA or State environmental
agency issues a permit, are they required to issue--to consider
the other pollutants the community be exposed to? Same thing?
Dr. Hollis. Same thing.
Ms. DeGette. Now, is it possible that, if you have
different pollutants, they can interact with each other or even
make each other worse in attacking our health?
Dr. Hollis. Absolutely.
Ms. DeGette. And are you familiar with the--I think you
talked about this a little bit in your opening statement--the
Harvard study about the relationship between chronic exposure
to air pollution and COVID.
Dr. Hollis. Yes.
Ms. DeGette. Can you talk to us for a minute about that
study?
Dr. Hollis. The study from Harvard, which was also done in
Beijing and Italy, suggests a relationship between particulate
matter and COVID-19, that the virus particles actually sort of
hitch a ride on the particulate matter. And particulate matter
is found at higher concentrations, of course, in the
environmental justice communities from emissions, from
polluting facilities like that. So communities who are already
at risk because of where they live are more at risk because the
particulate matter allows the COVID-19 to embed itself deeper
into the lung.
Ms. DeGette. Right. And we know that multiple sources of
pollution are a hallmark of environmental justice communities.
And what complicates that is EPA actually only carries out a
relatively small number of enforcement actions.
And so what my bill does is it says, ``EPA, identify 100
communities nationwide where there appears to be chronic
underenforcement, and work with State and local agencies to
figure out what needs to happen to clean that up.'' Would you
agree that underenforcement of environmental laws is a classic
example of an environmental--of environmental injustice?
Dr. Hollis. Absolutely.
Ms. DeGette. And why do you think that happens? What do you
think the reasons for that are?
Dr. Hollis. Gosh, I don't know the answer to that question.
Ms. DeGette. You have got 26 seconds, OK?
[Laughter.]
Ms. DeGette. OK, let me move on. Do you think that this
hurts the ability of the local neighbors to actually move
forward in supporting their communities, when they see that the
Government just doesn't even care?
Dr. Hollis. Absolutely.
Ms. DeGette. OK, thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I yield
back.
Mr. Tonko. The gentlelady yields back. The Chair now
recognizes the gentleman from Ohio.
Representative Johnson, you are recognized for 5 minutes,
please.
Mr. Johnson. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman. Before I start,
I ask unanimous consent to enter an article into the record.
This article from Politico, published a week ago, is entitled,
``The wage gap that threatens Biden's climate plan.''
Mr. Tonko. Mr. Johnson, we will do all the requests at the
end of the hearing, and we will recognize your request.
Mr. Johnson. OK, thank you. I am going to quote a couple of
excerpts from this article. And I quote, ``Energy industry
workers employed by solar and wind power companies earn
significantly less than those who mine coal or drill for
natural gas. Energy workers on the whole earn more than the
typical American, but the highest-paying positions are skewed
heavily toward nuclear utility and natural gas and coal
industry workers, the new data shows. The wind, solar, and
construction jobs that would surge under Biden's policies were
well below them on the median pay scale.''
When we are faced with the facts presented in this article,
I can't help but ask my Democratic colleagues and their
witnesses today, is this what my constituents in an oil, gas,
and coal-producing district have to look forward to?
If the legislation we are discussing today was to become
law, thousands of men and women I represent, millions across
our nation, will be forced to take a significant pay cut. Now,
I don't know about you, but that doesn't sound very just to me.
So, Mr. Hollie, let me start with you. When we review the
legislation in front of us today, the CLEAN Future Act doesn't
hide its bias against fossil fuels. There is a title in the
bill itself, title 10, that actually lists out the fossil
energy jobs that will be lost under this green transformation.
These include resource production, power generation, and
manufacturing.
So, Mr. Hollie, the shutdown of these industries would mean
the loss of thousands of good-paying blue-collar jobs that
would be replaced with vague promises of lower-paying green
jobs in far-off places. Would this help or hurt the communities
you advocate for?
Mr. Hollie. Oh, it would totally hurt them, devastate these
communities, Mr. Johnson.
Mr. Johnson. OK. Section 902 of that CLEAN Future Act would
halt permittiing for the domestic manufacturing of plastics,
including their feedstocks, which we all know is natural gas
and the petrochemical products harvested in the extraction
process of natural gas.
So your testimony talks about energy poverty, that idea
that low-income Americans suffer the most when policies are
enacted that raise the cost of gasoline, electricity, and
natural gas to heat their homes and cook their meals. So, Mr.
Hollie, would you agree that this same concept of energy
poverty could be realized if there is reduced access to the
thousands of affordable products derived from petrochemicals or
plastics that Americans rely on every day, those materials used
in clothing, food packaging, electronics, transportation,
common home furnishings, and other basic necessities?
Can you talk about what happens if we devastate the
plastics manufacturing sector?
Mr. Hollie. Yes, sir. Yes, sir, and I couldn't include all
that in my testimony in 5 minutes, but that is--I think a lot
of times people don't understand just how much the oil and gas
industry provides to us, and petrochemicals, but all the things
that we need to supply us and that we need to function daily,
even down to, like I said, your yoga mat. And I think, at the
end of the day, when you start taking away these jobs, taking
away the industry, it will ultimately drive up the cost for all
these goods that we need and that are a part of our life every
single day.
Mr. Johnson. Absolutely. You know, I--one of the things
that my Democratic colleagues are pushing so hard for is all-
electric vehicles. And, you know, I am not opposed to all-
electric vehicles. But I wonder, do my colleagues realize how
much plastics manufacturing goes into the process of making an
all-electric vehicle? It is possible because plastics are
lightweight, and much of the material that goes into an all-
electric vehicle is plastic.
And a lot of the components of solar panels and wind
turbines are also made out of petrochemical products. So I
think we are missing the point here in many, many cases. But,
Mr. Hollie, I thank you for your responses.
I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Johnson. Well, thank you, the gentleman yields back.
The Chair now recognizes the gentlelady from Illinois,
Representative Schakowsky, who also chairs our Subcommittee on
Commerce and Consumer Protection.
Representative Schakowsky?
Ms. Schakowsky. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. So nearly a decade
ago I met with a young constituent who was concerned about the
impact of oil and gas operations on drinking water. And as a
result, I introduced the SHARED Act--of course, that is an
acronym, and it is called the Safe Hydration is an American
Right in Energy Development--to require testing of water
sources near hydraulic fracturing operations, and then the
public disclosure of their results. It is a very simple and
commonsense way to protect communities from environmental harm,
and I believe that it is a valuable addition to the
environmental justice conversation.
The SHARED Act--that is H.R. 2164, I keep introducing it,
and hopefully it will be part of the--all the bills that we are
passing now, but--and it would require oil and gas companies to
report on the impact of their fracking activities, and how--
what they--how they--what impact they have on the water. And
companies would be required, then, to test the water sources
within a half-mile radius of fracking sites. And those results
would have to be made publicly available to the community.
So, Dr. Hollis, I am wondering if you could discuss the
importance of both monitoring pollution--polluting causes such
as fracking by fossil fuel operations, and publicly disclose
that information. What do you think of that?
Dr. Hollis. I can do that. I will do it quickly.
Ms. Schakowsky. OK.
Dr. Hollis. The issue with hydrofracking is that evidence
has shown that it contaminates the water, the groundwater, the
drinking water wells. It also contaminates the environment, the
air. The methane is released into the environment. And the
issue is that a number of the ingredients that we do know of
are carcinogens, are very toxic.
And then there are those that we don't even know are
included in hydrofracking fluid because of the--a trade secret,
so that facilities aren't required to provide that information
to communities, which is ridiculous because, you know, it goes
against common sense that people should know what they are
being exposed to, because when you fracture the soil, when you
fracture the ground, you are releasing--you are creating
cracks. And through those cracks, eventually, this fracking
fluid will get into the water supply, and has gotten into the
water supply.
Ms. Schakowsky. And has, thank you very much. And it is not
just common sense, but I think we are talking about the health
of our families and our communities. And every American family
really does deserve to know whether the water that they use to
cook and bathe and drink is safe, especially from contamination
due to fossil fuel energy production.
We can't forget that oil and gas operations are also major
drivers of the climate crisis, and specifically as the
country's primary source of harm from methane pollution. So I
wanted to ask Ms. Yeampierre, can you speak to the importance
of controlling dangerous methane pollution, especially for
frontline communities?
Ms. Yeampierre. Well, thank you, thank you for that
question. I want to make it personal for a second. I want to
share with everyone that a year ago this week I almost went
into cardiac arrest because of COVID and lost four family
members within 2 weeks. All of us were born and raised in the
midst of environmental burdens right next to power plants,
waste transfer stations, brownfields. We have all of those
things in common from the front line.
And so these protections are tremendously important. They
land on our--in our lungs, in developing--while women are
pregnant. They affect the ability for children to function in
school. They disrupt work. So all of these protections are
tremendously important. And so I want folks to know that we are
not talking about people out there, some question mark of
folks. We are literally talking about our aunties, our
grandmothers, our children.
And so anyone who cares about children, and anyone who
cares about families and who is invested in making sure that we
live healthy, thriveable lives will invest in making sure that
we are moving away from extraction and investing in
regenerative economies and putting in those protections.
And people, for example----
Ms. Schakowsky. I am going to--my time is almost expired,
but I just wanted to say how important it is, and this hearing
in general, and bringing it home, bringing it home to our
families, as you were talking about, talking about your
aunties, that we need to make that a top priority when we
consider how we develop our energy future. And I just
appreciate this hearing so much.
Thank you, and I yield back.
Mr. Tonko. The gentlelady yields back. I next have Mr.
Carter. I don't see him on our screen, so if he does return we
will reinsert him on our list. So let's go to the gentleman
from South Carolina.
Representative Duncan, you are recognized for 5 minutes,
please.
Mr. Duncan. Thank you, Chairman Tonko. I first want to say
that it is time for fear tactics like Ms. Hollis was talking
about to stop. Most drinking water wells are--deep drinking
water wells--300 feet. Most fracking happens at hundreds, if
not thousands, of feet below the depth of a drinking water
well. It has been proven time and again that fracking fluids
are not flowing up from a fracking operation into drinking
water wells. So just stop with the misinformation that is out
there to put fear tactics and fear in the hearts and minds of
folks across America.
I want to shift gears. Mr. Hawkins, Shay, it is great to
see you. Thanks for all the work that you did with Tim Scott,
Senator Scott, on the opportunity zones. I want to start by
saying I appreciate that. I appreciate the opportunity zones in
general. And low-income communities will be the last to recover
from economic instability.
As we work towards relief for American families and
businesses to return to pre-COVID conditions, I think the
opportunity zones should play a vital role. I know they have
already benefited many communities in my home State of South
Carolina. How can incentivizing investment in distressed areas
establish longer-term quality-of-life benefits for those
residents in the communities, compared to direct Government
benefits, Shay?
Mr. Hawkins. Yes, so absolutely. So, you know, when we look
at what is going on in opportunity zones, particularly around
job creation--so there are multiple benefits.
One benefit that potential opportunity zone residents see
is in direct jobs. That is obvious. But we also see benefits
around better access to goods and services that weren't
previously available. Significant numbers of designated
opportunity zones are in food deserts. And so, you know, food
security becomes an issue.
But then you also see that opportunity zone residents
benefit from higher real estate prices, and the majority of
opportunity zone real estate--the majority of opportunity zone
residents own real estate in the opportunity zone. And so, you
know, there is a plethora of potential benefits.
Representative DeGette indicated that environmental cleanup
was the topic of the hearing and that we hadn't offered much
from our side on that. So if you will allow me, Representative
Duncan, I will just talk a little bit about brownfield
remediation, and the fact that EPA worked closely with
opportunity zones in designating the areas they--151 areas that
they laid out for brownfield remediation; 118 of those were in
opportunity zones.
And so, you know, it is critical, both on the cleanup side
for frontline communities, but both on the long-term quality-
of-life side that you laid out.
Mr. Duncan. Yes, well, that is great. I want to shift gears
a little bit and, Mr. Hawkins, I appreciate all the work on
opportunity zones, as well.
This move toward higher-priced and more expensive
electricity generation through wind and solar, it has been
proven time and again that that is more expensive than
traditional, 24/7/365 power supplies that exist today. And that
is nuclear power, that is coal- and natural gas-fired power
plants. The higher-priced electricity generation affects the
lower-income populations more than it does anyone, because they
now have to pay more, as a percentage of their discretionary
income, for utility rates because of the high-priced
electricity generation.
So, as we move toward more higher-priced electricity, just
keep in mind that those that are on a very limited and fixed
income--and that is the lower-income side of the scale--will
pay more out of their pocket for electricity. That means they
have less money to spend in the economy on other things that
they need, whether that is education of their children,
clothes, food, rent, taxes, other things that they have to pay
for in life. They will have less money to do that. So let's
just keep that in mind.
Mr. Chairman, I appreciate the committee hearing and the
comments from the witnesses, and with that I yield back.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you, the gentleman yields back. We now
recognize the gentleman from Maryland.
Representative Sarbanes, you are recognized for 5 minutes,
please.
Mr. Sarbanes. Mr. Chairman, thank you for holding the
hearing, and I want to thank the witnesses that you have
assembled here today for their testimony. I certainly
appreciate the work this committee has been doing to bring
environmental justice to the forefront of the conversation. It
is really, really critical.
One of the bills that we are discussing today is the
Ensuring Safe Disposal of Coal Ash Act, which would establish
stronger protections against unsafe coal ash disposal. As we
know, coal ash, or coal combustion residuals, is one of the
largest types of industrial waste in the United States that is
generated. And according to the EPA, in 2012 about 110 million
tons of coal ash was generated. Power plants have disposed of
this waste, including many times in unlined coal ash ponds.
The coal ash is filled with toxic levels of several
pollutants, including mercury and arsenic, and exposure to coal
ash can lead to cancers, cardiovascular issues, developmental
defects, and nervous system damage. If disposed of in an unsafe
manner, coal ash poses significant risk to neighboring
communities. I have seen that in Maryland. We have had some
real challenges there, and I have witnessed firsthand the
impact of coal ash pollution on residents and the dangers
associated with unsafe disposal. In my prior district I
represented previously, this was a real concern.
The Obama administration issued the 2015 coal ash rule to
protect communities and water resources in the United States
from toxic coal ash contamination. Unfortunately, rather than
strengthening that rule, the Trump administration took action
to weaken the critical provisions that were contained within
it. So it is of little surprise now to know that an estimated
60 percent of coal ash disposal sites are located near low-
income communities. So I am very pleased to see H.R. 2396 is
being considered today.
Dr. Hollis, in your testimony you discuss how systematic
racism is a public health issue. I certainly agree with that.
And as you know, this week the head of the Centers for Disease
Control also issued a statement, and the CDC is now going to be
examining that link in a more systematic fashion. Could you
elaborate a little bit more on how locally undesirable land
uses--and taking coal ash on as an example of that--can
disproportionately burden communities of color and low-income
communities, as well as their resources?
And talk a little bit about the fact that there is a double
hit on these communities. On the front end they are getting
this environmental injustice; on the back end there is often a
gap in terms of them being able to access the health care and
resources they need to actually help them cope with the impact
of that environmental justice. So if you could speak to that, I
would appreciate it.
Dr. Hollis. Sure. Traditionally, mostly in the south,
communities have been inundated with coal ash. It is mostly
unregulated, which is a big problem. I live in--I am currently
in Alabama--I live in Maryland, and I have worked with
communities in Alabama, in Florida, and so forth, where coal
ash was illegally dumped not only in the residences, in the
yards, but also in schools. Traditionally, these are low-income
communities, and they don't necessarily have the resources to
protest the dumping of coal ash.
They also don't have the resources to routinely test their
drinking water and/or their soil. And they often, as you said,
lack access to adequate medical resources and also to legal
assistance. And that is part of the systemic racism that I had
alluded to earlier.
The issue with coal ash, which as we know is very toxic--
highly toxic, almost to the point of being radioactive--is that
these communities don't have representation, and only--you
know, their voices are--have traditionally been unheard or
often ignored. And normally you see facilities in these--near
these communities who truck these--this coal ash residue
through the community uncovered and, you know, unprotected from
community exposure.
So when it comes to the challenges, these communities are
indeed faced with multiple challenges, including healthcare,
legal resources, and the ability to stop this unregulated
practice.
Mr. Sarbanes. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. That was a
very powerful statement of why we need the legislation as part
of the bills we are looking at today, and I yield back.
Mr. Tonko. I agree with your sentiments, and the gentleman
yields back. We now recognize the gentleman from Alabama,
Representative Palmer.
You have 5 minutes now for questioning, please.
[Pause.]
Mr. Tonko. Mr. Palmer, you need to unmute, please.
Mr. Palmer. Thank you.
Mr. Tonko. OK, now we can----
Mr. Palmer. I can't wait until we get back to live hearings
so we can see each other and hear each other.
Mr. Hollie, I really appreciated your testimony. I think it
is time that people begin to speak up for energy and economic
justice for all people, all low-income people, in particular.
And I want to focus on a couple of things, and I will ask you
to comment.
I want you to respond about the impact of energy injustice.
Low-income families face tremendous disadvantages in the cost
of household energy. And not only that, they suffer health
consequences. I grew up dirt poor in northwest Alabama. We
heated our house with a coal-fired heater, a big heater that
had a stovepipe that ran out from it, out the side of the
house, and it sat in the kitchen. And so I understand what it--
what energy poverty means.
Right now households earning the average salary pay about
2\1/2\ percent of their salary in energy costs. But households
earning less than 20,000 a year pay almost 3 times as much, and
households earning 16,000 a year pay almost 4 times as much.
And there is another study that showed that, when you look at
the top 20 percent in wage earners versus the bottom 20 percent
in terms of disposable income, the bottom 20 percent pay almost
5 times as much.
Then you have the--in terms of the energy insecurity
injustice, you have Jesse Jackson and Al Sharpton and other
civil rights leaders literally working, campaigning for greater
access to natural gas, which is much less expensive, much
cleaner. You take Pembroke Township in Illinois, a town of
about 2,100, 80 percent of those residents are African-
American, and they are literally using propane in wood-burning
stoves to heat their homes in the wintertime. Jesse Jackson is
leading an effort there to get them a natural gas pipeline.
And then, in terms of jobs, if we were to shut down
fracking, it would cost us over 7 million jobs and would add
increased costs for the average family by over $5,000.
And then the whole health aspect of this, because--
particularly in cold weather--a British medical journal,
Lancet, reported that there are--17 times more people die from
the consequences of living in colder homes than from heat.
And so I am just so encouraged that you are speaking up for
energy and economic justice for low-income families. I would
like you to comment on that.
Mr. Hollie. Yes, sir, and I would just share that it has
been a passion of mine for a long time, for years, and I have
had the opportunity to speak to several people in your State,
and up and down the Atlantic coast, who all suffer from energy
poverty. And I think a lot of times they are misled about the
information that they are getting that actually is causing
energy poverty. And when you speak to these individuals and you
share with them about different policies and different
regulations that are impacting them--now, granted, they are all
about cleaning up the air, clean up where they live. But at the
same time, they are equally just as concerned about the energy
poverty and their--and the cost that they incur every single
month with the high cost of energy.
Mr. Palmer. I would like to see a show of hands of the
other witnesses, since I can see on the screen, how many of you
support Reverend Jackson's efforts to get a natural gas
pipeline into Pembroke Township to alleviate the energy
injustice those people are suffering?
Oh, man, none of the Democrat witnesses. That is shocking.
Mr. Hawkins, thank you for your testimony and particularly
for the work that you are doing to alleviate poverty and to
create opportunity. I would like for you to comment on these--
on energy and economic injustice.
Mr. Hawkins. Sure. There are--just in terms of context,
frontline communities are served with cleaner energy, you know,
energy that has less emissions. Frontline communities are
served with more affordable energy. Frontline communities are
served with secure sources of energy.
And so, you know, as we look to serve these communities,
you know, we have to have that as our framework and as our
outlook for approaching this. And so there are bipartisan
solutions that can serve those communities in all of those ways
without creating harm in the process.
Mr. Palmer. I thank the witnesses, and thank the chairman.
I yield back.
Mr. Tonko. The gentleman yields back. The Chair now
recognizes the gentlelady from my home State of New York, and
the former vice chair of the full Committee of Energy and
Commerce, Representative Clarke.
You are recognized for 5 minutes, please.
Ms. Clarke. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, and I thank
our Ranking Member McKinley for convening this very important
and timely hearing. But let me also thank all of our witnesses
for your testimony here today.
Make no mistake about it, the climate crisis is happening
right now, and its impacts are being felt most profoundly by
marginalized communities throughout this Nation. We see these
disparities when we look at the impacts of climate change on
people's health, on their livelihoods, and on their homes and
neighborhoods.
Ms. Yeampierre, it is so nice to have a fellow Brooklynite
at our hearing today. What do you see as the connection between
climate change and racial injustice?
And how does this relationship inform the climate justice
movement?
Ms. Yeampierre. Well, thank you. It is wonderful to see
you, as well. It feels like a blessing to be in a space with
you.
You know, this is part of a history of extraction on the
backs of our communities. The siting of environmental burdens
has always happened in low-income communities and communities
of color. Our communities are the ones that are suffering a
disproportionate share of the public health crisis. But we are
also working at solutions, and which is why your legislation is
so important.
We are operationalizing a just transition, and we are
passing the benefits--not just the health benefits, but the
economic benefits--to our communities so that they pay less for
energy, and they don't have to do it at the expense of their
health. All of this is connected. It is a long history.
And so what I see today is a collective effort to try to
move away from a history that has harmed generations and
generations of communities. We are, as I have mentioned before,
the descendants of enslavement and colonialization.
And it is not just happening in the United States, it is
happening in Puerto Rico, where you have got ash plants that
were hit by Hurricane Maria. Those ashes ended up miles from
where people--from where the facility was located, and they
have cancer clusters all around those facilities. So there is a
connection.
And so we really can't even talk about climate change
without talking about racial justice. Anyone who doesn't
understand that is someone who doesn't--who is basically
pretending that history has not taken place.
So thank you for asking me that question.
Ms. Clarke. Thank you, Ms. Yeampierre. The inequitable
impacts of the climate crisis are exactly why I recently
introduced the Climate Justice Act, modeled after New York
State's recent landmark climate legislation, which will
establish a Federal climate justice working group to address
the inequitable burdens of climate change on the front line.
Ms. Yeampierre, could you briefly describe your experience
serving on the New York State's Climate Justice Working Group,
and share what your group is seeking to accomplish?
Ms. Yeampierre. The Climate Leadership and Community
Protection Act was created to move resources to frontline
communities so that there would be investments in
operationalizing a just transition. And the working group is
making recommendations. It is a multidisciplinary group, it is
cross-sectoral, working to try to figure out what is the
language, what is the framework, how do we do it? How do we
move away from extraction, and how do we create 150,000 jobs in
the State of New York that put people on a track to economic
justice and move them away from extraction?
We have got several committees that have been set up to do
that. We work diligently every week, and, you know, we--just
because it hasn't existed doesn't mean that we don't create it,
right?
So a lot of the members are coming from New York Renews. It
is a coalition of up to 300 members across the State, rural,
urban, different ethnic and--race and ethnicities, different
class backgrounds, working together to move New York State to
be carbon neutral by 2050.
And so that is the bulk of the work that is happening in
those committees.
Ms. Clarke. Thanks again. And I think it is important to
note that the Federal climate justice working group in my
legislation will be comprised of representatives from
community-based organizations, as well as States, cities, and
indigenous nations.
Ms. Yeampierre, could you please explain why it is so
important, when we are talking about addressing climate
injustice, that the voices of frontline communities are helping
to lead this conversation?
Ms. Yeampierre. Because the people who are exposed to the
problems are the ones who have the solutions. We are not
sitting around complaining. We are coming up with mechanisms,
economic frameworks, recommendations for infrastructure,
developing leadership, and passing policy to move us away from
a history of extraction. We have got solutions.
And you have seen that happen even in our neighborhoods. I
mentioned earlier that in Sunset Park we launched the first
community-owned solar cooperative in the State of New York,
with economic benefits being passed on to people who have lost
their businesses as a result of COVID, who were really dealing
with the economic pressures of COVID.
And then we are also working on--you know, we have
successfully brought offshore wind to south Brooklyn, and we
are talking about thousands of jobs and training and working
with unions and workers to train them on how to do something
that is radically different. And, even while talking about
bringing offshore wind--because the parts will be coming from
Europe--we are also talking about how do we manufacture it
here? How do we bring those jobs? How do we make sure that the
United States is actually engaged in building for offshore
wind, so that we don't have to import the ships from Europe?
We have negotiated agreements so that the ships, when they
come into Brooklyn, aren't spewing diesel, and they basically
start operating off electricity. All of this are --all of these
are solutions where you have got people from communities
talking about infrastructure, about science, about health, and
about reclaiming spaces so that we are ready to address the
impacts that climate change is bringing.
Ms. Clarke. This is exciting. Mr. Chairman, I yield back,
and I thank you for the opportunity.
Mr. Tonko. The representative from Brooklyn yields back. We
caught that Brooklyn theme there. So next we will recognize the
gentleman from Utah.
Representative Curtis, you are recognized for 5 minutes,
please.
Mr. Curtis. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Well, a very long ways
away from Brooklyn is Utah and my district. And right on the
southern part of my district, we have been blessed with the
Navajo Indian Reservation. Recently there was a Navajo
generation station that was coal-fired, a power plant. Just a
little over a year ago, it was a victim of the villainization
of coal. It was closed. That plant and mine paid out $100
million in direct wages in that part of my district, and $50
million in leases and royalties that are now gone.
A nearby Tribe who provided the coal lost 80 percent of
their revenue for the entire Tribe because of that closing.
Along with the Native Americans, other parts of my district
have a long history of uranium mining and processing that
supported the Cold War. Many of those impacts are still looming
today. We have heard about them in other testimonies: higher
cancer rates, abandoned mine cleanups, counties overly reliant
on extraction industry for their tax base.
Coal and uranium mining technology has advanced and had its
place in these communities, but these communities still tell me
their greatest export is their children. And they are working
desperately to keep a way of life, and to keep their children
in the area, and economic stability.
These are resilient residents. They are proud. They don't
like to hear that they don't need to worry because we are going
to teach them to code. Instead, they want to be self-reliant
and stand on their own and chart a path forward. And I am
really pleased that the opportunity zones created from the Tax
Cuts and Jobs Act played a very significant role in their
efforts. They don't--they want to look to the future and not
get stuck in these issues of the past.
And these opportunity zones have been a tool to empower
these communities to help themselves instead of being reliant
on Federal dollars. We are all familiar with the saying that if
you give a man a fish, you feed him, but if you teach him to
fish, you feed him for a lifetime. To me, Federal dollars to a
distressed area are a little bit like a fish, and these
opportunity zones are a little bit like a fishing lesson.
Mr. Shaw--Mr. Hawkins, can you speak--and you have done
such a great job at speaking to opportunity zones, but
particularly in rural areas, and the impact that they can have
on lifting these rural areas?
Mr. Hawkins. Thank you, absolutely, Representative Curtis.
About--of the 8,700 designated census tracks that were
designated by Governors as opportunity zones that are eligible
for this great benefit, 25 percent, or just under 25 percent,
are in rural areas. And so they are critical in rural areas
because the most attractive portion, the most attractive
benefit of opportunity zones, goes from--goes to folks who are
investing in operating businesses, and where they hold that
investment, job-creating investment, for greater than 10 years.
And so a disproportionate amount of the operating business
investments that we are seeing happen in rural areas. A lot of
the urban areas tend to attract real estate investment. But in
the rural areas we see operating businesses, a lot of things
that are very important around rural broadband. But then also,
you know, again, like I said, we have seen significant
investments in clean energy, as well, and other job-creating
industries.
Mr. Curtis. Yes.
Mr. Hawkins. So opportunity zones are a great tool for
community development in rural areas.
Mr. Curtis. Excellent. Last Congress I partnered with
Representative Cuellar, and we introduced a bipartisan----
Mr. Hawkins. Yes.
Mr. Curtis [continuing]. Opportunity zone bill to help
small businesses struggling. Utah, I am very proud, has one of
the lowest unemployment rates in the country, but our rural
areas are struggling.
And we just got a few seconds left. Anything, any advice
you have for Congress on how to make these more impactful in
rural parts?
Mr. Hawkins. Absolutely. First we need a transparency and
reporting bill that lets us know where opportunity zone
investments are happening, how many direct jobs are being
created, and where they are being created. And now--that will
allow us to know if we need to tailor the program to more
carefully target rural areas.
Next we could look to codify the coordination that we have
seen across Federal agencies with opportunity zones to kind of
put that policy and prioritize opportunity zones in Federal
community development.
Mr. Curtis. I wish we had more time, and I regret that I am
out of time. Mr. Chairman, I yield.
Mr. Tonko. The gentleman yields back. The next person we
had was Dr. Ruiz, but we don't see him on the screen, so we
will go to the gentleman from California.
Representative Peters, you are recognized for 5 minutes,
please.
Mr. Peters. Thank you. The other gentleman from California.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thanks for having the hearing.
I wanted to talk with Dr. Hollis a little bit about lead
poisoning. I think that one of the most pernicious and really
tragic contaminants that we see affecting disadvantaged
communities is heavy metals. Sometimes it is mercury or
cadmium, but most often it is lead, and often from the pipes
that deliver water.
And I was able to visit Flint with Mr. Kildee and with
Elijah Cummings back in 2015 to see some of the devastation
that has been brought on that community. But that is, in many
ways, just the most famous example of something that happens
all too often. And Dr. Hollis, I wanted to see if you would
opine, if you would, on how do you think the proposal deals
with this, and is this what you would like to see? Are there
other things we should be doing? Is this the right approach, or
would you do--would you take a different approach?
Dr. Hollis. Thank you, Representative Peters. I do think
that, as you say, lead is a serious toxic, toxic substance, and
there is no safe level.
And I do think that the issues that we see with lead are
only going to be exacerbated by climate change: one, from the
water that is run off or from flooding and extreme weather;
also, because the pipes are--that were originally put in place
are, in some instances, corroded or rusted, and that is
released through whatever is in the water, as we talked about
earlier with Superfund sites and that runoff. We don't know how
these chemicals interact, but the thought is that there could
be extracting lead from the pipes.
So any regulation, any legislation that is considered that
addresses that issue is the right legislation, in my opinion.
Mr. Peters. OK, so I think that there is an attempt--and,
you know, one of the difficulties we have in the Federal
Government is that a lot of these systems are managed by State
and local governments. And, you know, we are trying to figure
out ways to help, you know, the communities--like, Flint is not
a wealthy one, for example--ways to incentivize and to assist
them in replacing those pipes.
Also one of the problems in Flint is that there is
disinvestment from people moving out, which means that the
water systems just don't function as well without people there.
So I am very interested in supporting this part of the
bill, in particular. And for me, I think fighting lead
pollution is an infrastructure priority.
And I appreciate the witnesses for being here, and I yield
back.
Mr. Tonko. The gentleman yields back. The Chair now
recognizes the gentlelady from Michigan.
Representative Dingell, you are recognized for 5 minutes,
please.
Mrs. Dingell. Thank you, Chairman Tonko. As we move towards
long-term economic recovery from COVID, this COVID pandemic, we
need to be bold and we need to go big and we need to be focused
on frontline communities that have borne the brunt for too long
to achieve lasting economic renewal. That is the key pillar of
the THRIVE Agenda that I am also proud to be one of the leaders
of.
There have been a lot of important points that have been
made by my colleagues today and many worthwhile provisions in
these bills that will make a real difference for the
communities that I represent and so many of us do. But I am
going to pick up on what my colleague Mr. Peters was just
talking about. I want to focus in on one provision. I do come
from Michigan, and we really do understand what lead and water
does to our children, let alone others. So I want to focus on
funding for lead service line replacement.
Lead exposure is a deeply serious environmental justice
issue which impacts across generations. And that is why I am so
pleased to see that President Biden is committed to replacing
lead service lines in the American Jobs Plan, and pleased that
there is language in the CLEAN Future Act to put that plan into
action.
With lead service line replacement, the details really
matter if we are really going to get it done. So I want to ask
a few questions about the specific language in the CLEAN Future
Act.
Dr. McClain, the CLEAN Future Act would create just one
factor for prioritizing lead line replacement funding, and I am
quoting here: ``Priority for the use of funds should be given
to projects that replace lead service lines serving
disadvantaged communities and environmental justice
communities.'' Dr. McClain, just yes or no, do you agree that
replacing lead service lines serving disadvantaged and
environmental justice communities should be the absolute top
priority for these funds?
Mr. Tonko. Representative Dingell, we may have lost Dr.
McClain because of technical difficulties, so you might direct
that----
Mrs. Dingell. I will give it to the other witnesses, then.
Mr. Tonko. OK, thank you.
Mrs. Dingell. And I hope somebody--do either of the two
witnesses left that I see want to answer--three----
Dr. Hollis. Yes.
Mrs. Dingell [continuing]. Four--answer?
[Laughter.]
Mrs. Dingell. Sorry we are all having technology--we all
can't wait until we are back in person again.
OK, so let me--I was going to ask Dr. McClain this. I don't
know if any of you can answer this: What level or estimate of
investment will this require from the Federal Government?
And I am asking this question because I don't think we got
enough in here, so what do you all think?
Nobody?
Dr. Hollis. I do not have an answer for that question,
Representative Dingell.
Mrs. Dingell. OK, you know what, Chairman Tonko? I think
that with a--my questions are really focused, nitty gritty, on
this. I should yield back and submit my questions for the
record.
Mr. Tonko. OK, thank you. The----
Ms. Yeampierre. OK, I would----
Mr. Tonko. Excuse me?
Ms. Yeampierre. I was going to try to answer the question,
because I am on my way out.
Mrs. Dingell. That would be great.
Ms. Yeampierre. From the Climate----
Mr. Tonko. OK, please do.
Ms. Yeampierre [continuing]. Justice Alliance, thank you.
First, thank you for supporting THRIVE. Senator Schumer has
been a great ally for us in the State of New York.
We are talking about $10 trillion, about a trillion a year,
2 more than is being recommended.
We are also talking about a 40 percent that has to be a
baseline, and not a goal. There are different communities that
have different needs. They are all different, and they have all
been dealing with a legacy of extraction for generations. And
so the needs, whether it is Indian country versus a coastal
community, may be radically different.
We are happy to provide you with more information at some
point, and I really want to thank everyone for inviting me. I
feel deep gratitude for this conversation and for being
invited. Thank you so much.
Mrs. Dingell. Thank you, and it is important.
And I will yield back, Mr. Chair, and do my questions for
the record.
Mr. Tonko. OK, the gentlelady from Michigan yields back. We
next had Representative Barragan on our list, but we don't see
her on the screen. So we will now move to the gentleman from
Virginia.
Representative McEachin, you are recognized for 5 minutes,
and thank you for your input on this important topic.
Mr. McEachin. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank you to--
both to you and Chairman Pallone for convening this hearing,
and the work that we are all doing on the notion of
environmental justice for all.
I am going to skip a lot of my introductory comments for
the sake of time and just sort of focus on H.R. 2021 and the
notion of cumulative impacts. And I would like to start off by
asking Dr. Hollis, how does the current permittiing process
disproportionately hurt low-income communities, communities of
color, and Tribal and indigenous communities?
Dr. Hollis. Thank you, Representative McEachin. The current
permittiing process doesn't account for or take into account
the different ways that communities are exposed to different
pollutants and the different mechanisms, different routes of
exposure.
Mr. McEachin. Thank you. And is it--now I am going to--I
had a question for Dr. McClain, but I want to shift it over
to--is it Dr. Yeampierre? Help me out with the pronunciation of
your name. I am so sorry, ma'am,
Dr. Hollis. I think Ms. Yeampierre had to leave.
Mr. McEachin. Yeampierre, is she still on?
Dr. Hollis. No, I think she had to leave.
Mr. McEachin. Well, Dr. Hollis, I guess it is just you and
me, then.
Dr. Hollis. But Mr. Logan is here.
[Laughter.]
Mr. McEachin. Well, either Dr. Hollis or Dr. Logan,
whichever one--either one of you all can try to tackle this
question.
How could requiring consideration of cumulative impacts--
implementing decisions impact and benefit the environmental
justice communities?
Mr. Logan. If I may?
Mr. McEachin. Please.
Mr. Logan. Thank you, Representative McEachin. The
environmental justice communities are overburdened with a
concentration of polluting facilities in very small geographic
areas. In some cases there are concentrations of lead smelters,
for instance.
When there is that type of infrastructure that helps to
service lead smelters, for instance, in a concentrated
geography, the tendency is that companies continue to want to
serve that area or to be placed or sited in that area. When the
permitting process starts to run through, it only examines the
permit on its own merits, not taking into account the multiple
other effects or multiple other facilities.
So it is important that, as we address environmental
justice, that the cumulative impact policies really incorporate
the permit denial as a strategy, as it looks at the potential
of harm in these communities. These communities are already
overly burdened. Another ounce of lead is just detrimental to
the community and continues to harm the community.
So permitting is critical, not just examining, not just
studying, not just enforcing, because in most cases these
permitting processes are following the letter of the law.
Mr. McEachin. Thank you for that, sir.
Dr. Hollis, as we have seen throughout the COVID-19,
communities of color have been some of the hardest hit. How
does environmental pollution and cumulative health impacts
connect to the current pandemic, and the cumulative impacts
approach to permitting have potentially prevented some of the
health disparities that we have seen?
Dr. Hollis. Thank you, Representative McEachin. With--
communities are exposed, as I mentioned earlier, to numerous
contaminants. And when we talk about COVID-19--so these
contaminants make them more at risk already; we see increased
cardiac issues, we see increased respiratory issues, all of
these things that make them predisposed to issues, and
breathing issues, and just having, I guess, a healthy
environment. And so that makes them more susceptible to things
like COVID-19, and not just COVID-19.
So when it comes to permitting, as Mr. Logan said, it is--
you know, it is important that we look at all of the
contributors to pollution, because we don't know which
particular combination of contaminants will make a person more
at risk, will put a person more at risk for attacks of viruses
like COVID-19.
Mr. McEachin. Thank you, ma'am. And I want to thank you
both. I look forward to working with you all and my colleagues
on this committee to ensure that we pass legislation that
protects EJ communities from environmental health hazards.
Before yielding back, I am proud that our EJ for All Act
has earned the support of many of my colleagues and
organizations across the country. I would ask unanimous consent
to introduce letters of support for the Environmental Justice
for All Act into the record, including a letter from some of
our Senate colleagues.
With that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Tonko. We will be glad to deal with the request at the
end of the meeting, and thank you for the request to enter the
document into the record.
Mr. McEachin. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Tonko. OK, the gentleman yields back. I see we have
been rejoined by Representative Carter. The gentleman from
Georgia will be recognized next, to be followed by Dr. Ruiz,
who has also rejoined us.
So to the gentleman of Georgia, you are recognized for 5
minutes, Mr. Carter.
Mr. Carter. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank all of you
for your presence here today and your participation.
Mr. Chairman, I would like to submit for the record a
letter from the Georgia Ports Authority, the economic engine of
the southeast, and entailing their work and the environmental
work that they are doing at the ports.
Mr. Tonko. They will deal with that request, Representative
Carter, at the end of the hearing, but thank you for submitting
it.
Mr. Carter. OK, all right. Mr. Chairman, as I mentioned,
locally the Port of Savannah has been extremely engaged in
working with the local community and outside groups to invest
in forward-looking decisions that benefit the port and
surrounding areas. In fact, Georgia Ports Authority has made
tremendous investments in the port to benefit the community.
They have used the DERA program to replace old trucks, they
have electrified their gantry cranes, and they have upgraded
their rail infrastructure to take additional trucks off the
road, and a lot more.
However, I am worried that programs like the port
electric----
[Audio malfunction.]
Mr. Tonko. Mr. Carter, it seems like we have lost you with
technical difficulties here. Why don't we go to Dr. Ruiz for 5
minutes, and we will return to you, if you don't mind.
Mr. Ruiz. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Today's
hearing about environmental justice is personal to me and my
constituents.
To achieve true environmental justice, our Government must
offer equal protection from environmental health hazards and
provide equal access to decision making that affects the
public's health. Environmental justice can look differently
depending on the community, whether it is low-income housing
next to an interstate, or farmworker communities in desperate
need of clean air and clean water.
In the eastern Coachella Valley, where I grew up initially
in a farmworker trailer park, my constituents face numerous and
staggering environmental justice challenges. For decades, trash
companies illegally dumped human waste at a site known as Mount
San Diego in my district. In 2019 new illegal dump opened at
that same site, where mulch fires sickened local
schoolchildren, closing schools for a week and sending kids to
the emergency department. Lax environmental enforcement allowed
these hazards to persist, at the expense of my constituents'
health. Other residents of Polanco parks and mobile home
communities like the Oasis Mobile Home Park get their drinking
water from suspect wells, drawing water from aquifers with
naturally occurring arsenic.
True environmental justice means that our Government is
looking out for these communities with the same intensity as
they would for those with money, access, and power. That is why
I am so pleased that we are considering two of my bills here
today.
First, the Voice for Environmental Justice Act, which would
provide funding for frontline communities to speak out against
polluters seeking to set up shop in their neighborhood. This
bill is included in the CLEAN Future Act under section 602 and
510
Second, my bill the Environmental Justice Act of 2021,
codifies Executive Order 12898 on environmental justice, which
instructs agencies to establish a process to consider
environmental justice in the agency's actions. And it also
requires consideration of cumulative impacts in certain clean
air and clean water permitting decisions.
Dr. Hollis, I would like to ask you about this bill that
would impact frontline communities. What does it mean to you to
assess cumulative impacts of permitting decisions on EJ
communities?
And how can communities get involved in assessing those
cumulative impacts? How do we empower communities to get
involved in assessing those cumulative impacts?
Dr. Hollis. Yes, thank you, Representative Ruiz. It means a
great deal, because communities finally are--you know, the
concerns that they have been talking about for years are
finally being addressed. And the way to get involved is to have
community members at the table, to have--as equal stakeholders,
to get their input and to recognize community science as a
valid source of information, an important source of
information.
Mr. Ruiz. How about having a community-based air quality
monitoring?
Dr. Hollis. Absolutely. Not just at the fence line but in
the community, because communities can tell you where they are
experiencing, where they have seen damage from air pollution or
weather, where there are certain areas--for example, when I
visited a community, we were--I became ill in certain parts of
the community. That is where we need air monitors, and we need
community input to determine where those areas are.
Mr. Ruiz. Ms. Yeampierre, one of the challenges my
constituents have faced over the years is the attempted opening
of new dumps and waste facilities in their communities,
oftentimes illegally. In your opinion, do frontline communities
currently have the resources to stand up to polluters seeking
to do business near their homes?
Ms. Yeampierre. Yes, they do and they have. Just this week
we received a proposal about a waste company wanting to bring
CND to our EJ community, and we are already organizing, and we
have already shared with our community what the different
chemicals and particulate matter----
Mr. Ruiz. Do you think that is enough for the Nation and
for environmental justice communities, or do we need more?
Ms. Yeampierre. We need more. And I think we need to
strengthen our relationship with the National Institute of
Environmental Health Sciences and the National Institutes of
Health and engage in interagency coordination, invest in
participatory research from communities.
Mr. Ruiz. My----
Ms. Yeampierre. Yes.
Mr. Ruiz. My focus is to empower local communities, and the
grants provided in my Voices for Environmental Justice Act
enable communities to hire their own experts and participate in
permitting decisions of waste facilities. Democracy is about
participating in the decisions that affect your lives. And
there is no more truer democracy than empowering communities to
be part of the decisions that affect their public health and
their environmental health.
So with that, I yield back my time. I ran out of time, and
so I thank you all for being here. It is a very important
topic.
I appreciate you, Chairman, for holding this hearing, and
let's get this done.
Mr. Tonko. The gentleman yields back.
Mr. Carter, Representative Carter, we are sorry we lost
you. We want to hear from you. Let's give it another try, OK?
So you are recognized for five----
Mr. Carter. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate your
indulgence, Mr. Chairman.
Again, I want to mention the letter from GPA to be
considered for unanimous consent afterwards.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you.
Mr. Carter. Thank you, sir.
Again, I want to mention I have the honor and privilege of
representing one of the great economic engines of the
southeast, and that is the Georgia Ports Authority. In my
district alone we have two major seaports, the Port of Savannah
and the Port of Brunswick.
And they--both of these ports have done a yeoman's work
with outside groups and with the local community to invest in
forward-looking decisions that benefit the port and the
surrounding areas. They have made tremendous investments in the
port that benefit the community. They have used the DERA
program to replace old trucks. They have electrified their
cranes, and they have upgraded their rail infrastructure to
take additional trucks off of the road, and a lot more.
However, I am worried that programs like the Port
Electrification and Decarbonization Program under the CLEAN
Future Act could potentially hamstring the progress that is
being made by ports to upgrade older technology. And I wanted
to ask you, Mr. Hollie, shouldn't we be focusing on making sure
all these ports get the assistance they need to advance
environmental and public health outcomes?
Mr. Hollie. Yes, sir, we should.
Mr. Carter. Good, thank you. Do we need to be careful, Mr.
Hollie, about putting too many requirements in place to
participate?
Mr. Hollie. Absolutely, yes, sir, Mr. Carter.
Mr. Carter. Good, thank you again. Mr. Hollie, previous--in
previous testimony in front of the Natural Resources Committee,
you talked about a specific project that could have benefited
an environmental justice community but was canceled: the
Atlantic Coast Pipeline. What lessons should we be taking away
from this about inhibiting or stopping industries from moving
forward with construction or upgrades when those investments
will benefit the communities?
Mr. Hollie. My goodness, that was a plan that had--they
had--the restrictions--what they had done, in terms of just
requirements and regulations, they had gone 10 times the
amount, in terms of what the--what they were asked to do, in
terms of putting it together for safety regulations. And so
many people right now are still suffering because of the lack
of natural gas that that pipeline was going to produce.
Mr. Carter. Well, if the goal is to create jobs and to get
money out to people, shouldn't we be predicating grants and
other forms of money on issues like whether or not the
employees had previously been incarcerated, or if they have
ties to the foster care system?
Mr. Hollie. Yes, sir. Yes, sir.
Mr. Carter. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Hollie.
Mr. Hawkins, I want to go to you next, because you
mentioned something in your testimony that I am very interested
in, and that is the opportunity zones. And you have talked
about the benefit of opportunities zones to bolster
disadvantaged and low-income communities. And yes, I have a lot
of low-income communities in my district, and I am very
concerned about them and want to help them as much as I can.
What is the best adjustment, Mr. Hawkins, that we can make
to the policy to spur more investment in operating businesses
like energy projects?
[Pause.]
Mr. Carter. I think you are muted.
Mr. Hawkins. I appreciate the question, Representative
Carter. And the best adjustment that can be made is to allow
any type of capital, not just capital gains, to be used for the
purposes of the 10-year, 100 percent step up.
So briefly, the opportunity zone policy has three levels of
benefit, one based on deferring capital gains and another one
based on a step up in basis on your initial capital gain. But
the largest benefit goes to investors that make a long-term--10
years or more--commitment to an investment. And so, for those
purposes, we should allow noncapital gains to be invested. That
way we can democratize the capital that is coming in, but also
greatly increase the resources that come in and fund those
operating businesses.
And so, you know, it is--if I could wave a wand, that would
be the primary adjustment I would make to this policy and this
next round of legislation.
Mr. Carter. Thank you, Mr. Hawkins. I know I am out of
time, but I do want to mention, Mr. Hawkins, that your
opportunity zones have been in line with EPA to deal with
brownfields, and that is something that is very important in my
district. I appreciate you bringing that up, and I appreciate
your work on that, as well.
Mr. Chairman, again, I want to submit this letter, and I
will yield. Thank you.
Mr. Tonko. OK, the gentleman yields. The Chair now
recognizes the gentlelady from California.
Representative Barragan, you are recognized for 5 minutes,
please.
Ms. Barragan. Thank you, Chair Tonko, for holding this
important hearing on environmental justice legislation.
My district is majority minority, almost 90 percent Latino,
African-American, working class. It is right next to three
freeways and the Port of Los Angeles, urban oil drilling, and
oil refineries right next to parks where children play. This
is--it results in a dangerous level of air pollution, with
asthma rates twice the national average and high rates of
cancer and respiratory illnesses. It is unacceptable.
We must invest to clean up and transform our communities. I
am proud that my bill, the Climate Smart Supports Act, is
included as part of today's hearing and that another one of my
bills, the Climate Justice Grants Act, is part of the CLEAN
Future Act's environmental justice section. Both offer
significant resources to communities hit hard by pollution and
the climate crisis.
Mr. Logan, first I want to thank you for your advocacy on
behalf of the Moving Forward Network to fight for clean air in
port communities, including south Los Angeles, where you have
done amazing work.
Can you describe the Climate Smart Ports Act? Mostly, how
would it make a difference for air quality in Los Angeles and
poor communities across the country?
Mr. Logan. Thank you, Representative Barragan, and thank
you for all the work that you have done to advance
environmental justice in your district and the districts
surrounding you.
The Ports of LA and Long Beach, for instance, is a major
source of not just toxic pollution, but also climate
pollutants. As you all may know, Los Angeles Basin is one of
the most polluted, if not the most polluted, regions in the
country. The number-one source of air pollution in the Los
Angeles Basin is the two ports. The two ports of LA and Long
Beach have done tremendous work at cleaning up their pollution.
But with the constant growth and the constant activity of the
ports, with all the trucks, the trains, the ships, the
equipment, the amount of pollution continues to increase.
So we have to stop the incremental improvements and really
get down to zero pollution, zero emissions. So investment in
zero-emissions technology, in infrastructure is essential for
the community's health and well-being.
And if you can't breathe, you can't work. If you can't
breathe, you can't go to school. If you can't breathe, you just
can't be a part of our society. So the quality of life and
livelihood of our communities depend on getting to zero
pollution, zero emissions in our community.
I also appreciate the fact that there are certain
requirements for receiving these funds, making sure that it
does not displace workers at the waterfront. Automation, it
does not mean--I am sorry, zero emissions does not mean
automation. If it displaces workers, that is not the right kind
of investment.
Also, having folks at the table, making sure that we are
engaged in a way that is meaningful and making sure that we are
investing in communities that need that investment, but in a
real way, not just a--this kind of--the benefit--side benefit,
but direct investment with real benefits that you can see in
communities.
Ms. Barragan. Well, thank you, Mr. Logan. Just to follow up
on that. I know you spoke a little bit about it. An important
part of the Climate Smart Ports Act is the support for zero-
emissions technology.
You know, in addition, the Green Ports Program established
in the CLEAN Future Act takes that approach based on my bill.
Can you tell the committee how important it is for
environmental justice communities that our investments to green
ports focus on zero-emissions technology rather than, let's
say, low-emissions technology?
Mr. Logan. Absolutely. To your point earlier, our
communities are inundated with multiple impacts: refineries,
urban drilling, all types of impacts from the fossil fuel
industry, as well as many others. And so, when we are talking
about these false types of solutions such as what they call
near-zero or renewable natural gas, what happens is we don't
just see the impacts from the production of that, those fuels
in our communities. We also see the impacts of the production
of those fuels in other communities across the country.
The other part of that is with these natural gas vehicles
and products, the particles of natural gas are so fine that
they are toxic within themselves, that the particles, the
ultrafine particles, penetrate the bloodstream and have major
impacts on the body, not just on the Earth and the climate
impacts.
Ms. Barragan. Thank you, Mr. Logan, for that testimony,
again, for all the work that you are doing and all our
panelists are doing.
I just wanted to quickly mention a UCLA study that just
came out. It tied COVID-19 deaths linked to poor air quality,
and showed that those in communities that had poor air quality
were dying at much higher rates. And so, when we talk about
devastation to communities, air pollution is devastating our
communities and it is killing our communities, which is why
this is so important.
Mr. Chairman, thank you so much for this hearing. And with
that, I yield back.
Mr. Tonko. The gentlelady yields back. The Chair now
recognizes the gentleman from Arizona. Representative
O'Halleran, you are recognized for 5 minutes, please.
Mr. O'Halleran. Thank you, Chairman Tonko.
There are over 520 abandoned uranium mines on and around
the Navajo Nation in Arizona. These mines have gone unaddressed
since the Cold War--actually, the late 1940s, despite the well-
known health impacts of the exposure to uranium.
Minerals from these dangerous sites were used in the
construction of homes, children's play area, and some of the
sites are still used by children to play on. None of the sites,
according to the EPA, are safe. And livestock are also grazed.
This exposure has led to uneven health outcomes and even
Federal programs to compensate miners through the Radiation
Exposure Compensation Act.
I think we must ask ourselves: What would happen if these
mines had been anywhere else?
While I am heartened that the EPA recently added the Navajo
abandoned uranium mines to the Administrator's Superfund list,
with a focus on being completed in the next 10 years, I believe
we must do more.
Since 1994, the EPA and Navajo EPA have worked hand in hand
to build the Navajo Nation's cleanup capacity, and the American
Jobs Plan represents an opportunity, a meaningful opportunity,
to invest in that workforce and get these sites addressed so
hardworking families do not have to worry about toxic exposure
on a daily basis.
Additionally, water infrastructure remains an area where
there is a large disparity between Indian country and the rest
of the Nation. My legislation to address the Indian Health
Services sanitation facilities construction program backlog is
a part of the solution with several agencies, including the
Bureau of Reclamation, Bureau of Indian Affairs, Indian Health
Service, USDA, and EPA, can play an important role in building
up reliable water systems and in getting this uranium problem
cleaned up.
Environmental justice needs may look different in rural and
Tribal areas, and I am optimistic that a whole-of-government
approach can help address the unique needs like access to clean
water of these communities.
Dr. Hollis, the question is going to be, in a situation
like this, where the DoI and the HHS and EPA would all have a
hand in addressing dangerous sites, why is it that critical for
us to codify the longstanding Clinton-era Executive order to
make environmental justice a part of agency missions and
require interagency cooperation to maintain public health and
safety?
Dr. Hollis. Thank you, Representative O'Halleran. It is
important to codify Executive Order 12898 to give it the
strength that it needs in order to clean up these sites and
reduce pollution in communities and reduce exposure to
hazardous substances, as well as reducing the effects of
facilities releasing chemicals into the environment,
particularly--mostly in communities of color, in our
environmental justice communities, be it Black, brown,
indigenous, Native American, whatever.
Mr. O'Halleran. Thank you for that answer. Just to wrap
things up a little bit, over 1,000 homes have uranium in their
walls. This has been ongoing for over 75 years in this one
site. These are all surface mines, and there is money from a
trust fund of $1.7 million, but that is not going to address
520 sites. And why hasn't that been used for over 15 years?
And so, in a community where infrastructure has been
ignored for decades, how can interagency coordination speed up
delivery of critical infrastructure projects like clean water
delivery systems, Dr. Hollis?
Dr. Hollis. Well, I think the main reason is by working
with communities, is by having them at the table, because that
is how you are going to identify priority areas, and that is
how you are going to identify what is needed.
And I think it is important to listen to what communities
have to say, and to work with them as partners, and so that--to
ensure that you are addressing their needs.
Mr. O'Halleran. Thank you, Dr. Hollis.
And Chairman, I yield.
Mr. Tonko. The gentleman yields back. We next had
Representative Soto on our list, and I don't see him on our
screen. We will go to the ever-patient Representative, the
gentlelady from Delaware, Representative Lisa Blunt Rochester,
for 5 minutes, please.
Ms. Blunt Rochester. Thank you so much, Mr. Chairman, and
especially for calling this critically important hearing. And
thank you to all of the witnesses for your testimony today.
While the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic has exacerbated
environmental justice concerns in communities across the
country, as has been made clear through your testimony today,
these concerns are not new. Generations of inequalities and
injustices have placed a disproportionate environmental burden
on our Black, brown, and indigenous communities. For decades,
low-wealth communities and communities of color in Delaware
have faced higher risks of cancer and respiratory diseases due
to their proximity to facilities that produce harmful
pollutants.
We need to expand all of our communities' access to
information, and we need to better prepare our communities in
the face of a toxic release. Earlier this year I reintroduced
the Alert Act, which requires facilities that produce hazardous
and toxic chemicals to engage directly with the communities
where they are located and to ensure that residents have real-
time knowledge of any toxic release.
My first question is for Dr. Hollis. The Alert Act requires
facilities that process extremely hazardous substances to hold
public meetings at least once a year. Do you support that
requirement, and how can it promote environmental justice?
Dr. Hollis. I absolutely support it, Representative.
Absolutely. And it can support environmental justice by letting
communities speak for themselves, first and foremost, and
giving them the opportunity that they already have, giving them
that chance to be heard, and to provide input and guidance
where needed.
Ms. Blunt Rochester. Thank you.
And Mr. Logan, first I want to thank you and the Moving
Forward Network for your expertise and support that you
provided during the drafting of my Climate Action Planning for
Ports Act. Something that you said was, ``If you can't breathe,
you can't work.'' And I think that needs to stay at the
forefront of all of this. If you can't breathe, you can't work,
you can't learn, as you said.
Why are climate action plans like the ones outlined in the
Climate Action Planning for Ports Act so critical to advancing
cleaner air in our near-port communities?
Mr. Logan. Well, thank you, Representative Blunt Rochester.
You know, at the end of the day, what we are really doing here
is problem-solving, right?
We have a crisis in our hand, our--and it has multiple
issues that we are contending with. Specifically when we are
thinking about ports, ports are complex facilities. They have
many, many different types of operations and pieces of
equipment.
So with the community leading the planning process to
identify what the problems are, what the solutions are, and
what the action items are, we are able to identify and work
towards resolving those problems that we are contending with so
that we can breathe, so that the workforce can go to work and
still breathe when they get home and during their work hours.
And so really, problem-solving is really important for the
health and well-being of the local community.
And as we are trying to tackle the climate crisis, again,
we need to have a living wage on a living planet. We can't
ignore these extreme impacts to local communities and to the
planet.
And so starting off with a community voice and a planning
process is essential. And we know that, when we come together,
we can really find the solutions to solve the problems that we
are addressing.
Ms. Blunt Rochester. Thank you. I recently had an
opportunity to meet with the folks from the Port of Wilmington
in Delaware and hear about their efforts at electrification but
at the same time maintaining the union jobs that they had. And
it was a really good partnership. And my last question is for
Ms. Yeampierre.
First of all, I want to thank you so much, not only for
your professional testimony but for your personal testimony.
And I think that was really powerful to make this real for
people.
One of the things that I noticed in doing this work is that
major environmental groups lack representation from low-wealth
communities or communities of color. And as a result,
environmental justice priorities are often excluded from the
discussion. How do we ensure that the environmental justice
communities are represented and included in the decision making
in major environmental groups?
Ms. Yeampierre. Well, thank you for that question. I think
that we need to start thinking about governance differently.
Climate change is going to disrupt governance, and we need
to start thinking as--of communities as the brain trust of
decision making, the folks that have the answers to complex
questions, because they have been living in the midst of all of
the isms.
Instead of being thought of as people whose problems we
solve, they should be thought of as people who have the
solutions and as added value. And I think that oftentimes
Government always thinks that they are the recipients of their
good intentions, instead of--and expectations have to be
managed. And the truth is that, in partnership, we can solve
very complex, big problems. But we have to be in partnership
with each other.
Ms. Blunt Rochester. Thank you so much.
And Mr. Chairman, I was very proud that our ports
legislation was included in the CLEAN Future Act. And I thank
you so much again for all of your leadership in saving our
planet. I yield back.
Mr. Tonko. Well, you are most welcome, and thank you. And
the gentlelady yields back.
I am very pleased to see that the representative from
Florida, the gentleman from Florida, has returned, and we
welcome him for 5 minutes of questioning.
Representative Soto?
Mr. Soto. Thank you, Chairman.
Mr. Tonko. The floor is yours.
Mr. Soto. Thank you, Chairman. We face a climate crisis
that is an existential threat to the human race. Fossil fuels
are destroying our Earth, and we are going to do something
about it. Our American Jobs Plan and our CLEAN Future Act will
finally upgrade our infrastructure, including creating national
electric vehicle systems, boosting clean energy such as
renewable energy and modular nuclear, and use natural gas as a
bridge fuel.
On our march to carbon net-neutral by 2050, to my
colleagues across the aisle, what is the plan? If it is just
criticizing our plan, that is not possible, because the cost of
inaction is too great. Nothing is not an option.
In my home State of Florida, we face rising seas. We face
intensifying hurricanes. When--by 2050 we will face over 1,000
extremely hot days. This will condemn Floridians and other
Sunbelt Americans to become climate refugees, and it will
decimate our local tourism and agriculture industries.
We have been down this road before. We have seen it before,
and we are going to work together. In our area of Florida we
have seen over 12 billion pounds of toxic coal ash, with over
6.1 million tons being generated each year. There was a major
issue of coal ash being accumulated by some of our local
municipal utilities like OUC and KUA. I applaud them for
stepping up by setting a timetable to shutter their coal plants
by 2025, 2026, because they don't know where to put the coal
ash anymore.
And we have seen issues with health in East Orange County.
We have seen issues of storage in Osceola County, in central
Florida. And on my family's native island of Puerto Rico, they
even were trying to store some coal ash in central Florida,
which, while we work with them on many things, was a huge
issue, because where are you going to put all this coal ash at
the end of the day?
With natural gas, with renewables, with nuclear, you don't
have this byproduct issue. There are over 42 of these dangerous
coal ash ponds, 33 of which are in unlined impoundments or
landfills, leading to widespread groundwater contamination in
the Sunshine State.
Mr. Chairman, I would like to enter into the record a
letter from 13 groups supporting my colleague Rep. Cohen's
Ensuring Safe Disposal of Coal Ash Act.
Mr. Tonko. It will be entered into a request at the end of
the hearing, sir.
Mr. Soto. Thank you. From the letter: ``The Ensuring Safe
Disposal of Coal Ash Act builds off the committee's CLEAN
Future Act coal ash provisions, rectifying deficiencies in the
2015 coal ash rules, and directing EPA to strengthen the coal
ash protections.'' We know coal ash is toxic, and it hurts both
our brains and our nervous system, respiratory disease, cancer,
and other developmental defects. And it would allow local
communities to be more involved in the decision making.
Dr. Hollis, is banning the storage of toxic chemicals in
unlined pits after they have been found to contaminate water
supplies a proper step forward to protect the public?
Dr. Hollis. Yes.
Mr. Soto. And the bill requires plant owners to provide
financial assurances for cleanup costs in the event of
hazardous spills or disasters.
Dr. Hollis, should facilities be required to financially
plan for future cleanups that become even more likely as
climate change worsens floods and storms?
Dr. Hollis. That is a great question, and it is sort of a
tricky question. I don't want them to plan for cleanup. I want
them to use the best available technology to prevent that from
ever happening.
Mr. Soto. Well, thank you so much. And we know that the
Ensuring Safe Disposal of Coal Ash Act is a significant step
forward to combat coal ash in the Sunshine State and around the
Nation.
We are moving towards getting beyond coal, getting beyond
oil, using gas, natural gas, as a bridge fuel, and boosting
renewables. And that is what the American Jobs Plan is all
about. That is what the CLEAN Future Act is all about. We will
take action. We will help out all States, and we will provide
jobs to communities in transition. Everyone can be lifted up if
we think big and bold and we work together.
And I urge our colleagues across the aisle, let us not
think of the past and what can bring us back, but let us look
to the future, because I believe we as Americans can do
everything, anything if we work together. We know that,
President Biden has said that many times.
With that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Tonko. The gentleman yields back, and I believe that
completes the list of colleagues that chose to question our
witnesses today.
So we thank everyone for their participation, and in
particular our witnesses. And we thank you for joining us at
today's hearing. Thank you for your input.
I remind Members that, pursuant to committee rules, they
have 10 business days by which to submit additional questions
for the record to be answered by our witnesses. And I would
please ask that our witnesses respond promptly to any such
questions that each might receive.
Before we adjourn, I have a list of documents here that
have been requested to be entered into the record. So I request
unanimous consent to enter the following documents into the
record:
A statement from the Environmental Technology Council; a
letter from the Solar Energy Industries Association; a policy
platform from the Solar Energy Industries Association; a letter
from 13 environmental organizations in favor of H.R. 2396, the
Ensuring Safe Disposal of Coal Ash Act; a letter from the
Association of Metropolitan Water Agencies and the National
Association of Clean Water Agencies; a letter from the
Wilderness Society in favor of H.R. 2021, the Environmental
Justice for All Act, and H.R. 516, the Environmental Justice
Mapping and Data Collection Act of 2021; a letter from Senators
Duckworth, Wyden, Murphy, Blumenthal, Padilla, and Durbin in
favor of H.R. 2021, the Environmental Justice for All Act; a
2016 report from the U.S. Commission on Civil Rights entitled
``Examining the Environmental Protection Agency's Compliance
and Enforcement of Title 6 and Executive Order 12,898''; a
letter from Our Children's Trust; a letter from the Port of
Long Beach; an article from Politico entitled ``Biden's green
energy plans clash with pledge to create union jobs''; an
article from Bloomberg entitled ``Secrecy and Abuse Claims
Haunt China's Solar Factories in Xinjiang''; a dissenting
statement of Commissioner Gail Heriot to the U.S. Commission on
Civil Rights Report on Environmental Justice, examining the
Environmental Protection Agency's compliance and enforcement of
title 6 and Executive Order 12898; a letter from Georgia Ports;
a letter from the Ground Water Protecting Council; a letter
from the Independent Petroleum Association of America; a letter
from the mayor of Petersburg, Indiana; an article from Politico
entitled ``The Wage Gap That Threatens Biden's Climate Plan'';
a letter from the mayor of Gillette, Wyoming; a 2019 report
from Ash at Work entitled ``CCPs: Not Just for Concrete09Coal
Ash Makes the Grade in Highway Construction''; a 2020 report
from the Executive Office of the President, Council of Economic
Advisors, entitled ``The Impact of Opportunity Zones: An
Initial Assessment''; a fact sheet from the American Coal Ash
Association entitled ``Coal Ash Regulation and Unencapsulated
Beneficial Use''; a letter from the Alaska Community Action on
Toxics; a letter from the Breast Cancer Prevention Partners; a
letter from Black Millennials for Flint; a letter from
Chesapeake Bay Foundation; a letter from Coming Clean; a letter
from Creation Justice Ministries; a letter from Earthjustice; a
letter from the Environmental Defense Fund; a document of
support from 13 environmental justice organizations; a letter
from the Moving Forward Network; a letter from the National
Wildlife Federation; a letter from the Sierra Club; a letter
from the Union of Concerned Scientists; a statement from the
Western Environmental Law Center; a letter from the mayor of
Hazard, Kentucky, to Representative Tonko; and a letter from
the mayor of Hazard, Kentucky, to Representative McKinley.
And that list is, I believe, totally complete for today's
hearing. And without objection--do I hear any objection?
Voice. No.
Mr. Tonko. Without objection, so ordered.
[The information appears at the conclusion of the hearing.
\1\ ]
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ The U.S. Commission on Civil Rights and Council on Economic
Affairs reports, the dissenting statement, and the Our Children's Trust
letter have been retained in committee files and are available at
https://docs.house.gov/Committee/Calendar/ByEvent.aspx?EventID=111450.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Mr. Tonko. And with that, the hearing is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 1:28 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]
[Material submitted for inclusion in the record follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
