- CANNABIS POLICIES FOR THE NEW DECADE

[House Hearing, 116 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

CANNABIS POLICIES FOR THE NEW DECADE

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON HEALTH

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED SIXTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

JANUARY 15, 2020

__________

Serial No. 116-89

Printed for the use of the Committee on Energy and Commerce

govinfo.gov/committee/house-energy
energycommerce.house.gov

______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
48-043PDF           WASHINGTON : 2022

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE

FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey
Chairman
BOBBY L. RUSH, Illinois              GREG WALDEN, Oregon
ANNA G. ESHOO, California              Ranking Member
ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York             FRED UPTON, Michigan
DIANA DeGETTE, Colorado              JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois
MIKE DOYLE, Pennsylvania             MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas
JAN SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois             STEVE SCALISE, Louisiana
G. K. BUTTERFIELD, North Carolina    ROBERT E. LATTA, Ohio
DORIS O. MATSUI, California          CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington
KATHY CASTOR, Florida                BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky
JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland           PETE OLSON, Texas
JERRY McNERNEY, California           DAVID B. McKINLEY, West Virginia
PETER WELCH, Vermont                 ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois
BEN RAY LUJAN, New Mexico            H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia
PAUL TONKO, New York                 GUS M. BILIRAKIS, Florida
YVETTE D. CLARKE, New York, Vice     BILL JOHNSON, Ohio
Chair                            BILLY LONG, Missouri
DAVID LOEBSACK, Iowa                 LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana
KURT SCHRADER, Oregon                BILL FLORES, Texas
JOSEPH P. KENNEDY III,               SUSAN W. BROOKS, Indiana
Massachusetts                    MARKWAYNE MULLIN, Oklahoma
TONY CARDENAS, California            RICHARD HUDSON, North Carolina
RAUL RUIZ, California                TIM WALBERG, Michigan
SCOTT H. PETERS, California          EARL L. ``BUDDY'' CARTER, Georgia
DEBBIE DINGELL, Michigan             JEFF DUNCAN, South Carolina
MARC A. VEASEY, Texas                GREG GIANFORTE, Montana
ANN M. KUSTER, New Hampshire
ROBIN L. KELLY, Illinois
NANETTE DIAZ BARRAGAN, California
A. DONALD McEACHIN, Virginia
LISA BLUNT ROCHESTER, Delaware
DARREN SOTO, Florida
TOM O'HALLERAN, Arizona
------

Professional Staff

JEFFREY C. CARROLL, Staff Director
TIFFANY GUARASCIO, Deputy Staff Director
MIKE BLOOMQUIST, Minority Staff Director
Subcommittee on Health

ANNA G. ESHOO, California
Chairwoman
ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York             MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas
G. K. BUTTERFIELD, North Carolina,     Ranking Member
Vice Chair                       FRED UPTON, Michigan
DORIS O. MATSUI, California          JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois
KATHY CASTOR, Florida                BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky
JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland           H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia
BEN RAY LUJAN, New Mexico            GUS M. BILIRAKIS, Florida
KURT SCHRADER, Oregon                BILLY LONG, Missouri
JOSEPH P. KENNEDY III,               LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana
Massachusetts                    SUSAN W. BROOKS, Indiana
TONY CARDENAS, California            MARKWAYNE MULLIN, Oklahoma
PETER WELCH, Vermont                 RICHARD HUDSON, North Carolina
RAUL RUIZ, California                EARL L. ``BUDDY'' CARTER, Georgia
DEBBIE DINGELL, Michigan             GREG GIANFORTE, Montana
ANN M. KUSTER, New Hampshire         GREG WALDEN, Oregon (ex officio)
ROBIN L. KELLY, Illinois
NANETTE DIAZ BARRAGAN, California
LISA BLUNT ROCHESTER, Delaware
BOBBY L. RUSH, Illinois
FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey (ex
officio)
C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hon. Anna G. Eshoo, a Representative in Congress from the State
of California, opening statement...............................     1
Prepared statement...........................................     3
Hon. Michael C. Burgess, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Texas, opening statement..............................     4
Prepared statement...........................................     5
Hon. Frank Pallone, Jr., a Representative in Congress from the
State of New Jersey, opening statement.........................     6
Prepared statement...........................................     7
Hon. Greg Walden, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Oregon, opening statement......................................     9
Prepared statement...........................................    10
Hon. Eliot L. Engel, a Representative in Congress from the State
of New York, prepared statement................................    93

Witnesses

Nora Volkow, M.D., Director, National Institute on Drug Abuse,
National Institutes of Health..................................    12
Prepared statement...........................................    14
Answers to submitted questions...............................   283
Douglas C. Throckmorton, M.D., Deputy Director for Regulatory
Programs, Center for Drug Evaluation and Research, Food and
Drug Administration............................................    23
Prepared statement...........................................    25
Answers to submitted questions...............................   297
Matthew J. Strait, Senior Policy Advisor, Diversion Control
Division, Drug Enforcement Administration......................    36
Prepared statement...........................................    38
Answers to submitted questions\1\

Submitted Material

H.R. 171, the Legitimate Use of Medicinal Marihuana Act..........    95
H.R. 601, the Medical Cannabis Research Act of 2019..............    99
H.R. 1151, the Veterans Medical Marijuana Safe Harbor Act........   109
H.R. 2843, the Marijuana Freedom and Opportunity Act.............   115
H.R. 3797, the Medical Marijuana Research Act of 2019 \2\
H.R. 3884, the Marijuana Opportunity Reinvestment and Expungement
Act of 2019 \3\
Statement of January 15, 2020, from Greenwich Biosciences to Ms.
Eshoo, submitted by Ms. Eshoo..................................   125
Letter of January 14, 2020, from Stephen A. Frangos, M.D.,
President, American College of Occupational and Environmental
Medicine, to Ms. Eshoo and Mr. Burgess, submitted by Ms. Eshoo.   129
Statement of January 15, 2020, from the National Safety Council,
submitted by Ms. Eshoo.........................................   131

----------
\1\ Mr. Strait did not answer submitted questions for the record
by the time of publication.
\2\ The information has been retained in committee files and also
is available at https://docs.house.gov/meetings/IF/IF14/
20200115/110381/BILLS-1163797ih.pdf.

\3\ The information has been retained in committee files and also
is available at https://docs.house.gov/meetings/IF/IF14/
20200115/110381/BILLS-1163884ih.pdf.
Letter of January 14, 2020, from the National Consumers League,
to Members of the Energy and Commerce Health Subcommittee,
submitted by Ms. Eshoo.........................................   135
Statement of January 15, 2020, by David L. Nathan M.D., Board
President, Doctors for Cannabis Regulation, submitted by Ms.
Eshoo..........................................................   137
Statement of January 15, 2020, by Aaron Smith, Executive
Director, National Cannabis Industry Association, submitted by
Ms. Eshoo......................................................   141
Letter of August 1, 2020, from over 100 organizations in support
of H.R. 3884, to Ms. Nancy Pelosi, et al., submitted by Ms.
Eshoo..........................................................   149
Letter of January 15, 2020, from Aaron Smith, Executive Director,
National Cannabis Industry Association, et. al., to Ms. Eshoo,
and Mr. Burgess, submitted by Ms. Eshoo........................   154
Statement of January 15, 2020, from the California Cannabis
Industry Association, submitted by Ms. Eshoo...................   157
Statement of January 15, 2020, from Congressman Hakeem Jeffries,
to Ms. Eshoo and Mr. Burgess, submitted by Ms. Eshoo...........   161
Statement of January 15, 2020, from Kris Krane, President of
4Front Ventures, submitted by Ms. Eshoo........................   162
Statement of January 15, 2020, from Americans for SafeAccess,
submitted by Ms. Eshoo.........................................   166
Report of October 2019, from the National Cannabis Industry
Association entitled ``Adapting a Regulatory Framework for the
Emerging Cannabis Industry'', submitted by Ms. Eshoo...........   170
Letter of January 13, 2020, from Bruce A. Jarrell, M.D., Interim
President, University of Maryland, to Mr. Sarbanes, submitted
by Ms. Eshoo...................................................   218
Statement of January 15, 2020, from the American Property
Casualty Insurance Association, submitted by Ms. Eshoo.........   220
Statement of January 15, 2020, by Paul Armentano, Deputy
Director, National Organization for the Reform of Marijuana
Laws, submitted by Ms. Eshoo...................................   224
Letter of August 27, 2019, from Norman E. Sharpless, M.D., Acting
Commissioner, FDA and Francis S. Collins, M.D., Ph.D.,
Director, NIH to Mr. Schatz, submitted by Ms. Eshoo............   227
Letter of December 16, 2019, from Greg Walden, et al., to Hon.
Pallone and Hon. Eshoo, submitted by Ms. Eshoo.................   231
Letter of January 22, 2019, from Ralph L. Sacco, President, the
American Academy of Neurology, to Mr. Griffith, submitted by
Ms. Eshoo......................................................   236
Letter of June 6, 2018, from Ralph L. Sacco, President, American
Academy of Neurology, to Mr. Gaetz, submitted by Ms. Eshoo.....   237
Article of January 12, 2020, ``Pot Imports Grow as U.S. Stalls on
Medical Research'' by Kristine Owram, Bloomberg News, submitted
by Ms. Eshoo...................................................   239
Article, ''Support for the Medical Marijuana Research Act of
2019,'' by Mr. Blumenauer, et al., submitted by Ms. Eshoo......   243
Letter of January 15, 2020, by George B. Hodgin,
Biopharmaceutical Research Company, to Mr. Pallone, et al.,
submitted by Ms. Eshoo.........................................   255
Statement of July 16, 2019, by Kevin A. Sabet, Ph.D., President,
Smart Approaches to Marijuana, to Mr. Harris, submitted by Ms.
Eshoo..........................................................   259
Letter of September 19, 2018, from Ted Thompson, JD, Senior Vice
President of Public Policy, the Michael J. Fox Foundation, to
Hon. Gaetz, submitted by Ms. Eshoo.............................   269
Statement of January 15, 2020, by Dr. Betsy Booren, Senior Vice
President, Consumer Brands Association, submitted by Ms. Eshoo.   270
Letter of August 26, 2019, from Neil D. Doherty, Acting Assistant
Administrator, Drug Enforcement Administration, to George B
Hodgin, submitted by Ms. Eshoo.................................   272
Fact sheets, by Nora D. Volkow, M.D., Director, National
Institute on Drug Abuse, submitted by Ms. Eshoo................   275

CANNABIS POLICIES FOR THE NEW DECADE

----------

WEDNESDAY, JANUARY 15, 2020

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Health,
Committee on Energy and Commerce,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 10:01 a.m., in
the John D. Dingell Room 2123, Rayburn House Office Building,
Hon. Anna G. Eshoo (chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Present: Representatives Eshoo, Engel, Butterfield, Matsui,
Castor, Sarbanes, Lujan, Schrader, Kennedy, Cardenas, Ruiz,
Dingell, Kuster, Kelly, Barragan, Blunt Rochester, Rush,
Pallone (ex officio), Burgess (subcommittee ranking member),
Upton, Shimkus, Guthrie, Griffith, Bilirakis, Long, Bucshon,
Brooks, Hudson, Carter, Gianforte, and Walden (ex officio).
Also Present: Representatives Schakowsky and Rodgers.
Staff Present: Joe Banez, Professional Staff Member;
Jeffrey C. Carroll, Staff Director; Waverly Gordon, Deputy
Chief Counsel; Tod Guidry, Health Fellow; Meghan Mullon, Policy
Analyst; Tim Robinson, Chief Counsel; Rebecca Tomilchik, Staff
Assistant; Kimberlee Trzeciak, Chief Health Advisor; C. J.
Young, Press Secretary; Madison Wendell, Intern; S. K. Bowen,
Minority Press Assistant; Jordan Davis, Minority Senior
Advisor; Theresa Gambo, Minority Human Resources/Office
Administrator; Tyler Greenberg, Minority Staff Assistant; Peter
Kielty, Minority General Counsel; Ryan Long, Minority Deputy
Staff Director; Brannon Rains, Minority Legislative Clerk;
Kristin Seum, Minority Counsel, Health; and Kristen Shatynski,
Minority Professional Staff Member, Health.
Ms. Eshoo. Good morning, everyone. The Subcommittee on
Health will now come to order. Welcome to everyone who is here
in the hearing room.
The Chair now recognizes herself for 5 minutes for an
opening statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. ANNA G. ESHOO, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA

According to the Department of Health and Human Services'
National Survey on Drug Use, 44 million Americans reported
using cannabis in the last year. Thirty-three States now allow
the medicinal use of cannabis and 11 States in the District of
Columbia have legalized cannabis for adult use.
But State laws and Federal policy are a 1,000 miles apart.
As more States allow cannabis, the Federal Government still
strictly controls and prohibits it, even restricting legitimate
medical research.
Given the widespread availability of cannabis, the purpose
of today's hearing is to examine the pressing need for medical
research about cannabis and its chemical compounds with CBD
being one of them.
A half century ago, Congress listed cannabis as a highly
controlled schedule I substance. Other schedule I drugs include
heroin, LSD and ecstasy. Schedule I drugs have no medical value
and high potential for abuse. Schedule II drugs, such as
cocaine and Vicodin through schedule V drugs, such as
Robitussin, all have some medical value but differ in ranking
depending on their potential for abuse.
The schedule I designation restricts legitimate medical
research about cannabis. Today scientists who wish to study
cannabis must seek approval from three Federal agencies: the
NIH, the FDA and the DEA. Once scientists are federally
approved, which can take more than a year, they are allowed to
only research cannabis grown by a government-authorized farm at
the University of Mississippi.
This cannabis lacks the properties and potency of
commercially available cannabis and leads to inadequate
research. So researchers are in a catch-22, they can't conduct
cannabis research until they show cannabis has a medical use,
but they can't demonstrate cannabis as a medical use until they
can conduct research. It doesn't make sense, at least to me.
So why is it concerning that research about cannabis is
blocked by Federal law? First, cannabis has therapeutic
potential for chronic pain, nausea, and the treatment of
neurological disorders such as seizures. In 2018, the FDA
approved the first cannabis-derived medication, Epidiolex,
which treats seizures in patients two years of age or older.
Second, the restrictions on cannabis research has led to
unanswered questions about the safety and quality of products
containing CBD.
In December 2018, the farm bill removed hemp, including CBD
derived from hemp, from the Controlled Substances Act. The farm
bill explicitly preserved the FDA's authority over CBD
products, but the FDA has yet to issue regulations due to its
unanswered questions about the intrinsic safety of the CBD. The
FDA says it will take three to five years to finalize CBD
regulations. And in the meantime, the CBD market is predicted
to reach $20 billion in sales by 2024. Meanwhile, CBD is now
available in everything from fast food hamburgers, to scented
lotions, to over-the-counter pills.
Today, we are considering six bills that offer a range of
solutions to update Federal policy to advance research on
cannabis and its compounds. I want to thank the leaders of the
bills. Representatives Barbara Lee and Congressman Earl
Blumenauer who have joined us. They are sitting in the front
row. Thank you for being here and for your work. Congressman
Jerry Nadler, Hakeem Jeffries, Matt Gaetz, and our fellow
subcommittee member Congressman Morgan Griffith: Thank you to
each one of you for your good work.
Now I would like to yield to Mr. Kennedy for the remainder
of my time.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Eshoo follows:]

Prepared statement of Hon. Anna G. Eshoo

According to the Department of Health and Human Services
National Survey on Drug Use, 44 million Americans reported
using cannabis in the past year. Thirty-three states now allow
the medicinal use of cannabis and 11 states and the District of
Columbia have legalized cannabis for adult use.
But states' laws and federal policy are a thousand miles
apart. As more states allow cannabis, the Federal Government
still strictly controls and prohibits it, even restricting
legitimate medical research.
Given the widespread availability of cannabis, the purpose
of today's hearing is to examine the pressing need for medical
research about cannabis and its chemical compounds with CBD
being one of them.
Fifty years ago, Congress listed cannabis as a highly-
controlled Schedule I substance. Other schedule I drugs include
heroin, LSD, and ecstasy.
Schedule 1 drugs have no medical value and high potential
for abuse. Schedule 2 drugs (for example, cocaine and Vicodin)
through Schedule 5 drugs (for example, Robitussin) all have
some medical value but differ in ranking depending on their
potential for abuse.
The Schedule I designation restricts legitimate medical
research about cannabis. For example, scientists who wish to
study cannabis must seek approval from three federal agencies--
the NIH, the FDA, and the DEA.
Once scientists are federally-approved, which can take more
than a year, they're allowed to only research cannabis grown by
a government-authorized farm at the University of Mississippi.
This cannabis lacks the properties and potency of commercially-
available cannabis and leads to inadequate research.
Researchers are in a catch-22. They can't conduct cannabis
research until they show cannabis has a medical use, but they
can't show cannabis has a medical use until they can conduct
research.
Why is it concerning that research about cannabis is
blocked by federal law?
First, cannabis has therapeutic potential for chronic pain
or nausea and the treatment of neurological disorders such as
seizures. For example, in 2018, the FDA approved the first
cannabis-derived medication, Epidolex, which treats seizures in
patients two years of age or older.
Second, the restrictions on cannabis research has led to
unanswered questions about the safety and quality of products
containing CBD.
In December 2018, the Farm Bill removed hemp, including CBD
derived from hemp, from the Controlled Substances Act. The Farm
Bill explicitly preserved the FDA's authority over CBD
products, but the FDA has yet to issue regulations due to its
unanswered questions about the intrinsic safety of CBD.
The FDA says it will take three to five years to finalize
CBD regulations, and in the meantime, the CBD market is
predicted to reach $20 billion in sales by 2024. CBD is now
available in everything from fast food hamburgers, to scented
lotions, to over-the-counter pills.
Today we'll consider six bills that offer a range of
solutions to update federal policy to advance research on
cannabis and its compounds.
I thank the leaders of the bills for their work:
Representatives Barbara Lee and Earl Blumenauer, who have
joined us in the audience today, as well as Representatives
Jerry Nadler, Hakeem Jeffries, Matt Gaetz, and our fellow
Subcommittee Member Representative Morgan Griffith.
Working together, I hope our Subcommittee can move forward
on a commonsense proposal that stops the Federal Government
from impeding medical research and allows Americans to have
access to the information they need about the harmful and
therapeutic effects of cannabis.
I yield the remainder of my time to Representative Kennedy.

Mr. Kennedy. Thank you, Madam Chair. I want to thank you
for the time for yielding.
This is a critical debate and it is long overdue. Federal
prohibition has failed, from our criminal justice system, to
our healthcare system, to our State and local governments that
are forced to navigate an impossible landscape. To that end,
government officials and elected representatives are important
witnesses and bring an important perspective to this
conversation.
But there are also critical stakeholders who are missing,
those who lives have been directly touched by our broken
marijuana policies. The people unjustly incarcerated, patients
who rely on medical cannabis, and researchers with expertise
yearning to learn more, small businesses owners trying to find
fair footing in a new industry.
I am grateful for woman who is committed to continue
working with us on a second hearing that will center those
voices in this debate.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I yield back.
Ms. Eshoo. The gentleman yields back. It is a pleasure to
recognize Dr. Burgess, the ranking member of our subcommittee
for his opening statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. MICHAEL C. BURGESS, A REPRESENTATIVE
IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF TEXAS

Mr. Burgess. And I thank the Chair. I appreciate--and
thanks to our witnesses who are here with us today to help
advise us in this important matter. I appreciate that we are
holding the hearing today to discuss this policy. It is a topic
that is of interest to many members of this subcommittee. In
fact, that was evidenced when we had our discussion on the
smokeless tobacco products. At the end of last year, some of
the Republican members of the full Energy and Commerce
Committee and myself sent a letter to request a hearing on
three of the bills before us today that focus on easing
pathways to marijuana research. So I am glad that we followed
through with that. It included H.R. 171, the Legitimate Use of
Medical Marijuana Act; H.R. 601, The Medical Cannabis Research
Act of 2019; and H.R. 3797, the Medical Marijuana Research Act
of 2019 in this hearing.
States and localities across the country have moved
forward, they have different policies to address marijuana,
including both recreational and medicinal. I am concerned that
there is a lack of available research on the benefits and the
risks of the medical and recreational use of this product and
that we really don't justify the actions that some of the
States have taken. Thus far the Food and Drug Administration,
the National Academies have found that there is a lack of
evidence to demonstrate effective medical use for marijuana. So
certainly we need more research.
It is concerning that there are arguments over what may or
may not be a great medicinal use for marijuana, but we don't
have any data. So it is time to get the data and let the
decision be driven by the data. Additionally, some of the data
that we do have includes some concerning results. For example,
a study conducted by researchers at Kaiser Permanente in
northern California found that cannabis use among pregnant
mothers nearly doubled between 2009 and 2016. Research has also
found that prenatal marijuana may impair fetal growth and
neural development but added that more studies are necessary as
the THC potency continues to vary, but appears to be continuing
to rise. So, as someone who has practiced obstetrics for a
number of years, I worry about the health of the mothers and
their babies that could be at risk.
So one of the key hurdles to research is that researchers
require DEA approval. And for decades they have only been
allowed to obtain marijuana from one source, the University of
Mississippi, which is the only contract that the National
Institute on Drug Abuse has for research-grade cannabis.
In the past, it may have made some sense to have this
single source for research purposes. Certainly if there are
variations in quality or gradation, that could be minimized by
having that single source. But because of the diversity now of
the quality potency and other aspects of the marijuana that is
available for individuals to obtain from medical and
recreational purposes, and it does vary across the United
States, research using the single-source marijuana may not
adequately assess what the current landscape represents. Not to
mention, it is difficult to obtain the quantity necessary to
conduct research in the existing structure.
To that point, the Drug Enforcement Agency--we are grateful
that you are with us this morning--announced in 2016 that it
would establish a new policy to increase the number of approved
sources of research grade marijuana, but I don't think that has
quite gotten across the finish line. Maybe we can hear about
that today. I hope that we will get an update on the
administrative efforts to streamline the research process
today. I hope that we can identify ways to work together to
achieve that goal.
While three of the bills before us today aim to enhance
research efforts, there are two that may go a step too far.
H.R. 2843 and H.R. 3884 completely remove marijuana from the
controlled substances list. It is worth noting and I believe
the Food and Drug Administration will explain this in more
detail, that in order for the Drug Enforcement Agency to
reschedule a drug, doing it administratively without
congressional direction, the Food & Drug Administration must
conduct a medical evaluation of the drug and provide a
recommendation to the Drug Enforcement Agency as to what the
scheduling should be. This recommendation is binding;
therefore, the DEA must do what the FDA recommends. My opinion,
completing descheduling marijuana using or congressional
authority, which can override this scenario, could possibly be
a dangerous move, especially given the lack of research to back
up the decision.
So it is critical that the American public, the medical
community understands what marijuana does to our bodies and our
brains at different potencies throughout our lifecycle. We have
a way to go before we have a full understanding of all of these
factors. Some of the bills before us are a step in the right
direction. Some go a step too far, but I look forward to
learning more about the issues of our Federal agencies and the
efforts they are taking to work on this problem.
Thank you all for being here, and I yield back my time.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Burgess follows:]

Prepared statement of Hon. Michael C. Burgess

Thank you, Madame Chair. I appreciate that we are holding
this hearing today to discuss marijuana policy, a topic that is
of interest to many Members on this subcommittee. At the end of
last year, a few Republican Members of the full Energy &
Commerce Committee and I sent a letter to request a hearing on
three of the bills before us today that focus on easing
pathways to marijuana research. I am glad that you have
followed through and included H.R. 171, the Legitimate Use of
Medicinal Marihuana Act, H.R. 601, Medical Cannabis Research
Act of 2019, and H.R. 3797, Medical Marijuana Research Act of
2019, in this hearing.
States and localities across the country have moved forward
with different policies to address marijuana, including both
recreational and medical use.
As a physician, I am concerned that the available research
on the benefits and risks of marijuana, both medical and
recreational, do not adequately justify the actions states have
taken. Thus far, the Food and Drug Administration and the
National Academies have found that there is a lack of evidence
to demonstrate effective medical use for marijuana. That being
said, we need more research.
It is concerning that there are arguments over what may or
may not be a great medicinal use for marijuana, but we don't
even have the data. It's time to get the data and let the
decision be driven by the data. Additionally, some of the data
that we do have includes some concerning results. For example,
a study conducted by researchers at Kaiser Permanente in
Northern California found that cannabis use among pregnant
mothers nearly double between 2009 and 2016.
Researchers also found that ``prenatal marijuana may impair
fetal growth and neurodevelopment,'' but added that more
studies are necessary as THC potency continues to rise. As an
OB/GYN, I worry that the health of mothers and their babies
could be at risk.
One of the key hurdles to research is that researchers
require DEA-approval, and for decades they have only been
allowed to obtain their marijuana from one source--the
University of Mississippi--which is the only contract that the
National Institute on Drug Abuse has for research-grade
cannabis.
In the past it may have made sense to have a single source
for research purposes. However, because the diversity of the
quality, potency, and other aspects of marijuana that
individuals obtain for medical and recreational purposes varies
across the United States, research using this sole source of
marijuana may not adequately assess the current landscape. Not
to mention that it is difficult to obtain the quantity
necessary to conduct research under the existing structure.
To that point, the Drug Enforcement Agency announced in
2016 that it would establish a new policy to increase the
number of approved sources of research-grade marijuana but has
failed to do so. I hope that the DEA will update us on its
administrative efforts to streamline the research process
today, and that we can identify ways to work together to
achieve that goal.
While three of the bills before us today aim to enhance
research efforts, there are two that take a step too far. H.R.
2843 and H.R. 3884 completely remove marijuana from the list of
Controlled Substances.
It is worth noting, and I believe that the Food and Drug
Administration will explain this in more detail, that in order
for the Drug Enforcement Agency to reschedule a drug
administratively without Congressional direction, the Food and
Drug Administration must conduct a medical evaluation of the
drug and provide a recommendation to the DEA as to what the
rescheduling should be. That recommendation is binding;
therefore, the DEA must do what the FDA recommends. I think
that completely descheduling marijuana using our Congressional
authority is a dangerous move, especially given the lack of
research to back up that decision.
It is critical that the American public, and the medical
community, understand what marijuana does to our bodies and to
our brains, at different potencies, and throughout our life
cycle. We have a way to go before we will have a full
understanding all of those factors, but some of the bills
before us are a step in the right direction.
I look forward to learning more about the issues our
federal agencies are facing and the current efforts they are
working on. Thank you to all of our agency witnesses for being
here today to discuss this important topic. I yield back.

Ms. Eshoo. The gentleman yields back.
It is a pleasure to yield 5 minutes to the chairman of the
full committee, Mr. Pallone, for his opening statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. FRANK PALLONE, Jr., A REPRESENTATIVE
IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF NEW JERSEY

Mr. Pallone. Thank you, Chairwoman Eshoo.
Today the subcommittee will have an important hearing about
Federal cannabis policies. While State laws and public
perception around cannabis and its derivatives have evolved
over the years, much of the Federal framework that regulates
cannabis has stayed the same. In my home State of New Jersey,
for example, State law allows for the use of medical cannabis,
and at the end of last year, State lawmakers passed a
referendum that will put the question of legalizing adult
cannabis use to New Jersey voters on the 2020 ballot this
coming November.
New Jersey is not alone in its State-level changes, in fact
the National Conference of State Legislatures reports that 33
States, as well as Puerto Rico, Guam, the U.S. Virgin Islands,
and the District of Columbia approved medical cannabis programs
while 11 States, DC, Guam, the Northern Mariana Islands
approved adult-use cannabis. And although some States have
changed their own policies, national laws, such as the
Controlled Substances Act, have yet to change in the same way.
And that is why we are looking forward to this hearing from a
panel of agency witnesses who agreed to appear before the
subcommittee today. The Drug Enforcement Agency, the FDA, the
National Institute on Drug Abuse all play crucial roles on the
Federal cannabis policy. From researching its benefits and
harms to protecting the American public from bad actors. And I
hope that we can learn about what the agencies believe works
and what needs to be changed.
We will discuss six bills offered by both Democrats and
Republicans, some bipartisan. These bills propose various
policy changes, such as rescheduling or descheduling marijuana,
providing a safe harbor for patients and veterans who use
medical marijuana, and streamlining cannabis research
processes.
Given the evolving landscape in the States, these bills are
worthy of further discussion. And I am particularly interested
in hearing about how Federal agencies are reducing barriers to
research and enabling research on cannabis to thrive. I am also
interested in how the agencies are working together to regulate
a cannabis derivative recently removed from the Controlled
Substances Act, and that is CBD or cannabidiol, I guess is how
it is pronounced.
Before I conclude, I did want to recognize, as Ms. Eshoo
did, Representatives--first--Blumenauer and Representative
Barbara Lee. I know they have talked to many us on a regular
basis, and we are pleased to see that you are here in the
audience today. And they are the co-chairs of the bipartisan
Cannabis Caucus with Representatives Young and Joyce. Together
they foster a continued dialogue on cannabis issues and both
have offered bills before us today. And I thank them for
joining us and commend them for their ongoing leadership in
this area.
Thank you again, Madam Chair. I don't know if anybody are--
I have two minutes left if anybody wants it. If not, I yield
back.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Pallone follows:]

Prepared statement of Hon. Frank Pallone, Jr.

Today the Subcommittee will have an important hearing about
federal cannabis policies. While state laws and public
perception around cannabis and its derivatives have evolved
over the years, much of the federal framework that regulates
cannabis has stayed the same.
In my home state of New Jersey, for example, state law
allows for the use of medical cannabis and, at the end of last
year, state lawmakers passed a referendum that will put the
question of legalizing adult cannabis use to New Jersey voters
on the 2020 ballot.
New Jersey is not alone in its state-level changes. In
fact, the National Conference of State Legislatures reports
that 33 states as well as Puerto Rico, Guam, the U.S. Virgin
Islands, and the District of Columbia approved medical cannabis
programs while 11 states, the District of Columbia, Guam, and
the Northern Mariana Islands approved adult-use cannabis.
Although some states have changed their own policies, national
laws, such as the Controlled Substances Act, have yet to change
in the same way.
That is why I am looking forward to hearing from the panel
of agency witnesses who agreed to appear before the
Subcommittee today. The Drug Enforcement Agency, the Food and
Drug Administration, and the National Institute on Drug Abuse
all play crucial roles on federal cannabis policy--from
researching its benefits and harms to protecting the American
public from bad actors. I hope that we can learn about what the
agencies believe works, and what needs to be changed.
We will discuss six bills offered by both Democrats and
Republicans, and some bipartisan in nature. These bills propose
various policy changes such as rescheduling or descheduling
marijuana, providing a safe harbor for patients and veterans
who use medical marijuana, and streamlining cannabis research
processes.
Given the evolving landscape in the states, these bills are
worthy of further discussion. I am particularly interested in
hearing about how federal agencies are reducing barriers to
research and enabling research on cannabis to thrive. I am also
interested in how the agencies are working together to regulate
a cannabis derivative recently removed from the Controlled
Substances Act--cannabidiol, or CBD.
Before I conclude, I would like to recognize
Representatives Lee and Blumenauer, who are joining us in the
audience today. They serve as the cochairs of the bipartisan
Cannabis Caucus with Representatives Young and Joyce. Together
they foster a continued dialogue on cannabis issues, and both
helped author bills before us today. I thank them for joining
us and commend them for their ongoing leadership in this area.
Thank you again to the witnesses for testifying before us.
I am looking forward to this discussion. Thank you, and I yield
back.

Mr. Griffith. Mr. Chairman, will take it.
I appreciate that. As one of the sponsors of the bills, a
lot of times people think, why does a conservative Republican
get into this and champion it?
Well, let me tell you a story. When I was a young man in
the 1980s, some of my friends were smuggling marijuana into the
hospital in our community there in the Roanoke Valley because
there was an individual whom I did not know who was dying of
cancer, but he wanted to spend every day he could with his son
who was about two at the time. And that formed my policy that
we need to have a rational medical marijuana policy; thus the
LUMMA bill.
But I decided when I got to Congress that, you know, well,
it is kind of controversial, and maybe I shouldn't do that. But
I would talk about it. And when I was at a high school townhall
as I call them--I go to the high schools and talk to students--
they ask about marijuana policy.
I told them my position on medical marijuana, which I went
public with in 1998 on the floor of the Virginia House of
Delegates. And I was standing there, and I thought--all the
hands went up, and I thought one of the kids was going to say
to me, ``Well, what about for just for recreational use or for
fun?'' And I will never forgot it: I was in Wise, Virginia, and
a young man on this side of the room raised his hand, and I
went to him expecting to get the recreational question. And he
said, ``They did that for my daddy, too.'' Now my district is a
big district. These two communities, 20 years apart--30 years
apart, and hours apart from one another. And yet doctors were
turning a blind eye to allow marijuana to be brought into the
hospital because they recognized for those patients who were
dying, this was the only way they could have a little bit of
relief and get the nutrients that they needed to stay alive a
little bit longer to spend a little bit more time with their
children. I came back to DC, and I said: You know what? I am in
Congress now. I can do something about the DEA and the FDA not
making marijuana available for patients who need it. And today
is that day.
I yield back.
Mr. Pallone. And I yield back, Madam Chair.
Ms. Eshoo. The gentleman yields back. There is nothing like
a real-life story.
It is a pleasure to recognize the ranking member of the
full committee, my friend Mr. Walden, for 5 minutes for his
opening statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. GREG WALDEN, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF OREGON

Mr. Walden. Thank you, Madam Chair.
We appreciate the hearing today because we will finally
have an opportunity to review initiates aimed at improving
federally sanctioned research on cannabis. Representatives
Burgess, Griffith, Rodgers, and others, we sent a letter asking
for this hearing. We appreciate your willingness to have it,
Madam Chair.
Federally sanctioned reached on cannabis is challenging. It
is a schedule I controlled substance under theControlled
Substances Act. This means that researchers seeking to
investigate cannabis must work with the Food & Drug
Administration, the National Institute of Drug Abuse and the
drug enforcement administration just to meet the Federal
guidelines, requirements specified in the CSA to conduct
research. In addition, international obligations set forth in
the United Nations drug control treaties impose additional
requirements on the substance impacting the supply of research-
grade cannabis.
So researchers now can only use cannabis for products
sourced through the NIDA's drug supply program single DEA
licensee, the University of Mississippi.
Now, unfortunately, that cannabis is distinct from what is
commercially available from State legal dispensaries, such as
in my home State of Oregon, meaning that we have little to no
data on the health impacts of products in States that have
legalized cannabis for medical or recreational use.
Now, in Oregon, you can purchase a range of THC-infused
products, like these cookies we have a photo of right there. If
you look up on the screen behind you, I guess, it is sort of
stereo on this other side, but right there. And each of you, by
the way, has a cookie in front of you. I have a pizza stand
opening in an hour out in a hallway. Don't worry; I didn't get
that carried away. You can actually eat these, as far as I
know. Unless Safeway inserted something beyond the normal
ingredients, it is just a cookie.
The question is, how do you know if your child stumbled
upon it? So serious side. Oregon, these cookies in this photo
are limited to five milligrams of THC per serving, 50
milligrams per package. Now, if you go across the Columbia
River to Washington State, you find they have a different
limit, ten milligrams and 100 milligrams per package. The
difference is arbitrary. You see we lack data. We do not know--
what we do know is there have been an elevated number of
cannabis-related poison center calls, emergency room visits,
and impaired driving incidents. But we need the research that
reflects the reality of what is on today's market.
Additionally, products containing CBD derived from the hemp
plant have become commonplace across the country in pharmacies,
food health stores, even fast food chains since hemp was
removed from the CSA in 2018 farm bill. Now these products
often contain claims they can effectively treat depression,
inflammation, and even cancer or Alzheimer's. However, none of
these claims have been evaluated or approved by the Food and
Drug Administration, which means patients may be relying on the
unsubstantiated claims of CBD products and foregoing other
proven medical treatments.
And while there is potential for CBD to provide real
patient benefit, the research and science lags far behind the
market, and the agencies are struggling to catch up.
So nationwide exposure in youth is increasing. From 2006 to
2013, children's exposure to marijuana products rose 147.5
percent nationwide. And in States that have legalized medical
marijuana, exposure has risen 610 percent. And while alcohol
use is going down in teens, last month, NIDA reported record
numbers of eighth through twelfth grade students regularly
vaping marijuana, a subject we have talked about before this
committee.
So we need more research, and we need more data. Americans
are consuming more cannabis, and policy decisions on this
substance has been made in a virtual information vacuum. States
that have legalized marijuana, such as my State, have done so
with far less information than they have on legal substances
that are easily abused, such as alcohol or tobacco.
Rescheduling cannabis may help improve the research landscape
and allow for more medical treatments. However, administrative
rescheduling necessitates robust data on potential medical
uses, and the current research restrictions on fully studying
cannabis have effectively created a catch-22 in this
rescheduling debate. Evaluations by the FDA and the National
Academies have both concluded that lack of research was a
significant factor in denying previous rescheduling petitions.
So I would like to note that two of the six bills we are
reviewing today completely descheduled cannabis, removing it
from the Controlled Substances Act, even though we do not have
the necessary data to justify doing so, in my opinion.
Descheduling cannabis is a step too far and a step I cannot
support because descheduling removes it from the Controlled
Substances Act and cuts the DEA completely out of the picture.
So any discussion of descheduling must be preceded by a fuller
understanding of the potential risks associated with cannabis
use, which we currently do not have.
Research is the first step in making it easier to get our
research on cannabis. It is common ground we should pursue as
we improve the Federal-State relationship and the marijuana
policy gap.
And, with that, Madam Chair, I yield back.
And you can eat your cookies now.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Walden follows:]

Prepared statement of Hon. Greg Walden

At today's hearing, we will have the opportunity to review
initiatives aimed at improving federally-sanctioned research on
cannabis. Republican Leader, Burgess, Reps. Griffith, Rodgers
and I sent a letter requesting this hearing last month, and I'd
like to thank the Majority for responding and getting a hearing
on the books in such a timely fashion.
Federally sanctioned research on cannabis is challenging.
It is a Schedule I controlled substance under the Controlled
Substances Act (CSA). This means that researchers seeking to
investigate cannabis must work with the Food and Drug
Administration (FDA), the National Institute on Drug Abuse
(NIDA), and the Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA) to meet
the federal requirements specified in the CSA to conduct
research. In addition, international obligations set forth in
three United Nations (U.N.) drug control treaties impose
requirements on the substance, impacting the supply of
research-grade cannabis.
Currently, researchers can only use cannabis products
sourced through the NIDA's Drug Supply Program single DEA
licensee: the University of Mississippi. Unfortunately, that
cannabis is distinct from what is commercially available from
state-legal dispensaries, such as in my home state of Oregon,
meaning that we have little to no data on the health impacts of
products in states that have legalized cannabis for medical or
recreational use.
In Oregon, you can purchase a range of THC infused
products, like these cookies we have a photo of here.
Now everyone on the dais has a cookie in front of them that
looks a lot like this photo. Don't worry, yours are just from
Safeway. But how would you know if you, or a child, stumbled
upon it.
That serious concern aside, in Oregon, the cookies in this
photo are limited to 5mg of THC per serving. 50mg per package.
Washington state has limits of 10mg and 100mg.
The difference is largely arbitrary. We lack data. We do
know there have elevated numbers of cannabis-related poison
center calls, emergency room visits, and impaired driving
incidents.\1\ We need research that reflects the reality of
what's on the market.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ https://www.oregon.gov/oha/PH/PREVENTIONWELLNESS/MARIJUANA/
Documents/fact-sheet-marijuana-consequences.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Additionally, products containing CBD derived from the hemp
plant, have become commonplace across the country in
pharmacies, health food stores, and even fast food chains since
hemp was removed from the CSA in the 2018 Farm Bill. These
products often contain claims that they can effectively treat
depression, inflammation, and even cancer or Alzheimer's.
However, none of these claims have been evaluated or approved
by the FDA, meaning patients may be relying on the
unsubstantiated claims of CBD products and forgoing other,
proven, medical treatments. While there is potential for CBD to
provide real patient benefit, the research and science lags far
behind the market and the agencies are struggling to catch up.
Nationwide, exposure in youth is increasing. From 2006 to
2013, children's exposure to marijuana products rose 147.5
percent nationwide. In states that have legalized medical
marijuana, exposure has risen 610 percent. \2\ And while
alcohol use is going down in teens, last month NIDA reported
record numbers of eighth through 12th grade students regularly
vaping marijuana. \3\
We need more research and better data. Americans are
consuming more cannabis and policy decisions on this substance
have been made in a virtual information vacuum. States that
have legalized marijuana have done so with far less information
than they have on legal substances that are easily abused, such
as alcohol or tobacco. Rescheduling cannabis may help improve
the research landscape and allow for more medical treatments.
However, administrative rescheduling necessitates robust data
on potential medical uses; and the current research
restrictions on fully studying cannabis have effectively
created a Catch-22 in the rescheduling debate. Evaluations by
the FDA and the National Academies have both concluded that
lack of research was a significant factor in denying previous
rescheduling petitions. \4\
I would like to note that two of the six bills we are
reviewing today completely de-schedule cannabis, removing it
from the Controlled Substances Act, even though we do not have
the necessary data to justify doing so. De-scheduling cannabis
is a step too far and is something I cannot support, as de-
scheduling removes it from the Controlled Substances Act and
cuts the DEA completely out of the picture.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\  https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/abs/10.1177/0009922815589912.
\3\  https://www.nih.gov/news-events/news-releases/vaping-
marijuana-rise-among-teens.
\4\ https://www.nap.edu/catalog/24625/the-health-effects-of-
cannabis-and-cannabinoids-the-current-state.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Any discussion of de-scheduling MUST be preceded by a
fuller understanding of the potential risks associated with
cannabis use--which we currently do not have. Research is the
critical first step. Making it easier to conduct research on
cannabis is common ground that we can pursue together in
improving the state-federal marijuana policy gap, and I'm
looking forward to hearing from our distinguished federal
witnesses on potential solutions to help improve the research
landscape.

Ms. Eshoo. The gentleman yields back. The Chair would like
to remind Members that, pursuant to committee rules, all
members' written opening statements shall be made part of the
record.
Now I would like to introduce our witnesses for today's
hearing and to thank each one of you for being with us today.
Dr. Nora Volkow is the director of the National Institute of
Drug Abuse at the National Institutes of Health.
Thank you to you.
Dr. Douglas Throckmorton is the deputy director for
regulatory programs at the Center for Drug Evaluation and
Research at the FDA, at the Food & Drug Administration.
And Mr. Matthew Strait is senior policy adviser for the
Diversion Control Division of the Drug Enforcement
Administration.
So welcome to each one of you. Thank you for essentially
your life's work that brings you to the table to testify today.
We look forward to the testimony that each one of you are going
to offer.
I think you are familiar with the lights. It is like a
traffic system. Green is go. Yellow is caution, and when red
turns up, it is time to stop.
So we will start with Dr. Volkow.
You are recognized for your 5 minutes of testimony. And,
again, thank you not only for your work, but for being here
with us today. Turn your microphone on.

STATEMENTS OF NORA D. VOLKOW, M.D., DIRECTOR, NATIONAL
INSTITUTE ON DRUG ABUSE, NATIONAL INSTITUTES OF HEALTH; DOUGLAS
C. THROCKMORTON, M.D., DEPUTY DIRECTOR FOR REGULATORY PROGRAMS,
CENTER FOR DRUG EVALUATION AND RESEARCH, FOOD AND DRUG
ADMINISTRATION; AND MATTHEW J. STRAIT, SENIOR POLICY ADVISOR,
DIVERSION CONTROL DIVISION, DRUG ENFORCEMENT ADMINISTRATION

STATEMENT OF NORA D. VOLKOW, M.D.

Dr. Volkow. I want to say good morning to everybody, and I
want to than Chairwoman Eshoo, Ranking Member Burgess, and all
of the members of the subcommittee for inviting us to discuss
cannabis research.
Cannabis is the most widely used illicit drug in the world
and in the United States. THC is responsible for cannabis
rewarding and addictive effects. And it is content has tripled
in the past two decades. On the other hand, the content of
cannabidiol, or CBD, which is not rewarding but of interest
because of its potential therapeutic effects, has decreased in
cannabis plants while food, drinks, and other products
containing it have proliferated it.
THC exerts its effects by interacting with cannabinoid
receptors, which are part of our own endogenous cannabinoid
system. The system is involved in brain development and
multiple brain functions, memory, emotions, reward, among
others. Cannabinoid receptors also modulate immune,
inflammatory, hormonal, metabolic processes in our body. Thus,
it is not surprising that cannabis, which basically hijacks
that systems can negatively affect health. Of particular
concern are its effects on the developing fetal and adolescent
brain. Cannabis exposure, as was mentioned before, during
pregnancy has increased and is associated with fetal growth
restriction, lower birth rate, and preterm delivery. In
adolescents, cannabis use has been consistently associated with
lower academic achievement, higher risk of dropping out of
school, lower IQ, disruptions in brain connectivity and
structure as the brain transitions into adulthood. Cannabis use
at a young age increases the risk of addiction to cannabis and
to other drugs.
Another area of major concern is the association of
cannabis use with psychosis, the risk of which increases with
consumption of high-content THC. The while most episodes of
psychosis are short lasting, they can become chronic. Concerns
have also emerged regarding higher risk for depression and
suicide, though these associations have been less studied.
The availability of high-THC products has markedly
increased emergency department visits and hospital admissions
associated with cannabis exposures. Vehicle-related injuries
while driving under the influence of THC are one of the main
causes. Another frequent cause is severe cycles of nausea,
vomiting, and abdominal pain referred to as cannabis
hyperemesis syndrome.
However, our understanding of the adverse effects of
cannabis is incomplete. This was made clearly evident by the
outbreak of e-cigarette or vaping product use associated lung
injury or EVALI, a condition reported in June 2019
predominantly associated with THC vaping that has, over six
months, resulted in 2,500 more hospitalizations and 55 deaths.
Consumption of cannabis edibles packaged in food and drinks
disproportionately accounts for cannabis-related emergency
department visits. The slow absorption can prompt the user to
take further doses, resulting in very high THC levels. Toxicity
was frequently manifest as acute psychosis, severe anxiety, and
cardiovascular complaints, and they also contribute
increasingly to intoxication in children. Cannabis plants have
been legalized for medical use for multiple indications in many
States, even though FDA has not approved any of them for any
indication.
Though not meeting FDA requirements, there is evidence
though that cannabis may be effective for treating spasticity
multiple sclerosis and for pain, but otherwise there is little
evidence for other indications for which patients are using it.
NIH is helping to close this knowledge gap, including
supporting stories to examine CBD for treating pain,
inflammation, PTSD, and addiction. Understanding the effects of
cannabis on brain development is a NIDA priority. And the
adolescent brain cognitive development study will follow more
than 11,000 children into early adulthood to investigate how
cannabis affects their brains.
Despite the urgency for advancing research, the fact that
cannabis is a schedule I substance proposes major challenges.
NIDA's contract with the University of Mississippi is currently
the only DEA source of research cannabis, and researchers are
unable to access cannabis for research from dispensaries and
other sources resulting in a gap in our understanding of their
impact on health.
Cannabis research is urgently needed both to guide policy
and to develop therapeutics; thus the importance of
facilitating their ability to do so.
Thank very much.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Volkow follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Ms. Eshoo. Thank you, Doctor.
We will now recognize Dr. Throckmorton for his 5 minutes of
testimony.
And thank you again for being here today. Do you have your
microphone on?
Dr. Throckmorton. I do. Thanks.
Ms. Eshoo. You are recognized.

STATEMENT OF DOUGLAS C. THROCKMORTON, M.D.

Dr. Throckmorton. Chairman Eshoo, Ranking Member Burgess,
and members of the subcommittee, I am Dr. Douglas Throckmorton
Morton from the Center for Drug Evaluation and Research at the
Food & Drug Administration. Thank for the opportunity to be
here today to discuss the important role that FDA plays in
research involving cannabis and cannabis-derived compounds for
potential medical uses in the United States.
I would also like to discuss the recent work the FDA is
doing to respond to the recent legislation affecting the
availability of compounds derived from cannabis, such as
cannabidiol.
First, with regards to drug development, FDA continues to
believe that the drug approval process represents the best way
to ensure that safe and effective new medicines, including
medicines derived from cannabis, are available for patients.
FDA stands ready today provide information to investigators on
the progress and process and specific requirements needed to
develop a human drug that is derived from plants such as
cannabis. For example, FDA has ways to speed drug development
programs, including programs such as fast track, breakthrough
therapy, accelerated approval, and priority review, all
designed to facilitate the development of and to expedite the
approval of novel and effective drug products.
We have also established a botanical review team to assist
the development of plant-based drugs, including those derived
from cannabis. Using these resources, the FDA has successfully
approved one cannabis-derived drug product, Epidiolex,
containing cannabidiol or CBD, and three synthetic cannabis-
derived drug products: Marinol, Syndros and Cesamet.
While FDA is aware of the activities of States in this
area, to date FDA has not approved any other cannabis,
cannabis-derived, or CBD products currently available on the
market. Turning our activities through recent work under
legislation, in December of 2018, the farm bill removed hemp
defined as cannabis and its derivatives with extremely low
concentrations of THC from the definition of marijuana in the
Controlled Substances Act. The farm bill explicitly preserved
FDA's authorities over products derived from hemp, such as CBD,
which means the products must still meet any applicable FDA
requirements and standards just like any other FDA-regulated
product. Because we understand the broad interest in making
compounds found in cannabis more widely available to the
public, FDA is working hard to respond to these changes quickly
and appropriately.
For example, we have reached several conclusions about the
use of CBD in nondrug products. First, it is prohibited under
our statute to introduce into interstate commerce any human or
animal food to which certain drug ingredients have been added.
In addition, drug ingredients are excluded from the definition
of dietary supplement. Because CBD is an active ingredient of
an approved drug, these restrictions apply to products made
with CBD.
These provisions make sense. It is easy it to understand
why we generally don't want blood pressure medicines or pain
medicines in our food are in our dietary supplements.
Additionally, FDA is concerned that the marketing of CBD in
nondrug products could put consumers at risk, such as by making
unsubstantiated claims to prevent or cure serious diseases such
as cancer or Alzheimer's disease. The proliferation of such
products may deter consumers from seeking proven, safe medical
therapies for serious illnesses.
We also know that CBD can cause adverse effects, including
drug interactions, sleepiness that could impair driving, and
potential liver injury. There are many unanswered questions
about the safety and quality of products containing CBD, and
the agency has made it a priority to address these questions,
including questions about the safety of long-term use of CBD by
different populations. For example, we have very little
information about the use of CBD by pregnant women, by
children, and by the elderly. To address these gaps, FDA is in
the process of systematically collecting all of the data that
are available to us to make the best science based and public-
health-focused decisions about the availability of the
compounds in hemp.
To close, FDA understands the broad interest in making that
compounds more available to the public and is considering the
possibilities and new legal pathways for CBD products. However,
it is important to maintain adequate incentives for drug
development as we do so. Drugs have important therapeutic value
and are approved after rigorous scientific studies that provide
important, new information about their safety and
effectiveness. It is critical that we continue to do what we
can to support quality science needed to develop new products
in cannabis.
With that, I thank you and look forward to answering any
questions I can.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Throckmorton follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Ms. Eshoo. Thank you, Doctor.
Now it is a pleasure to recognize Mr. Matthew Strait for
his 5 minutes of testimony.
And thank you again for joining us today.

STATEMENT OF MATTHEW J. STRAIT

Mr. Strait. Thank you. Chairwoman Eshoo, Ranking Member
Burgess, and distinguished members of committee, on behalf of
the Administrator Dillon and 9,000 men and women of the Drug
Enforcement Administration. I appreciate the invitation to be
here today to discuss DEA's regulatory requirements for those
who perform research with schedule I controlled substances,
including marijuana.
Much like our partners at HHS, the Department of Justice
and DEA fully support research into the effects of marijuana
and the potential medical utility of its component. The
procedures for evaluating an application for registration by
statute is an interagency process. At HHS, the Food and Drug
Administration conducts a review of the qualifications and
competency of the researcher as well the merits of the
scientific protocol. The DEA is charged with ensuring that
adequate steps are in place to safeguard against diversion.
These procedures have been in place for several decades, and in
my 20 years, there has not been a single incident in which a
researcher who has put forth a valid research protocol and has
implemented safeguards to prevent diversion has been denied.
Given the public interest in marijuana research, DEA has
taken a number of proactive steps to do its part in improving
research with marijuana. First, in December 2015, DEA executed
a change intended to ease the requirements to modify existing
registrations in order to conduct research with cannabidiol or
CBD, which at the time was being investigated for use in
children with certain epilepsy disorders. I believe this action
ultimately contributed to the 2018 approval of Epidiolex.
Second, in August 2016, the Department of Justice and DEA
took steps to increase the number of entities registered under
the Controlled Substances Act to grow marijuana to supply
researchers. To ensure that this program is consistent with
applicable laws and treaties, the Department, in consultation
with other Federal agencies, continues to be engaged in a
policy review process. In August 2019, DEA published a list of
the 33 entities who have applied for registration and whose
applications remain pending to grow marijuana pursuant to that
policy. A forthcoming proposed rule, which has been drafted and
submitted to the Office of Management and Budget, remains under
development at this time.
Third, in February 2018, DEA announced its development of
and implementation of an online portal for researchers to
safely and securely submit their research protocol, curriculum
vitae, and institutional approval, materials required by DEA
regulations to be submitted for FDA and DEA review. This online
portal has streamlined the process and improved the amount of
time for obtaining a schedule I research registration.
Presently the average time it takes to approve a new
application is 52 days, while the time required to modify an
existing registration is far less.
Finally, two months ago, DEA increased the aggregate
production quota for marijuana to 3,200 kilograms. The increase
was based on a close collaboration with NIDA, who provides
high-quality marijuana to NIH and non-NIH-funded researchers.
The 2020 quota represents a 575-percent increase for marijuana
since 2017.
I believe these efforts are working. Today DEA has 829
active researchers; 70 percent of those researchers, 605 in
total, are performing research with marijuana or its
constituent parts, making it far and away the most researched
schedule I controlled substance in the United States.
Despite these efforts and our successes the multistep
process for approving research with schedule I controlled
substances is perceived as onerous by some of the research
community. Unfortunately, this perception has translated into a
false narrative that DEA does not support research. I am here
today to tell you that this is simply not true. This belief has
hampered efforts to pass practical commonsense legislation
aimed at addressing the more than 30,000 overdose deaths in the
United States from fentanyl and fentanyl-related substances. In
just 23 days, DEA's temporary scheduling action which placed
schedule I controls on substances chemically similar to
fentanyl will expire unless Congress acts. DEA and the
Department of Justice have worked with HHS and ONDCP to put
forth a proposal that addresses this public health emergency
while improving access for research. On behalf of the
Department of Justice, I urge the committee to take up this
important legislation.
In conclusion, DEA is fully committed to supporting
research for schedule I controlled substance. We will continue
to work with our partners within the administration to find
commonsense approaches to improve and enhance research of
marijuana.
Thank you and I look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Strait follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Ms. Eshoo. Thank you, Mr. Strait. Now we have concluded not
only the opening statements of members but the testimony of the
witnesses. We are going to move to members' questions now, and
I recognize myself for 5 minutes.
I would like to ask a few foundational questions of the
panel, and I think that the following can be answered with a
simple yes or no. Is more medical research needed on the
therapeutic effects and the health consequences of cannabis?
Dr. Volkow. Yes.
Dr. Throckmorton. Yes.
Mr. Strait. Yes.
Ms. Eshoo. Is the cannabis from the University of
Mississippi, which is the only approved cannabis for Federal
research, adequate for medical research?
Dr. Volkow. No.
Dr. Throckmorton. No.
Mr. Strait. We would like additional sources, but we also
recognize that importation is allowed in certain circumstances.
Ms. Eshoo. Should legitimate researchers be able to access
a wider array of cannabis products for their research?
Dr. Volkow. Yes.
Dr. Throckmorton. It would help drug development.
Mr. Strait. Yes.
Ms. Eshoo. Have there been, in your view, real-life
consequences to researchers not being able to conduct research
on a variety of cannabis products?
Dr. Volkow. Yes.
Dr. Throckmorton. Product development has been slow.
Ms. Eshoo. So there has been an effect because of that.
Dr. Throckmorton. Uh-huh.
Mr. Strait. I don't disagree with what my colleagues have
said.
Dr. Volkow. I know one point that we haven't discussed
enough, which has been hindered, is our ability to actually
recognize when drugs may be particularly harmful. So that is
another aspect of the limitations.
Ms. Eshoo. The main reason cannabis research is restricted
is because cannabis is listed as a schedule I drug. Yet two
active compounds in cannabis, THC and CBD, are both approved
ingredients for drugs that are scheduled as schedule III and
schedule V respectively. So how can cannabis be schedule I and
considered to have no accepted medical use because that is part
of the schedule I, but both of its major active ingredients can
be considered to have medical use?
Dr. Volkow. I defer to my colleagues at the FDA for
answering that.
Dr. Throckmorton. Separately those two compounds are safe
and effective for intended uses and so meet the statutory
standard for accepted medical use.
Ms. Eshoo. How do you pull them out and separate them?
Dr. Throckmorton. That is what the drug development process
is meant to encourage. It is to have people----
Ms. Eshoo. So, if FDA decides to pull those out to be
applied to and used and be part of a certain drug, you just
automatically vanish--schedule I vanishes as a result of that?
Dr. Throckmorton. When Congress defined what the schedules
were to be, they said that there were tests to be applied for
whether you had accepted medical use. There are five that we
would be happy to talk in greater detail offline. When you
apply those tests to marijuana, at least when the FDA and NIDA
have applied those tests to marijuana three times in the recent
20 years or so, our conclusion, our recommendation to the DEA
is that it did not meet the test for accepted medical use. It
mostly has to do with whether you have identified a therapeutic
value for the product and whether you can describe it.
Ms. Eshoo. It is more the trigger than anything else.
Dr. Throckmorton. Yes.
Ms. Eshoo. To Dr. Throckmorton, does the FDA have all the
authorities it needs to regulate CBD products for consumer
safety?
Dr. Throckmorton. I believe we do. When I talk to drug----
Ms. Eshoo. Are you sure?
Dr. Throckmorton. When I talk to drug developers that come
in and talk to me and they say, ``We are interested in studying
a compound found in cannabis,'' whether it is CBD or it is one
of the other 80 cannabinoids or the terpenes or whatever else,
I say: If you can get me a legal source for that compound, a
legal source for that compound, I am going to treat you exactly
the same way I would treat any other drug in development.
Ms. Eshoo. OK.
Dr. Throckmorton. Except I am going to give you some
additional resources in the forms of----
Ms. Eshoo. I still have more questions. Now, the FDA has
estimated that it will take three to five years to complete
rulemaking in relation to CBD products. Is this still accurate?
Dr. Throckmorton. We understand the----
Ms. Eshoo. Is it?
Dr. Throckmorton. It is unfortunately not a yes-or-no
question, ma'am. We know that there is interest in moving
quickly. We understand that three to five years is longer than
people would like. We are looking----
Ms. Eshoo. What is the estimate today?
Dr. Throckmorton. We are looking at a full range of
options. We are interested----
Ms. Eshoo. You don't want to tell me. It seems to me that
maybe three to five is still in place, but you don't want to
say.
In your testimony, you said the FDA knows of CBD products
that may not contain the amount of CBD indicated on the label
or may contain other potentially dangerous compounds. Has the
FDA issued any labeling requirements for CBD? My time is--you
may answer.
Dr. Throckmorton. The labeling requirements would be
imposed on the approved drugs, Epidiolex. That product is well
manufactured, possesses--we have no concerns like that that I
am aware of. The products that the warning letters are subject
to that that comment related to are the unapproved products
that have been marketed in the States.
Ms. Eshoo. Thank you.
Well, my time has expired, and I recognize the ranking
member now for his 5 minutes of questions.
Mr. Burgess. Thank you, Madam Chair.
And, Dr. Throckmorton, staying with you for just a minute
on the Epidiolex question. When I look at my drug discount app,
it is like $1,300 a month for a therapeutic course of that. So,
if somebody didn't have $1,300, could they just go buy CBD oil
and supplant the use of Epidiolex?
Dr. Throckmorton. Well, we always recommend that you use an
approved product for a number of really good reasons. But what
we learned when we did that sampling of unapproved products is
that we don't know what will be in that oil if you choose to
take it. It may contain things that would be dangerous to you.
We also know it is reasonably likely that it could not contain
the amount of CBD that you were looking to take for whatever
condition.
Mr. Burgess. Just along the lines of the timeframe that
Chairwoman Eshoo asked you about just, for point of reference,
when we did the Cures for 21st Century bill, pretty much
standard accepted lengths of time in FDA for approval of a new
drug was 14 to 16 years, and about a billion and a half
dollars. Do I remember that correctly? So three to five years
actually sounds like you are moving with great dispatch, would
that be a fair statement?
Dr. Throckmorton. The three to five years comes from our
general experience with rulemaking rather than any specific----
Mr. Burgess. So it is not a recent----
Dr. Throckmorton. It is not related specifically to drug
development or product development. It is just that rulemaking
has steps that we have to use.
Mr. Burgess. We will move forward with the DEA with this.
Has DEA ever done an administrative change in a scheduled drug
without being prompted by Congress?
Mr. Strait. Oh, absolutely, yes. We initiate scheduling
actions with some frequency. It could come through a petition
received from a public citizen. It could come as a direct
result of an approval of a new drug, a new molecular----
Mr. Burgess. Would that not come through the FDA, though?
Mr. Strait. Yes. In that circumstance, yes.
Mr. Burgess. So you couldn't just do that de novo and say,
``We are going to change the schedule of this medication on an
administrative basis''?
Mr. Strait. The agency retains the ability to initiate its
own proposal as well. In that instance, we would put together--
--
Mr. Burgess. Initiate, but you can't complete it without
input from the FDA.
Mr. Strait. No. As you say in your opening remarks quite
correctly that we are tethered to the science that we are given
by our colleagues over at HHS.
Mr. Burgess. Yes, I don't know if that is inappropriate;
being tethered to science can be a good thing.
Dr. Volkow, you actually mentioned in your written
testimony about the risk of addiction with cannabis products.
Presumably you are talking about marijuana. That is a thing?
That is a real thing?
Dr. Volkow. It is a real thing, and it is THC, the active
ingredient responsible for the addictiveness of marijuana. And
the plants contain higher and higher content of THC.
Mr. Burgess. So is marijuana a gateway drug? Some people
call it that. Is that a fair statement?
Dr. Volkow. It decreases the likelihood that you are
sensitive to the addictive effects of other drugs, and that is
why it has coined the term of ``gateway drug''; it makes you
more sensitive.
Dr. Burgess. So yesterday we spent a full hearing in
Oversight and Investigations on the scourge of opiate
addiction. We do worry that, if we go too far in one direction
or another, that ten years from now, we will be having a
hearing on perhaps we have gone too far with what we did with
liberalizing marijuana laws. But let me just ask you this: You
also mentioned the National Highway Traffic Safety
Administration, the effects of driving under the influence. Our
traffic laws and our State partners, have they kept up with all
of the changes in marijuana policy that have occurred across
the country?
Dr. Volkow. No. One of the major challenges in doing so is
that it is very difficult to quantify whether someone is
intoxicated with marijuana or not. With alcohol, you actually
measure the alcohol content in plasma, but that measure does
not guarantee for marijuana that you are under the influence of
the drug or not. So you can have very high levels from having
taken it three days ago in a regular user. So that has been a
major challenge.
Mr. Burgess. So you can't really quantitate to the degree
of behavioral disruption that may occur.
Dr. Volkow. That has been much harder to do
Mr. Burgess. And as a consequence for our law enforcement
partners and our partners at the State that are writing State
traffic laws, that becomes a difficulty. Is that correct?
Dr. Volkow. Correct. And that is an area that we are trying
to bring up new strategies to identify intoxication with
marijuana from NIDA.
Mr. Burgess. As a practical matter, that actually happened
in my district: A pedestrian who was struck by an automobile,
the driver of the automobile had under the 0.08 limit in their
blood alcohol, but they also had a positive quantitative test
for THC. That individual was no billed by the grand jury. I
don't know whether that was right or wrong, but it seems to me
that the potential for the additive effects should be something
that law enforcement would bear in mind when deciding whether
or not to bring a case like that. It was clearly a very tragic
situation, young high school athlete who got hit. So it was a
high-profile case in the community and something I will never
forget.
Thank you, Madam Chair.I yield back.
Ms. Eshoo. The gentleman yields back.
It is an pleasure to recognize the gentlewoman from
California, Ms. Matsui, for her 5 minutes of questions.
Ms. Matsui. Thank you very much, Madam Chair.
And I really appreciate the hearing we are having today.
This issue really needs to be examined.
And thank you very much for the witnesses for being here
today.
At the University of California, researchers are doing
important work to study the health effects, public safety, and
environmental impacts of marijuana. I would like to discuss how
our existing Federal regulations may be limiting researchers
from fully understanding cannabis' potential risks and
benefits.
Now despite the fact that cannabis is being cultivated
right in California to sell at local dispensaries, under
current law, UC researchers must obtain their study samples
through the NIDA contracted site in Mississippi. In order to
study what the public is purchasing in dispensaries, UC
researchers have applied for a license to cultivate cannabis
locally. However, these researchers have not heard back from
the DOJ and DEA as to the status of their applications.
Mr. Strait, where is the Department of Justice in its
process of granting or denying applications some researchers
have put forth at a university to study to cultivate cannabis
at a university?
Mr. Strait. As I said in my opening, we certainly support
all research endeavors.
One of the challenges we see that often leads to this
misperception about delays on the DEA side is we look for a
complete application before we forward that application to our
colleagues at the Department of Health and Human Services. So
there are three things that we need: We need a protocol, which
most researchers if they are federally funded or even State
funded have; a CV for the researcher, which every researcher
certainly has; but sometimes the delay is the result of the
third piece, which is that institutional review approval.
Sometimes, for purposes of timing, the researchers will submit
an application, knowing that their State university or their
State system, their university has not met to review their
application.
Ms. Matsui. Well, I now the University of California, I
think they pretty good about doing this. And so we would like
to be able to expedite as much as possible because their
research is going to be very important as far as all of this.
From the researcher's perspective I understand there is
some ambiguity around the ability to conduct research with
synthetic CBD for potential applications in humans. For the
panel, what is your agency's position on the current status of
CBD? Is there a distinction between marijuana-derived CBD and
hemp or synthetically derived CBD when it comes to regulating
these products? Dr. Volkow?
Dr. Volkow. From our perspective, we are interested in
understanding what are the effects of the chemical compound
that goes by the name of CBD. With respect to actually its
pharmacological actions, but the potential of negative effects
and the potential of therapeutic actions. So, for all, the
molecule is the one that is of interest. At the same time,
though, we are doing research to try to investigate how, when
it is mixed with other cannabinoids, that may influence its
effects.
Ms. Matsui. OK.
Dr. Throckmorton, do you agree?
Dr. Throckmorton. Yes. One of the things that happened in
the results of the farm bill was that cannabidiol was removed
from oversight from the Controlled Substances Act. In some
sense that allows us to encourage its conduct--studies and
things using it without interacting----
Ms. Matsui. It opens it up.
Dr. Throckmorton [continuing]. With DEA. We believe that is
a powerful, potentially powerful, in terms of getting new
studies done.
Ms. Matsui. Great. Mr. Strait?
Mr. Strait. Yes, and Dr. Throckmorton is 100 percent
correct. I think the passage of the farm bill created a little
bit of a question mark as to the legal status of synthetic CBD
versus that derived from natural sources. Very clearly that
which is derived from natural sources, if it contains less than
0.3 percent THC, it is no longer controlled under the CSA.
Ms. Matsui. Dr. Throckmorton, if a researcher wants to
conduct clinical cannabis research that may lead to a new drug,
what requirements need to be fulfilled with the FDA?
Dr. Throckmorton. When you say ``cannabis,'' are you
talking about farm-bill-compliant low-THC cannabis? It is
important, when we talk to investigators, we think about it in
sort of two tracks, an arrow going one way, and arrow----
Ms. Matsui. Right. Right. Right.
Dr. Throckmorton. One arrow, the farm-bill-compliant
cannabidiol and other compounds extracted from hemp, we view as
subject to the Food, Drug, and Cosmetics Act. They are able to
be used for investigational use. Come in and talk to us; we
will treat you as any other drug substance for study.
If it is high-THC cannabis, then that still applies, but in
addition, we would want to make certain that they work with the
DEA because there are other requirements under those
circumstances.
Ms. Matsui. OK. Fine. Thank you, and I have gone over my
time.
I yield back.
Ms. Eshoo. The gentleman yields back.
Mr. Strait, would you respond after you get back to your
agency with Congresswoman Matsui on University of California's
application, please?
Mr. Strait. Absolutely.
Ms. Eshoo. This is the greatest public university in the
world. They know how to do applications. They know how to do
applications. Well, it is causing a ruckus, but I will stand--
--
Mr. Upton. You do not have any right to object.
Ms. Eshoo. I will stand with my statement representing the
greatest private university in the world, Stanford.
It is now a pleasure to recognize the gentleman from
Michigan, Mr. Upton, for his 5 minutes of questions.
Mr. Upton. You are just lucky Pete Olson is not here this
morning, but I do not have my jersey on.
Thank you, Madam Chair, for this hearing. I do have a
couple of questions.
Dr. Throckmorton, you mentioned that Epidiolex is one of
the three drugs that have been approved, and two others in
addition to that. What are the illnesses or conditions that
they were approved for?
Dr. Throckmorton. Right. So Epidiolex is approved for two
genetic seizure disorders, severe seizure disorders in
children, and that contains cannabidiol.
Mr. Upton. Is it injected? Is it oral? Is it shot? Is it--
--
Dr. Throckmorton. It is oral.
Mr. Upton. Oral?
Dr. Throckmorton. It is given in an oil form. It is fat
soluble, and so it is a syringe basically.
The other compounds are all synthetic. They are not
extracted from the cannabis plant, and they are approved for
wasting diseases. There are nausea and vomiting associated with
chemotherapeutics. We can get you a full list of those, but it
is more general. Those compounds contain THC. So they have a
different active ingredient than the Epidiolex does.
Mr. Upton. So Greg Walden talked about something. As
consumers, 33 States now have approved medical uses. Eleven
States--Michigan is one--that is both medical as well as
recreational, or adult use. And I guess consumers are very
interested in, you know, how much is in here? I mean, we know,
when we drink a beer, different alcohol content, whether it is
a craft beer, you know, maybe a State like--that has a smaller
threshold like Utah.
But, in addition, you have got the law enforcement issues.
I was with one of my sheriffs last week. He, unfortunately,
had--we had a situation like Dr. Burgess had in his district
with a student returning back to Michigan State, and, sadly, he
was involved in a terrible auto accident, and, in fact,
afterwards, they--he survived, but they found out that he was--
had a high level of THC, as I understand it.
Where are we in terms of some visible standards or some
review that folks can look at as it relates to the cookies or
the brownies or whatever it is, the cereal that they are going
to eat and consume as relates to perhaps the safety of that,
and where are we as relates to law enforcement who, as--you
know, it is not like the breathalyzer. They have got to do a
variety of different cognitive exercises to try and determine
whether or not that individual has taken too much, and it is a
blood sample, but where are we in terms of trying to help the
consumer know the right information if they choose to take, in
these States, a legal substance?
Dr. Volkow. I can speak on the research perspective. We are
interested in understanding what content of THC is associated
with specific pharmacological effects, including side effects,
and so research has been done to show that, if you consume
anywhere between two and eight milligrams, you are going to get
high, but, in general, you do not have any adverse effects.
So what we would like to be able to do from the research
perspective is to create a unit of marijuana that can be
utilized consistently across research to help us understand how
exposures of different content THC----
Mr. Upton. And how long--when is that research going to be
completed?
Dr. Volkow. The research on doses has been done. The
research on creating a unit of THC that can be used
consistently is something that we are working on to try to
consolidate and get a perspective of what are the differences
on the consumption by people----
Mr. Upton. Are we a year out? How long do you think that
will take? What is----
Dr. Volkow. I would hope that we will be able to implement
the standard dose for research purposes within one year, but
that is very different from implementing a unit dose for
legal--for products that are not legally accepted federally,
and that is the States are trying to come themselves with
standard doses, and you mentioned it for the cookies, or--but
that varies also between the States.
Mr. Upton. Yes. Anybody else have a comment?
Dr. Throckmorton. I do, Mr. Upton. You raised an incredibly
important point that is important to understand about the
development of nondrug products containing things like CBD. So,
as the FDA thinks about how to develop those products, one
thing we remember is that there would be requirements on a
product that we approved regarding accurate labeling, regarding
dosing.
So, for instance, the cookie that we are discussing, if
that packaging was approved, if we found a pathway that enabled
us to allow CBD in a cookie, along with that packaging would
come labeling that would say it contains ten milligrams or a
hundred milligrams or whatever else; could include other
conditions of use that could help understand when it would
appropriately be used and things like that. So part and parcel
with the work we are doing is to think about the consequences,
the important consequences, which would include that kind of
labeling improvement. We would have more understanding. People
would have a better understanding. They would also have more
assurance that the product actually contained the CBD----
Mr. Upton. I know my time has expired, but just a ``yes''
or ``no.'' Do you have authority for that labeling now?
Dr. Throckmorton. It is--absolutely, we have that
authority. What we need is to determine the pathways to take--
--
Mr. Upton. Right.
Dr. Throckmorton [continuing]. For those nondrug-containing
CBD products.
Mr. Upton. I yield back.
Ms. Eshoo. The gentleman yields back.
It is a pleasure to recognize the Chairman of the full
committee, Mr. Pallone, for his 5 minutes of questions.
The Chairman. Thank you, Chairwoman Eshoo.
As I said in my opening statement, the cannabis policy
landscape is evolving across the States and territories. Yet,
at the Federal level, the policy has remained largely the same,
and one issue that researchers across the Nation have raised
with the committee is the fact that they are not able to
conduct research on cannabis products available through State
cannabis dispensaries.
Dr. Volkow notes in her testimony that the cannabis
available in States to consumers is much more potent than what
has been available in the past, and that means that Federal
researchers cannot adequately study the health potential or
adverse health consequences of products that are more readily
available.
So this poses a legitimate public health challenge as it
impedes the ability for researchers to truly understand the
impact of products regularly used by consumers and prevents us
from advancing sound science.
So, Dr. Volkow, you noted in your testimony that having
only a single domestic source of research of cannabis limits
the diversity of products and formulations available to
researchers and slows the development of cannabis-based
medications, so let me ask, yes or no, Dr. Volkow, do you
believe Federal researchers should have access to cannabis has
State-authorized dispensaries?
Dr. Volkow. Yes.
The Chairman. And, Dr. Throckmorton, yes or no, would
access to cannabis outside of the University of Mississippi be
beneficial to drug developers in the U.S.?
Dr. Throckmorton. Yes.
The Chairman. And, Mr. Strait, as you mentioned in your
testimony, DEA is actively working to consider applications for
additional cannabis growers. What is the status--this is not
yes or no--what is the status of this effort, and when can we
expect that the agencies would finalize rulemaking?
Mr. Strait. So we actually have a draft regulation in
place. In August of 2019, we were able to get to the point of
our policy review process where we were able to publicly
acknowledge, consistent with our regulations, who our pending
applicants were as of August 27th, 2019.
We know that we have to probably do notice-and-comment
rulemaking to implement regulations on two matters. One is how
we are going to evaluate all of our pending applications; and
then, two, what additional types of regulations might need to
be in place in order to--you know, in order to impose on those
that would grow. So that regulation is in a draft form. I
cannot talk too much about it, but rest assured we have
submitted it to OMB. It has been drafted, and, tomorrow, many
of us will be getting on a call to talk through it.
The Chairman. All right. Thank you.
I want to switch to CBD. A Google search can lead any
consumer to Web sites that offer CBD-infused gummies, cereal
cookie. This is in addition to personal care products and
dietary supplements. One recent estimate by an independent
company suggested that the CBD market can bring in as much as
$15 billion by 2025.
So, Dr. Throckmorton, I understand your agency is working
to regulate CBD products. However, FDA has suggested that it
could take three to five years before rulemaking to clarify the
regulatory pathway work to be completed.
Can you explain to the committee the scientific and
regulatory activities the agency believes are needed to ensure
the safety of CBD in other products, such as food and dietary
supplements?
Dr. Throckmorton. Sure. And I want to start by saying that
three to five years was an estimate, that we understand the
importance that people have in identifying in a rapid process
to a pathway for nondrug CBD products.
Having said that, rulemaking is the one pathway that is
identified in statute for an exception to the prohibition
against the use of drug substances in foods and dietary
supplements. So that prohibition, as I just--you know, as I
mentioned in my opening remarks, exists, and, for the agency to
change, we need to find a mechanism to allow a path forward for
nondrug CBD products to be developed.
We are in the process of doing that. The rulemaking is one
thing that is under consideration. As has been mentioned, there
are a number of legislative ideas that people have had. We have
had other meetings where people have raised other suggestions
regarding this as well.
Bottom line is we get it. Bottom line is we understand that
we need to identify a path as quickly as we can, but we need to
be grounded in science. You mentioned yourself--many of us have
mentioned--fundamentally, there are many unknowns about
cannabidiol. There are things that we know that it can do,
adverse effects that I mentioned in my testimony related to
liver jury, related to potential male reproductive injury that
we need to know more about.
We need to know more about its uses in vulnerable
populations and for long periods of time because, if it is
placed in a nondrug product, there will be no learned
intermedia. There will not be a doctor or a nurse or anyone
that will talk to the patient or to help them make their
choices about the use of that product.
You could get up in the morning, take your CBD--to get
started--in your coffee, take another dose of CBD for lunch
when you have your sandwich, and then end in the late afternoon
with an alcoholic beverage containing CBD; and the aggregate
amounts of CBD then matter. We need to decide how to do that
safely.
Our fundamental focus for foods and dietary supplements is
safety, and we need to have more data than we do available at
present in order to make that determination, in order to help
inform what the right, best steps are.
The Chairman. All right. Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Ms. Eshoo. And, in the appropriations bill that was passed
last year, there were moneys that go directly to FDA to move up
the work on CBD, correct?
Dr. Throckmorton. That is correct.
Ms. Eshoo. Yes. All right.
Dr. Throckmorton. And focused, I believe, in the----
Ms. Eshoo. Yes.
Dr. Throckmorton [continuing]. Nondrug space----
Ms. Eshoo. Yes. So you have the money, and now you have got
to get it going.
It is a pleasure to recognize Mr. Guthrie for his 5 minutes
of questioning, the gentleman from Kentucky.
Mr. Guthrie. Thank you very much. Thank you for being here.
And, Dr. Volkow, we have heard that it can take up to a
year to get a schedule I registration. That process of adding
new cannabinoids to an existing registration, and getting
approval for protocol modifications is time consuming, and how
does the DEA registration processes for modifying a schedule I
registration to conduct research of cannabis impact ability to
do research? But I also understand, Mr. Strait, you said--oh,
actually, I wanted to ask you something first, if that is OK.
Mr. Strait. Sure.
Mr. Guthrie. Before I get to answer your questions, last
October, myself and others sent a letter asking about the
implementation and recommendations included in the committee
staff report on the opioid distribution. To date, we have not
received DEA's response, and I would ask that, after the
hearing, that we follow up together to see if we can get DEA's
responses to that report.
Mr. Strait. I would be happy to follow up with that.
Mr. Guthrie. OK. Thank you. So, getting to my other
question, just the time-consuming process in ability to do
research, and I do believe, Mr. Strait, you said it was like 52
days to get a registration, and it seems like we are hearing
different than that. Can both of you, both Dr. Volkow, you talk
about the time-consuming process for that?
Dr. Volkow. Yes. And there are two issues with it. One of
them has to do with the process of how lengthy it is to get an
approval to do a human subjects protocol, and, if it is
schedule I, that is much longer. And, on average, about 52 days
by the DEA actually counts the moment that that protocol has
been deemed complete and moves forward, but what we have heard
from the researchers is that it is not so straightforward to
get the protocol in a way that the DEA can work with it,
because it is complex.
And another issue that becomes--makes it harder is that the
DEA State local agents interpret the rule differently, and, as
a result of that, that further hinders the problem. So those
are the issues that we see.
The other aspect where we are also seeing an impact on
schedule I is that there are certain scientists that do not
even want to go there because they say, ``I do not want to go
there; it is going to take too much effort to do research on a
schedule I,'' and so we lose potentially-valuable scientists
into looking at things that are important.
Mr. Guthrie. OK. Mr. Strait, do you have any comment on
that, or----
Mr. Strait. Yes. Thank you. Thank you for giving me the
opportunity.
You know, this is a common refrain we have heard from our
partners over at HHS. One of the challenges that they have is
that, when we try to get information from them about who the
concerns are being raised by, maybe it plays into the fear of
DEA, but we are kind of cited with PII, that they cannot
disclose information to us, that they are prohibited from doing
it. So we struggle to try to understand who the people are that
are having these difficulties so that we can give them some
special attention, and we are happy to give them that special
attention.
The other point I wanted to make is the inconsistent
applicability of our DEA regulations across our 23 field
divisions or the concerns of that, and, as I mentioned to some
staff before we started this call, we are actually getting
ready to host a management conference across our entire
division from all across the country, and we are going to
actually invite Dr. Volkow or her designee to come in and
address this because I think that is something that we can
solve easily. That is not anything that we need Congress' help
on.
Mr. Guthrie. OK. Thank you.
And I will yield a minute and a half, my remaining time, to
Mr. Griffith.
Mr. Griffith. Thank you very much.
Virginia actually has the oldest medicinal marijuana law on
the books. It was passed in 1979 with Chip Woodrum, who is now
deceased, as the House patron, and former member of this
committee, Rick Boucher, who was then a State senator, as the
Senate companion, to say that they would allow the use of
medicinal marijuana in the Commonwealth of Virginia. However,
the DEA had not allowed it, and so the doctors did not want to
risk their license by prescribing it. It required a legitimate
prescription. And that is where my bill came from, was that
this is what Virginia has stood for, for decades.
In 1998, there was an attempt to repeal it because they
thought it was like California's law that just said, you know,
``if it makes you feel good, you can try it'' kind of thing,
which Virginia rejected, but, still, the DEA has not acted. So,
when I hear people talking about, you know, ``It will take us
three to five years; we have to do the research,'' my question
is, why hasn't the research been done?
And, Dr. Throckmorton, I would have to say that it causes
me some great concern that apparently the FDA thinks it is OK
for opioids and opiates and barbiturates, but somehow marijuana
should stay schedule I. That is illogical to me. And so I
just--I lay that out.
Marinol, in the case of my two fathers, was available. The
problem is they were so sick, they could not swallow it and
hold it on their stomachs. That is why their friends were
smuggling in--with the doctors turning a blind eye--smuggling
in the marijuana so they could smoke it and then eat.
So we need to find a solution, and we should have started
working on this back in 1979 or earlier, but we have not done
it.
I yield back.
Mr. Guthrie. I yield back also.
Ms. Eshoo. The gentleman yields back. Excellent points.
Pleasure to recognize the gentlewoman from Florida, Ms.
Castor, for her 5 minutes.
Ms. Castor. Well, thank you, Madam Chair, for calling this
hearing. Thank you to our witnesses for being here today.
I think it is clear that cannabis research is caught up in
conflicting regulations. You cannot remove cannabis from
schedule I because it lacks proof for medical and controlled or
controlled recreational use, but you can't research to
determine if it is safe because it is included on the schedule
I.
Dr. Volkow, you ended your testimony by saying that
cannabis research is urgently needed, so let's focus on how we
can streamline our research process for cannabis and possibly
other schedule I substances.
First, what are the requirements and challenges for
conducting research on schedule I substances?
Dr. Volkow. What I was commenting before, the main
difference relates to the fact that you have to get the DEA
registration, so that makes the process much more complex than
just doing research with any other substance, and that can take
time.
Ms. Castor. And that clearly deters research----
Dr. Volkow. Yes.
Ms. Castor [continuing]. On those substances?
Dr. Volkow. Correct.
Ms. Castor. In thinking about how we reduce those barriers
for research with cannabis and possibly other schedule I
substances, you did answer to Representative Guthrie--you
pointed out a few of the barriers.
What do you recommend should change in the process right
now?
Dr. Volkow. Well, we have been working among the agencies
to come to--to try to come up with a process that will allow it
to safeguard the public, but at the same time to facilitate and
accelerate research. So those are the two issues that coming up
with a category that enables researchers to be able to
accelerate the pace at which they are doing research without in
any way jeopardizing the public, and that is wherein, again,
the DEA, the FDA, and the NIH have been working together.
Ms. Castor. There are a number of bills that have been
highlighted for the committee's consideration today. Would you
point to any of those pieces of legislation that would help
streamline the process appropriately?
Dr. Volkow. You are putting me in a little difficult
position because there are six of them, and we do not
legislate; we basically bring science. And what I can tell is
that the science tells us that marijuana is a substance that
can produce addiction.
Now, we also know from studies that it is likely that there
is potential for the therapeutic use of the cannabinoids within
marijuana, and, thus, to the extent that we, among the six ones
that you are proposing, can accelerate research while
protecting the public, then that is what you all have to weigh.
Ms. Castor. All right.
Dr. Throckmorton, has FDA seen an uptick or change in the
number of applications from researchers to conduct research on
hemp or other low-THC cannabis products since these are no
longer considered schedule I substances?
Dr. Throckmorton. Thank you for that question, and short
answer: yes.
Ms. Castor. Do you support removing marijuana from the
Controlled Substances Act to remove barriers to research?
Dr. Throckmorton. At present, my focus is on cannabidiol,
and focused on supporting those new INDs, those new
investigational studies that we have seen in house.
So your first question is worth going back to for just a
moment. We now have almost 40 investigators that have come in
to us proposing to use CBD and other substances found in hemp.
We believe that represents an important new opportunity for us
in terms of investigating CBD and those compounds for drug
development, and I want to make sure that we give them every
opportunity, every support that we possibly can.
The question about marijuana is more complicated. It has to
do with what you mean by ``marijuana.'' Obviously, one street
corner sells one kind of marijuana, and another street corner
sells a different kind of marijuana. Making a conclusion that
both of those marijuanas somehow have medical value is
challenging scientifically, and I think Dr. Volkow would agree
with me with that, and that is one of the findings that we
would be obliged to make were we to try to make a
recommendation to the DEA to reschedule marijuana from schedule
I. So, from a scientific perspective, there are real challenges
to making that conclusion.
We have been asked to look at it three times in the past,
and, each time, we have decided, as I had mentioned before,
that it was not possible given where we were with the science.
Ms. Castor. You know, when it comes to CBD, it is like the
cat is already out of the bag. It is amazing, the marketing for
CBD. What would you advise the public about the efficacy of the
products on the market today? Do they really help? And do we
even have a handle on what is truly in all of those products?
Dr. Throckmorton. Both questions would be: We don't know.
We don't know whether the various claims being made are
accurate to the standard that I would expect for a drug product
being developed, and we don't know well enough what is found in
those products that are being sold under a variety of State
initiatives. We need more data in both of those places.
With regards to efficacy, my job is to make sure that those
manufacturers, those around 40 that want to study this are able
to do that quickly, study what works and study what does not
quickly.
With regards to safety, the agency understands that we
desperately need to collect all of the available information
about the safety of CBD in all of those various uses. That is
challenging for us. We have been in the process of a yearlong
effort to collect all of those available data. We have
identified some gaps. I think I mentioned some in my testimony
previously--things we believe we absolutely need to know. We
are in the process of figuring out how to close those gaps.
Ms. Eshoo. The gentlewoman's time has expired.
Pleasure to recognize the gentleman from Virginia, Mr.
Griffith.
Mr. Griffith. I thank the----
Ms. Eshoo. Looking for another good story here.
Mr. Griffith. Well, I may or may not have one at this
point. I have got lots of stories, but we may not have time.
Mr. Strait, I know that you disagreed with the earlier
assessment on the University of California, having attended the
great university in Blacksburg, Virginia, Virginia Tech, which
I am so proud to represent.
That being said, going back to Dr. Burgess' questions, if
the FDA recommends that the DEA reschedule a compound, is the
DEA required to comply with that rescheduling recommendation?
Mr. Strait. If they recommended rescheduling, we are bound
to their--the statute actually says that the Attorney General
shall be bound by the recommendations of the Secretary as it
pertains to scientific and medical matters.
Mr. Griffith. As the Secretary determines?
Mr. Strait. Correct.
Mr. Griffith. All right. So you can confirm that the DEA
has never refused to reschedule a compound after being given a
recommendation to do so by the FDA or the Secretary?
Mr. Strait. I am certainly not aware of any instance where
that would be the case.
Mr. Griffith. All right. Now, continuing, Mr. Strait, as
you know, the U.S. is a party to the United States Single
Convention on Narcotic Drugs, which imposes manufacturing and
distributing restrictions on marijuana. Some have cited our
involvement in that agreement as a potential reason why the
Federal Government should not lift restrictions on marijuana.
Regarding American domestic manufacturing of research-
grade cannabis, why is it that other countries who have signed
the same treaty, such as Canada, Israel, Ireland, New Zealand,
Australia, and the Netherlands have several legal manufacturers
of research-grade cannabis, and their products are legally
imported to the U.S., but the U.S. has only one, the University
of Mississippi, as we have heard earlier?
Mr. Strait. So you are precisely right; there is a growing
number of countries that have implemented laws in their
countries that fully effectuate their requirement, their
obligations under the Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs. We
have, too, and that is the reason why we have the University of
Mississippi, or this NIDA drug supply program. What we are
trying to do is, as we expand the number of growers, we are
trying to take a look at whether or not there are things that
need to be changed--altered, I would say; not newly created,
but just altered slightly--in order to make sure that we are in
compliance with our treaty obligations.
Mr. Griffith. Well, then I hope that you all would work on
that quickly. You said earlier applications for research are
being approved, but you said regulations and paperwork--and I
am paraphrasing--are perceived to be so onerous that people
will not do it. Well, connect the dots. The paperwork and the
regulations, the perception becomes reality, and, as we have
heard from Dr. Volkow, sometimes that becomes a problem, and I
think that is why you have not received more applications.
Do you want to say something on that point? And I just have
a couple minutes.
Mr. Strait. If I may?
Mr. Griffith. Quickly.
Mr. Strait. And I am going to be very quick. But I did want
to go back to your comment and that of Congresswoman Castor's,
which is to say that there is a solution that this interagency
group and others worked on all throughout the summer as it
relates to some important legislation dealing with the
permanent control of fentanyl-related substances in schedule I.
We as an administration came out with kind of some commonsense
practical solutions to address all of the concerns raised by
the research community. We are happy to share that if----
Mr. Griffith. And whatever--and if you could share that,
and whatever you can--whatever help you need from us, I think
this committee would be willing to help in any way it can.
The DEA's 2016 policy statement said it would be consistent
with the 1961 Single Convention on Narcotic Drug Treaty if the
DEA were to register research-grade marijuana growers outside
of the NIDA contract system so long as the growers agreed to
only distribute marijuana with prior written approval from the
DEA. However, in your testimony, you said DEA has changed
course, saying that, quote, since publication of the 2016
policy statement, the Department of Justice determined that
adjustments to the DEA's policies and procedures may be
necessary to be consistent with certain treaty functions.
What changes need to be made in order to be consistent with
those treaty functions?
Mr. Strait. Well, I cannot really get into too many details
because, again, it is a deliberative process that we are
engaged in right now as we speak with the Office of Management
and Budget.
Mr. Griffith. Can you get that to me as quickly as you can?
Mr. Strait. I absolutely will.
Mr. Griffith. And I appreciate that. If you would give it
to the committee and to me as well, that would be appreciated.
Can you provide any additional rationale that would mandate
the DEA to re-evaluate the 2016 policy statement beyond the
volume of the applicant pool?
Mr. Strait. I am sorry. Can you repeat that? I am not sure
I understand.
Mr. Griffith. Yes, sir. Can you provide any additional
rationale that would mandate DEA to re-evaluate its 2016 policy
statement beyond the volume of the applicant pool?
Mr. Strait. I would say the size of the applicant pool is
probably one of the single greatest issues that we are trying
to contend with, is how to meet the statutory text of the basis
by which we are supposed to be evaluating all applications for
both manufacturers of schedule I controlled substances.
Mr. Griffith. We will be happy to change that statutory
text if need be.
I yield back. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Ms. Eshoo. Gentleman yields back.
Pleasure to recognize the gentleman from Maryland, Mr.
Sarbanes, for his 5 minutes of questions.
Mr. Sarbanes. Thank you, Madam Chair. I thank the panel for
being here today.
Dr. Volkow, first of all, thank you for your work, which I
know well, and you have brought a lot of important testimony to
this committee in the past.
I have heard from schools in my State, such as University
of Maryland-Baltimore, that have communicated to me the
difficulty in conducting research due to the current
regulations and are nervous that any unintended violation of
these strict and arduous restrictions can result in loss of
their Federal research grants. Obviously, we have had a lot of
discussion about that here today.
Despite these barriers, schools and researchers are eager
to advance the understanding of the topic, and, just last year,
the University of Maryland School of Pharmacy began offering a
master of science in medical cannabis science and therapeutics.
They now have this degree and focus opportunity.
I have a letter here, Madam Chair--I would like to submit
this for the record--from the University of Maryland-Baltimore
on the topic of cannabis research and cannabis training
programs for the record. I would ask that this be accepted into
the record.
[Material submitted for inclusion in the record follows:]
Mr. Sarbanes. Dr. Volkow, would you agree that, as more
patients are accessing cannabis products in States where they
have been legalized for medical or recreational use in
Maryland--of course we have taken that step with medical use--
that our provider workforce should be educated on these topics
and ready to respond to patients' questions?
Dr. Volkow. I agree that we need to have much more
education with respect to actually how and that the use of
marijuana products can negatively impact or help someone. The
problem is that we do not have sufficient evidence that could
help us mount those programs in a way that it is actually
required. So, at this point, I don't feel that the evidence,
like the National Academy of Science concluded, is sufficient
to say we are going to recommend that this product be used by
this patient.
There are many concerns, and it is not trivial. One of the
problems that was noted is many patients--for example, the
elderly may be given some of these products; they are on other
medications, and they are not told what effects of the
combination of THC with these medications, and the clinicians
do not even know about it, nor do the patients.
So I do believe in the importance of expanding our
knowledge so that we can then develop educational training
programs that are based on knowledge, not on anecdote. And that
is why I highlight the urgency of doing research on its
therapeutic, as well as on its potentially adverse, effects.
Mr. Sarbanes. Well, I think you are highlighting the
impediment to creating workforce categories that can be a
resource of expertise and perspective when it comes to cannabis
that is presented by the kind of research issue that we are
talking about today because, if you cannot--it is sort of a
chicken-and-egg situation. If you cannot open the doors to more
effective research, then, obviously, creating specific
workforce categories that can take advantage of that and help
push it forward and sustain it is made more complicated.
I would note that a survey of health providers from 2015
concluded that the health providers themselves perceive a
knowledge gap in areas relating to medical cannabis dosing,
development of therapeutic treatment plans, differences between
various cannabis products and other areas. So the providers
themselves have certainly perceived that there is the need for
more research and expertise to be developed in this area, and I
assume you would agree that incentivizing research on medical
cannabis, for starters, would help address these knowledge gaps
and support a more informed and robust provider workforce?
Dr. Volkow. Yes. I think we have an obligation to do the
research to determine, what are the consequences of the
products that people are taking with the expectation that they
are going to be beneficial? We owe it to them to give them that
knowledge, whether it is true or not. That is why we do
research. So I completely agree of the urgency of expanding our
understanding of the so-called medical properties of marijuana
in diverse patient populations.
Mr. Sarbanes. Thank you. I yield back.
Ms. Eshoo. The gentleman yields back.
Pleasure to recognize the gentleman from Oregon, Mr.
Walden, for his 5 minutes of questions.
Mr. Walden. I walked back in from the other hearing, Madam
Chair, so thank you because I know how important this issue is
to all of us and especially to Oregonians.
Mr. Strait, I want to shift gears to hemp, as there is a
lot of interest in my district from farmers who are growing
hemp for CBD, and Oregon State University is working with the
USDA's Ag Research Service to launch Federal hemp research.
Given that the 2018 farm bill removed hemp from the CSA, is a
DEA registration required to conduct research on hemp-derived
CBD?
Mr. Strait. No.
Mr. Walden. No. Relatedly, USDA's interim final rule for
hemp production, DEA is supposed to participate in oversight.
Is the DEA prepared to handle registration of the private and
public labs to handle hemp-compliance sampling?
Mr. Strait. The issue of hemp testing, which is actually
baked into the U.S. Department of Agriculture----
Mr. Walden. So to speak, yes.
Mr. Strait [continuing]. Interim final rule--no pun
intended. Sorry about that.
Mr. Walden. There you go.
Mr. Strait [continuing]. Was predicated on the concept that
those who performed testing probably made reasonable sense for
them to hold a schedule I license in the event that they ended
up procuring a sample that was not hemp; it actually ended up
being hot and contained more than 0.3 percent THC. So that is
an interim final rule. I know they are soliciting comments on
that, and I know that that is an issue of concern that has been
raised by some in the public.
Mr. Walden. Yes. There are quite a few of these issues. I
know somebody that had a commercial driver's license who was
using CBD oil to deal with something, or taking it, and then
did a drug test, and it triggered the drug test as if he had
used marijuana, which of course affected his CDL. So these are
issues we are running into in real lives. He was not a
marijuana user. You can have your own opinion on that, but he
tried CBD.
And I want to go to Dr. Throckmorton. When it comes to CBD,
are you able to tell us if FDA is any closer to determining if
there are appropriate regulatory frameworks for nondrug uses,
including for products marked as food and dietary supplements,
and has the lack of research on the substance been an
impediment to that process?
Dr. Throckmorton. I can tell you that process is a high
priority for us. We understand the interest. As I said before,
we are committed to working with you to find a path forward on
that.
I would also say that the lack of information we have about
the safety regarding cannabidiol is a challenge for us that we
are looking to fill. We need to understand the use of CBD, the
safety of CBD, in order for us to decide how best to place it
in nondrug products.
Mr. Walden. And so I guess I want to push a little just in
terms of the impediments to getting answers because this is
playing out in real life. I have friends that swear by CBD. I
have friends whose doctors have said, ``Do not worry. Go ahead
and take it. It does not impact anything else you may be
taking.'' They know that? Have you done the research?
Dr. Throckmorton. Well, in fact, we know that is likely not
accurate. Based on what we know from the Epidiolex, the
approval of the product that contains cannabidiol, cannabidiol
does interact with other drugs, and we can get you that list if
you are interested, but, in fact, there are interactions that
could occur that could be clinically significant, and I think
blood thinners are one, for instance.
Mr. Walden. Yes.
Dr. Throckmorton. And so we would want to make sure that
information is available to people.
Mr. Walden. Let me suggest they don't know that is
available. They are actually being told by medical providers,
at least this one case I know, that ``don't worry, there is no
interaction,'' and this is a legitimate doctor telling a
patient.
This is happening in real--I mean, I have got colleagues
that have been on television proclaiming the importance of CBD
in food products and drinks and consuming it. That is fine.
That is up to them, but I do not think--and if people want to
use it, that is their business. I got it. But I just want
people to have the facts and the data.
So I think what we are trying to do here is figure out what
are the impediments to getting that data, and what does it take
to get the agencies to a point where you are leading, not way
trailing? Because the States are way ahead of where we are
federally. We have got legacy rules we are trying to figure out
here. Doctor?
Dr. Throckmorton. And we have been fortunate to work with
the States. So you are right; the States are further ahead in
some ways because they have had to be. You have had to face the
use of these products in your own jurisdictions. The States
have been very interested in understanding these same things.
The State public health officials get that we need to
understand the safe uses of cannabidiol and then make it--
educate the prescribers, educate the choices that they are
making very quickly. Unfortunately, historically, marijuana was
used for its THC content.
Mr. Walden. Sure.
Dr. Throckmorton. And it has only been recently that the
cultivars containing large amounts of CBD have sort of come to
the floor.
The State data collection has been, historically, largely
focused in that other direction.
Mr. Walden. Yes.
Dr. Throckmorton. And so they are changing course. It is
just a matter of time.
Mr. Walden. Oh, yes. No, I understand all that. If you
could get me that list, if it is readily available.
Dr. Throckmorton. Absolutely.
Mr. Walden. Is it on the FDA Web site? Is it--I mean----
Dr. Throckmorton. Absolutely.
Mr. Walden. Please do. Thank you.
And thanks for your indulgence, Madam Chair, and I yield
back.
Ms. Eshoo. The gentleman yields back, and I think it is
terrific that we have our next member, another gentleman from
Oregon, so we have got a set of bookends here, Mr. Schrader,
for his 5 minutes of questions.
Mr. Schrader. Thank you very much, Madam Chair.
I think it is great that, if we have--all three witnesses
agree we need medical research into the effects of the hemp or
CBD or marijuana products. The sad part is we are not testing
the right stuff.
I fail to understand, with all due respect, Mr. Strait, why
we have one bloody facility in an artificial environment,
Mississippi, that is the really the sole nexus for research and
analysis of CBD products.
Could you explain why that is?
Mr. Strait. So that location is actually more--probably
better asked of Dr. Volkow because it is pursuant to a contract
administered by the National Institutes of Health. DEA is
mainly interested in----
Mr. Schrader. Well, I guess if I may interrupt briefly
here. It is limited time. You know, it seems to me we ought to
be testing the products that are on the marketplace. That is
where FDA, NIDA, you are most concerned. What is the consumer--
what is the American citizen actually being exposed to or
hopefully benefiting from?
Mr. Strait. Yes.
Mr. Schrader. The idea that we are using a specific
facility that does not mirror what people are actually
ingesting, smoking, whatever, is ludicrous. I am worried--you
are talking about more regulations coming out. We should be
making less regulations and just say there is a legally
approved facility in the State of Oregon, Colorado, District of
Columbia. Those are things that people are actually going to be
exposed to. We approve that research for that facility. Why are
you not doing that?
Mr. Strait. And, Dr. Schrader, I cannot agree more in what
you are saying, and that is certainly a conversation we have
been having internally. The challenge, of course, is that the
underlying principles of the CSA, the Controlled Substances
Act, require that people who are going to lawfully possess,
distribute, conduct research with schedule I controlled
substances have to procure those substances from a valid
source, and that valid source is--you know, at this point, it
is another DEA-registered facility.
Mr. Schrader. Well, valid source in the eyes of the Federal
Government----
Mr. Strait. Correct.
Mr. Schrader [continuing]. Not just you, perhaps, is this--
you know, is whatever. I am arguing respectfully that the
committee should be looking at legislation, if need be. I do
not think we need legislation. It just should be something FDA,
NIDA, and DEA can say, ``Hey, you know, there is all these
approved facilities out there in these States. We are not
adjudicating whether or not it is a controlled substance or
not. They are here. They are being used for certain products
that consumers are being exposed to. We need to investigate
them and make sure that they are not affecting adolescents
adversely, fetal development, male fertility, whatever the deal
is,'' and get it out there. There is so many benefits.
My colleague from Oregon talked about benefits. I have got
a farmer in the State of Oregon, a farm that is very
conservative by nature. They had a father that was ailing,
facing terminal illness. Pain relief was not getting done. They
turned to CBDs. Their father was able to communicate for the
first time in weeks with them, and he had a productive quality
of life to the very end.
These are the products we need to be starting to get
engaged in, or I just do not see that happening.
Talk to me a little bit, Mr. Strait, about approvals by
both Tilray and Biopharmaceutical Research. Talk to me a
little--these are not from Mississippi. How come they get
through and not other products?
Mr. Strait. I am not familiar with those two companies in
particular, but there are instances where pharmaceutical
companies can be manufacturing through synthetic means some of
these substances and then making those substances available for
research purposes.
Mr. Schrader. OK. It concerns me that you are not aware of
those being approved by DEA. I guess I would like to get more
information after the hearing on that.
And there is an apparent tendency to approve more foreign
applications than domestic applications that get held in limbo
for years. We have got, what, 12 or 15 different applications
that are pending and going through this long, exhaustive
regulatory process. That seems incongruent with the fact that
these products are out there now. We need the research now.
Everyone on the panel has agreed to the research. Let's just
get it done. What is the holdup?
Mr. Strait. Congressman Schrader, we have the same
frustration you do.
Mr. Schrader. Very good. Well, Madam Chair, I will yield
back. I just appreciate everyone's interest, and we just need
to move forward and test the products that people are being
exposed to.
Ms. Eshoo. I agree 100 percent. I do not understand--I
still do not understand why the agencies, the three that are
before us, can't get this done, but we will keep questioning,
and the next one to question is the gentleman from Indiana, Dr.
Bucshon.
Mr. Bucshon. Thank you very much, Madam Chairwoman.
This hearing is really very important. I was a physician
before I was in Congress. I am still a physician; I just do not
practice. And, as a doctor, data is critical. You practice
medicine based on facts and data. So I really appreciate this
hearing.
And I do support the legitimate medicinal use for THC, but
our knowledge on this subject actually is very limited and
needs more research.
Dr. Volkow, I am going to go along the lines of the
developing brain. Up to what age would you say the brain
continues to develop?
Dr. Volkow. The fastest growth is during the first two
decades and then until probably age 24 and then it slows down,
but it never really goes away.
Mr. Bucshon. Right. So I think people, a lot of times, have
a misunderstanding. When we are talking about the developing
brain, people think it is little children, but, actually, it
really goes up substantially until your mid-20s approximately?
Dr. Volkow. Right.
Mr. Bucshon. Great. Thanks. And you presented this, but we
all know THC can have damaging effects on the developing brain,
as you mentioned. In fact, the studies you conducted, the
National Institute of Drug Abuse, show a direct correlation
between persistent cannabis use and cognitive decline from
one's childhood to midlife.
Epidemiologic studies have further found that youth who
regularly use cannabis have lower academic achievements and a
higher risk of dropping out of school. Frequent cannabis use
during adolescence is associated with changes in the area of
the brain involved in attention, memory, emotions, and
motivation. And, Madam Chairwoman, I have a slide deck that Dr.
Volkow presented to the Doctors Caucus a number of years ago,
and I would like to introduce that into the record.
Ms. Eshoo. So ordered.
Mr. Bucshon. It outlines some of the things that you have
been talking about today.
Additionally--and this is where I am going to focus my
question on. NIDA recently put out research describing record
levels of teens vaping marijuana, vaping THC products. Can you
elaborate on that data?
Dr. Volkow. Yes. We have seen overall vaping has increased
among teenagers, and, in the United States, 40 percent of the
teenagers have vaped in their lives, and despite the fact that
this is a new technology. Three years ago, most of the vaping
was related to flavors. Two years ago, most of the vaping was
related to nicotine. And what we saw this last December was
there was a significant--a doubling of the number of teenagers
vaping for THC.
Now, considering that vaping THC delivers very high content
of THC, this is worrisome. It is also worrisome because, as you
know, the injuries from--the acute injuries from vaping are
predominantly associated with vaping of THC.
Mr. Bucshon. Right.
Dr. Volkow. So this is concerning, and we are seeing also
significant increases from in the past two years up on the
regular use of cannabis, which we think are driven in part by
the vaping.
So it is affecting the pattern of use of marijuana among
teenagers.
Mr. Bucshon. OK. So, then, along those lines, are
researchers able to conduct Federal research on the THC and e-
liquids and THC vape liquids sold at vape shops in States that
have legalized marijuana for recreational use, and, if they
can't, why not?
Dr. Volkow. The researchers are afraid that, if they use
Federal funds to purchase products that are illicit by buying
them in dispensaries, they will lose their funding. So, as a
result of that, overall, research is not done by investigators
that are being funded through the NIH, which is a Federal
agency.
Mr. Bucshon. And, based on what you just talked about,
about the rapid increase in vaping amongst teenagers, would you
say that we need to do something about that?
Dr. Volkow. I would completely agree. We need to be able to
move rapidly into the field and understand the products that
patients or citizens are being exposed to.
Mr. Bucshon. I think that just confirms what all of us have
been saying throughout this hearing.
And I am also concerned that law enforcement is not
equipped to address cannabis-impaired driving. I did have also
a case in my district where a young lady was sledding and was
hit by a car, and the person that hit her was not impaired by
alcohol or opioids, failed a field sobriety test, and
subsequently we find out it is marijuana, but there is no legal
standard. Unlike alcohol, obviously, there is no reliable test.
For that reason, I introduced H.R. 3890, the Combating
Impaired Driving Act, in 2019, to direct the Department of
Transportation to provide funding for grants and pilot programs
to address impaired driving.
Dr. Volkow, according to your organization, marijuana is
the illicit drug most frequently found in the blood of drivers
who have been involved in vehicle crashes, including fatal
ones, and in your testimony, you describe that the risk of
being involved in a crash significantly increases after
cannabis uses.
Can you describe the difficulties law enforcement may have
in testing for marijuana? Do you agree we need more funding to
provide advanced measuring testing for cannabis- impaired
driving?
Dr. Volkow. Yes, and, as I mentioned before, the problem
that we have is the content in alcohol, you know a certain
level is associated with motor impairment, but, in marijuana,
it has a very long half-life, and it accumulates in the fatty
tissues in our body. So, if you are a regular marijuana user,
you may get high, and, three hours later, you still have very
high levels even though you are not intoxicated.
On the other hand, if you are a naive user and you consume
marijuana, have very low levels, you may be intoxicated. So
there is not a one-to-one correspondence.
Mr. Bucshon. Right.
Dr. Volkow. So we are trying to actually incentivize
researchers to come up with innovative ways of determining
whether someone is intoxicated or not, and we are funding
researchers in that way.
Mr. Bucshon. My time has expired, but, Madam Chairwoman, I
think that again outlines why we need more research. I yield
back.
Ms. Eshoo. I think, if there is anything to come out of
this hearing is that the research is absolutely essential--
absolutely essential. So much of this is two and two equals
five. Well, it does not.
So the gentleman from Massachusetts, Mr. Kennedy, is
recognized for 5 minutes.
And I want to say how much I appreciate his--the input that
he gave the Chair, and we will, as he said earlier, have a
followup hearing with other stakeholders. Important to start
out with our three government agencies, but I think that our
subcommittee will benefit from the additional testimony of
others. So he is recognized for his 5 minutes of questions.
Mr. Kennedy. Thank you, Madam Chair. Thanks for holding
this hearing, and thanks for adding the weight of the committee
behind this conversation. Thank you to our witnesses for being
here, for your service, for your work, and for your diligence.
As some of you know, I was initially hesitant to support
legalization. My concerns stemmed from my work with the mental
health community where many advocates have told me that they
are worried about the impact of increased access to another
controlled substance on the patients that they serve. But as
States have moved forward with legalization, including my own,
I tried to understand how we could protect for the public
health concerns. I talked to experts. I talked to doctors. I
talked to families. I talked to advocates. I talked to
regulators. I have talked to some of you.
And that is where I started to get frustrated; frustrated
that, as a Federal legislator, my hands were tied because our
Federal policies still rested on Richard Nixon's decision to
put marijuana in the same category as heroin; frustrated, as
constituents told me that marijuana was the only thing that
eased their pain. We have heard some of those stories today.
But when I asked regulators and subject agencies how we
could ensure that this drug, like all drugs, was subject to the
highest patient safety standards, I was told that we could not
until we had more research. So I asked, how do we get more
research?
Remove marijuana from schedule I, I was told.
How do we do that?
Well, we need more research.
The Federal Government has hid behind that catch-22 for a
long, long time, and, meanwhile, millions of Americans, mostly
Black and Brown, have been locked up for nonviolent drug
offenses.
Meanwhile, desperate parents are forced to turn to a black
market with no concern for patient safety to get their children
the relief that they need. Meanwhile, our cities and States are
trying, at times stumbling, to put in place a thoughtful and
thorough regulatory framework with zero support from Federal
partners. And, meanwhile, a brand new corporate industry is
rising up, rife with predictable economic injustices that
spring up whenever government fails to regulate.
Prohibition has clearly failed, and America is not waiting
for its government anymore. That is why I decided to co-sponsor
Congressman Nadler's MORE Act, which would finally deschedule,
not reschedule, cannabis. It would expand critical research,
and the reason I think this bill is superior to the policy on
the table today, it makes an intentional and aggressive
commitment to restorative justice in communities of color.
But, to the witnesses today, I understand and appreciate
the deliberative detailed approached that you have outlined. I
commend and I share your commitment to public health and
safety. Clearly, that is why you are here. But I think it is
clear that we are also out of time. States just are not waiting
anymore. Incremental adjustments and the long path and a little
more research are not enough. If the Federal Government wants
to be active and honest and a smart stakeholder in marijuana
policy, we have to break free from that catch-22.
So, in your testimony, you each pointed to the restrictions
imposed by research because marijuana is a schedule I drug.
Dr. Throckmorton and Dr. Volkow, you have already
indicated, and I just wanted to make sure I am clear, in your
opinion, would those barriers be eased if marijuana was
descheduled. Dr. Volkow?
Dr. Volkow. What was the question specifically?
Mr. Kennedy. Would those restrictions on research be eased
if marijuana was descheduled?
Dr. Volkow. The scheduling of marijuana--and that is why I
want to comment on it because that is not specifically what we
do. We have to recognize that marijuana has harmful effects. We
know that, and the harmful effects can actually be very
consequential, and, at the same time, it is a drug that is
addictive.
So my perspective is--that is why I keep on saying it--what
is the policy that will protect the public of the adverse
effects of marijuana while at the same time accelerate our
ability to take advantage of the potentially beneficial effects
that the plant has? That is my perspective.
Whether it is descheduled or not, that is not what our
agency does.
Mr. Kennedy. Understood. And so let me just be clear about
the question. Would the barriers to research be eased if
marijuana was descheduled?
Dr. Volkow. If it were descheduled, it would be easier to
do research; we know that.
Mr. Kennedy. Yes. Dr. Throckmorton as well?
Dr. Throckmorton. I agree.
Mr. Kennedy. And, additionally, in your opinion, would your
office or agency be unable to continue its regulatory role
regarding marijuana if it were to be descheduled, Dr. Volkow?
Dr. Volkow. Well, we do not regulate marijuana. We do
research. So our agency is not involved. That would be
transparent to us.
Mr. Kennedy. So it would--your agency would not be harmed
in any way by continuing to conduct its regulatory authority?
Dr. Volkow. It will--I mean, it is--by descheduling a drug,
it is not--it is going to accelerate the ability to do
research, but at the same time, it may have unintended negative
consequences in that more people may be afflicted. So that is,
again, why we bring the science, and the policy decisions of
what is the optimal way of moving forward takes other factors
into consideration, like the ones that the FDA has described.
Mr. Kennedy. And, Doctor, again, just to clarify, I
understand the balance, and I appreciate that balance. I think
that is what we are all trying to strike today.
My question was, does the role of your agency change if
marijuana is descheduled?
Dr. Volkow. No.
Mr. Kennedy. Yes. Dr. Throckmorton?
Dr. Throckmorton. Well, it would matter how it happened
obviously. It is, in essence, another system on a subset of
drugs under development. So drugs containing compounds for
marijuana potentially are used--go through the Controlled
Substances Act, as well as the Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act. To
the extent that that step was removed and the authorities of
the Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act were maintained, it would not
have an impact.
Mr. Kennedy. Mr. Strait, I assume that the answer for you
would be, yes, it would change from DEA?
Mr. Strait. Yes.
Mr. Kennedy. Yes.
Mr. Strait. Since our obligation is to enforce the
Controlled Substances Act, yes.
Mr. Kennedy. Understood.
I yield back. Thank you.
Ms. Eshoo. Gentleman yields back.
Pleasure to recognize the gentleman from Florida, Mr.
Bilirakis, for his 5 minutes of questions.
Mr. Bilirakis. Thank you, Madam Chair.
And I really thank the witnesses for testifying today. It
has been very informative. Unfortunately, I was at
Telecommunications for a while, but I am back now.
Dr. Volkow, do you think that the process for conducting
research on schedule I substances coupled with the limitation
on the supply of research-grade cannabis have discouraged some
researchers from investigating the compound?
Dr. Volkow. The answer is yes, and it has slowed it down,
yes.
Mr. Bilirakis. OK. Let's see. I have a couple of questions
here that I want to go over.
Mr. Bilirakis. Mr. Strait, would you agree that scientists
studying cannabis and its effects, either bad or good, is it a
fundamentally different question than legalizing,
decriminalizing, or even discussing medical or recreational
cannabis?
Mr. Strait. Absolutely. We want DEA just like our
colleagues at HHS want to be tethered to science as it pertains
to research with marijuana
Mr. Bilirakis. Very good.
Next question is for Mr. Throckmorton--Dr. Throckmorton,
excuse me. Are products available in State-regulated markets
like edibles, concentrates, oils, wax, tropicals, for example,
et cetera? I mean, those particular products, are they commonly
available to clinical investigators through Federal sources?
And if not, how might that pose a risk to the public health?
Dr. Throckmorton. So I wouldn't be able to comment on their
availability to the nondrug centers because that isn't part of
what I regulate. I focus on the drug side.
On the drug side, with the passage of the farm bill, hemp-
derived compounds are now available for research. And we are
eager to support that any way that we possibly can. We think
that is an exciting new avenue to get some of the questions we
really desperately need answered.
Mr. Bilirakis. Doctor, one more question. With the recent
spate of lung illnesses related to illicit THC vaping products,
what were some of the key takeaway lessons learned regarding
the Federal state of oversight and research into current
products and consumption methods?
Dr. Volkow. Sorry. I thought you were asking----
Mr. Bilirakis. Yes. No, this is for----
Dr. Volkow. You are bringing up an example about why----
Mr. Bilirakis. And I would like----
Dr. Volkow. We need so much more knowledge. We did not know
about hyperemesis until 2006. And as a result of that, we
didn't know how to diagnose it. Now we are seeing it in the
medical emergency rooms, and it is associated with high content
THC and chronic use. But we are just assuming based on what the
patients are telling us, since we are unable to actually sample
from the sources that they are consuming. And that is just one
example about why we need to understand the consequences of
consumption of different products of marijuana, because we are
seeing adverse effects.
And so if we want to proclaim, well, there are medical
qualities to it and we need to have evidence to show that it is
the case, we also need to understand how to optimally dose it
and what product characteristics are safe, and we don't have
that data.
Mr. Bilirakis. Thank you.
Dr. Throckmorton?
Dr. Throckmorton. I just want to say Dr. Volkow is raising
an incredibly important point. Patterns of use, how these
substances are being used are changing year to year. The new
use of cannabidiol vaping, things like that. Just the ways
these are being consumed, the doses they are being consumed,
the populations, the perceived benefits are all changing. We as
a Federal architecture need to find some way to track that, to
understand it, to identify new risks as they emerge quickly,
ideally find new ways to assess efficacy and things like it
that are identified. But it is a central challenge, I think,
for all of us working in this area.
Mr. Bilirakis. Thank you very much. And I agree.
I am going to yield the rest of my time to Mr. Griffith,
please.
Mr. Griffith. Thank you very much.
Mr. Strait, several studies found that research-grade
marijuana from the University of Mississippi is genetically
distinct from the marijuana coming from State dispensaries,
such as we heard of earlier in the testimony from Oregon. Four
years ago, DEA announced that it would accept applications for
the manufacture of research-grade marijuana in order to
increase the diversity of products for scientists to study.
Thus far, the agency has not acted. And as we heard earlier
today, DEA intends to propose new regulations that will govern
the marijuana growers program for scientific and medical
research.
Can we have your assurance publicly and on the record that
the DEA will work expeditiously to review legitimate
applications to produce marijuana for federally approved
scientific research? And will current applicants be permitted
to amend their applications to conform to the new rules so they
are not caught in a catch-22 or a vortex of time?
Mr. Strait. On your first comment, yes, we definitely will
move expeditiously. We are moving expeditiously, although I
know it is not acceptable for anyone here in public office. So
we appreciate your patience on that.
And your second question?
Mr. Griffith. The second question was, if you already have
an application pending and the rules change, instead of having
to start back at go, you know, proceed directly to go and do
not collect your $200, can they just amend so they can move
forward? And a yes or no, because my time is up.
Mr. Strait. On that point, when we announced the notices of
application in August of 2019, some of those applicants had
been--had applied two years ago. We gave them the opportunity
then to get a full refund. And, of course, we would do that.
Ms. Eshoo. The gentleman's time has expired.
The Chair now recognizes the gentlewoman from Michigan, Ms.
Dingell, for her 5 minutes of questions.
Mrs. Dingell. Thank you, Madam Chair.
I want to associate my comments today with everybody at
this podium. And I think there is bipartisan frustration on
this issue. I think my colleague, Mr. Kennedy, probably
summarized where I am very deeply. I--Michigan is one of the
States that is now one of the legal States that this is being
traded in. I was--I will be very blunt, I did not support it
when it was on the ballot. I come from a family that has seen
what drug addiction does to people. But like my colleague, Mr.
Griffith, Mr. Schrader, my husband, who many know in this room,
suffered from great pain, and many people said that marijuana
would be the only thing. Though would he try it, and he would
not try it--can you see John Dingell smoking marijuana--because
it was not legal, you didn't know the side effects, and it
might have given him relief in the end.
But I was the keynote speaker at Hash Bash this past year.
Yes, you should laugh. My staff told me--I don't even know how
it got scheduled, if you want to know the truth. I am still
trying to figure that out.
Ms. Eshoo. It wasn't schedule I.
Mrs. Dingell. But I got up and said, I have never smoked
marijuana, and don't think I ever will smoke marijuana, but I
was getting a lot of indirect smoke that day. But I made the
point--I talked to a lot of the scientists, and there were very
clearly three things that need to happen. And I am as committed
as anybody at this--we need to get more research on this issue.
And we all keep asking you the same questions because we are
not--we don't understand what the answers are or why if we all
agree we need more research and we need it for medicinal
purposes, we need it for automobile. I am working on impaired
driving legislation right now too. Every one of us has got a
story from our districts somehow, some way that there is a
problem. And we are in the biggest catch-22 that you can ever
see or imagine. So you have got to help us figure out how we
are going it to get out of this catch-22.
It is one of the reasons I introduced, with my colleague,
Representative Blumenauer, the Medical Marijuana Research Act,
because just in case you can't tell, I am pretty passionate
about it now. Even though it is legal for recreational use in
11 States, Michigan being one, we have just started it, it has
gone recreational marijuana the last couple of weeks. The
National Academy of Sciences has done a study, which I have
right here, that found that the research of the health effects
of cannabis and cannabidiol has been limited in the United
States. And this lack of knowledge poses a public health risk.
I would like to make sure it is submitted for the record,
Madam Chair.
Ms. Eshoo. So ordered.
[Material submitted for inclusion in the record follows:]
Mrs. Dingell. So having agreed with all of my colleagues
here, having the three of you already establish we have got
problems, can we go back and look at some of these questions
that everybody keeps asking?
Dr. Volkow, you talked about the administrative burden that
current Federal rules mandate. We keep asking you why it takes
months to navigate, but we are looking for those details. How
would simplifying Federal guidance surrounding schedule I
registration improve NIDA's ability to conduct this research?
What do we need to do? And why is it only one kind of marijuana
that is OK at the University of Mississippi? Can you give us
more detail and highlight, you know, why Federal research is
done only a single source of cannabis? How does this reliance
on a single source limit our understanding of the health
impacts?
Dr. Volkow. We agree, and we are also, of course,
frustrated by the challenges of advancing the science and at
the same time recognizing that we have a problem. I wish
marijuana had no untoward effect; it would be quite remarkable.
But unfortunately, high content THC can have, as I mentioned,
pretty adverse effects.
Now, there is, as the national academy mentioned, there is
evidence, though it is not solid enough for FDA approval, that
there are some benefits clinically for some effects of the
active ingredients of marijuana. So how could it--what is one
of the things that we have been proposing? And again, we are
not legislators. And it is the FDA and the DEA that regulate.
But what we wanted to achieve is can there be a subcategory for
schedule I that allows researchers to do research with the
proper regulations but expedited. That is one of the things
that we have been working with our colleagues on.
Mrs. Dingell. How do we keep you from working and getting
it done?
Dr. Volkow. We need to actually solve the problem, and I--
and I agree. And I also think that we need to figure out a way
to be able to also take advantage of some of the new producers
of different cannabis plants in order to evaluate the diversity
of problems that are out there, as opposed to limiting us with
a Mississippi farm. These are regulations. This is not us
wanting to say territorially we are the only place that can
provide it. It is impeding research and knowledge.
Mrs. Dingell. I am unfortunately out of time, but I could
have asked a lot more questions.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Ms. Eshoo. The gentlewoman yields back.
A pleasure to recognize the gentlewoman from Indiana, Ms.
Brooks, for her 5 minutes of questions.
Mrs. Brooks. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman.
And I apologize to the panel, there is another hearing
going on, so I have been going back and forth a bit, but your
testimony is critically important to us. And I think from my
colleague across the aisle there has been frustration, because
I think we are trying, as Members of Congress, to figure out
what specifically we need to be doing to help to accelerate
medical research. I think that is the top priority of this
committee, I believe, and the purpose in having this hearing.
And so--and with that, you know, hearing testimony and
knowing friends who have suffered from tremendous pain,
particularly from cancer, I want to focus a little bit on pain
therapy. We have talked a little bit about it and, Dr. Volkow,
thank--and thank all of you for your work. I have very mixed
feelings about the issues around marijuana, having long ago
been a criminal defense attorney and seeing so many of my
clients have substance abuse problems and many of them starting
at a young age with marijuana, and then later as a former
United States attorney working with the DEA and involved in,
you know, disrupting trafficking organizations, drug
trafficking organizations that ruined neighborhoods and
communities and caused a lot of significant problems. I--but
yet I also have a number of friends and people I know who have
suffered tremendously, whether it is with cancer or other
things, where marijuana has helped them with their pain, or
those at end of life, as we have heard those stories. So we are
really conflicted here.
We as a Congress, I think, have a lot of issues around we
are trying to figure out how to break through and move the ball
forward because it is taking years, and we just don't have the
answers and we are so behind.
So what barriers, Dr. Volkow, remain at NIH to study the
new therapies around pain and where cannabis can particularly
help with pain? And even addiction therapies we are hearing.
Can you share with us what are the barriers around the research
specifically relative to pain?
Dr. Volkow. We are prioritizing as it relates to cannabis
research, its potential value for the treatment of pain, for
addiction, and also for HIV, and as an anti-inflammatory drug.
So researchers are being funded both for THC as well as for
CBD. We would like to have more investigators involved, and
that is where the whole discussion has been going back and
forth. Many investigators that don't have the infrastructure
support that is necessary shy away because they feel it is too
much of an obstacle to try to go through a schedule I. But we
are funding research.
Mrs. Brooks. Dr. Volkow, would these be private sector
investigators or these university investigators or hos---what
type of investigators do we--what kind of investigators do we
need?
Dr. Volkow. We want both of them. And one of the areas that
we are very interested is actually pairing academic
investigators with industry so that the products that are being
developed then can go into the market. So we fund different
mechanisms to try to facilitate those interactions. So you
don't want to limit it just to the academicians. You want to
also facilitate research by the private sectors.
Mrs. Brooks. Are there any significant pieces of research
that have been completed? I know you talked about 11 year--or
studies over long periods of time of adolescents and of
children that you are following, and I appreciate. What are the
numbers of years that you are typically looking for relative to
research?
Dr. Volkow. Well, it depends on what you are aiming for.
For example, to try to understand how marijuana affects the
developing brain, you need to follow it up doingbrain
development. So that will take 10, 15 years. If you are trying
to determine, for example, to what extent THC can have
analgesic effects for, say, in a patient suffering from low
back pain, I am just--that may be a study that you can complete
in three or four years. So it depends very much what the aim
is, what the study is going to be doing.
Mrs. Brooks. And approximately how many studies are we
funding now, you know, focused specifically on pain management?
Dr. Volkow. On pain management we are funding $39 million
for therapeutics of cannabis. And of them, I would sort of say
probably 35 to 40 percent may be pain, but I have to check the
figures, but I just guesstimate.
Mrs. Brooks. Off the top of your head, are there any
significant negative results that have shown in your current
research?
Dr. Volkow. Too early to say, from the ones that are
ongoing.
Mrs. Brooks. Thank you so much. Thank you all for your
work.
I yield back.
Ms. Eshoo. The gentlewoman yields back.
Pleasure to recognize the gentlewoman from Illinois, Ms.
Kelly, for her 5 minutes of questions.
Ms. Kelly. Thank you, Madam Chair. And thank you to the
witnesses for being here today.
My State of Illinois was the 11th State to approve adult
use cannabis. But with that said, I am interested in hearing
about the research that exists about cannabis, particularly for
vulnerable populations. I am the chair of the Congressional
Black Caucus Health Brain Trust and have worked with my
colleagues to create legislative and policy solutions to reduce
health disparity and promote good health in all communities.
So, Dr. Volkow, your testimony discusses the adverse health
effects of cannabis when it comes to prenatal and adolescent
development. What is the state of the science in this area? And
are there studies that focus on minority populations?
Dr. Volkow. Yes. And based on the science, we do know that
the use of THC during pregnancy is associated with
significantly negative outcomes for the newborn and the mother.
There are cannabinoid receptors in the placenta, and the
cannabinoid receptors emerge very early on in fetal development
and they guide, tell the brain actually how neurons in the
brain are moving and connecting. So it is something that needs
to be taken with caution.
We know that in adolescents, as has been mentioned, in all,
every single story has shown overall independently that it
leads to worse educational outcomes. And what we are now using
is more sophisticated technology, larger samples, to understand
how factors differs between one individual and the other. For
example, through the ABCD study, we have shown that adverse
social environments have a very negative effect in amplifying
the consequences of insults into the brain. So if you come from
a deprived environment, your brain is actually going to have a
much slower development than if you are in an environment that
enriches your experience. And in those circumstances, drugs
have a greater negative effect.
So we--I mean, these are stories that are ongoing, but it
is clear drug and marijuana is not a good thing for the
developing brain.
Ms. Kelly. Well, I am glad to hear that you have a more
diverse sample than it sounds like you did from the beginning.
You said you are bringing more diversity.
Dr. Volkow. Absolutely. We need to understand diversity.
Diversity in terms of ethnic background, diversity in terms of
economic opportunities, because those are influencing multiple
factors on the development of a child.
Ms. Kelly. And, Dr. Throckmorton, in your testimony, you
mention that the FDA is actively working to learn more about
the safety of CBD and CBD products. Among the list is work to
understand the effects of CBD of special populations, such as
the elderly, children, adolescents, and pregnant and lactating
women. Can you elaborate more on this?
Dr. Throckmorton. The best data we have available comes
from the control trials that were used to approve Epidiolex,
which is the product for procedure disorders. It was conducted
largely in young children. And so we simply don't have any
extensive randomized controlled trials in those populations. We
all sort of acknowledge they are terribly important.
When we approved Epidiolex, we also posted on the web what
we do know about the demographics of response to the drug. So
you can go on to what we call our drug trial snapshot page, and
it will show you the safety and effectiveness of Epidiolex
broken down by sex, gender, age, ethnicity. And you can look
and see for yourself what we know about Epidiolex, but we need
to have a lot more information to expand that to understand the
impact on the elderly, for instance, and on pregnant and
lactating women, because they just simply weren't in the trials
and so we haven't had that opportunity yet. But it is something
we recognize, and we are working to try to fill as quickly as
we can.
Ms. Kelly. Assuming you are working to get more diversity
in the trials.
Dr. Throckmorton. Absolutely, yes.
Ms. Kelly. I, like my colleague, I go back and forth about
how I feel about recreational marijuana. I don't know if that
is because I went to college in the 1970s, if that is the
reason why. But I just read in the paper, you know, Chicago
allowed it starting January 1. And the paper talked about how
the emergency room visits have gone up because of this. And
even places that treat dogs, because people are, I guess,
careless with the edibles. I don't know. And they found more
dogs are getting sick too. So it just seems like we need to
educate the public more too about the effects. And I don't know
if it is just an early overexuberance because it just became
legal or will we continue to see increased emergency room
visits.
Dr. Volkow. And I am just going to comment on that because,
actually, one of the aspects that have been coming back and
back, marijuana is not a safe drug. It has negative effects.
And among the ones that we are more concerned is that is what
affects young people. And one of the ones of greatest concern
has been the association of the use of marijuana with
psychosis. And stories across the world, for example, as a
psychiatrist, I was trained that the prevalence of
schizophrenia is the same across the world, it is one percent.
Well, it so happens that that is not the case. And in some
places, it is six to eightfold higher. And in those places, it
is associated with the consumption of very high content THC.
So in the Netherlands, for example, which has the highest
rate of schizophrenia linked with the consumption of THC, you
can have plants that have 38 percent THC. And this is not just
explained by having the genetic risks. There is something about
high-content THC that is triggering psychosis, and we need to
recognize it.
Ms. Kelly. I know my name time is up. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
Ms. Eshoo. The gentlewoman's time has expired.
Pleasure to recognize the gentleman from Montana, Mr.
Gianforte.
Mr. Gianforte. Thank you, Madam Chair. And thank you for
the panel being here today.
Understanding the full consequences of readily available
marijuana on public health and individuals is imperative. We
have heard that today. We should be concerned about the lack of
Federal research on marijuana because, when we consider such a
drastic change, we must ensure that that policy is based on
sound science. So the focus today on research is very
appropriate.
In November, I joined with 16 other Members of Congress in
asking Attorney General Barr to study the societal impacts of
legalizing marijuana for recreational purposes. As we start to
see preliminary data from States like Colorado and Oregon, it
is important to fully evaluate their experiments before making
Federal policy. I appreciate that Mr. Walden and Mr. Burgess
have asked for a hearing on this research, and we should
continue to investigate.
We should know how best to help people who need medical
marijuana and how greater access to recreational marijuana will
impact our communities, families, and users. However, expanding
access to marijuana without the benefit and guidance of the
facts and sound science is of grave concern. This is incredibly
concerning because we have an addiction crisis in my home State
of Montana. Methamphetamines and now opioids devastate our
communities and tear up too many families.
Meth accounted for 86 percent of drugs trafficked in
Montana in the past five years. Montana has worked hard to
support people fighting addiction through drug treatment
courts. These courts help people get clean and get back on
their feet while staying engaged in their communities, all at a
fraction of the cost of incarceration.
To consider making any schedule I drug legal and more
readily available without adequate research is a misplaced
priority when addiction continues to ravage our country.
Instead, we should support focusing on combating addiction,
building on this committee's bipartisan work and the success of
the SUPPORT Act from last Congress. We need to continue to
support those who face addiction and need the help the most,
rather than making marijuana easier to access when we don't
know the full effects on our communities.
Dr. Volkow, ensuring access to mental health services is a
top priority of mine. Unfortunately, Montana has the highest
suicide rate in the country. I have introduced the National
Suicide Hotline Designation Act, which makes 988 the national
suicide hotline number. This important bill will protect
emergency access to care for those facing a mental health
crisis, especially those in rural areas who lack access to
mental health professionals.
In your testimony, you state that serious mental illness
and suicides are on the rise in our country. And while multiple
factors very likely contribute to this rise, it is imperative
to understand if exposure to cannabis in adolescents is one of
them. Does current research draw a connection between marijuana
use and increased risk for suicide or mental health problems?
Dr. Volkow. There have been some large epidemiological
studies that have noted an increased risk for suicide among
regular users of THC, but the evidence is not as extensive as
associated with psychosis. And so we cannot ignore it, but we
need to determine if it is reproducible and understand the
extent to which it is contributing indeed to suicidally. So it
is something that has been noted by large epidemiological
studies.
Mr. Gianforte. OK. And from your experience as a researcher
in this area, do we fully understand the connection between
marijuana and mental health and suicide?
Dr. Volkow. Marijuana, if you take high-content THC, in
almost any one of us, if the content of THC is high enough, it
is going to make us paranoid, extremely anxious, and very, very
afraid, if not fully psychotic. And that can explain and one
could conceive why in those circumstances someone, if they feel
threatened, may actually attack someone else or attack
themselves.
So in some people, that results in a chronic syndrome, and
that is where we don't have sufficient knowledge of
understanding why is it that in most cases it is just a very
short limited psychotic episode and why is it that use of
marijuana in some results in long-lasting effects; that we do
not know yet.
Mr. Gianforte. OK. So just to summarize--I appreciate your
expert opinion--it is possible that cannabis could increase
suicide rates. Is that correct?
Dr. Volkow. The epidemiological data has given some
evidence that it may. But I want to be cautious again. I think
that one of the issues that we have been criticizing the whole
field of marijuana is that people say you are exaggerating. How
do you know that a person to start with was depressed and was
suicidal thinking that put them at risk to take marijuana to
auto-medicate? So how do you now it is really a causal as
opposed to an auto-medication? That is what I want to----
Mr. Gianforte. But it brings us back to the fact we just
have to do the research.
And with that, Madam Chair, I yield back.
Ms. Eshoo. The gentleman yields back.
A pleasure to recognize the gentlewoman from Delaware, Ms.
Blunt Rochester, for her 5 minutes of questions.
Ms. Blunt Rochester. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman, for this
important hearing. And thank you to the witnesses.
As you can tell, many of my colleagues, we are going over
time on the time we have because there are so many questions
that we have. And as I thought about this, it really is a
multitude of issues that we are dealing with in this one
hearing, both protecting and enhancing public health, providing
economic opportunities but in a just way, restorative and
criminal justice as well as public safety.
I am encouraged at the inclusion of comprehensive
legislation that addresses some of the social justice aspects
of cannabis reform. Even a minor criminal record can lead to
barriers in employment, housing, and education. It is also a
significant drain on our national economy. That is why I have
introduced bipartisan legislation, the Clean Slate Act, which
would seal an individual's Federal record, criminal record for
nonviolent or simple possession offenses involving cannabis.
As Congress continues to evaluate our Nation's approach to
cannabis, let us continue to include criminal justice reform as
a critical part of the conversation.
Dr. Throckmorton, as you mentioned in your testimony, the
FDA has approved one cannabis derived product for medical
treatment, Epidiolex, which is used to treat rare pediatric
seizures. Can you walk us briefly, very briefly through how the
FDA came to approve it?
Dr. Throckmorton. Happy to very shortly. So we have a
process that we have laid out in a variety of different ways,
including small business assistance and things that basically
gives a roadmap to drug developers, beginning with
conversations with us, coming in and just basically saying I
want to develop a drug to do the following and this is where I
think I might get my drug, my active pharmaceutical ingredient
so called. We walk them through a series of meetings leading
to, if successful, a drug approval of the kind that we were
able to do for Epidiolex.
Ms. Blunt Rochester. So you have a roadmap that we can
actually get a copy of?
Dr. Throckmorton. Absolutely.
Ms. Blunt Rochester. OK. So we will we request a copy of
that roadmap. And also, what I would like to follow up on is
what you have learned through the clinical trials from that as
well.
Since the 2018 farm bill, we have seen a massive expansion
in commercially available CBD products, everything from CBD
active wear to CBD toothpaste. Many of these products assert
that they contain various wellness benefits like reduced levels
of anxiety or better sleep. I want to continue on. The FDA has
stated that many of these products are marketed with
unsubstantiated therapeutic claims.
Doctor, could you talk about what the FDA does to--what
actions do you take for these bad actors? What are you
currently doing?
Dr. Throckmorton. Sure, thank you. And we would be happy to
follow up with details too there. So, fundamentally, if someone
makes a claim that their product treats, diagnoses, mitigates,
or prevents a disease, they are a drug. And if they are doing
that without approval from the Food and Drug Administration,
they are an unapproved drug, the subject to our enforcement
actions. You know, they are making claims that they don't have
any substantiated evidence for, we take an enforcement strategy
that focuses on the high-risk things, the really egregious
claims.
Ms. Blunt Rochester. So can you just give us some examples
of what you did, who you targeted, what you did?
Dr. Throckmorton. So the egregious claims that we have--
recently we took an action, we sent 15 warning letters out,
identifying specific products that made those kinds of claims
or in some other way violated the Food, Drug, and Cosmetics
Act. We called on them to stop whatever the violation was that
they were committing. Most of them had to do with labeling, and
gave them steps that they needed to take in order to come back
into compliance.
Ms. Blunt Rochester. Just so I am clear, the warning letter
went to the person who is the bad actor.
Dr. Throckmorton. Manufacturer.
Ms. Blunt Rochester. The manufacturer. How is the public
informed of that to be aware?
Dr. Throckmorton. So those letters are public. You can go
on to our Web site and see the series of warning letters. This
is actually I think the third time we have done this that we
put out. And then we obviously have a follow-up plan for each
of those companies to make sure that they come into compliance.
Ms. Blunt Rochester. One of the areas I didn't, when I ran
through all of those intersections, I didn't run through
consumer protection, and I think that is another big area. I
know if I go into a store, I am not likely to then go on your
Web site to figure out, is this dangerous for me or not. And so
I think this is something else that we need to follow up, as we
look at research and other issues, how to best protect the
consumer.
Thank you so much, Madam Chairwoman, for this very
important hearing, and I look forward to the next one. And I
yield back the balance of my time.
Ms. Eshoo. And thank you for your important work as well.
The gentlewoman yields back.
A pleasure to recognize the only pharmacist in the
Congress, Mr. Carter of Georgia, you are recognized.
Mr. Carter. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Mr. Strait, I am going to start with you. Dr. Burgess asked
you earlier in this hearing about changing a drug from one
schedule to another. And I wanted to expound upon that and ask
you, you mentioned that it can be initiated a number of
different ways. When was--what initiated the change from
hydrocodone from a C-III to a C-II? Do you know?
Mr. Strait. Yes, that was a petition from a doctor.
Mr. Carter. From a doctor. Why did it take so long? The
opioid epidemic started in the early 1990s, lasted--and
arguably the epitome of it was in 2006 to 2010, and yet it took
you until 2014 to initiate that--or to complete it. Excuse me.
Mr. Strait. Yes, to complete it. So I believe that petition
came in----
Mr. Carter. Why did you have to wait on a petition?
Mr. Strait. I am sorry?
Mr. Carter. Why did you have to wait on the petition?
Mr. Strait. We don't have to wait on a petition.
Mr. Carter. Then why, with the opioid epidemic being as bad
as it is, did it take the DEA until 2014 to reschedule
hydrocodone from a C-III to a C-II?
Mr. Strait. Well, actually, back when that petition came
in, I would argue that a lot of folks in the medical community
were actually concerned about access to opioids. And so a
petition to reschedule marijuana, despite its potential for
abuse and its actual abuse, kind of ran contrary to some of
those other broader concerns by the medical community.
Mr. Carter. I--OK. Dr. Volkow, you and I have worked
together for many years now, and I have great admiration for
your work and great respect. You were asked earlier, I believe
it was from Representative Castro, if marijuana is a gateway
drug. And I have to be quite honest with you, you gave a very
scientific response, something about sensitivity.
Is marijuana a gateway drug, in your opinion? And I ask you
that as a psychiatrist. You understand we have had, in this
subcommittee here, we have had panels of parents, of loved ones
who have lost loved ones to opioid addiction, who have all said
that it started with experimenting with marijuana.
Dr. Volkow. Indeed, they all--most of the epidemiological
studies show that the first drug of initiation is marijuana.
And because of that, that is another big argument for saying
why it is a gateway drug. The counter argument and why it is
not so simple is that it states that if you have the
vulnerability for drug taking, it is much more likely as you
are a teenager that you will encounter marijuana, then heroin.
And, ergo, you start with marijuana and then you go into other
drugs.
That is why it is not such a simple and that is why I
basically say, overall, I would state, based on stories, not
just in epidemiology or in laboratory animals, that if you
expose them early on, they are more sensitive to other drugs
that it----
Mr. Carter. Wouldn't you agree that the psychological
effects of experimenting with marijuana lead to experimenting
with other drugs, which leads to more addiction? No question
about it. That has been proven time and time again.
Dr. Volkow. But the same thing pertains to nicotine. So
nicotine is another one----
Mr. Carter. And what have we done with nicotine? We put
limitations on it.
And I want to cut to the chase. If you want to see time
fly, wait until you get up here for 5 minutes, but I want to
cut to the chase. Everyone up here has expressed the same
concern: We need more research. Tell us what we need to do.
Mr. Strait, what do you need? Do you need a schedule I-A
that is not going to have anything in it except for marijuana?
That is fine with me. I will create it.I will legislate that.
But tell me what it is going to take. I don't--please.
Mr. Strait. Two things. We have seen a 150 percent increase
in the number of schedule I marijuana--manufacture--researchers
in the United States in the last five years. We are making
progress. We want to do more, for sure.
What do we need in terms of improving access to research? I
feel as if this interagency group of folks here have worked
collaboratively on a proposal that would actually do just that.
Mr. Carter. And is that the proposal you mentioned earlier
about Fentanyl?
Mr. Strait. Correct. Absolutely. Yes. It is within the
context of fentanyl----
Mr. Carter. Can you make sure we get a copy of that?
Because I want to see it, because we invite your input. We want
to do the right thing.
You know, I saw an article just here recently that said
that there is actually the--the use of new research found
opioids were prescribed less often in States where marijuana
had been legalized for medicinal or recreational use. You know,
as a practicing pharmacist for many years, I have always said
that the only thing worse for me than filling a prescription
for someone who doesn't need it is not filling a prescription
for someone who does need it.
If marijuana truly does have medicinal benefit, I want to
use it. I am adamantly opposed to the recreational use of it. I
think it is a gateway drug, and it should not be used
recreationally. But if there are benefits to it, I want it to
be used. All we want here, everyone has expressed the same
thing throughout this whole hearing. Tell us how we can get
this research done. Tell us how we can find out.
It is the epitome of ineptitude that the Federal Government
has this scheduled as a schedule I drug and 11 States have
approved it recreationally. Embarrassing.
Thank you, and I yield back.
Ms. Eshoo. So there.
OK. The gentleman from California is recognized, Mr.
Cardenas, for his 5 minutes of questioning.
Mr. Cardenas. Thank you very much, Chairwoman Eshoo and
also Ranking Member Burgess, for having this important hearing
in this committee, in this committee where it belongs, the
Health Subcommittee of the Energy and Commerce Committee.
Too often we either talk about cannabis as either a
criminal justice issue or a medical issue. The reality is that
we cannot pull them apart. Research has shown that for youth,
in particular, incarceration is tied to poor physical and
mental health outcomes later on in life. Compared to those not
incarcerated, children and adolescents in the system for more
than a year were three times more likely to have functional
limitations, over four times more likely to have symptoms of
depression, and over two times more likely to have suicidal
effects into adulthood.
Now, I am not talking about the use of cannabis. I am
talking about incarceration. Let me make that clear.
Nearly 75 percent of all of the people arrested for
cannabis-related offenses are under the age of 30, and one in
four--one-fourth are under the age of 18. That is almost a
quarter of a million teenagers arrested for these types of
offenses each year in the United States of America.
Given that we know being arrested for possession, growing
or selling cannabis, can lead to incarceration, and we know
that incarceration has adverse health consequences, we can
establish that, at a minimum, cannabis criminalization causes
some negative public health consequences. So the question then
turns to balancing these public health concerns. We also know
that a conviction for a controlled substance can lead to
difficulty with job prospects, which could lead to both
unemployment and underemployment, which has potentially adverse
public health consequences. Similarly, a drug conviction means
a currently enrolled college student receiving Federal student
loan money would have their financial assistance terminated.
This can harm the future employment, earnings, and ultimately,
health prospects of that youth.
Examining the public health harms created by
criminalization of cannabis is the type of research that could
be conducted without having to expand the research supply.
I think it is really important for us to understand that
calling cannabis a gateway drug in an anecdotal fashion is
unfair to the American people and it is really not the proper
dialogue that policymakers and/or researchers and/or medical
experts should be having. And the reason why I say that is
because, if we are going to have that discussion, we should
have the discussion and the question, is alcohol a gateway
product or substance? Is nicotine a gateway product or
substance?
So to think that cannabis is in and of itself a category I,
an evildoer to all that touch it, is something that should not
be the subject of dialogue when it comes to true policymaking
and also when it comes to real honest research, not anecdotal
answers and questions.
What I have--I think one of the main things that we need to
understand as policymakers is that the inception of the United
States Congress calling cannabis a class I drug, I would
encourage everybody in this room and everybody in this country
to look at the footage on the floor of the United States
Congress and the nonresearched derogatory statements that were
being made specifically about a certain community and how using
cannabis would lead to rape and murder of women and citizens of
this country. I am cleaning it up a little bit because I think
it is unfortunate that we have that stain on the United States
Congress. And so far, we haven't had the will to actually
correct it.
The United States Congress made a mistake, and every
Congress since has not had honest hearings and honest dialogue
and has not allowed, truly allowed, the researchers in this
great country to do the true research that needs to be done for
us to properly categorize cannabis in this country. And as a
result of that, we have millions of individuals in this
country, as I outlined earlier, who have been subjected to
incarceration and a criminal record that otherwise they would
have a much more productive and better life, and that society
would be much better off, including the taxpayers, if we were
to actually get this right.
So hopefully we will have the opportunity to do that in
future hearings of the United States Congress so we can get it
right and we can get the research done and we can end this
anecdotal discussion and have a real, real discussion about the
facts.
With that, I yield back.
Ms. Eshoo. The gentleman yields back.
The gentleman from Illinois, Mr. Shimkus.
Mr. Shimkus. Thank you, Madam Chairman.
Ms. Eshoo. My partner in all things 911.
Mr. Shimkus. Oh, yes, that is right.
Thank you all for being here. It is been a long day for you
all. And I didn't have to sit through all of it, at least in
the hearing room. So I appreciate that you have had to do that.
And so I am going to try to be fairly brief.
And this one is to Dr. Volkow first. Are you familiar with
the most recent article that came out of The Lancet Psychiatry
about the risk of drug-induced psychosis converting to full
schizophrenia?
Dr. Volkow. That is correct.
Mr. Shimkus. Can you comment on--I mean, I have got the
stats and stuff. Can you tell me--I mean, summarize that report
and maybe comment on your observations of that.
Dr. Volkow. This report is consistent with a concern that
the use of marijuana, particularly high THC, can produce
chronic psychosis. Overall, the statement, as I have made, is
that most cases are of the use of marijuana trigger an acute
psychosis that by itself will go away. What this study does is
it shows that those individuals that went into an emergency
department for an acute psychotic episode associated with the
use of cannabis were much more likely to subsequently go into a
chronic psychosis.
So this study links the use of marijuana, not just with
acute psychosis, but provides evidence that it increases your
risk of transitioning into a chronic psychotic episode, as is
the case of schizophrenia.
Mr. Shimkus. OK, thank you. Let me--because I have been--
mental illness, mental health, early use, what we call when
they--a lot of people self-medicate through drugs based upon
psychosis. And I think a lot of us may have had personal
experiences with family members or friends and neighbors that
have kind of fallen into this trap. And I think part of it is
early drug use at an early age.
Let me go to this other subject that we have been dealing
with.And this will be back to you, Dr. Volkow, and to I think
Mr. Strait, and it really deals with this vaping and the THC
and also the vitamin E acetate issue. So the question is, first
of all, is it possible for scientists with a schedule I license
to conduct federally funded research on THC oil in these vaping
products?
Mr. Strait. Are we talking about the stuff that is actually
being consumed illegally, I presume, as opposed to----
Mr. Shimkus. Right.
Mr. Strait [continuing]. Creating a THC extract that could
then somehow be tested?
Mr. Shimkus. Yes. I think part of--that is the direction,
yes, sir.
Mr. Strait. Yes. So as we had said earlier, the challenge,
of course, with that is we certainly understand that
researchers want access to that material. Under the Controlled
Substances Act, researchers generally or have to obtain a
controlled substance from another DEA registrant. This is
something that Dr. Volkow has mentioned it. A failure to do so
might impact their ability to keep their Federal funding for
their program. So some of them have expressed some concerns
about that.
Mr. Shimkus. And then let me just follow up. Would you
agree that, with the CDC, that the scheduling status for
cannabis makes it challenging for the epidemiological testing
of these vaping products?
Dr. Volkow, you are shaking your head yes. Do you want to
elaborate?
Dr. Volkow. Yes. Yes, it is, because you want to, when you
start to see, for example, these emergency room admissions
occurring in different States or communities, you would like to
be able for researchers to go in and try to understand what is
it in those products that is accounting for the rise in these
cases, and that is not--currently not possible, if you want to
use funding from Federal agencies like ours.
Mr. Shimkus. Great. Thank you. And I want to yield my last
minute to Morgan.
Mr. Griffith. I appreciate the gentleman very much.
Earlier, Mr. Strait, we were talking about the applicants
that are already in place. So 33 applicants who grow marijuana
for research are out there. Y' all are changing the rules. I
asked if they would be able to amend their petition. You said,
well, yes, we did this before. We refunded their money. I don't
think they want their money refunded. They want to be able to
not have to go back and start all over again with their
application.
So can they just amend their application? Wouldn't that
make sense?
Mr. Strait. Thanks for giving me the opportunity to
clarify. What I meant and what I said and meant was for--
because the applications had come in prior to passage of the
farm bill and that some of these applicants may have actually
applied to produce things that now are no longer controlled
under the CSA, we gave them the opportunity to withdraw their
application for purposes of no longer needing it. Those that
have applied, they are in the queue and they will not have to
reapply. We will be adjudicating every single application.
Mr. Griffith. I appreciate that. Thank you. That makes more
sense than what I thought I heard. I appreciate the
clarification.
Mr. Strait. You bet.
Mr. Griffith. I yield back.
Ms. Eshoo. The gentleman yields back.
The Chair recognizes the gentleman from Illinois, Mr. Rush,
for his 5 minutes of questions.
And we have--we don't have very many members left, and it
is my understanding that votes are going to be called shortly,
so I think that we will be on time.
Mr. Rush, you are recognized.
Mr. Rush. I want to thank you, Madam Chair, for holding
this hearing.
And this hearing is particularly timely and more and more
States are loosening their restrictions around marijuana,
including my home State of Illinois, which just legalized
recreational marijuana beginning the first of January of this
year. As such, I believe more than ever that it is important
that we prioritize the research upon, not only the benefits,
but also on the risk of marijuana.
I worry, Madam Chairman, that too little is known about
when and how marijuana can be harmful, particularly after
frequent and long-term use. And that said, it seems to me that
many States, including mine, are stampeding to legalize both
medicinal and recreational use of cannabis, particularly
because there is a budgetary crisis that these States are
confronting. And the revenues from increased marijuana sales
and legalized marijuana, particularly at the recreational
level, is meant to help correct the budgetary issues that they
are facing.
And I want to ask Dr. Volkow a question. Would you please
expand on the possible health risk and implication for
citizens, both on adults and adolescents of these States, which
are exhibiting what I call a mob marijuana mentality and who
are engaged in what I would refer to as a marijuana mania, that
really exists in my State and in some of the situated States
across the Nation?
Dr. Volkow. Yes. And I like you way you call it the
marijuana mania, because it is actually a change in belief
without the fact that there hasn't been any evidence to make us
think that it is safe. And I don't want to negate the
possibility that, in some instances, cannabis can have
therapeutic benefits, but we cannot deny the fact it has some
very untoward effects. That does not negate the possibility
that we can come up with indications that can--where marijuana
can be used safely for therapeutic purposes. These things are
not exclusive.
But it is clear, the evidence is clear that use of
marijuana is associated with negative effects. And we are
already seeing it by the significant increase in emergency
department admissions that are being observed in the States
that are legalizing marijuana, as well as hospital admissions.
This is happening.
By changing the culture, by legalizing it, by creating a
sense that it is a safe drug, more people are being exposed to
it. And as a result of that, that otherwise they wouldn't have
because they wouldn't want to do something illicit. The more
people get exposed to it, the greater the likelihood that we
are going to see adverse effects, which is what we are
observing.
So the data is clear that it can have adverse effects and
why--I mean, and at the same time where we are leading as a
country, which is quite amazing, is how rapidly the perception
of risks disappear among the public. And we need to actually
create the balance that brings evidence of really what
marijuana can do, so that the individuals that want to take it
know the positives and the negatives and they don't do it
blindly, which is what we are observing happening.
Mr. Rush. Another area that I am really concerned about,
along with this mania that exists is this empty excuse of--or
this expungement of records. It is OK, all right, but the cause
of those records is being ignored.
Is there a nexus between marijuana--the offense of
marijuana, smoking marijuana or ingesting marijuana, and
abhorrent social behavior which creates a law enforcement issue
which, in my theory, is that led to mass incarceration? I don't
know whether or not you can make the connection, but can you
make that connection?
Dr. Volkow. Well, I think at the point of incarceration and
incarceration of individuals with a substance use disorder,
when you do the studies, it has clearly showed that not only it
does not in any way benefit or protect anyone; it actually
makes them much more vulnerable to relapsing and drug taking
and other adverse mental consequences. So incarceration has an
adverse effect on those that are suffering.
Mr. Rush. I want to thank you, Madam Chair. I yield back.
Ms. Eshoo. The gentleman's time has expired.
It is a pleasure to recognize the gentlewoman from--so we
are going to go to Ms. Barragan for her 5 minutes of
questioning. And we have two members that are waiving on to the
committee. And I sure hope we will be able to take your 5
minutes of questions as well.
Ms. Barragan, you are at bat.
Ms. Barragan. Thank you.
Ms. Eshoo. Five minutes.
Ms. Barragan. Great. Thank you.
And thank you all for being here today and providing
informative information. I thought it was pretty powerful, and
the most powerful was to hear from Congressman Griffith and his
story. It is the personal stories that are the most impactful.
When I was very young, my father had Parkinson's disease,
and he had it pretty much all of my life. And I remember when I
would see him in pain, I would just ask is there anything that
could be done for him. I don't care if it is legal or not. And
it was more of the sense of, you know, you are a child and
seeing your parent suffer and you want to give them something
to make that pain go away. And so I am firmly in the same boat
of supporting efforts to make sure that we are providing things
like marijuana for medical purposes to make sure patients are
having access to what they need to help give them some comfort,
especially when they are near the end of their life. There is
no reason that people need to be suffering. And so his story
was pretty compelling for me.
I am wondering if anybody on the panel today supports any
of the bills, any of the legislation that is before us today.
Does anybody want to comment on any support on any of the
bills?
Dr. Volkow. We have been asked that question, and I
actually was asked more specifically which one I favor, and I
said I favor actually the advancing of science and the ability
to do things in a way that can help us accelerate research. But
specifically which is the best bill, I think that that is more
on the side of you who are actually the ones that are creating
them. But my colleagues may--I may put them on the spot.
Ms. Barragan. And I am not asking for the best bill. I am
asking for, you know, these are the three bills I would support
that I think would be helpful or that I think would be
beneficial.
Dr. Volkow. And the one that I had--have gone on the record
for these that are basically--and we have been working with my
colleagues at the FDA and the DEA that are favored is the
creation of a subcategory for schedule I substances that would
allow us to do research expeditiously. And it is not just for
marijuana, it is in general schedule I substances, so that
researchers don't--don't have to go through all of the
obstacles and the delay process. That is what we have been--
actually one of the things that we are very specifically tried
to achieve.
Ms. Barragan. Gentlemen, any----
Dr. Throckmorton. I would be happy to provide comment on
any particular bill that you wanted us to help you with,
obviously. I think Dr. Volkow said it very well before. The
goal needs to be kept in mind. So whatever the vehicle,
decontrol or other approaches that are suggested and that are
included in some of those legislations, we need to think about
the goals in mind. And in particular, from the FDA's
perspective, the outcome needs to keep in mind the need for
continued drug development and appropriate scientific study.
Mr. Strait. And from the Department of Justice side, none
of these bills have actually been reviewed by the
administration, so there is actually no official position in
terms of any of the proposals. But as we are all talking about
today and as I think we all have kind of mutually agreed upon,
the key is science and having the access to the data to support
sound decisionmaking, whether that be legislative or within the
executive branch absent legislation.
Ms. Barragan. Right. So I want to shift for a moment on the
issue of sickle cell and the impact it has had on African
Americans. I think in some States they have a list of medical
marijuana uses, and I have talked to patients--I have seen what
sickle cell has done to patients and the pain that they have
suffered, and many sickle cell patients use marijuana to
address acute pain that is a symptom of the disease. And some
of the States currently have medical marijuana laws but have
chosen not to include sickle cell disease on the list of
conditions that would qualify a patient to receive the
medication.
Dr. Throckmorton, is there a way we can assure that States
that allow for medical marijuana have a comprehensive list of
conditions that would qualify for the medication so that those
who would potentially benefit from its effects are not
excluded?RPTR GIORDANOEDTR SECKMAN[12:59 p.m.]
Dr. Throckmorton. So which medications are you talking
about? So----
Ms. Barragan. We are talking about the use of marijuana for
sickle cell.
Dr. Throckmorton. OK. Yes. So the medications for sickle
cell disease that I would advocate for are the ones that we
have had the good fortune to be able to approve in recent
years.
Ms. Barragan. Well, no. I am asking----
Dr. Throckmorton. They are not for pains. And those
medications, we can and do work with providers to make certain
that they understand they are available. We hope to include
them--make them available----
Ms. Barragan. Right. That was not the question. The
question was that the States that provide the lists where
people can use medical marijuana, like how do we ensure that
some of these diseases are included. So----
Dr. Throckmorton. I am happy to talk with you offline.
Ms. Barragan. OK.
Dr. Throckmorton. Those States are making those choices
without Federal input, so----
Ms. Barragan. OK. Thank you. I yield back.
Ms. Eshoo. The gentlewoman yields back.
Pleasure to recognize the gentleman from California, Dr.
Ruiz, for his 5 minutes of questions.
Mr. Ruiz. Thank you, and thank you all for being here. Dr.
Volkow, you say in your written testimony that, quote, CBD is
ubiquitous, and it is possible to purchase CBD extracts as well
as food, drinks, cosmetics, and other CBD- containing products
which are sometimes marketed with health and wellness claims
that are not backed by science, unquote.
It is also worth noting that, while more than 30 States
allow for comprehensive medical use of cannabis and the FDA has
approved some derived and cannabis-related drug products,
cannabis does not have the FDA approval for any indication.
We have seen that cannabis can be used to treat certain
ailments, such as for children with particular seizure
disorders that are refractory to other treatments; as an
appetite stimulant for patients suffering from AIDS or
receiving chemotherapy; as an adjunct to other therapies in the
treatment of chronic pain syndromes, which is of particular
interest during the current opioid epidemic. Pain and
spasticity in multiple sclerosis is another use. However, there
is evidence show that chronic use is not without its
consequence: for example, cannabinoid hyperemesis syndrome, a
syndrome of cyclic intractable vomiting and chronic abdominal
pain; disadvantaged attention, learning, and processing speed
among teens who use marijuana regularly.
These neurobehavioral changes can even be seen on brain
MRIs of these patients. These changes can be permanent. Earlier
onset, as you had mentioned earlier, of schizophrenia and
bipolar disorders in young users of marijuana.
So it is clear that more research need to be done to better
understand the risks and benefits.
Dr. Throckmorton, it seems the FDA has found therapeutic
value in marijuana-related compounds, but for limited and
specific uses. Can you discuss what factors went into approving
these drugs for medical use for these specific populations?
Dr. Throckmorton. Sure. It began with the basic science
work that groups like NIDA does, so it began with supporting
the kinds of research that NIDA supports to identify compounds
and targets--therapeutic targets of interest; so suggesting
from animal models or other places that the drugs had use in
those areas.
And then something called translational science needs to
happen, which is a drug manufacturer or a drug developer picks
up that idea and comes and talks to us and says:We believe this
is a product that we can turn into a drug. What are the
pathways--what do we need to do? What are the next steps?
Typically that includes additional clinical studies,
sometimes additional non-clinical studies, and the result is
something called the new drug application, chosen--the
therapeutic area then is chosen by the individual company. They
are choosing to invest in pain, or they are choosing to invest
in--you know--I do not know--infectious diseases, or whatever
else it is, with a particular product. Our job is to make sure
that that assessment occurs, occurs quickly and efficiently,
and is scientifically driven, and results--you know, if the
data are what they need to be, and then approval of a drug for
a specific condition with an understanding of its safety and
effectiveness.
Mr. Ruiz. And, based on this approval process, can FDA
extrapolate the safety of CBD for other products?
Dr. Throckmorton. Extrapolation for effectiveness is very
hard to do, and we have done it in very limited spaces. It is
probably something we could talk about in more detail offline.
Safety is something that we are sometimes able to do more
readily. A drug in a class that has an adverse effect, we will
worry about does that same adverse effect occur in other drugs
in the class? We have discovered over the years that very small
differences in molecules have very large impacts in terms of
effectiveness.
THC and CBD are very close to one another at a molecular
level and yet have extraordinarily different patterns of use.
Mr. Ruiz. So your comments earlier said that CBD does not
come without its risks. That is what we have all been talking
about here. Your testimony outlines some of these risks. Can
you elaborate more about what you know about CBD so far and
what questions the agency may still have related to other uses?
Dr. Throckmorton. And now you are talking about safety, or
are you talking about effectiveness?
Mr. Ruiz. Safety in other uses.
Dr. Throckmorton. So safety, I think, as you said, my
testimony outlines, I would say, several buckets: one, adverse
effects that we have observed in the clinical trials leading to
the approval of Epidiolex; two, unknowns, things that we
believe we need to have additional information about. I would
put in that category particularly things like----
Mr. Ruiz. Right.
Dr. Throckmorton [continuing]. The liver injury and
testicular injury.
Mr. Ruiz. I only have seven minutes, and I just want to
make a very important statement here, that, as you conduct your
data collections, you have got to ensure that you have a
diverse sample of populations. Too many research is done on men
and non-Hispanics and non-African-Americans in the medical
world, and I believe that, in all categories of research, you
need more women, and you need more people of color. OK?
Dr. Throckmorton. Agreed.
Mr. Ruiz. All right. Thank you.
I yield back.
Ms. Eshoo. The gentleman yields back.
The Chair now recognizes Ms. Schakowsky of Illinois,
waiving onto the subcommittee, for her 5 minutes.
Ms. Schakowsky. Thank you, Madam Chair, and I appreciate
being able to waive onto the committee.
I am a proud original cosponsor of Representative Jeffries'
Marijuana Freedom and Opportunity Act and a cosponsor of
Representative Nadler's MORE Act, which would both remove
cannabis from regulatory Controlled Substances Act and add the
criminal justice and mass incarceration address-it issue that
we have been perpetually backing, and so that would get rid of
that.
Here is what--I want to focus on research, too. Everybody
has, it seems, or most people. On January 1st, Illinois
legalized recreational cannabis across our State, and
dispensaries sold more than $19.7 million in cannabis over the
first 12 days.
However, research at Northwestern University, which is in
my district and is a leading research institution, have no way
of accessing the cannabis that is sold in these dispensaries.
And instead Northwestern scientists often face extreme
difficulty in securing and maintaining cannabis and Federal
funding for the research.
So I am glad that there is strong bipartisan support, at
least for most of H.R. 3797, Representative Blumenauer's
Medical Marijuana Research Act of 2019. The bill would
streamline the cannabis research process to ensure that our
academic institutions remain at the cutting edge, et cetera.
Dr. Volkow and Dr. Throckmorton, how can we establish a
process by which researchers in a State like Illinois, where
recreational marijuana has been legalized and several different
strains of cannabis are now widely available--how could
Illinois acquire the research supply through local
dispensaries?
Ms. Volkow. And this is a question that we have been
discussing it, and DEA is the one that is actually on the
process of identifying additional sources of marijuana so that
researchers can investigate marijuana from different
dispensaries. So that is ongoing, and so--but that is regulated
by the DEA.
Ms. Schakowsky. And can we look forward to some change
there?
Mr. Strait. As we have previously discussed, I think one of
the challenges is unfortunately the fact that, for your
purposes, a researcher who is procuring a controlled substance
for research purposes is obligated under the Controlled
Substances Act to procure that substance from another Federal
DEA register----
Ms. Schakowsky. Right.
Mr. Strait [continuing]. To research it.
Ms. Schakowsky. Right.
Mr. Strait. So none of these dispensaries are applying for
a registration. None of them are registered with the DEA, and,
therefore, they are unable to distribute to researchers.
Ms. Schakowsky. So we would have to get marijuana off the
Controlled Substances Act--out of it in order to do the
research that we absolutely need to do on what is being sold
right now, and millions and millions of dollars being spent on
it, and many, many users?
Mr. Strait. Well, certainly that is your discretion and
Congress' discretion as one way to solve that issue. I do not
know at the end of the day where this administration would come
down on that approach.
Ms. Schakowsky. Is that the only way?
Mr. Strait. No. I think there are other legislative means
by which Congress could propose to change that specific
requirement, but I do believe that it would require some
legislative changes to the Controlled Substances Act.
Ms. Schakowsky. I did want to say about that piece of
legislation, H.R. 3797, that I do have a concern that DOJ would
have the ability to deny medical marijuana licenses based on
even minor past drug convictions, and I hope that we can also
remedy that. Though I know that we do not all agree on
deregulation and descheduling, we, I think, at the very least,
should be able to work together to ensure adequate research is
able to be conducted so that we know the consequences of what
people are using right this very minute in the State of
Illinois and many other States.
And I yield back.
Ms. Eshoo. The gentlewoman yields back. Votes have been
called, and I recognize the gentlewoman from the State of
Washington, Ms. McMorris-Rodgers, for 5 minutes.
Mrs. Rodgers. Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and I also want to recognize the
ranking member and all the committee members. I appreciate this
committee being engaged on this public health and consumer
safety topic around cannabis. I get asked about this a lot in
Washington State. We legalized both recreational and medicinal
marijuana the same year as Colorado. I believe we were the
first two States.
I am a cosponsor of Blumenauer's Research Act because I do
think that we need more research. I also represent Washington
State University, and it is in the same situation as Ms.
Schakowsky's university around wanting to do more research
around the issue.
Since we have legalized marijuana, the number of cannabis
products available on the marketplace has exploded over the
years, and so have the marketing tactics that promise cannabis
is a miracle for your health. A quick search promises you
cannabis products will help you sleep, relieve your pain, calm
your anxiety, shrink tumors, cure diseases, and a whole lot
more.
The concern is that these claims are not yet backed by
scientific research or clinical trials. I am concerned about
manufacturers who are ignoring all the unknowns of cannabis and
spending health promises to fuel an industry that is projected
to be nearly $2 billion by 2022.
I do believe that this industry, like with the FDA-
approved CBD oral solution for epilepsy--and others have
mentioned this--is on the verge of major breakthroughs that can
improve people's lives, and we should be encouraging these
developments. Like other cures and treatments, cannabis
products should be held to a standard that people can trust so
that the bad actors cannot spin to make a quick buck.
Bottom line: this is a public health and a consumer safety
issue. Those priorities should be at the forefront as we unlock
the mysteries of cannabis.
Dr. Throckmorton, I wanted to ask--and others have been on
this topic also, but, as I mentioned earlier, the FDA has
approved only one CBD product, a prescription drug product to
treat epilepsy.
That being said, all sorts of CBD products are being
marketed and sold throughout the country. We have no idea what
the health implications may be.
So what is the solution to this? How should it be handled?
Dr. Throckmorton. So not one solution; that shouldn't be a
surprise, right? I personally believed one really important
element is to encourage the development of a mature industry
using these products--an industry used to manufacturing
standards; industry used to packaging standards, labeling
standards; an industry of the kind that you see when you go
into Walmart and Costco and places like that. Those products
are being manufactured to a standard, as you said, which I
think is very valuable.
I hope that, by the recent increase in interest in doing
research using these products, behind that will be a growth of
an industry that wants to do the right thing, that wants to be
science-driven, appropriately labeled, manufacturing to a high-
quality standard. I think that is one important element, among
other things.
I also think it is terribly important that we lay out a
pathway for nondrug products containing compounds from hemp so
that there is a clear path that developers can follow to find a
way forward as far as developing those products and making them
appropriately available.
Mrs. Rodgers. Do you see that happening at the State level
in any of the States where marijuana has been legalized?
Dr. Throckmorton. Yes, I do.
Mrs. Rodgers. Either for the industry or the nondrug
products?
Dr. Throckmorton. We have really benefited from talking
with the states. I would say your State has been particularly
helpful to us as we talked to them about their experiences
because you have had to deal with all of these things.
The States are all taking different approaches, but many of
them--and I would say including your state--I know are
grappling with these issues around labeling and dosing and
manufacturing quality and things like that, and we are trying
to learn from those experiences as we try to formulate a policy
at the Federal level.
Mrs. Rodgers. Another big concern is the increase in
traffic accidents and traffic fatalities around the use of
these products, and we have seen some pretty dramatic increase
in numbers around accidents, at the very time that we are
working here diligently to make our roads safer, and now also
the number of fatality accidents that involve one of these
products.
What needs to happen in that regard to make sure that we
are safe on the roads?
Dr. Throckmorton. So it is one of the unknowns we have
identified for cannabidiol. We have studied it in children. We
never did those kinds of studies because children don't drive,
but we understand we need to understand the effects of CBD on
driving impairment. We need to have that--those data as soon as
we can.
Mrs. Rodgers. OK. Well, there is a lot more to explore
here. Thank you all for being here.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Ms. Eshoo. The gentlewoman yields back, and we thank her
for participating in our hearing.
So let me, on behalf of all of the members of the
subcommittee, thank our witnesses. This is a long hearing. I
might add it is the very first hearing on cannabis in the
history of the Energy and Commerce Committee, which is the
oldest committee in the Congress.
So it has been a long hearing, but I think a highly--excuse
the expression--instructive one because of the participation of
all of the members, and we will have another hearing from other
stakeholders that are not agency stakeholders. So thank you
again to each one of the witnesses.
Where you weren't instructive, it was instructive to us,
and so much of your testimony was. We learned from you. And we
have, I believe, the vehicles to develop a roadmap to address
this lack of really substantive research that is absolutely
needed. That is foundational to what--you know, so many of our
undertakings.
So I want to submit the following statements for the
record, and I also want to remind members--of course they are
not here--that, pursuant to committee rules, they have ten
business days to submit additional questions for the record to
be answered by the witnesses or to whomever questions are
submitted. We count on our witnesses to respond promptly to any
of the questions that you may receive, and I trust that you
will do that.
So I request anonymous consent to enter into the record the
following documents: the statement from the Greenwich--from
Greenwich Biosciences; a statement from the American College of
Occupational and Environmental Medicine; a statement from the
National Safety Council; a letter from the National Consumers
League; a statement from Doctors for Cannabis Regulation;
testimony of Aaron Smith, executive director of the National
Cannabis Industry Association; a letter from over 100
organizations in support of H.R. 3884; a letter from five
organizations representing State legal cannabis businesses; a
statement from the California Cannabis Industry Association;
the testimony of Congressman Hakeem Jeffries in support of H.R.
2843; a statement from Kris Krane, president of 4--the number 4
and the word ``Front''--Ventures; a statement from Americans
for Safe Access; a report from the National Cannabis Industry
Association entitled ``Adapting a Regulatory Framework for the
Emerging Cannabis Industry''; a statement from the American
Property Casualty Insurance Association; the testimony of Paul
Armentano, deputy director of the National Organization for the
Reform of Marijuana Laws; a response letter from FDA/NIH to
Senator Schatz; a letter from the minority requesting a hearing
on cannabis, and here we are, and I said yes; a letter from the
American Academy of Neurology in support of H.R. 171; a letter
from the American Academy of Neurology in support of H.R. 601;
a Bloomberg News article entitled ``Pot Imports Grow as U.S.
Stalls on Medical Research''--quite timely; a collection of six
letters from organizational supporters of H.R. 3797; a
statement from the Biopharmaceutical Research Company; a letter
from Smart Approaches to Marijuana; a letter from the Michael
J. Fox Foundation in support of H.R. 601; a statement from the
Consumer Brands Association; a letter from the DEA in reply to
an application to grow marijuana for research purposes; and
slides created by NIH entitled ``Effects of Cannabis on the
Human Brain.''
Without objection, so ordered.
[Material submitted for inclusion in the record follows:]
Ms. Eshoo. Does the ranking member have anything he wishes
to submit?
Mr. Burgess. I would not do anything to prolong the
hearing.
Ms. Eshoo. All right. So, on that happy note, thank you to
each one of our witnesses again.
To everyone that remained in the hearing room, thank you
for your attentiveness.
And, to the reporters, the press, thank you for your
interest.
At this time, the subcommittee is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 1:22 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]

Prepared Statement of Hon. Eliot L. Engel

Thank you Chairwoman Eshoo and Chairman Pallone for holding
today's important hearing on legislative proposals to modernize
federal policies on cannabis.
As an advocate for legalizing cannabis, I have been
supportive of state laws to legalize cannabis, including
marijuana. As this sea change has occurred, federal laws have
begun to catch up. In 2018, I served as a Conferee to the
Agriculture Improvement Act, better known as the Farm Bill,
which took a step forward in legalizing cannabis by allowing
the cultivation of hemp. This past June, I voted for an
appropriations amendment that would prohibit the Department of
Justice from interfering in state cannabis programs, including
those involving marijuana.
Many of the proposals under consideration today would help
us move closer to the complete legalization of cannabis. The
Marijuana Freedom and Opportunity Act, introduced by New York
Congressman Hakeem Jeffries, would decriminalize marijuana and
THC by removing it from the list of Schedule I substances. It
would also provide states with the necessary resources to
expunge marijuana convictions, which have had a
disproportionate impact on minority communities. Congressman
Jeffries' legislation, which I have cosponsored, would provide
commonsense reforms to our nation's antiquated cannabis laws.
It is also critical that we streamline the federal process
for medical research on cannabis. Currently, a number of
regulatory and legal barriers dissuade promising research into
cannabis. The bipartisan Medical Marijuana Research Act would
alleviate many of these barriers and open the door into
cannabis research.
I look forward to working with my colleagues, on both sides
of the aisle, on advancing cannabis policies that are in tune
with this new decade.

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
