- VAPING IN AMERICA: E-CIGARETTE MANUFACTURERS' IMPACT ON PUBLIC HEALTH

[House Hearing, 116 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

VAPING IN AMERICA: E-CIGARETTE
MANUFACTURERS' IMPACT ON PUBLIC HEALTH
=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT AND
INVESTIGATIONS

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED SIXTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

FEBRUARY 5, 2020

__________

Serial No. 116-96

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Printed for the use of the Committee on Energy and Commerce

govinfo.gov/committee/house-energy
energycommerce.house.gov

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
50-301 PDF                  WASHINGTON : 2024

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE

FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey
Chairman
BOBBY L. RUSH, Illinois              GREG WALDEN, Oregon
ANNA G. ESHOO, California              Ranking Member
ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York             FRED UPTON, Michigan
DIANA DeGETTE, Colorado              JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois
MIKE DOYLE, Pennsylvania             MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas
JAN SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois             STEVE SCALISE, Louisiana
G. K. BUTTERFIELD, North Carolina    ROBERT E. LATTA, Ohio
DORIS O. MATSUI, California          CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington
KATHY CASTOR, Florida                BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky
JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland           PETE OLSON, Texas
JERRY McNERNEY, California           DAVID B. McKINLEY, West Virginia
PETER WELCH, Vermont                 ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois
BEN RAY LUJAN, New Mexico            H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia
PAUL TONKO, New York                 GUS M. BILIRAKIS, Florida
YVETTE D. CLARKE, New York, Vice     BILL JOHNSON, Ohio
Chair                            BILLY LONG, Missouri
DAVID LOEBSACK, Iowa                 LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana
KURT SCHRADER, Oregon                BILL FLORES, Texas
JOSEPH P. KENNEDY III,               SUSAN W. BROOKS, Indiana
Massachusetts                    MARKWAYNE MULLIN, Oklahoma
TONY CARDENAS, California            RICHARD HUDSON, North Carolina
RAUL RUIZ, California                TIM WALBERG, Michigan
SCOTT H. PETERS, California          EARL L. ``BUDDY'' CARTER, Georgia
DEBBIE DINGELL, Michigan             JEFF DUNCAN, South Carolina
MARC A. VEASEY, Texas                GREG GIANFORTE, Montana
ANN M. KUSTER, New Hampshire
ROBIN L. KELLY, Illinois
NANETTE DIAZ BARRAGAN, California
A. DONALD McEACHIN, Virginia
LISA BLUNT ROCHESTER, Delaware
DARREN SOTO, Florida
TOM O'HALLERAN, Arizona
------

Professional Staff

JEFFREY C. CARROLL, Staff Director
TIFFANY GUARASCIO, Deputy Staff Director
MIKE BLOOMQUIST, Minority Staff Director
Subcommittee on Oversight and Investigations

DIANA DeGETTE, Colorado
Chair
JAN SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois             BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky
JOSEPH P. KENNEDY III,                 Ranking Member
Massachusetts, Vice Chair        MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas
RAUL RUIZ, California                DAVID B. McKINLEY, West Virginia
ANN M. KUSTER, New Hampshire         H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia
KATHY CASTOR, Florida                SUSAN W. BROOKS, Indiana
JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland           MARKWAYNE MULLIN, Oklahoma
PAUL TONKO, New York                 JEFF DUNCAN, South Carolina
YVETTE D. CLARKE, New York           GREG WALDEN, Oregon (ex officio)
SCOTT H. PETERS, California
FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey (ex
officio)
C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hon. Diana DeGette, a Representative in Congress from the State
of Colorado, opening statement.................................     2
Prepared statement...........................................     4
Hon. Brett Guthrie, a Representative in Congress from the
Commonwealth of Kentucky, opening statement....................     5
Prepared statement...........................................     7
Hon. Frank Pallone, Jr., a Representative in Congress from the
State of New Jersey, opening statement.........................     8
Prepared statement...........................................     9
Hon. Greg Walden, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Oregon, opening statement......................................    10
Prepared statement...........................................    11

Witnesses

K. C. Crosthwaite, CEO, JUUL Labs, Inc...........................
Prepared statement...........................................    14
Prepared statement...........................................    16
Answers to submitted questions...............................   107
Ricardo Oberlander, President and CEO, Reynolds American, Inc....    21
Prepared statement...........................................    23
Answers to submitted questions...............................   125
Ryan Nivakoff, CEO, NJOY, LLC....................................    26
Prepared statement...........................................    28
Answers to submitted questions...............................   131
Antoine Blonde, President, Fontem U.S., Inc......................    32
Prepared statement...........................................    34
Answers to submitted questions...............................   136
Jerry Loftin, President, Logic Technology Development, LLC.......    38
Prepared statement...........................................    40
Answers to submitted questions...............................   140

Submitted Material

Report of E-Cigarette Use Among Youth and Young Adults: A Report
of the Surgeon General, submitted by Ms. DeGette \1\
Letter of February 3, 2020, to Ms. DeGette, et al., by Lori
Tremmel Freeman, CEO, MBA, National Association of County and
City Health Officials, submitted by Ms. DeGettee...............    84
Article ``Indian Journal of Medical and Paediatric Oncology,"
submitted by Ms. DeGette.......................................    86
Article of January 31, 2020,``Teens Find a Big Loophole in the
New Flavored Vaping Ban, by Sheila Kaplan, The New York Times,
submitted by Ms. DeGette.......................................   101
Article of September 12, 2019, ``Europe's missing `vaping
sickness','' by Sarah Wheaton, Politico, submitted by Ms.
DeGette........................................................   103

----------
\1\ The information has been retained in committee files and also
is available at https://docs.house.gov/meetings/IF/IF02/
20200205/110462/HHRG-116-IF02-20200205-SD005.pdf.

VAPING IN AMERICA: E-CIGARETTE MANUFACTURERS' IMPACT ON PUBLIC HEALTH

----------

WEDNESDAY, FEBRUARY 5, 2020

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Oversight and Investigations,
Committee on Energy and Commerce,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 10:30 a.m., in
the John D. Dingell Room 2123, Rayburn House Office Building,
Hon. Diana DeGette (chairwoman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Members present: Representatives DeGette, Schakowsky,
Kennedy, Ruiz, Kuster, Castor, Sarbanes, Tonko, Clarke, Pallone
(ex officio), Guthrie (subcommittee ranking member), McKinley,
Griffith, Brooks, Duncan, and Walden (ex officio).
Also present: Representative Shalala and Hudson.
Staff present: Kevin Barstow, Chief Oversight Counsel;
Jesseca Boyer, Professional Staff Member; Jeffrey C. Carroll,
Staff Director; Dhindsa Manmeet, Counsel; Austin Flack, Staff
Assistant; Waverly Gordon, Deputy Chief Counsel; Tiffany
Guarascio, Deputy Staff Director; Judy Harvey, Counsel; Zach
Kahan, Outreach and Member Service Coordinator; Chris Knauer,
Oversight Staff Director; Joe Orlando, Executive Assistant;
Kaitlyn Peel, Digital Director; Peter Rechter, Counsel; Alivia
Roberts, Press Assistant; Tim Robinson, Chief Counsel; Emily
Ryan, GAO Detailee; Benjamin Tabor, Staff Assistant; C. J.
Young, Press Secretary; Jennifer Barblan, Minority Chief
Counsel, Oversight and Investigations; Mike Bloomquist,
Minority Staff Director; Diane Cutler, Minority Detailee,
Oversight and Investigations; Jordan Davis, Minority Senior
Advisor; Tyler Greenberg, Minority Staff Assistant; Brittany
Havens, Minority Professional Staff, Oversight and
Investigations; Peter Kielty, Minority General Counsel; Ryan
Long, Minority Deputy Staff Director; Zach Roday, Minority
Communications Director; Kristin Seum, Minority Counsel,
Health; Kristen Shatynski, Minority Professional Staff Member,
Health; and Alan Slobodin, Minority Chief Investigative
Counsel, Oversight and Investigations.
Ms. DeGette [presiding]. The Subcommittee on Oversight and
Investigations hearing will now come to order.
Today, the Subcommittee on Oversight and Investigations is
holding a hearing entitled, ``Vaping in America: E-Cigarette
Manufacturers' Impact on Public Health.'' The purpose of
today's hearing is to examine the role of manufacturers in the
marketing and use of e-cigarettes in the United States as well
as the associated public health implications.
The Chair now recognizes herself for the purposes of an
opening statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. DIANA DeGETTE, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF COLORADO

Today, we are here again to continue our examination of a
growing public health crisis--the soaring use of e-cigarettes
by young people. Simply put, our nation faces a youth vaping
epidemic.
In September, this panel heard from federal and state
health officials about the skyrocketing use of e-cigarettes
throughout the United States. Last year, more than 5 million
young people reported using e-cigarettes, up from 3.6 million
who reported using them the year before.
Just the other day, I met with a group of high school
students in Denver at my alma mater South High School. And
while the most recent national survey found that 1 in 4 high
school students are currently vaping, when I told this to the
students, they all shook their heads and said they believe the
actual rate is much, much higher. In fact, one sophomore I
talked to thinks that more than 60 percent of his peers are
using e-cigarettes.
Now, as I have said before many times, this teen vaping
epidemic is personal to me because in my State of Colorado, we
have the highest percentage of teens vaping than anywhere.
According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, e-
cigarettes pose risks to all users, but most particularly to
young people.
The vast majority of e-cigarettes contain nicotine, which,
according to the National Institutes of Health, can be as
addictive as heroin or cocaine, a fact which anecdotally was
cemented by the high school students I actually talked to the
other day.
Nicotine can harm brain development, affect respiratory
health, and can lead to heart disease. Further, research shows
that youth who use e-cigarettes are more likely to be using
combustible cigarettes, a fact also confirmed to me by the high
school students.
E-cigarette manufacturers have been negligent at best or
intentional at worst in attracting young people to their
products. Flavor options, concealable designs, highly addictive
nicotine levels, and slick marketing campaigns have all been
used to lure millions of young people into using e-cigarettes.
Parents and public officials have been left scrambling to
address this epidemic, and no one--not parents, not public
health officials, and not the students who vape--fully
understand the health impact of e-cigarettes. What is worse is
many of the young people actually believe that these products
are safe or harmless, also confirmed to me by the South High
Rebels I was talking to. And you know what? This simply is not
true.
The CDC has stated that all tobacco products, including e-
cigarettes, carry health risks. The only reason e-cigarettes
are available on the market today is because the Food and Drug
Administration gave them a temporary pass by exercising, or
refusing to exercise, its enforcement discretion.
No e-cigarette currently being sold in the United States
has been reviewed by the FDA for its impact on public health.
Instead, the e-cigarette industry has essentially been allowed
to conduct a public health experiment in real time without
knowing what the consequences of these products may be, and our
young people are paying the price.
So, this is why Congress decided to act. In December,
Chairman Pallone, myself, as well as some of my other
colleagues today, took an important first step to raise the
nationwide minimum age to buy any tobacco product, including e-
cigarettes, to 21. Clearly, more needs to be done, such as
advancing legislation that Chairman Pallone, I, and others have
introduced to tackle this public health priority.
These efforts are all the more important, given that the
administration recently caved to industry influence. Despite
the FDA's announcement last September that it intended to ban
all non-tobacco- flavored e-cigarette products to address the
rising youth use rate, the final policy issued in January
includes exemptions and loopholes. Not only are menthol-
flavored e-cigarettes still allowed under the FDA's new
guidelines, so are the fruity and sweet-flavored e-liquids and
disposable e-cigarette products. These loopholes may lead to
young people shifting to using menthol-flavored products or
disposable e-cigarettes that remain on the market. In fact,
there are reports that the shift is already happening.
The kids at South told me that it is harder for them to get
e-cigarettes at the gas station. Good news. The bad news is
people are just going to these vape shops to get these
products.
While companies claim that the e-cigarettes have the
potential to help adults who smoke combustible cigarettes, it
is important that CDC cautions such as the health benefit would
only apply if the smoker were able to quit completely. We know
that a majority of adult e-cigarette users, however, are dual
users, meaning they both smoke and vape, which could be more
dangerous than using either product alone.
So now, the question is, for every adult smoker who may
quit smoking because they are using an e-cigarette, how many
young people will start using those e-cigarettes and develop a
lifelong nicotine addiction? We must ensure that we are not
only attempting to solve one public health problem by creating
another at the expense of young people's health.
The responsibility to protect young people from these
dangerous products cannot fall solely on parents, teachers, and
health officials. And I am glad you gentlemen are here because
the industry caused this mess, and the industry needs to be
responsible for cleaning it up.
Today, we are going to hear from the companies responsible
for these products. I really do appreciate you coming because I
really do want you to be part of the solution.
And so, we are going to have a lot of questions. We are
looking forward to this hearing.
I know I went a little overtime, Mr. Guthrie, which I don't
usually do. So, I am happy to give you another minute for your
opening statement.
[The prepared statement of Ms. DeGette follows:]

Prepared Statement of Hon. Diana DeGette

Today, we are here again to continue our examination of a
growing public health crisis-the soaring use of e-cigarettes by
young people. Simply put, our nation faces a youth vaping
epidemic.
In September, our panel heard from federal and state health
officials about the skyrocketing use of e-cigarettes throughout
the United States.
Last year, more than 5 million young people reported using
e-cigarettes-up from 3.6 million who reported using such
products the year before.
This week, I met with a group of high school students from
my district. And while the most recent national survey found
that one-in-four high school students are currently vaping, the
students I met with tell me they believe the actual rate is
much higher.
In fact, one sophomore I met said he thinks more than 60
percent of his peers are using e-cigarettes.
As I have said many times before, this teen vaping epidemic
is personal to me. No state has a higher percentage of its
teens currently vaping than my state of Colorado.
According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
(CDC), e-cigarettes pose risks to all users, but particularly
to young people.
The vast majority of e-cigarettes contain nicotine, which
according to the National Institutes of Health, can be as
addictive as heroin or cocaine.
Nicotine can harm brain development, affect respiratory
health, and can lead to heart disease.
Further, research shows that youth who use e-cigarettes are
more likely to begin using combustible cigarettes.
E-cigarette manufacturers have been negligent, at best, or
intentional, at worst, in attracting young people to their
products.
Flavor options, concealable designs, highly addictive
nicotine levels, and slick marketing campaigns have all been
used to lure millions of young people into using e-cigarettes.
Parents and public officials have been left scrambling to
address this epidemic.
And no one-not parents, not public health officials, and
not the students who vape-fullyunderstand the health impacts of
e-cigarettes.What's worse is that many young people actually
believe these products are safe or harmless.
That is simply not true.
The CDC has stated that all tobacco products, including e-
cigarettes, carry health risks.
The only reason e-cigarettes are available on the market
today is because the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) gave
them a temporary pass by exercising its enforcement discretion.
No e-cigarette currently being sold in the United States
has been fully reviewed by FDA for its impact on public health.
Instead, the e-cigarette industry has essentially been
allowed to conduct a public health experiment in real time
without knowing what the consequences of these products may be.
And young people are paying the price.
That is why Congress decided to act.
In December, Chairman Pallone, myself, as well as some of
my other colleagues here today, took an important first step to
raise the nationwide minimum age to buy any tobacco product--
including e-cigarettes-to 21.
Clearly more needs to be done, such as advancing
legislation I, Chairman Pallone, and others have introduced to
tackle this public health priority.
These efforts are all the more important given that the
Administration recently caved to the industry influence.
Despite the FDA's announcement last September that it
intended to ban all non-tobacco-flavored e-cigarette products
to address the rising youth use rate, the final policy issued
in January includes exemptions and loopholes.
Not only are menthol-flavored e-cigarettes still allowed
under the FDA's new guidelines, but also too are the fruity and
sweet-flavored e-liquids and disposable e-cigarette products.
These loopholes may lead to young people shifting to using
menthol-flavored products, or disposable e-cigarettes that
remain on the market. In fact, there are reports that shift is
already happening.
While companies claim that their e-cigarettes have the
potential to help adults who currently smoke combustible
cigarettes, it is important to note that CDC cautions such a
health benefit would only apply if the smoker is able to quit
completely.
We know that a majority of adult e-cigarette users,
however, are "dual users," meaning they both smoke and vape,
which could actually be more dangerous than using either
product alone.
The question now is: for every adult smoker who may quit
smoking because they start using an e-cigarette, how many young
people will start using e-cigarettes and develop a lifelong
nicotine addiction?
We must ensure we are not attempting to solve one public
health problem by creating another-at the expense of young
people's health.
The responsibility to protect young people from these
dangerous products cannot fall solely on parents, teachers, and
health officials.
This industry caused this mess, and it needs to be
responsible for cleaning it up.
Today, we will hear from the companies responsible for
these products. The executives here today represent the five
companies with the largest e-cigarette market share in the
country.
Gentlemen, your industry ignited this fire. Now we all must
put it out.
I want to know how you intend to do it.
I want to know what your company is doing today to prevent
youth from getting their hands on your products.
I want to know what your company will do if the youth
vaping rate doesn't start to go down.
And, I want to know how far your company is willing to go
to help us fix this public health crisis that your industry has
created.

Ms. DeGette. And with that, I am pleased to recognize the
ranking member of the subcommittee, Mr. Guthrie, for 5
minutes--6 minutes.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. BRETT GUTHRIE, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE COMMONWEATH OF KENTUCKY

Mr. Guthrie. Six minutes. Well, thank you, Chair DeGette.
I appreciate the opportunity to be here and appreciate all
of our witnesses here this morning.
I thank you for holding this important hearing, and I share
your concern about youth vaping trends that have emerged in the
United States in recent years.
The U.S. Surgeon General has called e-cigarette use by
youth an epidemic and warned that it threatens decades of
progress towards ensuring that fewer young people use tobacco.
The most recent data from the National Youth Tobacco Survey
showed that 27.5 percent of youths--and, of course, you said
that you think it is higher than that from your sample, there--
reported using these cigarettes compared with 20.8 percent in
2018. We do know it is more, and the market has increased.
The marketing of e-cigarette products to children must stop
and youth access toe-cigarette products must be prevented. This
will require an all-hands-on-deck approach from all parties,
including the Federal Government, manufacturers, and retail
stores.
We have already made strides to curb youth access in
tobacco since we last held a hearing in September. In December,
as mentioned by the Chair, Congress passed, and President Trump
signed into law, legislation to raise the legal age to purchase
tobacco products, including e-cigarettes, from 18 to 21.
On January the 2nd, 2020, FDA issued guidance, finalizing
its enforcement policy regarding unauthorized flavored
cartridge-based e-cigarettes that appeal to children, including
fruit and mint. Under this policy, as of February the 6th,
2020, tomorrow, companies must cease manufacturing,
distribution, and sale of unauthorized flavored cartridge-based
e-cigarette other than tobacco or menthol, or risk FDA
enforcement action. This guidance also gives the FDA the
ability to pivot its enforcement priorities as needed. I hope
to hear from our witnesses today whether this enforcement
guidance will effectively target youth access or if there are
other or more effective steps the FDA should take, either alone
or in conjunction with the industry.
Further, according to FDA's new guidelines, manufacturers
like the ones before us today must submit premarket tobacco
product applications to FDA by May 12th, 2020, for deemed
tobacco products, including e-cigarette products, that were on
the market as of August the 8th, 2016. Through their
applications, manufacturers or importers must demonstrate to
the FDA, among other things, that marketing of new tobacco
products would be appropriate for the protection of public
health. As part of this determination, FDA must consider the
risk and benefits of the product to the population as a whole,
including users and non-users of tobacco products. If
manufacturers do not submit their premarket applications by May
12th, any products for which an application is not submitted
must be pulled from the market.
These legal and regulatory developments will drastically
change the e-cigarette landscape in the coming months and year.
While these actions are aimed at reducing the attraction of e-
cigarettes to youth and protecting broader public health, wide
bans and narrowing of what is legally available in the
legitimate marketplace will almost certainly shift product use
for existing users to other products that are still available.
We must be vigilant in responding to this potential shift
in utilization, which may result in an increase of black market
or counterfeit demand for e-cigarette products. We must ensure
that our efforts to protect our youth and the broader public
health do not inadvertently create a bigger and more
complicated problem.
Though not directly related to today's hearing, I continue
to be concerned about the lung injury outbreak associated with
vaping and e-cigarette use. These illnesses have been closely
associated with black market products and THC, a marijuana
derivative. While the number of cases appear to have peaked
when this subcommittee held its first e-cigarette hearing in
September, we have since learned that, according to the Centers
for Disease Control, an illness outbreak was strongly linked to
vitamin E acetate and additive to THC or marijuana e-
cigarettes. We need to more clearly understand the cause of
these illnesses.
It is my understanding that the e-cigarette manufacturers
have taken, and are continuing to take, their own actions to
prevent youth access to their products. This hearing can serve
as a constructive discussion for us to learn more about what
these manufacturers are doing to prevent youth utilization of
these cigarettes.
Before I conclude, I would like to make a quick comment and
recognize a subsidiary of Reynolds that is located in my
district. It is Kentucky Bioprocessing. Kentucky Bioprocessing
was founded in Owensboro, Kentucky, with a group of visionary
local entrepreneurs who wanted to find ways to use the tobacco
plant that is constructive to public health. And in doing so,
they found that it was a host for growing vaccines for Ebola, a
population that was used in emergency situations in the
previous Ebola outbreak, and is now working to address
potential vaccines for the corona virus. I am glad that KBP is
working on alternative uses for tobacco in order to better
America's public health.
I thank our witnesses for being here today and being part
of this important discussion.
And I yield back.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Guthrie follows:]

Prepared Statement of Hon. Brett Guthrie

Chair DeGette, thank you for holding this important
hearing. I share your concern about youth vaping trends that
have emerged in the United States in recent years. The U.S.
Surgeon General has called e-cigarette usage by youth an
"epidemic," and warned that it threatens decades of progress
toward ensuring that fewer young people use tobacco.
The most recent data from the National Youth Tobacco Survey
showed that 27.5 percent of youths reported using e-cigarettes,
compared with 20.8 percent in 2018. The marketing of e-
cigarette products to children must stop, and youth access to
e-cigarette products must be prevented. This will require an
all hands-on deck approach from all parties, including the
Federal Government, manufacturers, and retail stores.
We have already made strides to curb youth access to
tobacco since we last held a hearing on this topic in
September. In December, Congress passed and President Trump
signed into law legislation to raise the legal age to purchase
tobacco products, including e-cigarettes, from 18 to 21. On
January 2, 2020, FDA issued guidance finalizing its enforcement
policy regarding unauthorized flavored cartridge-based e-
cigarettes that appeal to children, including fruit and mint.
Under this policy, as of February 6, 2020-tomorrow-
companies must cease manufacturing, distribution, and sale of
unauthorized flavored cartridge-based e-cigarettes, other than
tobacco or menthol, or risk FDA enforcement actions. This
guidance also gives the FDA the ability to pivot its
enforcement priorities as needed. I hope to hear from our
witnesses today whether this enforcement guidance will
effectively target youth access, or if there are other or more
effective steps that the FDA should take, either alone or in
conjunction with industry.
Further, according to the FDA's new guidelines,
manufacturers, like the ones before us today, must submit
premarket tobacco product applications (PMTA) to FDA by May 12,
2020, for deemed tobacco products, including e-cigarette
products, that were on the market as of August 8, 2016. Through
their applications, manufacturers or importers must demonstrate
to FDA, among other things, that marketing of the new tobacco
product(s) would be appropriate for the protection of the
public health. As part of this determination, FDA must consider
the risks and benefits of the product to the population as a
whole, including users and non-users of tobacco products. If
manufacturers do not submit their premarket applications by May
12, any products for which an application is not submitted must
be pulled from the market.
These legal and regulatory developments will drastically
change the e-cigarette landscape in the coming months and year.
While these actions are aimed at reducing the attraction of e-
cigarettes to youth and protecting broader public health, wide
bans and the narrowing of what is legally available in the
legitimate marketplace will almost certainly shift product use
for existing users to other products that are still available.
We must be vigilant in responding to this potential shift in
utilization, which may result in an increased black market or
counterfeit demand for e-cigarette products. We must ensure
that our efforts to protect our youth, and the broader public
health, do not inadvertently create a bigger and more
complicated problem.
Though not directly relevant to today's hearing, I continue
to be concerned about the lung injury outbreak associated with
vaping and e-cigarette use. These illnesses have been closely
associated with black market products and THC use. While the
number of cases appear to have peaked when this Subcommittee
held its first e-cigarette hearing in September, we have since
learned that according to the Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention (CDC) the illness outbreak was strongly linked to
Vitamin E acetate, an additive in THC e-cigarettes. We need to
more clearly understand the causes of these illnesses.
It is my understanding that the e-cigarette manufacturers
have taken and are continuing to take their own actions to
prevent youth access to their products. This hearing can serve
as a constructive discussion for us to learn more about what
these manufacturers are doing to prevent youth utilization of
e-cigarettes.
Before I conclude, I would like to quickly recognize a
subsidiary of Reynolds that is located in my district, Kentucky
BioProcessing (KBP). KBP was very helpful with the development
of the Ebola vaccine and is now working to address the
coronavirus. I am glad that KBP is located in Owensboro,
Kentucky, and doing great things for America's public health.
I thank our witnesses for being here today and being part
of this important discussion.

Ms. DeGette. I thank the gentleman. The Chair now
recognizes the chair of the full committee, Mr. Pallone, for 5
minutes.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. FRANK PALLONE, Jr., A REPRESENTATIVE
IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF NEW JERSEY

Mr. Pallone. Thank you, Madam Chair.
I am pleased we are holding this hearing, so we can shed
more light on the youth tobacco epidemic and how we got here.
The significant progress that was made to curb tobacco use has
simply vanished. Last year, 6.2 million middle school and high
school students reported using tobacco products, including one
in three high school students and one in eight middle school
students. And these are shocking and concerning numbers.
And today, we are here to not only ask how this happened,
but what is going to be done to reverse these dangerous new
trends in tobacco use. While federal regulators share in this
blame, a large portion of culpability rests with the
manufacturers of e-cigarette products. These manufacturers saw
an opportunity to hook a new generation on their products and
used every trick in the book to make their products appeal to
kids through sweet flavors, glossy marketing campaigns, and
slick product designs.
It is long past time that the Food and Drug Administration
move forward with reviewing the health and safety risks of the
e-cigarette products that are currently on the market. And
then, the FDA must act swiftly to remove any products that are
not in compliance.
But it is also time for the manufacturers, including those
before us today, to acknowledge the responsibility they have to
ensure young people are protected from a lifetime of nicotine
addiction. We do not know all of the long-term health
implications of e-cigarette use, but we do know that nicotine
harms the developing brain and that young people who use e-
cigarettes are more likely to try combustible cigarettes as
well.
And that is why I am so disappointed that President Trump
chose to side with industry over the nation's public health by
permitting flavored products to remain on the market, like
menthol, disposable e-cigarettes, and open tank systems mixed
in vape shops. The President's announcement last month fell far
short of the promises he made last year to address the youth
tobacco epidemic. And we shouldn't be fooled; a so-called
flavor ban that exempts menthol and vape shops is not a flavor
ban at all. And that is also why it is critical that we
continue to move forward legislatively with a solution, since
the Trump administration will not.
And I look forward to bringing my bill, the Reversing the
Youth Tobacco Epidemic Act, to the floor soon. My legislation
not only includes a full flavor ban, it also bans certain non-
face-to-face sales and protects kids from predatory marketing.
It's a comprehensive approach to end this epidemic, and I hope
that it garners the bipartisan support that it deserves when it
comes to the floor.
In the meantime, I want to hear more from the manufacturers
and what role they believe their companies have played in the
creation of this epidemic and what they are doing to correct
it. It is chilling to sit and watch as we are seeing history
repeat itself. We have been here before, as the tobacco
industry admitted to misleading millions of users on the safety
of tobacco products, and we can't sit idly by as it happens
again. For that reason, I hope the witnesses today are
forthcoming and acknowledge the role they must play in
reversing these dangerous and disturbing trends.
And I just wanted to say, a few years ago, I started going
around to some of my middle schools and talking to the
students, and I was amazed at how they didn't think that there
was any harmful aspect of e-cigarettes, that they didn't
contain any nicotine, that they didn't cause any addiction,
that they actually were just bubble gum or cotton candy and
that was it.
It is the misleading marketing, in my opinion, that has
caused this epidemic and made young people feel that there was
absolutely no problem with vaping. And that is why all the
gains that we made from trying to discourage tobacco use,
cigarettes, putting the warnings, all that has evaporated now
because we have this young generation that, until recently,
just thought there was not a problem.
And I am pleased to see that we have some younger people
here in the audience today speaking out against this, not here
necessarily, but outside and getting the public and the media
more aware.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Pallone follows:]

Prepared Statement of Hon. Frank Pallone, Jr.

I am pleased we are holding this hearing so that we can
shed more light on the youth tobacco epidemic and how we got
here.
The significant progress that was made to curb tobacco use
has simply vanished. Last year, 6.2 million middle school and
high school students reported using tobacco products-including
one in three high school students and one in eight middle
school students. These are shocking and concerning numbers.
And today, we're here to not only ask how this happened,
but what is going to be done to reverse these dangerous new
trends in tobacco use. While federal regulators share in this
blame, a large portion of culpability rests with the
manufacturers of e-cigarette products.
These manufacturers saw an opportunity to hook a new
generation on their products and used every trick in the book
to make their products appeal to kids through sweet flavors,
glossy marketing campaigns and slick product designs.
It is long past time that the Food and Drug Administration
move forward with reviewing the health and safety risks of the
e-cigarette products that are currently on the market. And then
the FDA must act swiftly to remove any products that are not in
compliance.
But it is also time for the manufacturers-including those
before us today-to acknowledge the responsibility they have to
ensure young people are protected from a lifetime of nicotine
addiction.
We do not know all of the long-term health implications of
e-cigarette use, but we do know that nicotine harms the
developing brain and that young people who use e-cigarettes are
more likely to try combustible cigarettes as well.
That is why I am so disappointed that President Trump chose
to side with industry over the nation's public health by
permitting flavored products to remain on the market like
menthol, disposable e-cigarettes, and open tank systems mixed
in vape shops.
The President's announcement last month fell far short of
the promises he made last year to address the youth tobacco
epidemic.
Don't be fooled-a so-called flavor ban that exempts menthol
and vape shops is not a ban at all.
And that is also why it is critical that we continue to
move forward legislatively with a solution since this
Administration will not.
I look forward to bringing my bill, the Reversing the Youth
Tobacco Epidemic Act, to the floor soon. My legislation not
only includes a full flavor ban, it also bans certain non-face-
to-face sales and protects kids from predatory marketing.
It is a comprehensive approach to end this epidemic, and I
hope that it garners the bipartisan support that it deserves
when it comes to the floor.
In the meantime, I want to hear more from the manufacturers
and what role they believe their companies have played in the
creation of this epidemic and what they are doing to correct
it.
It is chilling to sit and watch as we are seeing history
repeat itself. We have been here before as the tobacco industry
admitted to misleading millions of users on the safety of
tobacco products.
We cannot sit idly by as this happens again.
For that reason, I hope the witnesses today are forthcoming
and acknowledge the role they must play in reversing these
dangerous and disturbing trends.
Thank you and I yield back.

Ms. DeGette. I thank the gentleman. The Chair now yields 5
minutes to the ranking member of the full committee, Mr.
Walden.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. GREG WALDEN, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF OREGON

Mr. Walden. Thank you very much, Madam Chair.
And I, too, Mr. Chairman, am glad these young people are
here. When I was a student body president in high school. I
know it was a long time ago; I led the effort before the school
board to get smoking out of the bathrooms. It wasn't legal
there, but we actually created a smoking area outside, which
was revolutionary. You had to have parental permission and all
this other stuff, but we got it out of the bathrooms, because I
hated smoking. I was the only one in my family that didn't
smoke. And my, we have come a long way. So, stay involved in
all of this.
And, Mr. Guthrie, I would be curious, too. I am going over
to the corona virus briefing for the House in a few minutes.
So, I hope we can find out more about the work that is being
done with the tobacco plant, because vaccines, and getting to
them quicker, is something that we have all been working toward
for a long time.
So, Chair, thank you for holding this hearing.
Electronic cigarettes or e-cigarettes, the long illnesses
associated with vaping, the youth vaping epidemic, these are
major health concerns for the United States, and particularly,
and sadly, in my home State of Oregon, which, unfortunately, is
one of the 27 states where there was a confirmed death from an
e-cigarette or vaping product use-associated lung injury,
EVALI.
Since the subcommittee's hearing in September with federal
and state health officials; we have learned more about what
causes these tragic lung illnesses. According to the Centers
for Disease Control and Prevention, laboratory data show that
vitamin E acetate and additive in some THC-containing vaping
products is strongly linked to the EVALI outbreak.
While there is still more to learn about the EVALI and what
causes it, we must remain vigilant about a separate, but
equally alarming issue, the troubling statistics regarding e-
cigarette use among youth. As Republican Leader Guthrie noted,
the most recent data from the National Youth Tobacco Survey is
alarming. We all share this concern. Twenty-seven and a half
percent of youth reported using e-cigarettes in 2019. That
compares to 20.8 percent in 2018. It is a big jump from 11.3
percent just three years ago.
Given these trends, the Trump administration, the states,
manufacturers, and all of you before us today in this
Committee, are right to look for solutions to curb/stop youth
access to e-cigarettes. I applaud the Trump administration's
pursuit of a solution to address our country's youth vaping
epidemic. For example, in December, President Trump signed
legislation to raise the legal age to purchase tobacco products
from 18 to 21.
Additionally, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration, FDA,
issued guidance in January finalizing its enforcement policy
regarding unauthorized flavored cartridge-based e-cigarettes
that appeal to children, including fruit and mint. In addition
to these two changes, the May deadline for manufacturers to
submit the premarket tobacco product applications, PMTA, to FDA
is quickly approaching, which will shift the industry's
landscape even further.
Now, while these are all promising steps, we remain
concerned about the counterfeit and black market products that
current e-cigarette users, including our youth, may
increasingly turn to, when products they are currently using
will no longer be available in the legal and legitimate
marketplace.
I am also concerned about the potential shifts of youth
usage to other non-cartridge-based e-cigarettes, and I am
interested in hearing from the companies today their thoughts
on how we can prevent this from occurring.
I would also like to note the irony of the Health
Subcommittee of this full committee holding a hearing just two
weeks ago that included bills to deschedule and decriminalize
marijuana, much of which is smoke; followed by this hearing
where my colleagues are now denouncing smoking tobacco in all
forms. While I have concerns about the epidemic of youth
tobacco usage, I believe that concern should extend to expanded
youth access to marijuana and marijuana-related products,
especially considering the death in Oregon was likely related
to a THC vape pod purchased at a dispensary. Denouncing smoking
tobacco in all forms while embracing the descheduling or
legalization of marijuana is, at best, inconsistent when
considering long-term health outcomes and a lack of research
and data.
In addition to the committee's ongoing work, Chair DeGette,
I hope you will invite the FDA to testify again once the PMTA
deadline passes in May. I think we could really benefit----
[The prepared statement of Mr. Walden follows:]

Prepared Statement of Hon. Greg Walden

Chair DeGette, thank you for holding this hearing.
Electronic cigarettes, or e-cigarettes, the lung illnesses
associated with vaping, and the youth vaping epidemic are a
major health concern in the United States, and particularly in
my home state of Oregon, which unfortunately is one of the 27
states where there was a confirmed death associated with the e-
cigarette, or vaping, product use-associated lung injury
(EVALI).
Since the Subcommittee's hearing in September with federal
and state health officials, we have learned more about what
caused the lung illnesses. According to the Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention, laboratory data shows that vitamin E
acetate, an additive in some THC-containing vaping products, is
strongly linked to the EVALI outbreak.
While there is still more to learn about EVALI and what
causes it, we must remain vigilant about a separate, but
equally alarming issue-the troubling statistics regarding e-
cigarette use among our youth. As Republican Leader Guthrie
stated, the most recent data from the National Youth Tobacco
Survey is alarming. About 27.5 percent of youth reported using
e-cigarettes in 2019, compared with 20.8 percent in 2018. This
is a big jump from 11.3 percent just three years ago.
Given these trends, the Trump Administration, the states,
manufacturers like the ones before us today, and this Committee
are right to look for solutions to curb youth access to e-
cigarettes. I applaud the Trump Administration's pursuit of a
solution to address our country's youth vaping epidemic. For
example, in December, President Trump signed legislation to
raise the legal age to purchase tobacco products from 18 to 21.
Additionally, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA)
issued guidance in January finalizing its enforcement policy
regarding unauthorized flavored cartridge-based e-cigarettes
that appeal to children, including fruit and mint. In addition
to these two changes, the May deadline for manufacturers to
submit their premarket tobacco product applications (PMTA) to
FDA is quickly approaching, which will shift the industry's
landscape even further.
While these are all promising steps, we remain concerned
about the counterfeit and black-market products that current e-
cigarette users, including our youth, may increasingly turn to
when products they currently use may no longer be available in
the legitimate marketplace. I am also concerned about potential
shifts in youth usage to other non-cartridge-based e-
cigarettes, and am interested in hearing from the companies
today for their thoughts on how we can prevent this from
occurring.
I would also like to note the irony of the Health
Subcommittee holding a hearing just two weeks ago that included
bills about de-scheduling and de-criminalizing marijuana, much
of which is smoked, followed by this hearing where my
colleagues are now denouncing smoking tobacco in all forms.
While I have concerns about the epidemic of youth tobacco
usage, I believe that concern should extend to expanded access
to marijuana, especially considering the death in Oregon was
likely related to a THC vape pod purchased at a dispensary.
Denouncing smoking tobacco in all forms while embracing the de-
scheduling or legalization of marijuana, is at best
inconsistent when considering long-term health outcomes and the
lack of research and data.
In addition to the Committee's ongoing work, I'd like to
ask the Chair to invite FDA to testify again once the PMTA
deadline passes in May. While we heard from FDA in September,
it is critical to continue to hear from FDA as the issue
evolves and as FDA begins to evaluate the manufacturers' PMTAs.
We also need a full investigation into counterfeit and black-
market products that are likely to fill the void of the
products that are expected to exit the market, whether from the
Administration's January guidance, or from manufacturers who do
not file PMTAs and accordingly remove their products from the
market. We want to make sure FDA stands ready to address these
issues as they arise to protect current e-cigarette users, but
most importantly our youth.
I want to thank the companies before us today for
voluntarily agreeing to testify before the Subcommittee. While
it is important to hear from these five companies and what they
are doing to ensure that their products stay out of the hands
of youth, they only represent a portion of the vaping industry,
and one that is captured by the Administration's January
guidance. This further underscores the importance for a more
thorough examination of the industry writ large, as well as
those manufacturing and selling counterfeit and black-market
products.
I look forward to listening to the testimony of the
witnesses and working with our friends on the other side of the
aisle to ensure that we make fully informed policy decisions to
protect public health and our youth.
I yield back.

Ms. DeGette. We will.
Mr. Walden. Excellent.
While we heard from the FDA in September, it is critical
for all of us to continue to hear from the FDA as the issue
evolves and the FDA begins to evaluate manufacturers' PMTAs.
We also need a full investigation to counterfeit and black
market products that are likely to fill the void of the
products that are expected to exit the market, whether from the
administration's January guidance or from manufacturers who do
not file PMTAs and, accordingly, remove their products from the
market. We want to make sure the FDA stands ready to address
these issues as they arise to protect current e-cigarette
users, but, most importantly, our youth.
So, I want to thank the companies before us for voluntarily
coming here. It is important that we hear from you.
And, Madam Chair, I appreciate you holding this hearing. I
will have to go over to that corona virus for the Members, but
we will be back and forth. And I yield back.
Ms. DeGette. Take notes over there. OK?
Mr. Walden. Yes, I will.
Ms. DeGette. And I just want to say, I don't think there is
anybody on this Committee that thinks marijuana should be
legalized for people under 21.
Mr. Walden. Here, here.
Ms. DeGette. And in addition, I think everybody on this
Committee will agree that we need to continue to do the
research on that, too.
Mr. Walden. Yes.
Ms. DeGette. There has been woefully inadequate research.
Mr. Walden. Fully agree.
Ms. DeGette. In fact, we are planning to have a hearing on
that sometime in the near future.
Mr. Walden. Excellent. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Ms. DeGette. The Chair would now ask unanimous consent that
the members' written opening statements to be made part of the
record. Without objection, so ordered.
The Chair would also like to welcome Representative Shalala
for joining us at the hearing today. Representative Shalala is
not on this Committee. And so, under Rule 11 of the House of
Representatives, Members, Delegates, and Residents can
participate in committee hearings, but they are not able to
question witnesses. But I think we could all stipulate that she
probably has more institutional knowledge about healthcare
policy than anybody in this Congress. So, we are really happy
to have you join us.
I would now like to introduce our witnesses for today's
hearing.
Mr. K.C. Crosthwaite, CEO of JUUL, welcome.
Mr. Ricardo Oberlander, who is the president and CEO of
Reynolds America, Inc., welcome. Glad to have you.
Mr. Ryan Nivakoff, CEO of NJOY, LLC.
Mr. Antoine Blonde, who is president of Fontem U.S., is
welcome.
Mr. Jerry Loftin, who is the president of Logic Technology
Development, LLC, and welcome to you, too, Mr. Loftin.
Thanks to all of our witnesses for appearing today before
the subcommittee.
You are aware that the committee is holding an
investigative hearing, and when doing so, has the practice of
taking testimony under oath. Does anyone have any objection to
testifying under oath today?
Let the record reflect that the witnesses have responded
no.
The Chair, then, advises you that, under the rules of the
House and the rules of the committee, you are entitled to be
accompanied by counsel. Does anyone desire to be accompanied by
counsel today?
Let the record reflect, again, that the witnesses have
responded no.
If you would, then, please rise and raise your right hand,
so that you may be sworn-in.
[Witnesses sworn.]
You may be seated.
Let the record reflect the witnesses have responded
affirmatively, and all of you are now under oath and subject to
the penalties set forth in Title 18, Section 1001, of the U.S.
Code.
The Chair will now recognize our witnesses for a 5-minute
summary of their written statements.
In front of each of you, there is a microphone, a timer,
and a series of lights. The timer will count down your time,
and the red light will turn on when your 5 minutes have come to
an end.
And so now, Mr. Crosthwaite, I am delighted to recognize
you for 5 minutes, please.

TESTIMONIES OF K.C. CROSTHWAITE, CEO, JUUL LABS, INC.; RICARDO
OBERLANDER, PRESIDENT AND CEO, REYNOLDS AMERICAN, INC.; RYAN
NIVAKOFF, CEO, NJOY, LLC; ANTOINE BLONDE, PRESIDENT, FONTEM
U.S., AND JERRY LOFTIN, PRESIDENT, LOGIC TECHNOLOGY
DEVELOPMENT, LLC

TESTIMONY OF K.C. CROSTHWAITE

Mr. Crosthwaite. Chair DeGette, Chairman Pallone, Ranking
Members Guthrie and Walden, and other distinguished
subcommittee members, my name K. C. Crosthwaite, and I am CEO
of JUUL Labs, a position I assumed when I joined the company
about four months ago.
At JUUL Labs, our thousands of U.S. employees are committed
to helping adult smokers transition away from combustible
cigarettes while combating the serious problem of underage use.
As we look at the vapor category, it is helpful to begin by
noting the significant changes that have taken place in a
relatively short period of time.
At the start of 2019, most Americans lived in states where
the legal age of purchase was just 18. Vapor products were
available in a wide array of flavors. There was low awareness
of black-market vapor products, and the deadline for PMTA
submissions to the FDA was uncertain.
In contract, today, 21-plus is the law of the land, thanks
to many of you on this Committee. Under FDA guidance, pod-based
products are now available in only tobacco and menthol.
Congress, the FDA, and the President have raised the alarm on
black market products, and the PMTA deadline of May 2020 is
rapidly approaching.
At JUUL Labs, we recognize the importance of these steps.
Over the past few years, trust in our company and category has
eroded. We know some of our past actions have contributed to
that erosion and we are committed to taking concrete action to
re-earn that trust.
We halted our broadcast, print, and digital product
advertising. We voluntarily restricted the sale of flavors
other than tobacco and menthol, and we restructured our company
to focus on developing technologies to combat underage use and
to conduct research in support of our PMTA submission.
Clearly, we still have a long way to go. Underage use rates
remain unacceptably high, but we believe that this challenge
can, and must, be met. It threatens the entire harm reduction
opportunity represented by vapor products. And that opportunity
is too important to lose.
Combustible cigarettes remain the leading cause of
preventable death in our country and worldwide. More than 34
million Americans still smoke. Each year, nearly half a million
Americans die from smoking-related diseases. To be clear,
anyone who doesn't use nicotine shouldn't start. Anyone who
smokes should quit. For those who cannot or will not quit, less
harmful alternatives like vapor products should be available.
Public health authorities agree that it is not the
nicotine, but the burning of tobacco and smoke that causes
disease and death. As the FDA noted in 2017, in a quote,
``Nicotine, while highly addictive, is delivered through
products that represent a continuum of risk and is most harmful
when delivered through smoke particles in combustible
cigarettes.'' End of quote.
At the same time, the FDA stated its intent to encourage
innovation that could provide adult smokers a less harmful way
to consume nicotine. JUUL products are one example of this type
of innovation. Our products are not risk-free, but research
indicates that vapor products are substantially lower risk than
cigarettes. Research also indicates that many, if not most,
adult smokers who try JUUL products are able to successfully
transition completely off of cigarettes. We will provide all of
this research to the FDA through the PMTA process.
That process, which we support, is a science- and evidence-
based review that will evaluate the harm reduction potential of
our products along with the ability to prevent youth usage. If
authorized by the FDA, our products will be marketed under
strict oversight, subject to the comprehensive regulatory
powers invested in the agency by Congress.
Chair DeGette, Ranking Member Guthrie, my company is
working hard to listen to our stakeholders, so, together, we
can make progress towards the twin goals of helping more adults
switch away from cigarettes while combating underage use. My
hope is today's panel can be another step along that path.
I thank you for the opportunity and I look forward to
answering your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Crosthwaite follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Ms. DeGette. Thank you so much.
The Chair now recognizes Mr. Oberlander for 5 minutes for
an opening statement.
Actually, hold on for 1 minute. We are going to replace Mr.
Crosthwaite's microphone, so you don't have to keep shifting
back and forth all day.
Thank you so much.
Mr. Oberlander, you are now recognized for 5 minutes.

TESTIMONY OF RICARDO OBERLANDER

Mr. Oberlander. Chair DeGette, Ranking Member Guthrie, and
members of the subcommittee, Chairman Pallone, Ranking Member
Walden, and distinguished members, my name is Ricardo
Oberlander. I am the president of Reynolds American, Inc.
I appreciate this opportunity to share information about
our company and to continue this important conversation today.
Over a decade ago, Reynolds set a goal to transform the
tobacco market through innovative products that could make
tobacco harm reduction a reality for adult smokers. Doing so
requires us to provide consumer-acceptable products that may
present less risk, including products in the vaping category.
In pursuing this goal, we have focused on both innovation
and responsibility, because the two must not be separated. The
way we bring innovative products to market and how we market
those products are as important as the products themselves. Our
marketing is important. It is how we communicate with adult
smokers about alternatives to combustible cigarettes.
As detailed in our submissions to the committee, we have
rigorous standards in place to ensure our marketing is accurate
and is responsibly directed to adult smokers 21 and older. We
pose numerous restrictions on the content of our marketing and
limit with whom we communicate.
Our vapor brand is VUSE. Our consumer demographics confirm
our focus on adults. Ninety-five percent of VUSE consumers are
over 25 and 70 percent are over 35.
With respect to youth vaping, when VUSE was the market
leader through 2017, youth vaping rates actually declined. And
the most recent National Youth Tobacco Survey results show that
VUSE is not popular among youth. Thus, we have demonstrated,
and continue to demonstrate, that it is possible to responsibly
market alternative products and manufacture them under rigorous
product stewardship standards.
The increasing youth vaping over the past two years and
serious health issues from illicit products are now at the
heart of a national discussion. These issues are being
discussed within families, by educators, and in state and local
governments. They are being discussed in law enforcement
communities, the White House, and here today in the United
States Congress. We support action by the administration and
Congress to address both issues. It is important to public
health and to adult consumers.
Looking forward, FDA's premarket tobacco application
process provides a pathway for vapor products aligned with
public health priorities. We believe vapor products can be
manufactured and marketed responsibly within this framework. In
fact, we have already made extensive PMTA submissions for our
VUSE products.
There are additional actions we encourage you to consider.
First, transparency in the PMTA process is critical. We
suggest FDA disclose which products have been submitted for
PMTA approval. This will help retailers and the public know
which vapor products are undergoing PMTA review and are
eligible to remain on the market, and will help FDA and state
officials enforce the law.
Second, FDA needs to adopt regulations that expedite
important innovations. For example, we are exploring
technologies that could provide additional measures for
reducing potential youth usage. However, the current PMTA
process, although thorough and welcome, would significantly
delay bringing this type of responsible innovation to market.
Third, FDA should consider adopting additional and rotating
warnings for vapor products. These warnings could reinforce
that vaping product are not safe and not for youth. We already
include many such statements in our packaging and brand
website.
And finally, FDA has a track record of success with its
youth prevention program. We applaud the agency's success and
encourage it to be continued and expanded.
In conclusion, we believe a level setting of the vapor
market through the PMTA process will help address these serious
issues facing us today. At the same time, it will foster the
continued transformation of the tobacco category and
significantly benefit public health.
I thank the committee for the opportunity to share
Reynolds' views about these important issues and reiterate our
full commitment to cooperating with this Committee and FDA.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Oberlander follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Ms. DeGette. Thank you so much.
Mr. Nivakoff, now you are recognized for 5 minutes, please.

TESTIMONY OF RYAN NIVAKOFF

Mr. Nivakoff. Good morning, Chair DeGette, Chairman
Pallone, Ranking Member Guthrie, Ranking Member Walden, and
distinguished members of the subcommittee.
My name is Ryan Nivakoff, and I am the CEO of NJOY. Thank
you for the opportunity to testify today to discuss with you
the important public health dynamics associated with electronic
cigarettes. I am humbled to be here today to provide NJOY's
insights into this complex and vitally important conversation.
By way of background, I joined NJOY for deeply personal
reasons. As I am sure is the case with many of the people in
this room, my family has been victimized by one of the most
deadly articles of commerce ever created, the combustible
cigarette. As a boy, I watched as my grandmother perished well
before her time and as my once-virile grandfather, a veteran of
the Army, and Marine Corps, and a police officer for over 38
years, spent the last six years of his life attached feebly to
an oxygen tank, unable to even sit up without losing his
breath. It is with these horrifying memories in mind that I
joined NJOY and wrote our mission statement to make smoking
history by helping adults find an alternative to combustible
cigarettes.
From day one, it was clear to me that neither we at NJOY
nor other pioneers in harm reduction would be able to advance
that mission if the public health benefits of electronic
cigarettes were overshadowed by a surge of youth use. To that
end, NJOY has pursued its mission with the goal of ensuring
that our products do not fall into the hands of America's
youth.
Though hollow as it may sound, this industry has the
greatest incentive, both moral and economic, to ensure that
youth use is eliminated. If that goal is not accomplished, this
life-changing technology may, rightfully and ironically, be
relegated to the ashtray of history. We see today's hearing as
an opportunity for productive dialog to move forward together
collectively to protect the public health.
There are approximately 34 million Americans who still
smoke combustible cigarettes and over a billion people
worldwide. Those smokers face a greater than 50 percent chance
of premature death if they continue to smoke. And each year,
nearly 500,000 Americans die prematurely from smoking-related
disease.
Switching adult smokers from combustible cigarettes to
electronic cigarettes has the potential to save millions of
lives and trillions of dollars in preventable healthcare
expenses. These assertions are not mere industry taglines
designed to obfuscate otherwise nefarious or profit-driven
motives. Former FDA Commissioner Scott Gottlieb has stated,
``If you can fully switch every currently addicted adult smoker
who is using combustible tobacco products onto e-cigarettes,
you will have a profound impact on public health.''
With this in mind, NJOY has recognized from inception that,
contrary to popular opinion, addicting a new generation of
nicotine users would not further our moral or financial bottom
lines, but, rather, would be our undoing. We have built our
business in accordance with that ethos, and the data prove that
it is working.
According to the National Youth Tobacco Survey, in 2019,
only 1.2 percent of high school students who used electronic
cigarettes within the prior 30 days reported using NJOY
products. Indeed, in the most recent National Youth Tobacco
Survey, NJOY's use rate for high-schoolers, despite being one
of the top three national brands, is over nine times lower than
the combined use of two brands that were not even part of the
survey, but were written in by students who used those brands.
Further, the FDA's yearly retail inspection violation data
consistently shows that NJOY's products are involved in the
fewest violations of the top four e-cigarette brands. For
example, in the fiscal year beginning October 2017, FDA
recorded more than 3,300 violations, including electronic
cigarettes, of which only 20 involved NJOY products, which is
less than 1 percent. The following fiscal year, FDA recorded
over 5,250 violations, only 28 of which involved NJOY products,
barely one-half of 1 percent. And in the present fiscal year,
NJOY products were involved in only eight violations of the 839
recorded by FDA thus far, again, less than 1 percent.
While NJOY will strive to continue to reduce this number
even further, NJOY is proud of its track record of success thus
far. To be clear, however, my goal is not to aggrandize NJOY's
track record, nor to draw comparisons against my competition.
Rather, I provide this data merely to demonstrate that, with
proper regulation and vigilant self-policing, there is a path
forward for this life-changing technology, a path that can
provide an off-ramp for adults without creating an on-ramp for
youth. And I am confident that everyone on this panel shares
that very same dedication to eliminating underage vaping.
I welcome the opportunity to share with the subcommittee
more detail about the policies and procedures by which NJOY has
been able to serve its mission to adult smokers while
minimizing access to youth. I look forward to answering your
questions, and thank you again for the opportunity to be here.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Nivakoff follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Ms. DeGette. Thank you so much.
I now recognize Mr. Blonde for 5 minutes for an opening
statement.

TESTIMONY OF ANTOINE BLONDE

Mr. Blonde. Chair DeGette, Chairman Pallone, Ranking Member
Guthrie, members of the subcommittee, thank you for the
opportunity to appear today before the House Committee on
Energy and Commerce, Oversight and Investigations Subcommittee,
to discuss the important issues regarding electronic nicotine
delivery systems, ENDS, commonly referred to as e-cigarettes.
My name is Antoine Blonde, and I am president of Fontem
U.S. Incorporated. Fontem U.S. markets and sells the blu
brands, which we acquired from another company in June 2015.
As you are aware, Fontem has cooperated extensively with
the committee's investigation since it began last August and
provided several hundred pages of material in response to the
committee's request for information.
We believe the facts make clear that Fontem is a
responsible actor in the e-cigarette marketplace, and we are
committed to ensuring that our business practices are
consistent with our objective of providing adult consumers only
with the highest quality products and an enjoyable product
experience.
I would like to briefly address four points.
First, Fontem believes, without equivocation that youth
should not use any e-cigarette product. We share the
subcommittee's view that preventing youth access to e-
cigarettes is an issue of critical importance. In this regard,
Fontem does not, and has never, directed its marketing efforts
for e-cigarettes to youth.
Second, Fontem takes extensive steps to ensure that its e-
cigarettes sales channel reflects Fontem's commitment to youth
access prevention. Fontem's e-cigarettes are sold through three
main distribution channels: the traditional brick and mortar--
the convenience stores, the gas stations--ecommerce, and vape
shops. In each distribution channel, Fontem takes steps to
ensure that youth do not have access to blu products.
Third, Fontem has invested extensively in its product
stewardship program. Fontem is also committed to responsible
product stewardship practices and ensuring product quality is
thoughtfully integrated from product conception to consumer
use.
Fourth, Fontem's products have not been found by the U.S.
Center for Disease Control to be involved in any of the
incidents of respiratory illness it has investigated. We were
deeply concerned by reports last year linking respiratory
illnesses to the use of vaping products, and we joined calls
for the CDC to investigate these instances as soon as possible.
Vitamin E acetate is not, and has never been, an ingredient
in blu products, and we are not aware of any Fontem product
being referenced by the CDC as involving incidences it has
investigated. Further, we fully agree with the CDC's advice
that consumers should not buy any vaping product, especially
the one containing THC, from unknown sources or in the black
market. Of course, we will continue to monitor these
developments very closely.
These initiatives are some examples of Fontem's extensive
efforts in the areas of youth access prevention and product
quality. All of us at Fontem are dedicated to ensuring that our
products are of the highest quality and that they are marketed
and sold only to other consumers.
I thank you for your time and attention to these important
issues. On behalf of Fontem U.S., we look forward to working
with the Congress and FDA and continue doing so. And I am happy
to answer any questions you will have.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Blonde follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Ms. DeGette. Thank you, Mr. Blonde. And I apologize for
mispronouncing your name earlier.
Mr. Loftin, you are now recognized for 5 minutes for an
opening statement.

TESTIMONY OF JERRY LOFTIN

Mr. Loftin. Chairman DeGette, Ranking Member Guthrie, and
members of the subcommittee, thank you for inviting me to
testify at this hearing.
I am Jay Loftin, president of Logic, and I appreciate the
opportunity to contribute to this very important inquiry.
To my knowledge, only one company has all of its ENDS
premarket tobacco applications accepted for substantive review
by the FDA. That is Logic. Logic has consistently acted
responsibly. Since we started, Logic has had numerous measures
to deter youth access to ENDS.
We share your concerns regarding unlawful products and
those that intentionally target minors or are marketed as low-
risk or cessation products without approval. So, as much as I
am grateful for the opportunity to participate today and
discuss the numerous challenges we face, I do not wish to be
painted with the same brush as others because we operate
differently.
We have made every effort to responsibly market our
products with controls in place aimed at preventing youth
appeal and access. We did this not because it was mandated by
law at the time, or because we were facing lawsuits, or because
we generated bad publicity with our products or marketing. We
did this because it was the right thing to do.
We don't suggest that our products are cessation devices.
We have not, and do not, use influencers to convince children
or adults to try our products. We are not evangelists claiming
to offer a cure for smoking.
Other companies have caused tremendous damage to the
reputation of this category while putting America's youth in
harm's way. Logic has always, and will always, responsibly
market and sell its products to adults only, period.
From our first day, Logic's product packaging and website
have carried a warning clearly stating that our products
contain nicotine which is addictive; our products are for
adults only, and underage sale is prohibited. Purchases through
our website have always been restricted to age-verified adults.
And even before the Deeming regulations took effect, we further
restricted sales to those aged 21 and above. Perhaps others now
have some of these practices in place, but introducing these
when you must, rather than because it is the right thing to do,
is different altogether.
Logic isn't a brand that resonates with youth. Our online
data shows that Logic's typical consumer looks much more like
me than my adult children. This is not by chance. It is the
result of the responsible steps that Logic has taken, such as
only using people who are over the age of 30 in our consumer
marketing materials.
Was it difficult to stand by and watch others take a less
responsible approach and see our competitors' businesses soar?
Yes, it was. Their growth came at a great cost. It has
tarnished the entire category, caused a serious youth uptake
problem, and created doubt and fear in this country.
Rather than treating counterfeit products as an excuse for
the problems at hand, Logic has committed substantial resources
towards eliminating them. For nearly four years, we have worked
with the FDA, Homeland Security, CBP, and law enforcement to
stop thousands of illegitimate sales of our products online and
at retail.
We have vocally and consistently called for the FDA to
close the window that it had opened when it pushed the PMTA
deadlines back, and for the FDA to immediately and robustly
impose and enforce premarket regulatory requirements. The FDA
has the authority to rid the market of products that are not
appropriate for the protection of public health and to
determine, based on science and evidence, including the likely
impact on the population as a whole, whether a product should
remain on the market, irrespective of design, irrespective of
flavor.
Yes, Logic has flavored products. That is because many
adults prefer them to the taste of menthol. The simple
existence of flavors doesn't cause a youth problem. What does
is irresponsible marketing combined with products that are
designed and marketed to appeal to youth. That is why we don't
agree with wholesale bans on flavors. That is why we believe in
allowing the FDA to decide which products should be on the
market through the PMTA process.
Having never manufactured or marketed our products to
appeal to young people, having acted with responsibility and
integrity, I and everyone at Logic will do what we can to
support the committee with this ongoing work. Thank you for
your time.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Loftin follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0301.017

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0301.018

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0301.019

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0301.020

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0301.021

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0301.022

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0301.023

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0301.024

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0301.025

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0301.026

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0301.027

Ms. DeGette. Thank you so much, Mr. Loftin.
It is now time for the committee to ask questions, and the
Chair will recognize herself for 5 minutes.
People are confused when it comes to the health and safety
of e-cigarettes, and I heard this the other day over at South
High School. The U.S. Surgeon General has noted that young
people try e-cigarettes, assuming that either they are less
harmful than other tobacco products or even that they are not
harmful at all.
So, I want to clear a couple of things up with this panel.
These questions should be able to be answered with a simple
yes-or-no answer.
My first question is, isn't it true that nicotine is
addictive? Mr. Crosthwaite?
Mr. Crosthwaite. Yes, nicotine is addictive.
Ms. DeGette. Mr. Oberlander?
Mr. Oberlander. Nicotine is addictive.
Ms. DeGette. Mr. Nivakoff?
Mr. Nivakoff. Yes.
Ms. DeGette. Mr. Blonde?
Mr. Blonde. Yes.
Ms. DeGette. Mr. Loftin?
Mr. Loftin. Yes.
Ms. DeGette. And isn't it true, then, that using the
products each of your companies makes which contain nicotine
could lead to nicotine addiction?
Mr. Crosthwaite?
Mr. Crosthwaite. Yes, nicotine is addictive.
Ms. DeGette. And your products could lead to nicotine
addiction, correct?
Mr. Crosthwaite. Yes, they could.
Ms. DeGette. Mr. Oberlander?
Mr. Oberlander. Any product containing nicotine is
addictive.
Ms. DeGette. And your products that people use containing
nicotine could cause people to become addicted, yes?
Mr. Oberlander. Yes, they do.
Ms. DeGette. Mr. Nivakoff?
Mr. Nivakoff. Yes, ma'am.
Ms. DeGette. Mr. Blonde?
Mr. Blonde. Yes.
Ms. DeGette. Mr. Loftin?
Mr. Loftin. Yes.
Ms. DeGette. And do you agree with the medical studies that
show that nicotine can have negative consequences for
respiratory health and can cause an increase in blood pressure,
heart rate, and lead to heart disease, and also could harm
brain development in young people?
Mr. Crosthwaite?
Mr. Crosthwaite. As part of our PMTA, we will have all of
our studies submitted to be reviewed by the----
Ms. DeGette. So, have you seen the studies that show that
there are these issues that I just mentioned?
Mr. Crosthwaite. I'm not familiar with the one you're
referring to.
Ms. DeGette. You don't know? So, do you maintain that
nicotine causes no health consequences in people then?
Mr. Crosthwaite. No, nicotine is addictive and----
Ms. DeGette. And does it have health consequences?
Mr. Crosthwaite. It can cause harm.
Ms. DeGette. Yes.
Mr. Oberlander, did you hear my question about the studies?
What is your view?
Mr. Oberlander. Yes, I did. Our scientific team actually
monitors all the literature regarding----
Ms. DeGette. So, would you agree that nicotine could cause
respiratory health issues, blood pressure, heart rate, and
brain development issues?
Mr. Oberlander. As I said before, nicotine is addictive and
tobacco products can cause harm.
Ms. DeGette. Could they cause the harms I just talked
about?
Mr. Oberlander. I am not familiar with----
Ms. DeGette. You don't know?
Mr. Nivakoff, what about you?
Mr. Nivakoff. I am not in a position to corroborate nor
repudiate----
Ms. DeGette. So, you don't know if it could cause those
harms?
Mr. Nivakoff. Nicotine can cause health issues. I am just
not----
Ms. DeGette. What health issues do you think----
Mr. Nivakoff. I am just not in a position to corroborate--
--
Ms. DeGette. Yes, what health issues do you think they
could cause?
Mr. Nivakoff. Nicotine can raise your blood pressure.
Ms. DeGette. OK.
Mr. Nivakoff. It can cause headaches.
Ms. DeGette. OK. But you don't really know about any other
things?
Mr. Nivakoff. I am not aware of the studies that----
Ms. DeGette. Even though you are the CEO of the company?
OK.
Mr. Blonde?
Mr. Blonde. Nicotine is addictive and, as such, can cause
harm.
Ms. DeGette. OK. The harm, I find it fascinating no one
really wants to talk about what that harm is. The medical
studies show that it can cause respiratory health problems,
blood pressure, heart rate problems, and brain development
problems in young people. Do you think it could cause any of
those harms?
Mr. Blonde. I have no reason to doubt those studies, but I
am not aware of them.
Ms. DeGette. Thank you. Thank you very much.
Mr. Loftin?
Mr. Loftin. Nicotine is addictive and we put all the
warning labels on our product.
Ms. DeGette. I understand that. Do you think it could cause
the harms that I am talking about?
Mr. Loftin. We are going to leave that up to the FDA to
decide through the PMTA process, the specifics of----
Ms. DeGette. So, you are not going to commit to that,
either? See, when you say nicotine is addictive, I don't think
that a lot of young people understand what that means in terms
of health consequences.
Mr. Nivakoff, I was really moved by what you said about, I
think, your grandmother and your grandfather. My mother died of
lung cancer at age 54 from smoking, which she started doing
when she was under 21. And I am sure she knew it was addictive,
but I don't think she had any idea.
And I think people think that e-cigarettes, sure, they are
addictive, but they are not going to cause the same harm as
cigarettes. In fact, we don't really know.
Now I want to ask you another yes-or-no question. Maybe you
will answer it. Do you agree with the CDC that there is no
completely safe tobacco product, including e-cigarettes?
Mr. Crosthwaite?
Mr. Crosthwaite. Yes, our products are not without----
Ms. DeGette. Mr. Oberlander?
Mr. Oberlander. No tobacco product is safe.
Ms. DeGette. Including your e-cigarettes?
Mr. Oberlander. Including them.
Ms. DeGette. Mr. Nivakoff?
Mr. Nivakoff. Yes, ma'am, I agree.
Ms. DeGette. Mr. Blonde?
Mr. Blonde. I agree.
Ms. DeGette. And, Mr. Loftin?
Mr. Loftin. All tobacco products carry risk.
Ms. DeGette. OK. One last question. Do you all agree that
there is a youth vaping epidemic in this country and that
people under 21 should not be using e-cigarettes, including
your products?
Mr. Crosthwaite?
Mr. Crosthwaite. I completely agree.
Ms. DeGette. Mr. Oberlander?
Mr. Oberlander. Chair DeGette, one----
Ms. DeGette. Mr. Nivakoff?
Mr. Nivakoff. Yes, ma'am, I agree.
Ms. DeGette. Mr. Blonde?
Mr. Blonde. Absolutely.
Ms. DeGette. Mr. Loftin?
Mr. Loftin. I agree.
Ms. DeGette. What did you want to say?
Mr. Oberlander. One youth vaping is too many.
Ms. DeGette. Thank you. Thank you very much. I appreciate
all of you.
And now, I recognize Mr. Guthrie for 5 minutes.
Mr. Guthrie. Good to see you all here. Thank you for being
here.
And I want to begin by asking, actually, I want to begin by
understanding the FDA's authorities. So, concerns have been
raised about disposable products still being on the market and,
therefore, potentially available to youth, including newer
flavored products such as Puff Bars or POSH.
And this is directed to Mr. Blonde and Mr. Nivakoff. I want
to make sure we all understand FDA's authorities. Is it correct
that, under the Deeming Rule, FDA can currently remove products
that enter the market after August the 8th, 2016?
Mr. Nivakoff. Yes, sir, that is correct.
Mr. Guthrie. It is correct?
Mr. Blonde. It is correct.
Mr. Guthrie. In fact, the FDA has used the authority,
removing nearly 100 flavored products by EonSmoke from the
market in October of 2019. So, to Mr. Blonde and Mr. Nivakoff,
under the January enforcement guidance, what actions can FDA
take against manufacturers of non-cartridge- based products,
such as disposable products, if the FDA finds the manufacturers
fail to keep them away from minors?
Mr. Nivakoff. Who would you like to go first, sir?
Mr. Guthrie. You can go first, yes.
Mr. Nivakoff. I think what is sometimes lost in the FDA
guidance is that there were three prongs of the FDA's guidance
document that allowed FDA to take action against products,
products that included flavors, and products that are targeted
towards minors or manufactured or marketed in a way that makes
them attractive to youth.
So, the products that you refer to, while I can't comment
on their genesis, I can say that, to the extent that they
create an increased level of youth use, the FDA has sweeping
authority to remove them from the market summarily.
Mr. Guthrie. So, since you answered that, I will ask Mr.
Blonde to answer this second. You first and, then, second. So,
what has your company--because they have disposable products
where the others don't--what have you done to prevent
disposable products from being unavailable to youth?
Mr. Nivakoff. Historically, our disposable products have
not contributed to really any statistically- meaningful level
of youth use. Our historical practice to avoid youth use across
the spectrum of our products has been avoiding, and in our case
eliminating, all advertising activity that occurs outside of
the confines of the physical premises of a licensed tobacco
retailer. We have eliminated the social media presence.
And then, specifically with respect to, I think, the
inference regarding flavored disposables, a week ago, we made
the decision to voluntarily remove our flavored products,
flavored disposable products, from stores; albeit, not because
those products have created increased access to youth use. We
did so because we felt it was consistent with the spirit of the
FDA guidance that the large businesses use the PMTA process to
adjudicate whether or not flavors are appropriate for the
protection of public health.
Mr. Guthrie. OK. Mr. Blonde, I have another question to get
to. Your company, to keep disposable products out of the hands
of youth, what is your company doing?
Mr. Blonde. As for all of our products, we keep all of our
products outside of the hands of youth through a very robust
youth access prevention program. And this is through our
marketing practices. The use of all the means that we put in
marketing are only related to adult consumers, and we are being
very careful about that.
We are using very strict labeling rules as well to make
sure that our products are informative and appropriate for
consumption for adult smokers only. And we engage very actively
with our retailers/partners to make sure that not any product
is being sold to a youth.
Mr. Guthrie. Thank you.
And some of the others, since you all answered, I just want
to get to. What actions as your company, recent actions have
your company taken to curb youth access to the products? And do
you monitor access and how do you make sure youth aren't using
them?
And then, I think Mr. Loftin used the term they have
controls in place. So, if you want to talk about what controls
are in place each of you, the other two can kind of answer that
question, to keep youth from having access to your product.
Mr. Crosthwaite. When I joined the organization, it was
obvious to me that youth use levels were unacceptable. And we
took immediate action when I joined and we pulled back and
stopped all of our product, our digital and broadcast/print
advertising. When I saw the access that youth were getting to
certain flavors, including the bars, we stopped shipping them
in November of last year.
We are also focused at preventing access in the retail
channel and working on technology solutions with retailers to
ensure that identifications are scanned and bulk limit
purchases are in place, so that transactions are only happening
with adults in retail stores. It is an effort that we are
focused on, and we know we must combat the underage access to
e-vapor.
Mr. Guthrie. Can I jump to Mr. Oberlander? And then, we
will get to Mr. Loftin, hopefully.
Mr. Oberlander. First of all, our communication has been
directed to adult consumers 21-plus since the very beginning.
Second, most of our engagement is one-to-one mission-based.
Third, we are early supporters of Tobacco 21+. Fourth, we have
age-gated protocols in process for all our online interactions;
we have state-of-the-art stage-gating for online purchases.
Fifth, we have enhanced our contractual policies and
penalties----
Mr. Guthrie. OK, I am out of time. But, with the indulgence
of the chairman, Mr. Loftin, you said you have controls in
place? So, you are going to give me a few seconds.
Mr. Loftin. Yes, sir. We always have a health warning.
Online, we have strict age verification. We have no marketing
flavors that we specifically go after minors. Consumer
marketing, all our models are above 30 years old, and we use no
social influencers.
Mr. Guthrie. Thank you very much.
I yield back.
Ms. DeGette. The Chair now recognizes the chairman of the
full committee for 5 minutes, Mr. Pallone.
Mr. Pallone. Thank you, Madam Chair.
I just wanted to say a little disclaimer here. I heard all
of you over and over again say you were responsible men, men of
integrity. That is not true. People who have integrity and are
responsible don't sell products which, after listening to Ms.
DeGette's questions, you admit make people sick, and probably
kill people. If you wanted to be men of integrity and
responsible men, you would not be selling this product. You
would do something else. So, I just want you to understand I am
very upset by hearing this constant reference to your integrity
and responsibility. It is just false.
But I wanted to get to the bottom of this. I don't believe
for one minute that any of you did not purposely target young
people, but you are not going to admit that. So, let me get to
my questions.
I continue to be alarmed by the rapid increase in the
number of young people who are using your product, youth
interest and curiosity in e-cigarettes. That stems not only
from availability and kid-friendly flavors, but also from the
persuasive and targeted marketing tactics. And these tactics
are not dissimilar to those used by Big Tobacco decades ago.
Instead of Joe Camel, e-cigarette companies have used social
media to convince consumers these products will make you cool.
A Stanford study found that in the years following the
launch of its product, JUUL's advertising was, and I quote,
``widely distributed on social media channels frequented by
youth, was amplified by hashtag extensions, and catalyzed by
compensated influencers and affiliates.''
So, my questions are all of you, Mr. Crosthwaite. I could
ask the others, but I don't have enough time.
Mr. Crosthwaite, at the time that JUUL used these tactics,
were any controls in place to prevent the advertising and
marketing activities from reaching young people? Briefly, if
you could answer? Were there any controls or any efforts to
prevent the advertising and marketing from reaching young
people?
Mr. Crosthwaite. Just to be clear, we do not do any of the
social media programs today. They are not in place.
Mr. Pallone. No, I am talking about when you started doing
it.
Mr. Crosthwaite. Yes, so, from my recollection, looking
back in time, this company never had any intention to market to
youth.
Mr. Pallone. I know you are going to say you had no
intention. I don't think anybody here is going to admit their
intent was to market to youth. But what I am asking you, at the
time that you were doing this, were any controls in place to
prevent the advertising and marketing activities from reaching
young people? If the answer is no, you can say no.
Mr. Crosthwaite. It was before my time at the company and--
--
Mr. Pallone. OK, it was before your time.
Mr. Crosthwaite [continue]. We are not on social media.
Mr. Pallone. JUUL has acknowledged that it was not able to
prevent young people from engaging with its product on social
media. So, I am not going to ask you that.
But, in the November 2018 release announcing your action
plan to address underage use of e-cigarettes, JUUL stated, and
I quote it, ``User-generated social media posts involving JUUL
products or our brand are proliferating across platforms and
must be swiftly addressed.'' Unquote.
So, Mr. Crosthwaite, what was the tipping point that led
JUUL to decide that its marketing practices were a problem that
needed to be addressed? I know you are going to say you didn't
target young people, but your action plans state that at some
point, you realized that the social media was causing that. So,
what was the tipping point that led JUUL to decide that these
marketing practices were a problem that you should address? At
what point?
Mr. Crosthwaite. Well, the company in the past has taken
actions when youth data became available, and I believe it was
in, my best recollection, 2018 the company stopped being on
social media.
Mr. Pallone. OK. Now you have disabled Facebook and
Instagram accounts, but hashtags involving your products
continue to be shared across these social platforms. Despite
your efforts to end your social media presence, it is clear
that your influence continues to be active through user-
generated content. As you indicated, again in this action plan,
and I quote, ``There is no question that this user-generated
social media content is linked to the appeal of vaping to
underage users.''
So, Mr. Crosthwaite, after years of marketing practices to
attract young people, is it reasonable to say that JUUL's
actions were too little too late? I mean, hasn't the train
already left the station? Because now, you know, the social
media is being used by the people themselves, not by yours. So,
don't you think that taking this off the market or all social
media was a little too late? Yes or no?
Mr. Crosthwaite. Mr. Chairman, when I joined the
organization, I knew more needed to be done. And that is why I
took the steps that I took to combat this issue that we are
facing.
Mr. Pallone. OK. Last question, because I only have got a
few minutes. Do you agree that kids who cannot legally purchase
tobacco products should never be the target of tobacco product
advertising, including e-cigarette advertising and marketing?
Yes or no?
Mr. Crosthwaite. No, the products should never be intended
to be marketed to youth, and that is not the company's
intention.
Mr. Pallone. All right. Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Ms. DeGette. The Chair now recognizes Mr. McKinley for 5
minutes.
Mr. McKinley. Thank you, Madam Chair.
I want to go back to; there are number of studies that were
done by the National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and
Medicine. As a result of all those studies, they have come to a
conclusion that said that, included in the vaping products are
heavy metals, ultrafine particles, and toxic and carcinogen
materials, and ingredients. Do any of you deny that there are
ultrafine particles? Let's just focus on the ultrafine
particles, the particles in the fluids. Do any of you deny that
these particles are there, despite the reports?
Mr. Crosthwaite?
Mr. Crosthwaite. Sorry, I am not familiar with the specific
report that you are referring to, but I will tell you, for
our----
Mr. McKinley. It is just a conclusion. Really, specifically
for your product, do you have ultrafine particles in your
product?
Mr. Crosthwaite. I am not familiar with the ultrafine
particles that----
Mr. McKinley. Ultrafine particles are defined as 1 micron,
1 micron of materials. In a hearing earlier, they indicated
that 1 micron exists in almost all, if not all, and maybe even
larger. But the concern for young people--well, maybe for
anyone--is 1 micron getting in someone's lungs can have some
long-term, very deleterious effect. And if we are allowing 1
micron to be in these fluids, it is going to be introduced to
people's lungs in young people, old. Anyone that uses this
product is going to have a health risk, a health problem with
it. And they are saying that.
So, you don't. Any of the rest of you acknowledge that,
yes, maybe it is in there? Mr. Oberlander?
Mr. Oberlander. If I can, I understand your concern, sir.
Mr. McKinley. Use your microphone, please.
Mr. Oberlander. Sorry. Can you hear me now?
Ms. DeGette. Yes.
Mr. Oberlander. OK, sorry.
I understand your concern, sir, but we do believe that,
actually, through the PMTA applications, we can actually
provide the FDA with all the evidence in order to understand
what is the level of exposure of chemicals that you have
mentioned and other substances in order for the FDA to make a
decision about the impact on public health.
Mr. McKinley. OK. Apparently, I am not going to get quite
the answer I am looking for--or just an answer. Just for people
to understand, 1 micro, the science of a micron; most people
wouldn't understand that, but 50 microns is below the naked
eye. We are talking about 1/50th of a micron is going to be in
your lungs; we are going to be introducing it. It is a
millionth of a meter. We are talking about something extremely
small. And at 1 micron getting into your lungs, you are going
to have some long-term problems.
When we have been debating the Clean Air Act and the issues
on that, we allow up to two and a half. That is the limit we
think that we can tolerate, the two and a half. But we are
allowing this product to be down to 1 micron, significantly
causing long-term healthcare risks.
And so, I guess my concern is, not only are we allowing
these small microns to get into our lungs, but we are also
allowing people to introduce other cancerous materials that are
in THC, the acetate. Is that something that we should be paying
more attention to, how to prevent people from aftermarket
introducing a product into their device? And how do we make it
so that it is not tamper-resistant, but tamper-proof? So that
people can't play with this and causing even more health
concerns.
CDC has come out with quite a study about all this, the THC
additive that we were talking about, the vitamin E acetate, how
that is being put into aftermarket utilization. Are any of you
doing anything to prevent the aftermarket introduction of THC
and this vitamin E acetate? Any of you?
Mr. Loftin. Congressman----
Mr. McKinley. Mr. Loftin, please.
Mr. Loftin. Yes, Congressman, we have pre-filled, sealed
cartridges that they can't get in at this point.
Mr. McKinley. OK. So, we have got one of you that has got a
preventive.
I have run out of time. I yield back. Thank you.
Ms. DeGette. I thank the gentleman. The Chair now
recognizes Ms. Schakowsky for 5 minutes.
Ms. Schakowsky. Last September, President Trump promised to
take action to take all of the non-tobacco-flavored products
from the marketplace in response to the youth vaping epidemic.
But he didn't. That is not true. Incredibly, the Trump
administration caved to special interests and created
exemptions for disposable e-cigarettes in every imaginable
flavor and menthol-flavored e-cigarettes.
So, Mr. Blonde, this carveout will allow, it is my
understanding, that Fontem ``Vivid Vanilla'' and ``Cherry
Blast''--these are disposable products, clearly not aimed at
adults--to remain on the market. We will get back to that
later.
We already have reports of young people shifting to these
fruit- and dessert-flavored disposable products. There was a
headline in The New York Times last week that says, ``Teens
Find a Big Loophole in the New Flavored Vaping Ban''.
So, you all say your products were created to help adults
to stop smoking tobacco, but, thanks to your products, this is
an entire generation of young people that are now addicted to
nicotine. And we have heard discussions about what that problem
can be and the microns. And I thank Mr. McKinley for that.
Mr. Crosthwaite, JUUL cannot deny the role of its legacy in
the epidemic. JUUL is literally a common verb now; ``JUULing''
is now what people are talking about. And each of you must
accept responsibility for the role that you have played in
reviving the youth tobacco epidemic or youth vaping epidemic.
Mr. Loftin, yes or no, do you believe the administration's
exemption for any disposable product will leave many mint,
fruity, and other sweet cigarette products easily accessible to
young people?
Mr. Loftin. We were disappointed in the guidance. We
thought it should have gone further and all companies and all
products should have been a part of the PMTA process.
Ms. Schakowsky. Mr. Nivakoff, NJOY recently decided to
voluntarily stop selling all flavored disposable products, and
that they are not available to youth. Do you believe there is a
risk that they will simply turn to using the disposable
flavored products?
Mr. Nivakoff. As the data has demonstrated, NJOY hasn't
contributed statistically to youth use historically. So, the
notion that youth would switch from our flavored disposable
product to another flavored disposable product is factually
inaccurate because they haven't been using it, to begin with.
Ms. Schakowsky. So, disposable e-cigarettes are attractive
to youth because they cost less, can be easily hidden, and have
an enticing range of flavors. Mr. Blonde, given what you have
heard here today, will you join NJOY and commit to voluntarily
suspending the sales of your disposable ``Vivid Vanilla'' and
``Cherry Crush'' products?
Mr. Blonde. Our disposable products have been on the market
for about ten years, and as for other disposable products,
these are widely obtained by very older consumers. We are not
aware of any issue, current issue, caused by our disposable
flavors.
And the fact that the FDA excluded the disposables from the
guidance, we will comply on completely, but on disposables, we
do have 9 million vaporers in the U.S., more or less adult
smokers, that are currently using our products which look like
a cigarette. It has been designed like that and didn't change
the design in the last ten years.
I am aware----
Ms. Schakowsky. And you are not concerned that those are
also used by kids, that they may be attracted by those names?
Mr. Blonde. We don't have any issue.
Ms. Schakowsky. No, you----
Mr. Blonde. We don't have an issue right now on historical,
and we are monitoring that very carefully.
I have a concern, though. I have seen The New York Times
articles recently about new disposables coming into the market
that probably don't have a youth access prevention program that
would be robust enough, and as well, apparently, will be in
some foam factors that will be very appealing to these----
Ms. Schakowsky. My time has expired.
I hear a lot of you relying on the Food and Drug
Administration, and it seems to me that, as much as we want to
have the data, that you ought to know--I was just shocked that
you did not know about the reports about the content of your
vaping products.
And I will yield back.
Ms. DeGette. I thank the gentle lady. The Chair now
recognizes Mr. Duncan for 5 minutes.
Mr. Duncan. Thank you, Madam Chair.
And thank you all for being here today.
You know, e-cigarette products have been in use at least
since the early 2000s, I believe. And I know that we can all
agree that the youth vaping epidemic is a serious problem. But
this has been a recent development. So, you have to stop and
ask yourself, if the products have been out there for that
long, you have to ask yourself, why is this a recent
occurrence? I say ``recent''; within the last few years.
E-cigarettes were developed as an alternative to tobacco
products, tobacco products which can contain tar and other
things that are damaging to the body. But you also have to ask
yourself, if e-products are used, e-cigarette products are used
in Europe and other places in the world, why they aren't seeing
the uptick in health-related problems that we are seeing and
the deaths that we are seeing here in the United States. These
are rhetorical questions that we have to ask ourselves.
And I want to reference, Madam Chair, a Politico article
dated October of 2019 and submit it for the record.
Ms. DeGette. Without objection.
[The information appears at the conclusion of the hearing.]
Mr. Duncan. In that article, it also references that the
Trump administration is urging people to avoid buying
unregulated vape products. And I think we can point to the
unregulated vape products, the black market products, and the
tampered-with products as the leading cause for the health
problems. They are not seeing that in Europe.
In fact, Constantine Vardavas, a European Respiratory
Society Scientific Regulations Director within the EU says
this, ``We have not seen anything like what we are seeing in
the U.S. recently in Europe, to my knowledge as a scientist,
and I'm pretty aware of the field.''
Clive Bates, former Chief of the UK charity Action on
Smoking and Health said this, ``You're terrifying people who
are benefitting from vaping by not smoking.'' I think that was
the ultimate reason the e-cigarette products were created in
the first place.
So, the question I have is, are youth being pushed to the
black market where they are finding THC pods and other
counterfeit products? The lung illnesses that have been
reported over the last several months are almost directly
linked to the black market products, not the commercially-
produced products by the companies represented here today.
So, I think it is extremely important that we have an
ongoing conversation about how your companies are working to
minimize the number of black market products and what we in
Congress can do. Instead of attacking you for developing an
alternative cigarette use, we ought to talk about how we can
work together to help this industry because it is an
alternative to smoking.
I personally believe that much more could be done to assist
the Customs and Border Protection with identifying, and
Immigration and Customs Enforcement, which seems to get the ire
of the left, but there are Customs Enforcement officers that
are actually enforcing our customs laws. OK? We need to help
them to identify and intercept black market e-cigarettes.
So, my first question for all the witnesses is, can you
speak to the relationships your companies have with CBP agents
and how you are working alongside them to combat the influx of
black market e-cigarettes? And I will start with Mr.
Crosthwaite.
Mr. Crosthwaite. Thank you.
And first, our hearts go out to anyone who was hurt and
impacted by the unfortunate EVALI situation, and we were fully
supportive when that investigation was going on. And we do not
sell any THC products or products that contain vitamin E.
But you are right to call out the amount of illicit
products that exist in the United States market.
Mr. Duncan. Is it difficult for the CBP officers to detect
a counterfeit product versus a legitimate product, if it is
manufactured overseas?
Mr. Crosthwaite. Yes. So, we have a brand protection
organization within our company who works with law enforcement,
Border Patrol, and other regulatory agencies, on education,
awareness, and helping combat this issue.
Mr. Duncan. Mr. Oberlander? Put your microphone on.
Mr. Oberlander. Mr. Congressman, first of all, this is a
very serious issue and I understand your concern. When the
EVALI crisis broke out, we were very concerned about, I mean
very sorry for the pain that actually the families of victims
were going through. And then, we immediately contacted the FDA
and the CDC, offering our help. We had, to my knowledge, no
confirmed cases associated with our VUSE products. I mean
associated with the victims of the EVALI crisis.
Ms. DeGette. Can you move the microphone back up again? It
is okay.
Mr. Duncan. And in the essence of time, I am running out
here.
Mr. Oberlander. OK. And then, definitely, we have worked
with enforcement agencies in order to curb illicit trade, which
is a serious problem for this country.
Mr. Duncan. Yes. I am out of time, guys. Let me just
reiterate, we need to work with the Customs and Border Patrol
and Immigration and Customs Enforcement agencies, and this
Committee needs to work with them as well, even though we don't
necessarily have jurisdiction, to figure out how we can stop
the counterfeit products from coming into this country and
address the real problem. And that is tampering with the
legitimate products and the counterfeit products that people
are using in this country because, apparently, it is not a
problem in Europe.
And with that, I yield back.
Ms. DeGette. The gentleman yields back. The Chair now
recognizes Mr. Kennedy for 5 minutes.
Mr. Kennedy. Thank you, Madam Chair, for holding this
hearing.
Thank you to our witnesses for being here.
We have heard consistent testimony from all of you this
morning saying these products were designed to help people
transition off cigarettes, that they were not designed to
market to children or youth, and that if you are not a smoker,
you should not start.
To echo some of the skepticism from my colleagues, some of
these products are marketed for 99 cents. It seems pretty easy
to get started.
I had a youth council of high school students from my
district over the course of the past several years. It was
probably about four years ago when a high school student asked
me if Congress was going to step in and regulate e-cigarettes
because everyone in their school was smoking.
It is a bit difficult for us, I think, to hear your concern
for youth when there were systemic and systematic and strategic
social media campaigns to get products in front of kids. It is
very difficult for me to understand--and I am certain that all
of you have followed this information--I can't imagine that
your companies don't. I can't imagine that you would be a CEO
if you didn't.
But when Johns Hopkins says, from 2016 to 2018, the adult
non- smokers that are now using e-cigarette products has
doubled, that there are now 6 million people that you claim
were not the targeted market audience for your products, but
there are 6 million more customers that have come in that
weren't the folks that supposedly, at least outwardly, people
were marketing to. In a 2019 Youth Tobacco Survey, a quarter of
high school students had vaped in the last 30 days. And yet, we
are saying we are not marketing to them. I think it is pretty
hard to say that the consequence of the products that you have
injected, and the ways in which you have gone about your
businesses, haven't marketed to kids.
Mr. Crosthwaite, I understand that you are newly at the
position. I understand that the previous executives might not
have done things the way that you would have wanted and your
company would have wanted, and certainly I would have wanted.
So, we have seen a change there.
But, respectfully, what are you going to do to fix it? You
can stop advertising now. You can stop putting up some of these
bars. And I appreciate that, but we have now created an
epidemic that is going to be touching today a quarter of all
high school students; that the bars that you put up--I disagree
a bit with Mr. Duncan's formulation of this, but he is not
wrong. We now step in to regulate; you create incentives for a
black market. Kids are going to go someplace else. Your company
is now old news, and they are off to the next one, because of
an industry that you helped create. And there are quotes in The
New York Times from people in your company that have said that
that was, in fact, never really the objective. And now, you are
before us saying, ``Yes, we are open for regulation.'' What are
we going to do to stop this? What do I do?
And if the concern is a black market and an evolution of
new products that will come out that don't have the robust
protections that you all are now putting in place, would you
pledge at this moment not to purchase one of those companies or
acquire one of those companies or engage in those product
sales?
Mr. Crosthwaite?
Mr. Crosthwaite. We do not sell any of the----
Mr. Kennedy. Will you not sell? Will you not? Will you
pledge not to acquire a company that is engaged? You have put
up bars, but there are new products out there from new
companies that don't face that regulation. Would you pledge not
to acquire such a company that engages in those practices?
Mr. Crosthwaite. What we are focused on is submitting our
PMTA. We have no plans at this time to----
Mr. Kennedy. So, no plan?
Mr. Oberlander?
Mr. Oberlander. Could you repeat your question, please?
Mr. Kennedy. Will you pledge not to acquire a company that
does not currently abide by the practices that you say you
abide by, as they increase their own market share?
Mr. Oberlander. We are not focused on that----
Mr. Kennedy. So, a second non-answer.
Mr. Nivakoff?
Mr. Nivakoff. I would fully pledge.
Mr. Kennedy. Fully pledge?
Mr. Blonde?
Mr. Blonde. We don't have any intent to purchase any
company.
Mr. Kennedy. Mr. Loftin?
Mr. Loftin. We have no intent, but we will honor that we
will always market responsibly.
Mr. Kennedy. And so, given that we have now created this
industry that has a younger generation that is now addicted,
what do you want us to do about it?
Mr. Crosthwaite?
Mr. Crosthwaite. Congressman, I fully recognize that the
opportunity for the millions of adult smokers who still use
combustible cigarettes to have an alternative is at risk if we
don't address this issue. And we are focused on combating
underage access because I know it puts it all at risk if we
don't make progress here.
Mr. Kennedy. So, how do I trust what you say?
Mr. Crosthwaite. My actions so far since I have joined
support our recognition that more needs to be done. So, we have
taken action and we recognize more needs to be done to turn
this issue around. We have been successful in converting
millions of adults away from the most harmful form of tobacco
use, and also recognize that that is at risk if we don't
continue to make progress.
Mr. Kennedy. I yield back.
Ms. DeGette. The Chair now recognizes Mr. Griffith for 5
minutes.
Mr. Griffith. Thank you very much, Madam Chair. I
appreciate it.
We heard testimony earlier from Dr. Nora Volkow--this was
at a previous hearing--that in December the number of youth who
were using the vaping products, there were more youth using THC
vaping products than nicotine vaping products. The youth vaping
epidemic is a separate health concern from the e-cigarette,
vaping-association lung injury, EVALI outbreak. The use of
vitamin E acetate in THC has been strongly linked to those lung
illnesses. Is vitamin E acetate used in any of your brands'
cartridges? We will start with you Mr. Crosthwaite.
Mr. Crosthwaite. No, Congressman.
Mr. Oberlander. No.
Mr. Nivakoff. No, sir.
Mr. Blonde. No, sir.
Mr. Loftin. No, sir.
Mr. Griffith. So, none of your companies sell anything that
contains THC or is specifically designed to be used with THC
products? Can I assume that to be correct?
Mr. Crosthwaite. Correct, we do not.
Mr. Oberlander. No, sir.
Mr. Nivakoff. No, sir.
Mr. Blonde. No, sir.
Mr. Loftin. No, sir.
Mr. Griffith. Now can your products be adulterated so they
can be used with THC products, modified or changed? Do you
know?
Mr. Crosthwaite. Our products are not designed to be
changed or modified. They are tamper-resistant.
Mr. Oberlander. Our products are also designed to be
tamper-resistant.
Mr. Nivakoff. The same answer, sir.
Mr. Blonde. Same answer, sir.
Mr. Loftin. Our products are pre-sealed cartridges. They
can't get in them.
Mr. Griffith. And what steps do you have, or plan to take,
to prevent somebody using your device with some kind of a
knockoff product that could be used with one of your devices?
Mr. Crosthwaite. So, we take steps, when we see in the
market illegal products that come on, to work to get them
removed from the market. There are pods out there that are not
intended to be used with our device. When we see it, we try to
get them off the market.
Mr. Oberlander. To my knowledge, at this point in time, we
don't have any counterfeit or illicit products actually for our
VUSE products.
Mr. Griffith. Does anybody have a different answer?
Mr. Oberlander. We closely monitor the market.
Mr. Griffith. Thank you.
Does anybody have a different answer? OK.
It is interesting because I had some folks who own vape
shops come in to see me recently, and what they said was,
``Look, we want people to come in and inspect us. We want them
to see that we're using the right products, that we're not
selling anything that's contraband or has been smuggled into
the country, or that has THC when it's not supposed to be
there. We don't sell those products.''
Would you all agree that it is important that we have
regulations, but that we also make it possible for there to be
outlets for adults to go to vape shops instead of being bought
on the street corner from some renegade company?
Mr. Crosthwaite. Congressman, we completely support the FDA
process and believe it is the most appropriate body to provide
oversight for this industry and, in fact, to preserve the
chance for adults to have access to alternatives to combustible
cigarettes.
Mr. Griffith. And does anybody else have a different answer
or something they would like to add to that? Mr. Loftin?
Mr. Loftin. At Logic, we don't believe it has gone far
enough. We think all products and all companies should go
through the same process.
Mr. Griffith. All right. I appreciate that.
And I also understand that some of you make a zero-nicotine
product. Can you explain why and for what purpose a nicotine-
free EVP might serve us? That would be a vaping product, for
those who are watching at home. No nicotine?
Mr. Crosthwaite. We do not make that product.
Mr. Griffith. You don't make that product? Do you all make
that? Does anybody else make that product?
Mr. Oberlander. At this point in time, we don't have it. We
are considering it.
Mr. Nivakoff. No, sir.
Mr. Griffith. OK.
Mr. Blonde. Yes, we do.
Mr. Griffith. Tell me about it.
Mr. Blonde. In some cases, some smokers have evolved their
way of taking nicotine. And at blu, we want to offer a full
range of nicotine.
Mr. Griffith. And they still want to have the feel of
having something in their mouth or something that they are
breathing in? What causes that?
Mr. Blonde. Yes, as in my opening statement, I mean, some
of our adult consumers decide to keep their pleasurable
experience with our products, but without nicotine.
Mr. Griffith. Right.
Mr. Loftin, do you all have a product like that?
Mr. Loftin. No, sir.
Mr. Griffith. Okay. Well, very good. My time is just about
up, but I appreciate you----
Ms. DeGette. Will the gentleman yield, please, the rest of
his time?
Mr. Griffith. I will yield you my 37 seconds, yes, ma'am.
Ms. DeGette. Mr. Blonde, what percentage of your sales are
the no-nicotine e-cigarettes?
Mr. Blonde. I don't have a precise number, but it is quite
low.
Ms. DeGette. Quite low? Could you supplement your answers
with the exact number?
Mr. Blonde. I would be happy to.
Mr. Griffith. I yield back.
Ms. DeGette. The Chair now recognizes Ms. Castor for 5
minutes.
Ms. Castor. Thank you, Madam Chair, for calling this
important hearing today. It has really highlighted how e-
cigarettes and vape manufacturers have enticed young people to
their products.
And I am particularly concerned about companies marketing
through social media to target--it is an insidious use of
social media to target young people. And it has continued to
happen even after the harm has become clear to young people,
the addictive nature, the impact on the developing brain, among
other health impacts.
Mr. Crosthwaite, prior to reforming your social media
marketing efforts in November of 2018, a large number of the
JUUL social media followers were young people. In fact,
according to the Journal of American Medical Association
Pediatrics, almost half of your Twitter followers were aged 13
to 17. You testified here today that JUUL should never be
marketed to youth, but they were extensively marketing to youth
in the past. I assumed that JUUL addressed its social media
presence because it was concerned about how its social media
activities did impact youth. Is that correct?
Mr. Crosthwaite. Yes, it was before I joined the
organization when the company stopped in social media activity.
And what we are actually focused on today with social media is
getting posts off. So, we look for posts that we think are
inappropriate. We ask them to be taken down, so that the access
to this type of information is not available.
Ms. Castor. So, Mr. Blonde, you just heard Mr. Crosthwaite
state that they have a strategy, a social media strategy, but
he acknowledged that social media does impact youth use of the
vapes. As a major player in the industry, Fontem continues to
use social media as a marketing tool. On the one hand, you have
said here today, boy, you have an access program, you are
trying to do everything you can to discourage, but, on the
other hand, you continue to actively market to youth through
social media. Why do you do that?
Mr. Blonde. We don't market to youth in any shape or form.
Ms. Castor. Well, one aspect of Fontem's social media
activity I am concerned about is the use of the social media
influencers. Underage youth who may be blocked from your social
media accounts can still go to YouTube and see your posts that
promote your product. The influencers' promotion of these
products is especially harmful because the popularity of the
influencers, the individuals, can sway young people into
believing that the products are attractive and they are trendy.
Will you commit here today to end your use of influencers to
market the vapes to young people?
Mr. Blonde. We have currently stopped producing any content
from those influencers.
Ms. Castor. What have you done to actively, then, end the
influencers' use, the use on YouTube, of all of those videos?
Mr. Blonde. We have very strict measures as far as it
pertains to social media. We believe social media is an
accepted platform of communication for our adult smokers.
Ms. Castor. I mean, what social media is and the use of the
influencers now, it makes it very difficult to control the
dissemination of the marketing information.
Mr. Crosthwaite, do you think that the e-cigarette industry
as a whole should end its use of social media as a marketing
tool, given the difficulty in preventing youth from being
exposed to this material, influencers included?
Mr. Crosthwaite. What I have been focused on as CEO, since
I have joined, is taking every step I believe I can to minimize
youth getting access to----
Ms. Castor. Was that a yes or----
Mr. Crosthwaite. We are not on social media. I stopped,
actually, all of our advertising----
Ms. Castor. You are the market leader now. What would you
say to these other CEOs who are not going down the same path?
Mr. Crosthwaite. I can just share what I have been focused
on, which is addressing youth getting any real access to
information that they should not. And that is why I have taken
the steps I have as CEO.
Ms. Castor. Mr. Loftin, do you use influencers?
Mr. Loftin. We do not use influencers.
Ms. Castor. Mr. Nivakoff?
Mr. Nivakoff. No, ma'am, we do not use influencers.
Ms. Castor. Mr. Oberlander?
Mr. Oberlander. We do not use social influencers.
Ms. Castor. So, Mr. Blonde, you are the odd man out here.
Mr. Blonde. Again, I mean, the use of influencers, as I was
going to say, the choice of influencers is making sure that all
people that we are interacting to are above 25 and look above
25.
Ms. Castor. Well, that is not good enough in today's age of
social media. You have got to be proactive and you have got to
control. If you are saying, on the one hand, ``I am not going
to market to youth,'' and then, on the other hand, you are
allowing the dissemination of videos and influencers on those
platforms, you are really being hypocritical and it needs to be
brought under control. We understand how harmful these products
are. You have a responsibility, especially with the growing
harm, the growing evidence of the health impacts to young
people, not to market to them.
I yield back my time.
Ms. DeGette. The gentle lady from New Hampshire, Ms.
Kuster, is recognized for 5 minutes.
Ms. Kuster. Thank you, Chairwoman DeGette, and thank you
for holding this very, very important hearing.
Let me just start by saying, as a mother of two sons, I
spent the last 30 years trying to keep them from smoking
cigarettes. And instead, you have come into our life with
nicotine that is highly addictive.
So, I want to just say, based on the data, that we are on
the precipice of minimizing tobacco's hold on our nation's
youth, but confronting alarming rates of youth nicotine use. As
a result, e-cigarettes are now the most commonly-used tobacco
product among youth, surpassing the rate of youth use of
conventional cigarettes five years ago. In fact, e-cigarette
use among youth doubled again from 2017 to 2019, demonstrating
that this problem is only getting worse.
And in my home State of New Hampshire, the Department of
Health and Human Services estimates that at least a quarter of
high-schoolers are using vaping products, and those numbers are
on the rise. Now Dr. Sue Tanski, who was before this Committee
recently a pediatrician from Dartmouth-Hitchcock, has helped us
to understand this very issue. Based upon her testimony, sworn
under oath, we know that biologically the brain is more
susceptible to nicotine addiction during adolescence. Late
adolescence begins around 18 and, for most, lasts well into the
twenties. A brain that is not exposed to psychotropic drugs
such as nicotine during adolescence is less likely to develop
an addiction.
My State is in the throes of the worst opioid epidemic in
our lifetime that began with misleading marketing and lack of
regulatory oversight. And my fear is that we are repeating
those same mistakes and making way for a new generation
grappling with addiction that we all fought to avoid.
So, I just want to say, 26 years ago, we had tobacco
company CEOs sitting in this room testifying before this
Committee that they did not believe that nicotine in their
cigarette products was addictive. Four years later, the CEOs
were forced to admit to the risk of nicotine in another hearing
before this Committee. Today's schools around the country warn
students about the harms of nicotine, particularly on
developing brains.
Mr. Crosthwaite, JUUL offers a 5 percent nicotine content
pod which the company claims releases an amount of nicotine
similar to a pack of 20 cigarettes. Some young users report
going through a single JUUL pod in three hours. To try to
reduce their nicotine intake, these young people are now
turning to combustible cigarettes to reduce their nicotine
intake.
Are you aware of reports of e-cigarette users so highly
addicted to your products that they feel the need to switch
back to regular cigarettes? And if so, do these reports concern
you?
Mr. Crosthwaite. Congresswoman, I share your concern about
the amount of youth getting access to e-vapor. It is
unacceptable and we must work to combat it.
Ms. Kuster. What is it that you are doing about it today?
Mr. Crosthwaite. So, since I have joined the company, about
four months ago, we took action to address this issue. So, we
stopped shipping, when I became CEO in November, our mint
product, which at the time, we got the data that youth were
getting access to mint, and that was 70 percent of our company
at that timeframe.
Ms. Kuster. Seventy percent going to youth for nicotine
addiction?
Mr. Crosthwaite. No, no. No, 70----
Ms. Kuster. Seventy percent of your profits were from this
product that youth were using. Is that the number you are
trying to explain to us?
Mr. Crosthwaite. No, just to clarify, when we stopped
shipping mint in November, at that time, of all of our sales,
that product was 70 percent of our business.
Ms. Kuster. That is what I am trying to say. I mean, for
the American people, 70 percent of your product was going to
youth in our country. And four months ago, you stopped that
practice?
Mr. Crosthwaite. So, in November, when I saw that youth
were getting access to mint flavors and found it appealing, I
took it off the market for our company.
Ms. Kuster. What about the other flavors that are currently
on the market?
Mr. Crosthwaite. So, today, we sell tobacco and menthol in
the company.
Ms. Kuster. Menthol e- cigarette?
Mr. Crosthwaite. Yes, in the U.S. market.
Ms. Kuster. And do you think that is getting access to
youth?
Mr. Crosthwaite. Well, we have paid very close attention to
the data when we made the decision on mint.
Ms. Kuster. Is there any reason not to take that off the
market?
Mr. Crosthwaite. Well, today, there are over 10 million
Americans who use combustible menthol cigarettes.
Ms. Kuster. How many youths?
Mr. Crosthwaite. When we saw the data, menthol was not one
of the leading flavors that youth were getting access to. The
number was quite small.
Ms. Kuster. How many youths?
Mr. Crosthwaite. My recollection is I believe the number
was a few percentage points, but I will have to refer back to
the report specifically.
Ms. Kuster. My time is up. I just want you to know mothers
and fathers across this country are watching this hearing very
carefully.
Thank you.
Ms. DeGette. The Chair now recognizes the ranking member of
the full committee, Mr. Walden, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Walden. Thank you again, Madam Chair, for having this
hearing.
As I mentioned in my opening statement, I am concerned
about the counterfeit products, among other things, and the
safety issues they present in the e-cigarette space. There are
plenty of news articles about seizures of counterfeit JUUL
products, in particular. I understand the FDA's Office of
Criminal Investigations has several ongoing criminal
investigations related to counterfeit JUUL products that are
unrelated to the lung injury investigation.
So, for each of you, and pretty quickly, what concerns do
you each have about counterfeiting of your product?
Mr. Crosthwaite. Counterfeit products are an issue. It is
something we have been very focused on in the United States
market, getting them off of the marketplace.
Mr. Walden. All right. Mr. Oberlander?
Mr. Oberlander. Mr. Congressman, at this point in time, we
haven't seen any counterfeits of VUSE products, but we
constantly monitor the markets, to my knowledge.
Mr. Walden. All right.
Mr. Nivakoff. We have not seen any reports of counterfeits
for our products.
Mr. Blonde. We don't see any counterfeit product.
Mr. Loftin. We are very concerned about counterfeit and, in
fact, I would love to share some of our results by working with
FDA, Homeland Security, CBP, and local law enforcement, if you
don't mind.
Mr. Walden. All right. Yes, if you want, real quick.
Mr. Loftin. Through the help of everyone that I just
mentioned, and all the outside agencies, we closed a factory in
China shipping in. We also had eight seizures last year just in
the U.S. in 2019; $1.5 million dollars worth of products
confiscated in Nassau County in New York; 681 cease and desist;
1859 unauthorized online sellers.
Mr. Walden. OK. All right. If I could get that from you? I
have got a couple of other questions I want to get to. I
appreciate you have answered the question well, but I would
like to get the full dataset from you.
Mr. Loftin. Absolutely.
Mr. Walden. Mr. Crosthwaite, I want to go back to you to
make sure I understood your answer to Ms. Kuster. Did you say
70 percent of JUUL's profits come from youth mint use? I don't
think that is what you were saying, right?
Mr. Crosthwaite. No. No, Congressman. What I was saying is,
when we saw the youth data that came out and that youth were
getting access to mint, we stopped shipping that in the United
States. And when we stopped shipping mint in the United States,
at that time, it was 70 percent of what the company sold in the
United States.
Mr. Walden. To all users, not just youth?
Mr. Crosthwaite. Correct.
Mr. Walden. OK. All right. In just a few months, the entire
industry is going to undergo yet another shift when the PMTA
filing deadline passes after May 12th. Only products for which
a PMTA has been submitted can remain on the market.
So, the question I have is, how will a consumer retail
store owner know which products are allowed on the market after
this date and which ones should be removed? What kind of
transparency should we be thinking of? Do we need to do
something here, once that process is completed?
Mr. Crosthwaite, or anybody, want to take that? Yes, go
ahead.
Mr. Crosthwaite. So, we look forward to submitting our PMTA
in May and to be in that process, which we think is a very
important step for the industry to go through, for the FDA to
review these products.
Mr. Walden. Right.
Mr. Crosthwaite. And, of course, whatever way we need to be
communicating about our status in that process, we will do so.
Mr. Walden. But to the retailers and to consumers----
Mr. Crosthwaite. Right.
Mr. Walden [continue]. How will they know things are left
behind?
Mr. Oberlander. Mr. Congressman, as I mentioned in my oral
statement, it is paramount that actually, the FDA gives full
transparency of all products that have submitted PMTAs. So,
that retailers, enforcement agencies, and the FDA actually have
full visibility about which products are eligible to remain in
the market or not.
Mr. Walden. OK. Gentlemen?
Mr. Nivakoff. Sir, I can't speak to my competitors.
However, our products are almost exclusively sold in highly
compliant Tier 1 channels with corporate counterparties that
have fairly robust compliance groups within their stores. And
as a result, with respect to our products, I don't think there
will be any confusion.
Mr. Walden. Got it.
Mr. Blonde. We strongly encourage the what you call the
PMTA process. We intend to submit our PMTA to the FDA by May.
And I agree that we strongly support the fact of full
transparency to make sure only reliable actors stay in the
market.
Mr. Walden. All right. Mr. Loftin?
Mr. Loftin. We strongly agree with the PMTA process. In
fact, we are in standard review and working with them right
now.
Mr. Walden. All right. Perfect.
Now, this issue with cannabis, THC, whatever, vitamin E,
what is the best thing we can do here to put a stop to that?
Because that is some of where the lung injuries are occurring.
In a state like Oregon, that has legalized everything, we are
seeing this. Any of you want to weigh-in on what the best
course of action for Congress to do to deal with that issue?
Mr. Loftin. I think you add all products and all companies
involved in that under the PMTA process as well.
Mr. Walden. OK. Will that get at it?
Mr. Oberlander. I believe the FDA has discretionary power,
an enforcement power actually, to understand the root cause of
the situation and actually go after the culprits in this
crisis.
Mr. Walden. All right.
Mr. Crosthwaite. And the benefit of a PMTA process are you
have preclinical, clinical, behavioral research. For us, for
example, we will have a hundred scientific studies submitted,
so the FDA can fully evaluate a product and determine if it is
appropriate for the protection of public health.
Mr. Walden. All right. My time had expired. Thank you,
Madam Chair.
Thank you to all of you for your testimony.
Ms. DeGette. I thank the gentleman. The Chair now
recognizes Mr. Ruiz for 5 minutes.
Mr. Ruiz. Thank you very much. Thank you all for being
here.
Everyone here agrees that youth should not be using vaping
products, but it is still happening at disturbing rates. That
is why this Committee accepted my bill, the No VAPE Act, when
we marked up the Reversing the Youth Tobacco Epidemic Act. The
No VAPE Act would increase penalties on retailers who sell vape
products to underage teens.
I am also working on legislation to require manufacturers
to label the vaping products, not just the packaging, to make
it clear that nicotine in vaping is addictive and harmful to
health--I am a doctor; I know that--and to make it clear for
parents and teachers to identify vaping products.
It would also prohibit the sales of products that are
clearly being used to attract teens with the ability to easily
conceal their use like this sweatshirt. The thread in the hood
is the vaping product. Or these vaping products disguised as
juice boxes--juice boxes. Who else are products like these
marketed toward but underage youth? These are egregious tactics
that companies have employed to attract and addict youth to
their products, and we must stop it.
Mr. Loftin, in your testimony you link thedramatic increase
in youth usage of e-cigarettes to the combination of, quote,
``irresponsible marketing and product characteristics'' of
other e-cigarettes. Can you describe the marketing tactics and
product characteristics you think are driving youth use,
including the companies that are, or were, engaging in these
practices?
Mr. Loftin. Sir, I am not here to talk about the other
companies, but I will tell you it is based on irresponsible
marketing----
Mr. Ruiz. Like what?
Mr. Loftin [continue]. Exciting colors----
Mr. Ruiz. You don't have to name companies, but give me
examples of irresponsible marketing.
Mr. Loftin. Exciting colors, exciting shapes, exciting
names, parties, all kinds of different things without warning
labels. It is all about the atmosphere of having fun, and it
shouldn't be marketed to youth.
Mr. Ruiz. So, despite companies' attempts to address public
concerns about their marketing, we know that youth continue to
be targeted. In guidance published just last month, the FDA
stated that e-cigarettes, quote, ``continue to be marketed to
minors through a wide variety of media and technology''.
Mr. Crosthwaite, in your testimony, you state that JUUL
has, quote, ``halted our broadcast, print, and digital product
advertising''. Do you believe that the e-cigarette industry
should be subject to the same advertising restrictions as
combustible cigarettes? If not, why not?
Mr. Crosthwaite. Congressman. I share your concern about
youth getting access to e-vapor----
Mr. Ruiz. Should they be held under the same standards as
cigarettes?
Mr. Crosthwaite. I took the steps in the company because I
felt it was critical to limit any sort of awareness to tools
like we were using.
Mr. Ruiz. They are addictive products. Should they be held
to the same standards as smoking cigarettes?
Mr. Crosthwaite. I think the FDA is going to have complete
oversight over marketing practices.
Mr. Ruiz. OK.
Mr. Crosthwaite. I chose to take the steps we did because I
felt significant action needed to happen to address this issue.
Mr. Ruiz. All right. So, we know that e-cigarette
manufacturers have also marketed their products through various
promotions, such as highlighting the affordability and various
flavors of their products. Certain promotions caught our eye.
After the FDA announced its recent guidance, Reynolds and
Fontem began online promotions to sell flavors affected by the
new policy.
Reynolds' website banner promotion, for instance, stated,
quote, ``Last chance to buy vapor flavor packs''. ``Last chance
to get your flavored packs.'' And the home page of Fontem's
website for its blu products features a promotion for a, quote,
``Last chance flavor blowout'' to, quote, ``stock up on
selected liquid pods flavors before they're gone,'' end quote.
``Buy 10 products, get 15 free.''
It is very obvious that those who sell this product have
their profit in mind when they are marketing to the public, not
the public's health. Notably, both promotions excluded menthol
and tobacco flavors, the two flavors excluded by FDA's flavor
guidance.
Mr. Blonde, it seems quite unabashed in its interest to
cash in on flavors that FDA has been urging to take off the
market. Don't you think it is irresponsible of your company to
offload your remaining stock of flavors in a fire sale at the
same time FDA is sounding the alarm on the appeal of these
products to youth?
Mr. Blonde. The sales on our website are very strictly
controlled and only accessible to 21-plus adults.
Mr. Ruiz. So, you are saying it wasn't your decision? You
are not taking accountability for the fact that, while the FDA
says let's remove flavors, you are trying to sell your flavors
and market these flavors that Mr. Loftin said would be
considered as an irresponsible act of marketing and
characteristics of a product?
Mr. Blonde. We have several promotions on our website, and
this one was dedicated to our other consumers currently
enjoying those flavors and making sure that they could stock
them before they would be off the market.
Mr. Ruiz. Clearly, flavors have been a target for youth.
So, you can say the adults, but, clearly, it has been a cause
for the youth epidemic.
I yield back.
Ms. DeGette. The gentleman yields back. The gentleman from
Maryland, Mr. Sarbanes, is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Sarbanes. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you to the panel.
So, I understand that the premise of the product that you
keep pointing to largely is to cure cigarette addiction and
move people off of cigarette addiction. But when you look at
the societal impact, it seems to me that the cure here may be
worse than the disease because we have now created the next
great public health crisis, really of scandalous proportions.
It is implausible that your companies didn't pick up pretty
quickly that youth vaping was contributing significantly to the
profitability of the bottom line. I don't know what the various
cases out there have turned up yet, but I know that in years to
come we will see emails and memos and other things from the
sales force going back and forth to headquarters, et cetera,
talking about the great opportunities to boost the numbers from
certain kinds of sales. You knew it was happening. And it
wasn't until this got to crisis proportions and there was a
public outcry that the accountability kicked in. So, that is
something that your industry is going to have to live with. And
unfortunately, it is something our youth are living with and
will be with them into the future.
I wanted to talk a little bit about the FDA's decision
because, originally, you know, FDA announced that it would ban
all flavored e-cigarette products. Hooray. And public health
experts were encouraged by that, and children's advocates and
medical. In a way, we couldn't believe it, that the President
was moving there; he was going to push on the FDA to do it. It
sounded almost too good to be true as a really forceful
response to the crisis. And then, of course, it turned out it
was too good to be true, because when the policy ultimately
came down, it was significantly weakened with exempting
multiple e-cigarette products.
So, the question I keep asking myself is, what happened?
Why would the FDA, the agency that is tasked with regulating
tobacco, and has as one of their key areas of focus protecting
America's youth and ensuring a healthier life for every
family--this is mission-oriented stuff--why would they walk
back their decision? And I just feel like it has got something
to do with how money moves in Washington.
So, there is a report from the American Public Media that
talks about the multimillion-dollar campaign that JUUL launched
to push back on the government's efforts to restrict vaping.
JUUL hired an army of lobbyists, spending almost $3 million on
lobbying the Federal Government, more than doubling its
lobbying expenses from 2017 and 2018 combined. The Political
Action Committee reported spending $200,000 for candidates and
committees, and JUUL dramatically increased its spending in
states to combat state-level efforts to restrict their
products; reported 142 lobbyists registered in 48 states.
Then, when the Citizens United case opened the floodgates
on how dark money comes into our politics and into the
policymaking apparatus up here, we saw companies like Reynolds
American and JUUL invest--I think 35 percent owner of Altria--
using their deep pockets to influence the regulations. Reynolds
American donated millions of dollars to dark money groups like
Americans for Tax Reform, and Americans for Prosperity. Altria
spent $295 million on lobbying since 1998, more than ExxonMobil
spent in the same time period.
So, the problem here is that this culture of responding to
legitimate scrutiny around a public health crisis, responding
by turning up your lobbying and money influence on the Hill,
means that the priorities that the public wants to see are
continuing to be frustrating because there is an inside game.
And I just want to speak to that.
I didn't give anybody any opportunity to respond and I have
now used my time. But I think it is a real concern and it is
something that we need to shine a light on because the American
public is, frankly, tired of it.
And I yield back.
Ms. DeGette. The gentle lady from New York is recognized
for 5 minutes, Ms. Clarke.
Ms. Clarke. I thank you, Madam Chair.
Gentlemen, over the past decade, our public health agencies
have become increasingly concerned about the youth vaping
rates, as have all of us. In 2013, the Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention first sounded the alarm on the
increasing use of e-cigarettes among youth. And in 2018, the
Food and Drug Administration declared youth vaping an epidemic.
Yet, the number of young people using e-cigarettes has
continued to grow. Today, more than 5 million young people use
e-cigarettes.
Mr. Nivakoff, is e-cigarette use among youth a national
public health threat?
Mr. Nivakoff. Yes, ma'am.
Ms. Clarke. The nation's leading public health officials
point to the attractiveness of fruity and sweet flavors,
targeted marketing tactics, stealth design, and low cost in
explaining the appeal of e-cigarettes to youth.
Mr. Loftin, your testimony attributes the rise in youth use
primarily to, quote, ``youth appeal of certain products that
seem to intentionally target minors''. End quote. Mr. Loftin,
which products do you believe intentionally target young
people?
Mr. Loftin. Congresswoman, I am not here to talk about the
other companies, but I know it is irresponsible marketing with
exciting flavors and colors and shapes and sizes that appeal to
minors. And if they are doing that, they should stop.
Ms. Clarke. Well, you are a part of an industry, sir. So, I
don't know how much you all interact with each other outside of
being called here to testify before us, but the whole industry
is basically under scrutiny right now. And if you feel as
though you have colleagues that are unscrupulous in their
practices, it would seem to me that the industry would have
that conversation.
Mr. Crosthwaite, according to national survey data, nearly
60 percent of high-schoolers and over half of middle-schoolers
who vape report JUUL as their usual brand. Mr. Crosthwaite, why
are so many young people drawn to your products?
Mr. Crosthwaite. JUUL has had great success converting
millions of adults who were using combustible cigarettes, and
otherwise wouldn't have quit----
Ms. Clarke. Hold on one moment. My question is, why are so
many young people drawn to your product?
Mr. Crosthwaite. And with that success with adults, and
that social sourcing plays a role in how youths get access to
e-vapor products. An unintended consequence of our success was
youth getting access to JUUL.
Ms. Clarke. So, how many young people do you estimate were
drawn into this because of the adult population that you are
quoting?
Mr. Crosthwaite. So, when we saw the youth data that came
out, clearly, those numbers are unacceptable and too high.
Ms. Clarke. But what were those numbers?
Mr. Crosthwaite. They are publicly available numbers that
the government has----
Ms. Clarke. You don't know what the numbers are, sir?
Mr. Crosthwaite. The studies that came out were the
Monitoring the Future Study that showed that youth were getting
access to mint-flavored----
Ms. Clarke. Yes, but do you know what the numbers are? What
did your study indicate, sir?
Mr. Crosthwaite. They all indicated that the youth use was
just too high.
Ms. Clarke. Mr. Oberlander, beyond pointing to the specific
product, how did we get here? What caused more than 5 million
youth to start vaping?
Mr. Oberlander. Madam Clarke, first of all, I share your
concern. And the most important point I would like to remind
you----
Ms. Clarke. Can you pull the microphone closer, sir?
Mr. Oberlander. When VUSE was the market leader between
2015-2017, youth vaping rates declined. In the National Youth
Tobacco Survey from last year, it actually showed that less
than 5 percent of the respondents claimed to have used VUSE.
Additionally, our consumer demographics for our VUSE products
indicate that 95 percent of our consumers of VUSE are actually
25 and older, and 70 percent of them are 35 and older.
Ms. Clarke. So, are you saying you just have no idea how
these 5 million youths starting vaping, sir?
Mr. Oberlander. Frankly, we don't research youth. We
research----
Ms. Clarke. You have no idea?
Mr. Oberlander. Excuse me. We have only researched 21-and-
plus individuals.
Ms. Clarke. Turning back to you, Mr. Crosthwaite, in your
testimony you mentioned that JUUL is, quote, ``combating the
serious problem of underage use''. Yet, as discussed, youth use
continues to increase and young people are still using your
products in high numbers. You came to JUUL from big tobacco,
which has not always been a stalwart of promoting public
health. Why should we take your word for it when you say that
JUUL is serious about combating youth use of e-cigarettes?
Mr. Crosthwaite. I joined the company because I believe in
the historic opportunity for adults to have another option to
combustible cigarettes who otherwise wouldn't quit. I also
recognized that it is at risk if we don't solve this problem.
The youth use situation is unacceptable. And when I joined, I
took action, and we are prepared to do more over time.
Ms. Clarke. So, as those responsible for perpetuating the
practices that have so enticed young people to your products, I
believe that your industry must be willing to take ownership
over your actions that have contributed to our nation's youth
vaping epidemic. Each of you, though you tried to differentiate
what your companies are doing, are all collaborating in an
industry that has drawn in, and will continue to draw in, young
people unless you take affirmative actions or unless we do so.
I yield back, Madam Chair.
Ms. DeGette. The gentleman from New York, Mr. Tonko, is
recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Mr. Crosthwaite, for every person that gets off of a
combustible cigarette, how many will get hooked or start using
an e-cigarette? In other words, the addiction that might come
to e-cigarettes for young people, how many are we willing to
tolerate?
Mr. Crosthwaite. The youth rates are unacceptable. And this
whole opportunity for adults we recognize is at risk if we
don't address this issue.
Mr. Tonko. I think there is that tipping point. I think we
really need to take that into consideration. We do not want our
young people to be the victims that will be addicted, or become
addicted.
Common sense and research show that flavored products are
an on-ramp to youth e-cigarette use. According to an NIH and
FDA national survey, nearly 80 percent of youth used the
tobacco product because, and I quote, ``It comes in flavors I
like.'' Industry claims that flavored e-cigarettes are
important to help some adult smokers quit, though whether these
flavors are necessary to help a person quit smoking is yet
unproven.
So, Mr. Crosthwaite, between November of 2018 and November
of 2019, JUUL voluntarily removed all of its flavored products
except tobacco and menthol from the U.S. market. Was the
increasing youth use of non-tobacco flavored products a factor
in this decision?
Mr. Crosthwaite. So, when I joined the organization, and
when we saw the data that youth were getting access to mint, it
is that data that drove the decision I made, which was to take
mint off the market for the company in November.
Mr. Tonko. And at our subcommittee hearing last fall, then-
Acting FDA Commissioner Sharpless stated that the research is,
and I quote, ``very strong that flavors draw a child to use''.
Mr. Nivakoff, do you agree with FDA that fruity and minty
flavors play a role in attracting our youth to e-cigarettes?
Mr. Nivakoff. I think that NJOY's data overwhelmingly
demonstrates that flavors did not drive youth to our products.
NJOY has the lowest rate of youth use amongst the four major
brands and has overwhelmingly, by a multiple of greater than
30, the lowest rate of violations with FDA retail inspections,
despite the overwhelming majority of our revenue previously
being derived from flavors; albeit, all flavors will be off the
market as of tomorrow.
Mr. Tonko. Well, at the listening session that the White
House held this past November, you told the President, and I
quote, ``Flavors are an issue. They are attractive to youth.''
So, how does that coordinate or respond to the answer you just
gave now?
Mr. Nivakoff. Can you repeat that quote? I don't recall
saying that, sir.
Mr. Tonko. The quote from the White House listening session
was, and I quote, ``Flavors are an issue. They are attractive
to our youth.''
Mr. Nivakoff. Are you certain that came from me? I might
have been speaking colloquially about the industry, but I think
the data clearly demonstrates that flavors with respect to
NJOY's distribution, which is the only thing over which I
exercise control, have not been a driver of youth use, as we
are overwhelmingly the industry leader in avoiding youth use.
Mr. Tonko. Yes, I have a document here that has the
transcript of the listening session that was held on November
22nd. And so, that was a direct lift from that transcript.
Mr. Nivakoff. Perhaps you could share the context because,
out of context, I don't fully understand what the comment is.
But, again, NJOY is the overwhelming market leader. Despite
having the overwhelming majority of our revenue derived from
flavors, we have the lowest rate of youth use by any measurable
benchmark afforded by the Federal Government.
Mr. Tonko. Again, the context was whether or not flavors
are a driving force.
So, we will move on. A recent study of e-cigarette use
among U.S. youth found the use of mint and menthol-flavored e-
cigarettes increased sharply over the past three years. For
JUUL, it was reported that its mint products contributed 70
percent to its overall sales after it restricted the
availability of its fruit flavors. I am concerned that FDA's
action to temporarily restrict certain flavored e-cigarettes
does not go far enough because it exempts menthol products.
FDA's website describes menthol as, and I quote, ``a flavor
additive with a minty taste and aroma''.
So, Mr. Crosthwaite, given the similarities between mint
and menthol, do you believe it is possible that youth using
mint e-cigarette products may just switch to those menthol
products?
Mr. Crosthwaite. I think it is important the note the
differences today. We now have Tobacco 21 as the law of the
land. And our menthol product is actually very different than
our mint product. It is a tobacco-based formulation that
exists.
Mr. Tonko. But do you think it is possible that youth using
mint will switch to the menthol product?
Mr. Crosthwaite. We know that the FDA is certainly going to
track it. We are going to do the same.
Mr. Tonko. And, Mr. Oberlander, the same question to you.
Are you convinced that menthol won't just become the new mint
in terms of popularity among youth?
Mr. Oberlander. Tobacco and menthol flavors have not been
perceived by the FDA--there is no research--to be popular
amongst youth. However, we will continue to monitor the market,
and we encourage the FDA to do the same.
Mr. Tonko. Well, I am disturbed by what we know of youth
behavior and their likelihood to merely shift from using fruity
and mint-flavored e-cigarettes to menthol products.
Unfortunately, I have not heard anything this morning to
convince me this won't be the case.
And with that, Madam Chair, I yield back.
Ms. DeGette. I thank the gentleman. The ranking member and
I will now each ask one last round of questions, and I will
recognize the ranking member, Mr. Guthrie, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Guthrie. Thank you for that.
And again, thank you for being here.
No doubt, e-cigarettes must get out of the hands of our
youth. And I want to ask each of you just to verify, before we
break today, are you committed to stopping all youth access,
and will you commit to keeping the Committee updated as you
take actions to stop usage of these cigarettes?
Mr. Crosthwaite?
Mr. Crosthwaite. We are committed to combating access for
youth getting to e-vapor and we are happy to keep you up-to-
speed on all of our actions.
Mr. Guthrie. Thank you.
Mr. Oberlander?
Mr. Oberlander. Yes, we are committed.
Mr. Guthrie. Mr. Nivakoff?
Mr. Nivakoff. Yes, sir.
Mr. Guthrie. Mr. Blonde?
Mr. Blonde. Absolutely, sir.
Mr. Guthrie. Mr. Loftin?
Mr. Loftin. We are committed and helping in any way.
Mr. Guthrie. And then, one final question. You have all
submitted PMTAs or indicated you plan to submit PMTAs. And that
is important because, in order to stay in the market, you have
to submit PMTAs, and there seems to be a lot of products that
aren't, that are on the market that aren't going down that
direction. But, currently, there is no final regulation from
FDA on the PMTA process, including what information should be
submitted and in what format. Do you think it would helpful for
the FDA to finalize its regulation before May 6th? And if it
doesn't do it sooner rather than later, what setback will that
cause your process?
Mr. Crosthwaite? We can just go down the aisle.
Mr. Crosthwaite. We are preparing to submit our FDAs. We
have opportunities to engage with our regulator and get
feedback on the process.
Mr. Guthrie. Even without the final regulation? Are you
getting feedback on what you need to do without a final reg in
place?
Mr. Crosthwaite. We have our regulatory science
organization that does engage with the FDA and to seek the
appropriate information to make our filing.
Mr. Guthrie. But would a final regulation be helpful?
Mr. Crosthwaite. Sure. Any clarity is always helpful, but
we are confident that we are going to submit a fulsome
application.
Mr. Guthrie. Mr. Oberlander?
Mr. Oberlander. We have submitted the first set of PMTA
applications for VUSE products, and we will actually comply
with the May 12th deadline to submit all others.
Mr. Guthrie. But without a final regulation in place, do
you feel confident that you are able to----
Mr. Oberlander. Continuous clarity/clarification about the
process would be helpful for sure.
Mr. Guthrie. Thank you.
Mr. Nivakoff?
Mr. Nivakoff. We think the current guidance is sufficient.
Mr. Guthrie. So, are you going to submit without a final
reg?
Mr. Nivakoff. We do plan to submit before a final
regulation is promulgated. Certainly, we would welcome any
additional clarity, but we don't think it is a prerequisite.
Mr. Guthrie. OK. Mr. Blonde?
Mr. Blonde. We agree that we are in the process of
finalizing our PMTA and submitting it date, and we encourage
everybody, and all the actors in the market should do so.
Mr. Guthrie. OK. Mr. Loftin?
Mr. Loftin. We have already submitted our PMTAs. We are in
standard review. We are working with them right now. We will
work with them if any new regulations come up.
Mr. Guthrie. Thank you.
But my point is, I knew you had to move forward because
there is not enough time, if you are not moving forward, to go
from where we are today to have it by May 6. But I am sure, as
the oversight committee of FDA, we would like to see that they
have a final regulation as you are moving for approval. We
think that is the way the process should work. But we certainly
understand you can't wait for that to happen, but clarity is
always important. And following the process, the way it should
be followed is important to us as well.
Thank you for being here. As I said, we absolutely must get
e-cigarettes out of the hands of our youth, and we would like
for you to update us as you put new controls in place, as Mr.
Loftin said. You shared with us what you do, but, as you move
forward, we would like to see that as well. Thank you.
And I yield back.
Ms. DeGette. Thank you. I thank the gentleman.
I just have a couple of quick questions. One of the things
that the kids at my roundtable earlier this week said is that
people are just getting e-cigarettes online, now that the age
has gone up to 21. Mr. Loftin, you said that you have very
strict online protections before you will send them out; is
that right?
Mr. Loftin. Yes, ma'am, we have.
Ms. DeGette. Could you submit; we could see?
Mr. Loftin. We have already sent that to the committee
staff.
Ms. DeGette. OK.
Mr. Loftin. But I would be glad to do it again as well.
Ms. DeGette. OK. Great. Thank you.
And do the rest of you all have very strict online
protections? Mr. Blonde, you are nodding yes.
Mr. Nivakoff?
Mr. Nivakoff. Yes, we do.
Ms. DeGette. Mr. Oberlander?
Mr. Oberlander. Yes, we do.
Ms. DeGette. And, Mr. Crosthwaite?
Mr. Crosthwaite. Yes.
Ms. DeGette. OK. Thank you.
The second question that I had was, e-cigarettes are being
marketed as a smoking cessation tool, but, partly because we
haven't had a final guidance from the FDA, e-cigarettes are not
approved by the FDA as a smoking cessation tool. Isn't that
correct, Mr. Crosthwaite?
Mr. Crosthwaite. Correct. We do not market today as a
smoking cessation tool.
Ms. DeGette. OK. But they are not approved by the FDA, is
that right?
Mr. Crosthwaite. Correct.
Ms. DeGette. OK. The next question I have--and I want to
commend all of you for now realizing the extent of the problem,
5 million youth vaping. And I want to commend you all for
trying to remove the marketing. But have you also tried to
figure out ways that you can help contribute to smoking
cessation programs or other programs to help kids get off of
this highly-addictive substance? It is one thing just to say,
``We are not going to market to you anymore,'' but we already
have millions of underage kids who have gotten addicted. What
are we going to do about that?
Mr. Oberlander, you seem to be nodding.
Mr. Oberlander. Thank you. Chair DeGette, I think this is
an important issue.
Ms. DeGette. Yes.
Mr. Oberlander. And at Reynolds American, we have a youth
tobacco prevention program called ``Right Decisions Right
Now''. We have put a significant amount of money behind it. And
only last year, we had 800 employees actually contacting
schools, I mean talking about the dangers, including vapor.
Ms. DeGette. And so, you actually are trying to help kids
get off of nicotine?
Would that be accurate for JUUL as well, Mr. Crosthwaite?
Mr. Crosthwaite. We are trying to make sure they don't get
it in the first place, access prevention.
Ms. DeGette. I understand.
Mr. Crosthwaite. And the question you are raising is an
important one, and we would be happy to engage----
Ms. DeGette. So, you are not doing it? You don't have
programs right now to try to help people get off of it?
Mr. Crosthwaite. We are not doing programs, right?
Ms. DeGette. Thank you.
What about you, Mr. Nivakoff?
Mr. Nivakoff. Ma'am, we would support any recommendations
that the committee has.
Ms. DeGette. Right, but you are not aware of any program
you all have now?
Mr. Nivakoff. No, ma'am. We don't think it is----
Ms. DeGette. What about you, Mr. Blonde?
Mr. Blonde. No, we don't currently have programs and we
don't address these----
Ms. DeGette. Would you be willing to consider something
like that?
Mr. Blonde. We are happy to collaborate with the Committee
and talk to----
Ms. DeGette. OK. Mr. Loftin?
Mr. Loftin. We are very open to working through that as
well with the committee.
Ms. DeGette. You don't have any programs right now?
Mr. Loftin. Nothing specific.
Ms. DeGette. OK. I am going, to be honest. I was pleased
that all of you admitted under oath that nicotine is addictive,
but I was extremely dismayed when I asked you about the health
problems with nicotine, that you all were extremely vague in
your answers and seemed to say, well, you are doing studies
right now. Because it has actually been established that
nicotine itself has severe health risks.
I have got two reports that I had the staff go get me while
we were sitting here, and they are surveys of the medical
research. And the Surgeon General says, ``Nicotine exposure
during adolescence can cause addiction and harm the developing
brain.'' So, these kids get addicted; then, they are addicted.
But, then, it says, ``Nicotine can cross the placenta and has
known effects on fetal and postnatal development. Therefore,
nicotine delivered by e-cigarettes during pregnancy can result
in multiple adverse consequences, including Sudden Infant Death
Syndrome, and could result in altered corpus callosum, deficits
in auditory processing, and obesity.''
It goes on to say, ``E-cigarettes can expose users to
several chemicals, including nicotine, carbonyl compounds, and
volatile organic compounds known to have adverse health
effects. The health effects in potentially harmful doses of
heated and aerosolized constituents of e-cigarette liquids,
including solvents, flavorants, and toxicants, are not
completely understood.'' And it goes on to say, ``E-cigarette
aerosol is not harmless water vapor, although it generally
contains fewer toxicants than combustible tobacco products.''
The Indian Journal of Medical and Paediatric Oncology,
which was in 2015--so, that was five years ago, when we already
knew this stuff--says, ``Nicotine poses several health hazards,
cardiovascular, respiratory, gastrointestinal disorders,
decreased immune response, and ill impacts on reproductive
health, cell proliferation, oxidative stress, apoptosis, DNA
mutation,'' et cetera.
I am going to put these studies in the record.
But I also asked the staff to make a copy to give to each
of you, because I think you need to be aware that, once these
kids get addicted, then the nicotine is also going to have
lifelong impacts, as long as they stay addicted.
I have one last question for you, Mr. Crosthwaite, and I
appreciate that you have said that JUUL needs to get it right.
And I appreciate the turning the page, looking forward. You
said, for example, when you saw the youth data on the mint, you
quit shipping the mint because it was an unacceptable level.
So, here is my question to you: let's say the 2020 National
Youth Tobacco Survey does not show a decline in the rate of
youth use of e-cigarettes, despite all of the efforts that you
and the other companies, and Congress, and the administration,
in raising the age to 21, have taken. Would you, then, consider
suspending the sales of all of your products until health
officials can figure out how we can stop this youth vaping
epidemic?
Mr. Crosthwaite. In just a few short months, we are going
to have our PMTA in with the FDA, who will have all of the
information to make the determination if, in fact, our product
is appropriate for the protection of public health. And that is
the process we think is best to make that determination.
Ms. DeGette. Well, I am glad you are going through that
process. I am glad everybody is going through that process, but
my question is: if the number of youth vaping doesn't go down,
despite all of this, with the effort you have taken already,
would you stop marketing your e-cigarettes until we figure out
how to solve this epidemic?
Mr. Crosthwaite. Well, I have stopped all of our broadcast,
print, and digital marketing already.
Ms. DeGette. OK. So, you are not prepared to go as far as
what I am suggesting? Wouldn't that be fair to say?
Mr. Crosthwaite. We have taken serious actions to address
this issue, and we are prepared to do more as we go on.
Ms. DeGette. OK, but stopping sales altogether until we
figure it out, that is not what you are thinking about?
Mr. Crosthwaite. We are trying to preserve this opportunity
for the millions of adults while combating the underage issue
that exists. And ultimately, we are going to make that filing--
--
Ms. DeGette. I got you. You don't want to answer it. I got
you.
But I do really want to thank you for coming, and I want to
thank all of the witnesses for their participation in this
hearing.
We have a number of documents that we want to put into the
record. We already put Representative Duncan's article into the
record.
We have the 2015 study from the Indian Journal of Medical
and Paediatric Oncology I just referred to.
We have the letter to the committee from the National
Association of County and City Health Officials.
We have The New York Times article that Congresswoman
Schakowsky referred to, and the 2016 Surgeon General report on
the dangers of nicotine.
I would ask unanimous consent that all of those be put in
the record. So ordered.
[The information appears at the conclusion of the hearing.]
Ms. DeGette. I also want to remind Members that, pursuant
to the committee rules, they have ten business days to submit
additional questions for the record to be answered by the
witnesses. And if the witnesses could answer those questions,
we would very much appreciate it.
Ms. DeGette. And with that, the subcommittee is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 12:56 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
