- THERE'S SOMETHING IN THE WATER: REFORMING OUR NATION'S DRINKING WATER STANDARDS

[House Hearing, 116 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

THERE'S SOMETHING IN THE WATER: REFORMING
OUR NATION'S DRINKING WATER STANDARDS

=======================================================================

VIRTUAL HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON ENVIRONMENT AND CLIMATE
CHANGE

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED SIXTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

JULY 28, 2020

__________

Serial No. 116-122

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Printed for the use of the Committee on Energy and Commerce

govinfo.gov/committee/house-energy
energycommerce.house.gov

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
55-867 PDF                  WASHINGTON : 2024

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE

FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey
Chairman
BOBBY L. RUSH, Illinois              GREG WALDEN, Oregon
ANNA G. ESHOO, California              Ranking Member
ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York             FRED UPTON, Michigan
DIANA DeGETTE, Colorado              JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois
MIKE DOYLE, Pennsylvania             MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas
JAN SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois             STEVE SCALISE, Louisiana
G. K. BUTTERFIELD, North Carolina    ROBERT E. LATTA, Ohio
DORIS O. MATSUI, California          CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington
KATHY CASTOR, Florida                BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky
JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland           PETE OLSON, Texas
JERRY McNERNEY, California           DAVID B. McKINLEY, West Virginia
PETER WELCH, Vermont                 ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois
BEN RAY LUJAN, New Mexico            H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia
PAUL TONKO, New York                 GUS M. BILIRAKIS, Florida
YVETTE D. CLARKE, New York, Vice     BILL JOHNSON, Ohio
Chair                            BILLY LONG, Missouri
DAVID LOEBSACK, Iowa                 LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana
KURT SCHRADER, Oregon                BILL FLORES, Texas
JOSEPH P. KENNEDY III,               SUSAN W. BROOKS, Indiana
Massachusetts                    MARKWAYNE MULLIN, Oklahoma
TONY CARDENAS, California            RICHARD HUDSON, North Carolina
RAUL RUIZ, California                TIM WALBERG, Michigan
SCOTT H. PETERS, California          EARL L. ``BUDDY'' CARTER, Georgia
DEBBIE DINGELL, Michigan             JEFF DUNCAN, South Carolina
MARC A. VEASEY, Texas                GREG GIANFORTE, Montana
ANN M. KUSTER, New Hampshire
ROBIN L. KELLY, Illinois
NANETTE DIAZ BARRAGAN, California
A. DONALD McEACHIN, Virginia
LISA BLUNT ROCHESTER, Delaware
DARREN SOTO, Florida
TOM O'HALLERAN, Arizona
------

Professional Staff

JEFFREY C. CARROLL, Staff Director
TIFFANY GUARASCIO, Deputy Staff Director
MIKE BLOOMQUIST, Minority Staff Director
Subcommittee on Environment and Climate Change

PAUL TONKO, New York
Chairman
YVETTE D. CLARKE, New York           JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois
SCOTT H. PETERS, California            Ranking Member
NANETTE DIAZ BARRAGAN, California    CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington
A. DONALD McEACHIN, Virginia         DAVID B. McKINLEY, West Virginia
LISA BLUNT ROCHESTER, Delaware       BILL JOHNSON, Ohio
DARREN SOTO, Florida                 BILLY LONG, Missouri
DIANA DeGETTE, Colorado              BILL FLORES, Texas
JAN SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois             MARKWAYNE MULLIN, Oklahoma
DORIS O. MATSUI, California          EARL L. ``BUDDY'' CARTER, Georgia
JERRY McNERNEY, California           JEFF DUNCAN, South Carolina
RAUL RUIZ, California, Vice Chair    GREG WALDEN, Oregon (ex officio)
DEBBIE DINGELL, Michigan
FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey (ex
officio)
C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hon. Paul Tonko, a Representative in Congress from the State of
New York, opening statement....................................     2
Prepared statement...........................................     3
Hon. John Shimkus, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Illinois, opening statement....................................     4
Prepared statement...........................................     6
Hon. Frank Pallone, Jr., a Representative in Congress from the
State of New Jersey, opening statement.........................     7
Prepared statement...........................................     8
Hon. Greg Walden, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Oregon, prepared statement.....................................     9
Prepared statement...........................................    11

Witnesses

Mae Wu, Senior Director, Health and Food, Healthy People Natural
Resources Defense Council......................................    12
Prepared statement...........................................    15
Answers to submitted questions...............................   131
Shellie R. Chard, President, Association of State Drinking Water
Administrators, Director, Water Quality Division, Oklahoma
Department of Environmental Quality, on Behalf of Association
of State Drinking Water Administrators.........................    29
Prepared statement...........................................    31
Answers to submitted questions...............................   142
Diane VanDe Hei, Chief Executive Officer, Association of
Metropolitan Water Agencies....................................    53
Prepared statement...........................................    55
Answers to submitted questions...............................   161

Submitted Material

Report ``Clean Water and Reproductive Justice: Lack of Access
Harms Women of Color,'' National Partnerships, submitted by Mr.
Tonko..........................................................    97
Letter of July 28, 2020, to Mr. Tonko and Mr. Shimkus, from G.
Tracy Mehan III, Executive Director, Government Affairs,
American Water Works Association, submitted by Mr. Tonko.......   120
Letter of July 24, 2020, to Mr. Tonko, from Gary A Brown, City of
Detroit Water and Sewerage Department, submitted by Mr. Tonko..   123
Letter of July 27, 2020, to Mr. Tonko, from Steven J. Bonafonte,
Assistant District Counsel, Metropolitan District of Hartford,
CT, submitted by Mr. Tonko.....................................   124
Letter July 27, 2020, to Mr. Tonko and Mr. Shimkus, from Luke
Duncan, Chairman, UTE Indian Tribe Business Committee,
submitted by Mr. Tonko                                            125

THERE'S SOMETHING IN THE WATER: REFORMING OUR NATION'S DRINKING WATER
STANDARDS

----------

TUESDAY, JULY 28, 2020

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Environment and Climate Change,
Committee on Energy and Commerce,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 11:05 a.m., via
Cisco Webex online video conferencing, Hon. Paul Tonko
(chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Members present: Representatives Tonko, Clarke, Peters,
Barragan, McEachin, Blunt Rochester, Soto, DeGette, Schakowsky,
Matsui, McNerney, Ruiz, Dingell, Pallone (ex officio), Shimkus
(subcommittee ranking member), Rodgers, McKinley, Johnson,
Mullin, Carter, Duncan, and Walden (ex officio).
Also present: Representative Walberg
Staff present: Jeffrey C. Carroll, Staff Director;
Jacqueline Cohen, Chief Environment Counsel; Adam Fischer,
Policy Analyst; Waverly Gordon, Deputy Chief Counsel; Anthony
Gutierrez, Professional Staff Member; Rick Kessler, Senior
Advisor and Staff Director, Energy and Environment; Brendan
Larkin, Policy Coordinator; Elysa Montfort, Press Secretary;
Joe Orlando, Staff Assistant; Tim Robinson, Chief Counsel;
Nikki Roy, Policy Coordinator; Rebecca Tomilchik, Staff
Assistant; Mike Bloomquist, Minority Staff Director; William
Clutterbuck, Minority Staff Assistant; Jerry Couri, Minority
Deputy Chief Counsel, Environment and Climate Change; Theresa
Gambo, Minority Human Resources/Office Administrator; Tyler
Greenberg, Minority Staff Assistant; Peter Kielty, Minority
General Counsel; Ryan Long, Minority Deputy Staff Director;
Mary Martin, Minority Chief Counsel, Energy and Environment and
Climate Change; Brannon Rains, Minority Legislative Clerk; and
Peter Spencer, Minority Senior Professional Staff Member,
Environment and Climate Change.
Mr. Tonko. Good morning. The Subcommittee on Environment
and Climate Change will now come to order.
Today the subcommittee is holding a hearing entitled:
``There's Something in the Water: Reforming Our Nation's
Drinking Water Standards.''
Due to the COVID-19 public health emergency, today's
hearing is being held remotely. All Members and witnesses will
be participating via videoconferencing. As part of our hearing,
microphones will be set on mute, for purposes of eliminating
inadvertent background noise. Members and witnesses, you will
need to unmute your microphone each time you wish to speak.
Documents for the record can be sent to Adam Fischer at the
email address we have provided to staff. All documents will be
entered into the record at the conclusion of the hearing.
I now recognize myself for 5 minutes with an opening
statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. PAUL TONKO, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF NEW YORK

The Safe Drinking Water Act is one of our Nation's most
important environmental laws, and I am pleased that in recent
years we have been able to enact meaningful bipartisan reforms
to strengthen provisions on infrastructure and other forms of
assistance. However, SDWA's remaining deficiencies are as
apparent as ever, and Congress has not done a serious
examination of how the law can better meet the needs of States,
of utilities, and, most importantly, of the public.
Today's hearing is an opportunity to begin to review SDWA's
standard-setting process. SDWA requires EPA to set standards
for contaminants in the Nation's public water supply, but many
would acknowledge the process established by the 1996
amendments has not worked.
The statute lays out a long and complicated process, from
the contaminant candidate list to unregulated contaminant
monitoring rule to a regulatory determination and, finally, a
rulemaking that, even if working properly, would take years to
set a standard. At each step, there are several barriers that
may prevent a standard from moving forward, some of which I
expect to be discussed today, and this is hardly the only
issue.
The revision process has also proven to be difficult. Since
1996, all regulatory determinations have been negative except
for perchlorate, which EPA has now reversed. This means that
there has not been a single new standard set in 24 years that
wasn't explicitly required by Congress.
Perchlorate, a contaminant that was found in the water of
millions of Americans, is a perfect example of the regulatory
regime's problems. Despite knowing its dangers for decades, we
are still a long way from a finalized national standard. And
this could very much be the path for PFAS.
Drinking water systems serving millions of people have
detected PFOA and PFOS at levels above EPA's health advisory
levels, and many millions more have PFAS contaminations that
fall below the advisory but are likely still a threat to human
health.
EPA's limited progress on setting a PFAS standard exposes
SDWA issues. For one, EPA has relied on nonenforceable health
advisory levels. I think many people believe that if EPA has
enough evidence to establish a health advisory, they should
move to establish a standard. And while health advisories have
flaws, EPA has not even been using this tool to its fullest.
EPA may not want to issue an advisory, perhaps for fear
that there becomes an expectation that more will need to be
done. I believe this is the case for GenX, where there does not
seem to be an intention to issue an advisory.
Second, the lack of a PFAS standard demonstrates what
happens in the absence of Federal action. States have been
forced to step up to protect their residents, but we are
witnessing a wide range of State standards. This can create
poor risk communication and a crisis of confidence by the
public, who have diminished trust in their State's standards
when it fails to align with a neighboring State.
Today, we hope to better understand why Federal standards
have consistently failed to be developed. And while there may
be disagreements amongst the various stakeholders about just
how to best improve the existing process, I believe most of us
agree that EPA should set standards in a reasonable timeframe.
And I believe that Congress can play a larger role in
addressing systems, infrastructure, and affordability
challenges and preventing contaminations from happening in the
first place by putting a greater emphasis on source water
protection.
Congress can also provide more resources to support the
development of testing methods, innovative treatment
technologies, and data collection that can ensure the standard-
setting process is based on sound science.
But ultimately, we need national standards, standards that
are protective of the health of all Americans, including the
most vulnerable to risks: Pregnant women, infants, children and
other susceptible populations. Today, standards are not
guaranteed to be protective of human health.
So, while I certainly support Congress providing more
resources and other reforms to improve our drinking water, I
firmly believe fixing the standard-setting process is an
important part of that effort. As we move forward and consider
the needs of utilities and the Americans they serve, especially
in light of COVID-related challenges, I hope that we can have a
productive dialogue on just how to best ensure people have
access to the safe water they need and deserve.
So, with that, I thank you again for joining us today.
Mr. Tonko. The Chair now recognizes Mr. Shimkus, ranking
member of the Subcommittee on Environment and Climate Change,
for 5 minutes for his opening statement. John, please.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Tonko follows:]

Prepared Statement of Hon. Paul Tonko

The Safe Drinking Water Act is one of our nation's most
important environmental laws, and I am pleased that in recent
years we've been able to enact meaningful, bipartisan reforms
to strengthen provisions on infrastructure and other forms of
assistance. However, SDWA's remaining deficiencies are as
apparent as ever, and Congress has not done a serious
examination of how the law can better meet the needs of states,
utilities, and most importantly, the public.
Today's hearing is an opportunity to begin to review SDWA's
standard setting process.SDWA requires EPA to set standards for
contaminants in the nation's public water supply, but many
would acknowledge the process, established by the 1996
amendments, has not worked.
The statute lays out a long and complicated process from
the Contaminant Candidate List to Unregulated Contaminant
Monitoring Rule to a regulatory determination and finally a
rulemaking that--even if working properly--would take years to
set a standard.
At each step, there are several barriers that may prevent a
standard from moving forward, some of which I expect to be
discussed today.
And this is hardly the only issue. The revision process has
also proven to be difficult.Since 1996, all regulatory
determinations have been negative, except for perchlorate,
which EPA has now reversed.
This means there has not been a single new standard set in
24 years that wasn't explicitly required by Congress.
Perchlorate, a contaminant that was found in the water of
millions of Americans, is a perfect example of the regulatory
regime's problems. Despite knowing its dangers for decades, we
are still a long way from a finalized national standard.
And this could very much be the path for PFAS.
Drinking water systems serving millions of people have
detected PFOA and PFOS at levels above EPA's health advisory
levels, and many millions more have PFAS contaminations that
fall below the advisories but are likely still a threat to
human health.EPA's limited progress on setting a PFAS standard
exposes SDWA issues.
For one, EPA has relied on non-enforceable health advisory
levels. I think many people believe that if EPA has enough
evidence to establish a health advisory, they should move to
establish a standard.
And while health advisories have flaws, EPA has not even
been using this tool to its fullest.
EPA may not want to issue an advisory, perhaps for fear
that there becomes an expectation that more will need to be
done.
I believe this is the case for Gen X, where there does not
seem to be an intention to issue an advisory.
Second, the lack of a PFAS standard demonstrates what
happens in the absence of Federal action. States have been
forced to step up to protect their residents.
But we are witnessing a wide range of state standards.
This can create poor risk communication and a crisis of
confidence by the public, who have diminished trust in their
state's standards when it fails to align with a neighboring
state.
Today, we hope to better understand why Federal standards
have consistently failed to be developed and while there may be
disagreements among the various stakeholders about how to best
improve the existing process, I believe most of us agree that
EPA should set standards in a reasonable timeframe.
And I believe Congress can play a larger role in addressing
systems' infrastructure and affordability challenges and
preventing contaminations from happening in the first place by
putting a greater emphasis on source water protection.
Congress can also provide more resources to support the
development of testing methods, innovative treatment
technologies, and data collection that can ensure the standard
setting process is based on sound science.
But ultimately, we need national standards that are
protective of the health of all Americans, including the most
vulnerable to risks- pregnant women, infants, children, and
other susceptible populations.
Today, standards are not guaranteed to be protective of
human health. So while I certainly support Congress providing
more resources and other reforms to improve our drinking water,
I firmly believe fixing the standard setting process is an
important part of that effort.
As we move forward and consider the needs of utilities and
the Americans they serve-especially in light of COVID-related
challenges- I hope we can have a productive dialogue on how to
best ensure people have access to the safe water they need and
deserve.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. JOHN SHIMKUS, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF ILLINOIS

Mr. Shimkus. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. It is great to be
with you. And I guess I will see you all back in D.C. for me
tonight, and you all the rest tomorrow.
Let me just start by saying, Mr. Chairman, you got my
attention when you said a PFAS standard, and then you mentioned
PFOS, P-F-O-S, and then you mentioned P-F-O-A. As I have been
trying to remind people, there are 5,887 known PFAS chemicals.
We can only test for 29 in drinking water.
I think it would be helpful if we would focus on the ones
that we know are bad, the PFOA and PFOS, and not link them with
the 5,887 other short-chain PFAS. I mean, that is going to be a
continuing debate.
I think we can get to safety on the ones we know that are a
concern, but that is part of this hearing anyway, because 35
years ago Congress decided that EPA was not regulating enough
contaminants in drinking water. As a result, it amended the
Safe Drinking Water Act to require the EPA to issue regulations
for 83 specific contaminants within three years.
It also required EPA to issue regulations for at least 25
additional contaminants every three years thereafter, as well
as filtration and disinfectant and underground injection rules.
Ten years later, those changes had led to a huge backlog, as
EPA struggled to satisfy the act's arbitrary goals.
This committee has repeatedly heard how the act's mandate
imposed significant burdens at the local, State, and Federal
levels and called into question whether the most significant
public health risks were being addressed.
Former Clinton and Obama EPA official Bob Perciasepe
testified that the mandate for 25 new rules every three years
needs to be replaced with a scientifically defensible risk-
based approach, conceding that this regulatory number game
dilutes limited resources on lower priority contaminants and,
as a consequence, may hinder more rapid progress on high-
priority contaminants.
States were also complaining that they were unable to
effectively implement core elements of the program, much less
the new and more stringent requirements of the act. Water
systems complained that compliance costs may triple for new
regulations with dubious scientific merit, including
contaminant issues that were not in their State, significantly
affecting small water systems.
In 1996, Congress stepped in to stop the chaos that the
Safe Drinking Water Act was causing. Those reforms to the act
are now the current statute. Like Mr. Perciasepe, Congress
declared that quantity was not the true measure of whether EPA
was doing its job, but, rather, the quality of the work it was
doing.
Congress removed the quota and instead required EPA to
prioritize contaminants it examined for regulation, based upon
public health concerns. Congress then required EPA to decide
whether those contaminants may have an adverse health effect,
are substantially likely to occur in drinking water systems,
and if regulation presented a meaningful opportunity for health
risk reduction. If so, EPA must regulate. If not, the States
could regulate, or EPA could provide information to concerned
persons on that contaminant.
Finally, Congress demanded the use of high-quality science
and made the EPA set a protective level goal, but to allow for
technical and economic feasibility considerations so long as
there is an adequate safety margin in the final number.
This seemed like a reasonable way to protect public health,
by prioritizing the biggest threats while ensuring that
quality, science, and practicality played a role in the
regulations that would be issued.
No one expected there would not yet be a single regulation
that went from start to finish under the regime instituted in
the Safe Drinking Water Act in 1996. What they expected was
thoughtful consideration and action where public health
benefits were clear.
Since 1996, EPA has been regulating contaminants in
drinking water. EPA has regulated arsenic, revised its total
coliform rule, issued new rules on stage 2 disinfection
byproducts, surface water treatment, and filter backwash, and
is angling to finish the lead and copper rule this year. EPA
has reviewed eight contaminants and decided they do not merit
regulation and issued public health advisories on several
contaminants.
These aren't small jobs. These are real actions that
advance public health protection, and they should not be
discounted. No system is perfect, but why would we give up an
evidence-driven, science-based objective with practical
systems, only to revert to a system driven by the notion that
quantity makes quality.
It is always useful to examine laws to see if something can
be done better, and there may well be a few improvements to be
made here and there. However, before we get carried away in the
rhetoric, let's consider the lessons of history so we don't go
back and make the same mistakes twice.
I want to thank our witnesses for making the time to be
with us.
And, Mr. Chairman, with that, I yield back my time.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Shimkus follows:]

Prepared Statement of Hon. John Shimkus

Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for recognizing me at today's
hearing on the regulatory standard setting provisions in the
Safe Drinking Water Act.
Thirty-five years ago, Congress decided EPA was not
regulating enough contaminants in drinking water. As a result,
it amended the Safe Drinking Water Act to require EPA to issue
regulations for 83 specific contaminants within three years. It
also required EPA to issue regulations for at least 25
additional contaminants every three years thereafter, as well
as filtration and disinfection and underground injection rules.
Ten years later, those changes had led to huge backlog as
EPA struggled to satisfy the Act's arbitrary goals. This
Committee repeatedly heard how the Act's mandates imposed
significant burdens at the local, state and federal levels, and
called into question whether the most significant public health
risks were being addressed.
Former Clinton and Obama EPA official Bob Perciasepe [PER-
CHA-SEP-EE] testified that the mandate for 25 new rules every
three years ``needs to be replaced with a scientifically
defensible, risk-based approach''--conceding that this
regulatorynumbers game ``dilutes limited resources on lower
priority contaminants, and as a consequence may hinder more
rapid progress on high priority contaminants.''
States were also complaining they were unable to
effectively implement core elements of their programs, much
less the new and more stringent requirements of the Act.
Water systems complained that compliance costs may triple
for new regulations with dubious scientific merits - including
contaminant issues that were not in their state, significantly
affecting small water systems.
In 1996, Congress stepped in to stop the chaos that the
Safe Drinking Water Act was causing. Those reforms to the Act
are now the current statute.
Like Mr. Perciasepe [PER-CHA-SEP-EE], Congress declared
that quantity was not the true measure of whether EPA was doing
its job, but rather the quality of the work it was doing.
Congress removed the quota and instead required EPA to
prioritize contaminants it examined for regulation based on
public health concern.
Congress then required EPA to decide whether those
contaminants may have an adverse health effect, are
substantially likely to occur in drinking water systems, and if
regulation presented a meaningful opportunity for health risk
reduction. If so, EPA must regulate. If not, the states could
regulate, or EPA could provide information to concerned persons
on that contaminant.
Finally, Congress demanded the use of high-quality science
and made EPA set a protective level goal, but to allow for
technical and economic feasibility considerations so long as
there is an adequate safety margin in the final number.
This seemed like a reasonable way to protect public health
by prioritizing the biggest threats while ensuring that quality
science and practicality played a role in the regulations that
would be issued.
No one expected there would not yet be a single regulation
that went from start to finish under the regime instituted in
the Safe Drinking Water Act in 1996. What they expected was
thoughtful consideration and action where public health
benefits were clear.
Since 1996, EPA has been regulating contaminants in
drinking water. EPA has regulated Arsenic, revised its Total
Coliform Rule, issued new rules on Stage 2 Disinfection By-
Products, Surface Water Treatment, and Filter Backwash; and is
angling to finish the Lead and Copper Rule this year. EPA has
reviewed eight contaminants and decided they do not merit
regulation; and issued public health advisories on several
contaminants. These aren't small jobs; these are real actions
that advance public health protection and they should not be
discounted.
No system is perfect, but why would we give up an evidence-
driven, science-based, objective, and practical system--only to
go revert to a system driven by the notion that quantity makes
quality?
It's always useful to examine laws to see if something can
be done better, and there may well be a few improvements to be
made here and there. However, before we get carried away in the
rhetoric, let's consider the lessons of history so we don't go
back and make the same mistakes twice.
I want to thank our witnesses for making time to be with
us, and I yield back.

Mr. Tonko. Thank you. The gentleman yields back.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. FRANK PALLONE, Jr., A REPRESENTATIVE
IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF NEW JERSEY

The Chair now recognizes Mr. Pallone, chairman of the full
committee, for 5 minutes for his opening statement.
Chairman Pallone, please.
Mr. Pallone. Thank you, Chairman Tonko.
Safe drinking water obviously is essential to our Nation's
public health, and never has that been more clear than during
this pandemic. And right now families are struggling to keep
the water turned on so they can wash their hands to stay safe.
And in too many communities, families are also worrying that
contaminants in their water, including forever chemicals like
PFAS, have weakened their immune systems and made them more
susceptible to COVID-19, and this simply should not be
happening.
Every American should be able to turn on their tap
confident that the water coming out is safe and healthy. This
should be true for all communities, including environmental
justice communities. Where you live should not play a factor in
whether or not your tap water is clean and safe. And that
should be true for the most vulnerable among us too, including
pregnant women, infants, children, the elderly and those with
underlying conditions.
Unfortunately, there are fundamental weaknesses in both the
design and implementation of the Safe Drinking Water Act that
leave us all at risk. And the first fundamental problem is that
the current water standard-setting process, which was developed
in 1996 through changes to the law, simply does not work.
Right now, there are 90 drinking water standards in place,
covering contaminants or groups of contaminants, and all but
six of those standards were established before the 1996
changes. The six standards put in place since then were all
established under special statutory procedures. So in the last
24 years, the EPA has not been able to set a drinking water
standard under the general process.
Another fundamental problem is that the Safe Drinking Water
Act is not designed to produce health-based standards. Four
years ago, this committee worked together in a strong
bipartisan fashion to revise the Toxic Substances Control Act
from a regulatory system based on cost-benefit analysis to one
based on health protections. And I think we need to do it again
now for the Safe Drinking Water Act.
And a third fundamental problem with the Safe Drinking
Water Act is that it leaves far too much discretion to the EPA.
The Trump EPA has used and, in my view, abused this discretion
to move us in the wrong direction on drinking water safety. It
has squandered the opportunity to strengthen our drinking water
standard for lead. It has slow-walked efforts to set a standard
for PFAS instead of using its authority to set interim
standards, and it has abandoned the effort to set a standard
for perchlorate after more than a decade of agency effort.
So for nearly a quarter century, we have depended on the
protections of drinking water standards put in place before the
1996 amendments, as well as State standards and voluntary
efforts by water utilities who want to do the right thing, but
these efforts can only get us so far. We have to strengthen the
Safe Drinking Water Act to ensure that everyone has access to
drinking water that is safe and healthy.
And this important hearing continues the work of the
subcommittee to explore how the Safe Drinking Water Act should
be reformed.
I want to thank Chairman Tonko for his leadership in this
effort and also today's witnesses.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Pallone follows:]

Prepared Statement of Hon. Frank Pallone, Jr.

Safe drinking water is essential to our nation's public
health, and never has that been more clear than during this
pandemic. Right now families are struggling to keep the water
turned on so they can wash their hands to stay safe. And in too
many communities, families are also worrying that contaminants
in their water, including forever chemicals like PFAS, have
weakened their immune systems and made them more susceptible to
Covid-19. This simply should not be happening.
Every American should be able to turn on their tap,
confident that the water coming out is safe and healthy. This
should be true for all communities, including environmental
justice communities. Where you live should not play a factor in
whether or not your tap water is clean and safe.
And that should be true for the most vulnerable among us,
including pregnant women, infants, children, the elderly, and
those with underlying conditions. Unfortunately, there are
fundamental weaknesses in both the design and the
implementation of the Safe Drinking Water Act that leave us all
at risk.
The first fundamental problem is that the current water
standard setting process, developed in 1996 through changes to
the law, simply does not work. Right now, there are 90 drinking
water standards in place covering contaminants or groups of
contaminants, and all but six of those standards were
established before the 1996 changes. The six standards put in
place since then were all established under special statutory
procedures. So, in the last 24 years, the Environmental
Protection Agency (EPA) has not been able to set a drinking
water standard under the general process.
Another fundamental problem is that the Safe Drinking Water
Act is not designed to produce health-based standards. Four
years ago, this Committee worked together in a strong,
bipartisan fashion to revise the Toxic Substances Control Act
from a regulatory system based on cost/benefit analysis to one
based on health protection. We need to do it again now for the
Safe Drinking Water Act.
And a third fundamental problem with the Safe Drinking
Water Act is that it leaves far too much discretion to the EPA.
The Trump EPA has used and, in my view, abused this discretion
to move us in the wrong direction on drinking water safety. It
has squandered the opportunity to strengthen our drinking water
standard for lead. It has slow walked efforts to set a standard
for PFAS, instead of using its authority to set interim
standards. And it has abandoned the effort to set a standard
for perchlorate after more than a decade of agency effort.
Some of these actions will be challenged in court. And some
will likely be reversed by future EPA administrators. But in
the meantime, the public will be exposed to harm.
For nearly a quarter century, we have depended on the
protections of drinking water standards put in place before the
1996 amendments, as well as state standards and voluntary
efforts by water utilities who want to do the right thing. But
these efforts can only get us so far. We must strengthen the
Safe Drinking Water Act to ensure that everyone has access to
drinking water that is safe and healthy.
This important hearing continues the work of this
Subcommittee to explore how the Safe Drinking Water Act should
be reformed. I thank Chairman Tonko for his leadership in this
effort, and I thank today's witnesses for their testimony.

Mr. Pallone. And I yield back. I don't know how much time
is left, but I yield it to Ms. Dingell.
Ms. Dingell. Thank you, Chairman Pallone, for yielding. And
thank you, Chairman Tonko, for holding this important hearing
today.
As we know, we have needed reforms for a long time to this
law so that we are protecting future generations. Access to
clean and safe drinking water is a fundamental human right, and
this has become even clearer in the middle of the COVID-19
pandemic.
At its core, the Safe Drinking Water Act was designed to
ensure everyone is afforded that human right. But over recent
years, it has become evident that the standard-setting process
isn't working, and this includes for mitigating new, harmful,
emerging contaminants like PFAS. We know that PFAS is a forever
chemical. We know it causes damage, and when it goes in your
body, it doesn't come out.
It is time we improve the standard-setting process to one
that works efficiently and in a timely manner and that is
health-based and covers vulnerable populations.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and I yield back.
Mr. Pallone. And I yield back, Mr. Tonko.
Mr. Tonko. The gentle lady yields back. To Mr. Pallone.
Mr. Pallone yields back.
The Chair now recognizes Mr. Walden, ranking member of the
full committee, for 5 minutes for his opening statement,
please. Mr. Walden.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. GREG WALDEN, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF OREGON

Mr. Walden. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Almost two years ago, Congress capped off for the first
time in 25 years the comprehensive reauthorization of the Safe
Drinking Water Act. Driven by this committee, the act had
overwhelming bipartisan support and focused on improving
utility compliance, aiding State efforts to help drinking water
systems, bringing innovation and resilience to the drinking
water sector, bettering management of utility assets and
greatly improving poor performing water systems. The
legislation continues to make a difference today, and I am glad
that we can be part of that, Mr. Chairman.
Today's hearing, though, is focused on perhaps a more
contentious aspect of the Safe Drinking Water Act, efforts to
make substantial changes to the regulatory process for
contaminants under the Safe Drinking Water Act.
In my experience, any significant change to a core
environmental law requires overwhelming bipartisan support.
Knowing this issue is quite important to you and to members in
your caucus, I wanted to lay out some areas of importance to me
and my fellow Republican Members.
First, we believe objective science should guide decisions.
The Safe Drinking Water Act currently requires that science be
at the forefront of decision-making processes, and we believe
this must remain the case to protect public health. Facts and
science matter.
Second, we are concerned about efforts to eliminate risk
from the act. Specifically, some have called for the removal of
the current statutory criteria focused on, ``meaningful health
risk reduction,'' or that the contaminant's occurrence be ``at
a frequency and at levels of public concern.''
This would almost certainly result in community water
systems spending significant resources on the reduction of
contaminants that may not present a significant threat to
public health. It also would require EPA to promulgate
regulations that there would be little or no meaningful public
health benefit from.
Issuing numerous drinking water regulations for
contaminants that don't occur at levels of health concern will
actually divert limited resources from more important actions
to assure safe drinking water, like lead service line removals.
We must ensure that finite public resources are focused on
those contaminants for which public health risks are real and
can be reduced.
Additionally, we must be mindful of the burden reforms
would have on States, particularly because they would need to
keep up with their responsibilities as the primary enforcers of
Federal regulations. The States are already stretched thin. It
is not smart to overregulate them to the point they are forced
to return operations of their drinking water programs to the
Federal Government because of underfunded mandates ill-
conceived reforms would place on them.
Third, we are concerned about waking the ghosts of the 1986
amendments by placing EPA on an accelerated treadmill of
regulatory decision-making quotas and increasing the rolling 3-
year cycle of regulatory determinations. They are apprehensive
about the impact this would have on the scientific community's
ability to provide the health effects research and high-quality
peer-review risk assessments needed to establish regulatory
goals for the increased number of contaminants that the EPA
would be required to regulate.
Again, Mr. Chairman, Republicans believe science and facts
matter. We understand that some people would like to see the
Federal Government act more frequently to regulate. However,
the quality of the work is much more important than the
quantity of the pages in the Federal Register.
Fourth, we believe the cost and benefit provision should
remain part of the Safe Drinking Water Act. One unfortunate
impact of its removal is that it could require EPA to establish
stringent regulatory standards based only on feasibility of
large water systems.
That could leave small water systems with no affordable
options and force States into a burdensome administrative
process. So, its smaller systems could potentially use
technology that less effectively removes the contaminant. This
is an especially punitive no-win sanction on rural and small
communities and State governments.
Mr. Chairman, I do appreciate your ambition in tackling
this topic. I wonder whether some of the concerns you have are
better remedied with implementation improvements rather than
statutory overhauls, and I hope our witnesses can help us
better understand that and other questions.
So, I appreciate their willingness to testify and I welcome
our witnesses.
And I yield back the balance of my time.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Walden follows:]

Prepared Statement of Hon. Greg Walden

Thank you, Mr. Chairman.Almost two years ago, Congress
capped off--for the first time in 25 years--the comprehensive
reauthorization of the Safe Drinking Water Act (SDWA). Driven
by this Committee, the Act had overwhelming bipartisan support
and focused on improving utility compliance, aiding state
efforts to help drinking water systems, bringing innovation and
resilience to the drinking water sector, bettering management
of utility assets and greatly improving poor performing water
systems. The legislation continues to make a difference today
and I am glad that we can be a part of that, Mr. Chairman.
Today's hearing, though, is focused on perhaps a more
contentious aspect of SDWA: efforts to make substantial changes
to the regulatory process for contaminants under the Safe
Drinking Water Act.
In my experience, any significant change to a core
environmental law requires overwhelming bipartisan support.
Knowing this issue is quite important to you and the members in
your Caucus, I wanted to lay out some areas of importance to me
and my fellow Republican members.
First, we believe objective science should guide decisions.
The Safe Drinking Water Act currently requires that science be
at the forefront of decision-making process and we believe this
must remain the case to protect public health. Facts and
science matter.
Second, we are concerned about efforts to eliminate risk
from the Act. Specifically, some have called for the removal of
the current statutory criteria focused on `meaningful health
risk reduction' or that the contaminant's occurrence be `at a
frequency and at levels of public concern.' This would almost
certainly result in community water systems spending
significant resources on the reduction of contaminants that may
not present a significant threat to public health. It also
would require EPA to promulgate regulations when there would be
little or no meaningful public health benefit.
Issuing numerous drinking water regulations for
contaminants that don't occur at levels of health concern will
divert limited resources from more important actions to assure
safe drinking water, like lead service line removals. We must
ensure that finite public resources are focused on those
contaminants for which public health risks are real and can be
reduced.
Additionally, we must be mindful of the burden reforms
would have on states, particularly because they would need to
keep up with their responsibilities as the primary enforcers of
federal regulations. The states are already stretched thin.
It's not smart to over-regulate them to the point they are
forced to return operation of their drinking water programs to
the federal government because of the underfunded mandates ill-
conceived reforms would place on them.
Third, we're concerned about waking the ghosts of the 1986
Amendments by placing EPA on an accelerated treadmill of
regulatory decision-making quotas and increasing the rolling
three-year cycle for regulatory determinations. We are
apprehensive about the impact this would have on the scientific
community's ability to provide the health effects research and
high-quality peer-reviewed risk assessments needed to establish
regulatory goals for the increased number of contaminants that
EPA would be required to regulate. Again, Mr. Chairman,
Republicans believe science and facts matter.
We understand that some people would like to see the
federal government act more frequently to regulate. However,
the quality of the work is much more important than the
quantity of pages in the Federal Register.
Fourth, we believe the costs and benefits provisions should
remain part of the Safe Drinking Water Act. One unfortunate
impact of its removal is that it could require EPA to establish
stringent regulatory standards--based only on feasibility for
large water systems. That could leave small water systems with
no affordable options and force states into a burdensome
administrative process, so its smaller systems could
potentially use technology that less effectively removes the
contaminant. This is an especially punitive, no-win sanction on
rural and small communities and state governments.
Mr. Chairman, I appreciate your ambition in tackling this
topic. I wonder whether some of the concerns you have are
better remedied with implementation improvements rather than
statutory overhauls. I hope our witnesses can help us better
understand that and other questions. I appreciate their
willingness to testify and want to welcome them.
I yield back the balance of my time.

Mr. Tonko. Thank you, Mr. Walden. The gentleman yields
back.
The Chair would like to remind Members that, pursuant to
committee rules, all Members' written opening statements shall
be made part of the record.
I now will introduce the witnesses for today's hearing. We
begin with Ms. Mae Wu, senior director of Health and Food,
Healthy People and Thriving Communities Program with the
Natural Resources Defense Council.
Next, we have Ms. Shellie Chard, director of the Water
Quality Division and Oklahoma Department of Environmental
Quality, on behalf of the Association of State Drinking Water
Administrators.
And then we have Ms. Diane VanDe Hei, chief executive
officer, Association of Metropolitan Water Agencies.
I now recognize Ms. Wu for 5 minutes to provide an opening
statement.

STATEMENTS OF MAE WU, SENIOR DIRECTOR, HEALTH AND FOOD, HEALTHY
PEOPLE AND THRIVING COMMUNITIES PROGRAM NATURAL RESOURCES
DEFENSE COUNCIL (NRDC); SHELLIE R. CHARD. DIRECTOR, WATER
QUALITY DIVISION, OKLAHOMA DEPARTMENT OF ENVIRONMENTAL QUALITY,
ON BEHALF OF ASSOCIATION OF STATE DRINKING WATER ADMINISTRATORS
(ASDWA); AND DIANE VANDE HEI, CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER,
ASSOCIATION OF METROPOLITAN WATER AGENCIES (AMWA)

STATEMENT OF MAE WU

Ms. Wu. Thank you, Chairman Tonko.
Good morning, chairman, Ranking Member Shimkus, and members
of the subcommittee.
My name is Mae Wu. I am the senior director for Health and
Food at the Natural Resources Defense Council, and thank you
for this opportunity.
I still remember vividly my friend Gary, which isn't his
real name, returning home from the hospital after his colon had
ripped open and he almost died. He had ulcerative colitis and
had his colon removed. And I saw a guy who used to bike eight
miles a day barely be able to walk around the block. He had
dropped 50 pounds in six weeks. He can't eat fresh vegetables.
He can't be away from a toilet now for more than a few hours at
a time. He can't go camping with his 5-year-old daughter. He is
missing dance recitals. And he and his wife have to recalibrate
what their future will look like.
I bring up Gary's story to highlight the cost of disease
beyond the final total on the medical bill. EPA can exploit its
inability to quantify these intangibles to set weaker drinking
water standards. This and other problems in the Safe Drinking
Water Act have left EPA unable and perhaps unwilling to set
health protective standards despite science that demands
otherwise.
The 1996 amendments created a new process to regulate
contaminants, but it is broken. Take perchlorate, for example.
By the 1990s, science showed that perchlorate exposure to
pregnant women could significantly interfere with developing
brains of fetuses and infants, with significant lifetime
consequences, and it was found contaminating the drinking water
of millions of Americans.
In 2011, EPA finally announced that it would regulate it,
which triggered important statutory deadlines. But those
deadlines came and went with no perchlorate standard. And now
the Trump administration is trying to defy a court order
requiring EPA to act on the 2011 finding. And I should note
that NRDC has challenged that delay in court and is now
challenging this most recent action.
History may soon repeat itself. EPA recently made a
preliminary decision to regulate PFOA and PFOS, and a massive
study shows a link between PFOA-contaminated water and
ulcerative colitis, kidney and testicular cancer, and other
harmful effects. And it is found in the drinking water of
millions of Americans. But without important changes to the
Safe Drinking Water Act, we may not see PFOA and PFOS standards
that protect the most vulnerable populations.
So here are five things that could fix the statute: First,
fix the legal standard. EPA should regulate a contaminant when,
one, it may have an adverse effect on human health; and, two,
it occurs in water at levels of public health concern. The
third element in the current law requiring the administrator to
find that there is a, quote, meaningful opportunity to reduce
risk is unnecessary when the first two are already in place.
Second, we should stop allowing EPA to cherry-pick
contaminants not to regulate. Over the past 17 years, EPA has
made final decisions about 25 unregulated contaminants and
decided not to regulate 24 of them. The 25th is perchlorate,
which remains unregulated.
The statute should push EPA to act. For example, finding a
contaminant in the water of a lot of people at levels above a
scientifically derived value should automatically trigger a
regulation. And EPA should be required to regulate certain
high-hazard contaminants that have language that is unregulated
for far too long.
Third, to get rid of the extra cost-benefit analysis. EPA
is required to set drinking water standards based on
feasibility, meaning using the best technology available and
taking cost into consideration. But then EPA can make the
standard weaker than is feasible if it finds the benefits do
not justify the costs.
The problem is that while costs of regulation are fairly
straightforward to quantify, the benefits are often
undercounted. For perchlorate, EPA didn't consider many
benefits, like reduced likelihood of ADHD and autism in
children or people's willingness to pay for better water or
calculate the co-benefits of reducing other contaminants when
treating for perchlorate.
When it is developing the PFOA and PFOS regulation, will
EPA quantify the intangible impacts of disease like Gary's when
calculating the benefits of a regulation? If not, it could end
up ineffectively weak.
Fourth, standards need to be as stringent as feasible and
not just consider but protect pregnant women, infants,
children, and other vulnerable populations.
And finally, EPA needs to move beyond the whack-a-mole
approach toward a class-based approach. PFOA and PFOS are but
two of more than 7,000 chemicals in that class. And while U.S.
manufacturers recently phased out PFOA and PFOS production,
their replacements are showing similar adverse health and
environmental effects. Going one by one or even two by two will
leave drinking water contaminated with toxic forever chemicals
for hundreds of years.
EPA needs to take a class-based approach to regulating
drinking water. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Wu follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Tonko. Thank you, Ms. Wu.
And now we will move to Ms. Chard. You are recognized for 5
minutes for your opening statement, please. Please unmute if
you haven't.

STATEMENT OF SHELLIE CHARD

Ms. Chard. Sir, I am having a little connectivity issue
this morning. I apologize.
Mr. Tonko. We can hear you.
Ms. Chard. Good morning, Subcommittee Chairman Tonko and
Ranking Member Shimkus, members of the subcommittee.
Thank you for this opportunity to speak with you on how we
can best address the protection of public health through
collaborative partnerships among the States, Tribes,
territories, and the Federal Government in implementing the
Safe Drinking Water Act.
My name is Shellie Chard. I am the president of the
Association of State Drinking Water Administrators, whose
members include the 50 State drinking water programs, five
territorial programs, the District of Columbia, and the Navaho
Nation.
ASDWA members have primary responsibility for implementing
the Safe Drinking Water Act. Our members and our staff provide
technical assistance, support and oversight of drinking water
programs, which is critical to ensuring safe drinking water.
I am also the water quality director for Oklahoma DEQ,
where I oversee drinking water, wastewater, and operators'
training and certification programs. Today I will discuss
ASDWA'S perspective on Safe Drinking Water Act, Section 1412,
and the drinking water standard-setting process.
Over time, there has been a shift away from the methodical
process of developing regulations based on the best available
peer-reviewed science and in collaboration with the States to
an approach based more on litigation and the highly publicized
events. This shift has contributed to the fragmentation of
regulatory development and is not fulfilling the needs of
regulators, the regulated community, or the public.
We would like to highlight six key points today: First, EPA
must set standards in a reasonable timeframe and using sound
science and collaboration with the States. The timeline to
develop a new standard must be reasonable. The process must
strike a balance between being too long that we lose confidence
in the process and being too short where EPA fails to properly
engage the States or to consider best available science and
cost of regulations, which are both essential to the standard-
setting process.
Second, we believe that EPA must consider the availability
of and help develop appropriate testing methods, laboratory
capacity, treatment technologies and Federal and State data
systems. While establishing maximum contaminant levels is the
goal of the Safe Drinking Water Act standard-setting process,
it is useless unless there are appropriate analytical test
methods and laboratory capacity to conduct the analysis as well
as affordable, effective treatment technologies.
Finally, data systems must exist for both EPA and the
States in order to properly track and report compliance. EPA
must consider the differences in water system characteristics,
based on geography, population served, affordability and source
water.
In order to ensure compliance with Federal standards, it is
important to consider the site-specific characteristics of the
water system. One size does not fit all in terms of water
sources, population, geographic separation, local economic
conditions and other factors that should be appropriately
considered.
Fourth, EPA must be clear in its regulatory framework. It
is critically important that the standards set and the
compliance determination specified in the rulemaking be clear
and understandable for regulators, the regulated community, and
the public. The differences in immediate health impact versus
potential long-term impacts have been distorted over time.
Health advisories are not an appropriate long-term solution for
contaminants and should not be used as de facto standards.
Fifth, EPA must consider the need for workforce training
and assist the water sector in achieving a sustainable
workforce. As new standards are established, public water
supply operators and laboratory staff must understand the
various technologies and testing that is required.
As experienced operators retire, it will be vital to the
protection of public health that new operators are recruited
and are trained to implement Safe Drinking Water Act
requirements.
Finally, EPA must consider the need for funding and
Congress must assist EPA and the States to have increased
funding. Safe drinking water programs have received an increase
of four percent funding in 2020. However, the total funding gap
for State drinking water programs has increased by $197 million
since 2011.
Without adequate funding for EPA to fulfill their
obligations and for States to meet their responsibilities,
protection of public health through drinking water programs is
much more challenging.
In conclusion, ASDWA applauds Congress for hosting this
hearing to gain insight on potential policy changes to
strengthen the Safe Drinking Water Act. We believe that there
are opportunities to optimize and improve existing standard-
setting and implementation of new standards. It is the
implementation of the standard that protects public health, not
the standard itself.
With the global pandemic continuing, all citizens need
access to safe drinking water for handwashing, personal
hygiene, and for drinking.
ASDWA looks forward to continuing this dialogue with you
and with EPA, and we are happy to answer any questions. Thank
you.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Chard follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Tonko. Thank you, Ms. Chard. Thank you very much.
And finally, we will hear from Ms. VanDe Hei. You are
recognized, please, for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF DIANE VANDE HEI

Ms. VanDe Hei. Chairman Tonko, Ranking Member Shimkus, and
members of the subcommittee, the Association of Metropolitan
Water Agencies, or AMWA, appreciates the opportunity to offer
our thoughts today on the best approach to regulating drinking
water contaminants under Section 1412 of the Safe Drinking
Water Act.
I am Diane VanDe Hei, AMWA's chief executive officer. AMWA
is an organization representing the Nation's largest publicly
owned drinking water systems, and our members collectively
serve more than 155 million people.
As municipal public entities, our owners are our
ratepayers. We report to no investors and collect no profits.
Any expenses incurred by publicly owned drinking water systems
are ultimately paid for by the community, the residents of a
given community through their water rates or other municipal
investments. This is why our members strive to be careful with
each ratepayer dollar. We appreciate the subcommittee for
undertaking the hearing virtually, in light of the COVID-19--in
light of COVID-19.
It is also important to remember that professionals who
operate community water systems nationwide do not have the
luxury of telework. They remain on duty in the field operating
pumps, making emergency repairs, and monitoring water quality.
But the economic fallout of the pandemic will still hit
water systems and their customers hard, even as many water
systems have halted water service shutoffs for nonpayment
during the public health emergency.
As Congress continues its response to COVID-19, emergency
revenue assistance for community water systems and funding to
prevent low-income households from falling behind on their
water bills must be part of the equation.
On the topic of today's hearing, AMWA has submitted an
extensive statement for the record, but we have a simple
message. Everyone agrees that Federal drinking water standards
should call for safe, clean water that is free of contaminants
that pose public health threats.
But we also must remember that treating water to high
standards requires significant investments in chemicals,
equipment, and professional staff. All of these carry a cost
which is ultimately borne by the ratepayers. It is, therefore,
appropriate that any law that guides the standard-setting
process must consider both cost and public health benefits.
AMWA was proud to participate in the development of the
1996 SDWA amendments, which wisely took the local cost of
regulatory compliance into account.
This was a critical improvement over the previous 1986
iteration of the act, which had directed EPA to promulgate
dozens of new regulations within a set timeframe.
This meant that success was measured by the number of new
regulations enacted, thus forcing the agency to attempt to set
standards for many contaminants, regardless of whether they
were likely to be found in the Nation's water supplies at
levels of concern.
Communities were then forced to divert resources towards
screening for this growing list of substances, rather than
focusing their investment on specific substances that may pose
a greater risk to public health.
These additional compliance costs were paid for by the
members of the public, some of whom were, just like today,
already struggling with their affordability challenges.
The 1996 amendments, as many have said today, implemented a
three-part test for EPA to follow in determining whether a new
regulation is warranted: Whether the contaminant may harm
public health, whether there is a substantial likelihood that
the contaminant will occur in public water supplies at a
frequency and at levels of public health concern, and whether a
regulation presents a meaningful opportunity for health risk
reduction among individuals served by the public water system.
My written statement provides more details, but AMWA
believes that each of these criteria are critical to focusing
attention and limited resources on contaminants that pose the
biggest threat.
When EPA does move forward with a new drinking water
regulation, the 1996 amendments require transparency and focus
on the valid scientific data to guide the results. EPA must
also consider the effects of the contaminant on the general
population as well as vulnerable subpopulations who may be at
greater risk. Ultimately, all these factors are transparently
weighed and used to justify a new regulation.
This is difficult work, and there can be legitimate
differences of opinion on how stringent a regulation should be,
but that is why it is important for the act to clearly outline
the factors EPA must consider and require the ultimate decision
to be made with input from the public.
In our view, the best regulatory approach balances science-
based public health protection and water service affordability
priorities. AMWA believes that the 1996 amendments do this well
and should remain the basis for their Safe Drinking Water Act
regulatory framework.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify today. I will be
happy to answer any questions you may have. Thank you very
much.
[The prepared statement of Ms. VanDe Hei follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Tonko. You are most welcome and thank you, Ms. VanDe
Hei.
And to all of our witnesses, thank you for bringing your
experience and your expertise to the table and enabling us to
move forward with the best public policy.
We will now move to member questions, and I will start by
recognizing myself for 5 minutes.
Americans should be able to turn on the tap in any
community across our country with confidence that the water
coming out is safe and the water is healthy.
That is what the Safe Drinking Water Act should ensure. But
Hoosick Falls near my congressional district is just one of too
many communities across our country that have learned the hard
way that our drinking water law is not working.
Communities impacted by lead, by PFOS, by chromium, by
cyanotoxins and more are turning to State laws, local bond
measures, and voluntary efforts by water systems to make the
water safe. The Federal Government has not done enough to help
these partners or to guarantee safe drinking water for all.
So, Ms. Chard, how are States leading the way in addressing
drinking water safety?
Ms. Chard. Sir, that is a very important point. We expect
and should have safe drinking water available to all of our
citizens. And States do have various authorities. We are seeing
some States that are setting very specific regulatory limits.
Congress envisioned this could be a possibility, not only
in the Safe Drinking Water Act but also the Clean Water Act, in
giving States some autonomy to set limits above and beyond what
EPA may choose to do.
We are seeing States that, based on their local issues,
their local concerns, they are taking money that would go to
technical assistance or some other work and spending that on
those standard-setting processes.
We see addressing, you mentioned cyanotoxins. Harmful algal
blooms are a particular big deal. It impacts not only drinking
water but also recreation. We see States working across
programs much more so than sometimes we see at the Federal
level. So employing some Clean Water Act tools to help protect
our drinking water source water.
So it is very much a State-specific approach. And we also
see communities may go above and beyond even what their State
requires where they have the resources, the need, and identify
approaches.
We also see the use of innovative technologies or old
technologies used in new ways in order to address some of those
emerging contaminants of concern.
Mr. Tonko. OK. I appreciate that. I just wanted to get to
some of our other questions here.
Ms. VanDe Hei, what are water utilities doing to address
PFOS even without a Federal standard?
Please unmute.
Ms. VanDe Hei. I think I am unmuted.
Mr. Tonko. OK. We can hear you.
Ms. VanDe Hei. OK. PFOS to me, even when EPA came out with
its health advisory, was a surprise. It was not out in the
open. I learned about it from someone in California, so it was
a surprise.
But today, you have water systems, including Cape Fear,
including Ann Arbor, and I am sure there are others, who are
treating the water for PFOS, primarily using granular activated
carbon. That is the one I am most familiar with.
So it is water systems who have it. And the public fear
that it has ignited has forced them to go ahead with treatment
without a standard in place. And the treatment that is needed
for PFOA or PFOS is not cheap. It is not cheap. It is granular
activated carbon, for the most part. It needs to be found. It
needs to be developed as a treatment technique. It needs to be
regenerated. When it is of no use then it needs to be disposed
of. And that becomes a real question about, well, how is it
disposed and what are the innate challenges with that.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you.
And, Ms. Wu, should our public health and the safety of our
drinking water depend on voluntary efforts by water utilities
and State-by-State standards?
Ms. Wu. No. I mean, we want to make sure that everybody is
protected, not just those people that happen to be lucky enough
to live in States that want to take the right action or, you
know, living with the right water systems that want to take the
right action.
Mr. Tonko. Exactly. Now, do you believe that SDWA needs to
be reformed? And, if so, what are the most important steps
Congress must take to strengthen SDWA and ensure that safe
drinking water is there for all?
Ms. Wu. Yes, I mean, absolutely. I think it is quite broken
and there are things that we should do, including fixing that
legal standard, making sure that we don't have to do an extra
layer of cost-benefit analysis, the feasibility requirement
already includes taking cost into consideration, that we should
make sure that it is protecting the most vulnerable populations
and that the, you know, science is important.
So we also have to make sure that we don't have outsized,
industrial, you know, interference in developing that science,
that really it is looking at public health and how do we
protect people as best we can.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you.
I agree that the Safe Drinking Water Act needs to be
reformed, that the time to act is now. I certainly thank the
witnesses for their testimony and look forward to continuing to
work with you as we move forward to reform the Safe Drinking
Water Act.
With that, the Chair recognizes Mr. Shimkus, subcommittee
ranking member, for 5 minutes to ask questions, please.
Mr. Shimkus. Yes. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Let me go to Ms. VanDe Hei. And let's just stay on PFAS, P-
F-A-S, the class of chemicals. Ms. Wu said 7,000. EPA says
5,887. There are only 29 that we can detect in water.
How would a local water utility test for all 5,887 and what
would that cost be, or could they even do it?
Ms. VanDe Hei. Ranking Member Shimkus, I do not believe the
capability is there at this time for every water system to test
for 5,000 forever chemicals, as they have become known, to test
for.
They need those techniques. They need the testing methods.
They need EPA in particular to make the determination on which
of those contaminants present the most significant threat to
public health. And it is those contaminants that water systems
will comply with.
Mr. Shimkus. Let me follow up too, because another debate
we will have probably is on the problem with Flint. And Flint
was a problem of cost. Flint was a problem because they took
over their own water system and then they tried to cut corners
and they didn't treat properly per the rules and regulations.
Is that correct?
Ms. VanDe Hei. That is correct.
Mr. Shimkus. So, to keep cost out of this debate is
ridiculous, because it does cost money to meet these standards,
and when you try to cheap out, you hurt the very people that
you are supposed to locally protect.
And, again, there are, according to EPA, 5,887 chemicals.
Who is to say that that one chemical formulation of PFAS that
goes into a heart stent is not a life-saving element for that
person who needs it? Or who is to say that that one PFAS
formulation that goes into a coron occluder (ph) that plugs the
heart of a newborn child?
It is critical that if we are going to spend money to make
sure our water is safe, we use science and we don't use
emotion. Would you agree?
Ms. VanDe Hei. I totally agree.
Mr. Shimkus. And in the 1986 amendments to the Safe
Drinking Water Act, you know, Congress was frustrated, so it
said, do this amount and then every certain number of years do
this amount. And what was the effect of that?
Ms. VanDe Hei. The effect of that was that water systems
were left with standards of contaminants that rarely occurred
in their water supply, but that doesn't mean that they did not
have to monitor for, test for, report on. They had to put
resources into those contaminants.
I have to tell you something, Congressman. I went back into
the archives at EPA today, trying to find an EPA press release
that I had found years ago. I could not find it because the
archives are no longer being maintained.
But in the archives at EPA--and you can find today--the
headline on one of them from May 19, 1992, and the headline is,
EPA press release: ``EPA sets standards for 23 contaminants.''
How did they do that with taking science into account,
taking occurrence into account, taking those things that really
drove the development of the Safe Drinking Water Act of 1996?
Those things did not exist. EPA was able to develop a multitude
of standards which I don't believe cost them a lot in the long
run, but that lived with water systems that did have to pay the
cost for things that didn't occur in their water.
Mr. Shimkus. Yes, let me finish up with this. Ms. VanDe Hei
and Ms. Chard, would your organizations support Federal
legislation that would likely result in EPA being forced to
regulate numerous contaminants that are present in low
concentrations, irrespective of whether such regulation offers
meaningful public health protection?
Ms. VanDe Hei?
Ms. VanDe Hei. We would not.
Mr. Shimkus. Ms. Chard?
Ms. Chard. We would not.
Mr. Shimkus. All right. Thank you very much.
With that, Mr. Chairman, 18 seconds, I will yield back. I
could ask another question, but I would be taking time.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you for yielding back.
The Chair now recognizes Mr. Pallone, full committee chair,
for 5 minutes to ask questions, please. Mr. Chair.
The Chairman. Thank you, Chairman Tonko.
I think it would surprise a lot of people to learn that our
landmark law on safe drinking water is designed to set
standards based on cost-benefit analysis instead of health
protection, because the structure of the statute requires the
EPA to set a maximum contaminant level goal based on health
risk, but a goal is not a standard. And instead, the statute
directs EPA to set standards that are weaker than the goal,
based on cost-benefit analysis.
So I wanted to ask Ms. Wu: Right now the statute double
counts, in my opinion, cost considerations. First, it limits
standards of what is feasible, a term that, by definition,
means that there is some amount of cost taken into
consideration, but then the statute layers on top of
feasibility this cost-benefit analysis, which further weakens
protections, based on price calculation.
So, you know, I guess my question, Ms. Wu, do you think
that our drinking water standards should be set based on health
risks? I mean, should we get rid of this cost-benefit analysis?
Should we still keep the feasible standard? What is your
opinion so that we get to this health risk goal and not put so
much emphasis on cost consideration?
Ms. Wu. Yes, I agree. The feasibility part of the standard
does require that costs be taken into consideration already. So
really, the cost-benefit analysis, like you said, is an extra
added layer. And there are so many problems with how you do
cost-benefit analysis, especially the fact that you can often
undercount the benefits.
So the benefits with it often are outweighed by the costs
when you do that analysis. So then it just gives EPA that much
more reason to further weaken the standards. So really just
focusing on feasibility, which already account for costs, is
enough.
The Chairman. OK. Then let me go to another question I
wanted to ask. Maybe I will ask everybody this one.
There is an important concern under the Safe Drinking Water
Act, in my opinion, with regard to the protection of vulnerable
populations, which includes infants, children, pregnant women
and the elderly. So can I ask the witnesses maybe just yes or
no. Let me just ask yes or no if the witnesses agree that
infants, children, pregnant women and other vulnerable
populations should be able to safely drink their tap water?
Ms. Wu, yes or no?
Ms. Wu. Yes, absolutely.
The Chairman. Ms. VanDe Hei?
Ms. VanDe Hei. Yes, sir.
The Chairman. And finally, Ms. Chard, yes or no?
Ms. Chard. Yes.
The Chairman. OK. Then let me ask, let me go back to Ms. Wu
along the same lines, but if you could elaborate. In your view,
does the Safe Drinking Water Act currently protect vulnerable
populations and, if not, what more needs to be done, in your
opinion?
Ms. Wu. Right now, I don't think it does. And what needs to
happen is beyond just saying that the EPA should consider
vulnerable populations when it is looking at doing the
standards, they should be more explicit, that EPA actually
needs to set regulations that actually protect vulnerable
populations.
I think that explicit level needs to be added to it,
because EPA hasn't been doing a good job about accounting for
and then protecting those populations.
The Chairman. And then I know four years ago this committee
came together and agreed that chemical substances are not safe
if they aren't safe for vulnerable populations. And so I am
hoping that we can all agree that the same be true for our
drinking water, because, you know, we can't really say that our
drinking water is safe unless it is safe for all.
Ms. Wu, are you familiar with what we did with the chemical
substances with regard to vulnerable populations? Are you
familiar with what we did with that?
Ms. Wu?
Ms. Wu. Unfortunately, I am not as familiar with the TSCA
as I am with the Safe Drinking Water Act.
The Chairman. Well, I know Mr. Shimkus and Mr. Tonko are
familiar with TSCA. And I would say that we should try to use
the same example, but that is for another day.
Thank you very much.
Thank you, Chairman Tonko.
Mr. Tonko. You are welcome. And the gentleman yields back.
And I understand, Mr. Shimkus, that Mr. Walden had to step
out.
Mr. Shimkus. Correct.
Mr. Tonko. I believe we will go next to----
Mr. Shimkus. McMorris Rogers.
Mr. Tonko. Representative Rogers. Representative Rogers,
you are represented for 5 minutes, please, for questions.
Please unmute.
Mrs. Rodgers. There I go.
Mr. Tonko. How are you?
Mrs. Rodgers. OK. It took me a little bit there. Sorry.
Mr. Tonko. That is OK.
Mrs. Rodgers. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
We all agree on the importance of ensuring safe and
reliable drinking water for our communities. It is not a
partisan issue and we should be working together on bipartisan
solutions. For example, last year I worked with Congresswoman
Blunt Rochester on the Safe Drinking Water Assistance Act of
2019, which was included in fiscal year 2020 NDAA and will help
communities mitigate the risk posed by emerging contaminants
such as PFAS.
In addition to working across the aisle, it is also
critical that we work within the realm of the best available
science. In 2016, the Obama EPA imposed unattainable water
quality standards on Washington State under the Clean Water
Act. These regulations were not based on science, but
aspirational goals. Despite hundreds of millions of dollars
spent by cities and businesses in eastern Washington, these
standards were not attainable by any kind of technology, and
there is no evidence that they were even necessary for public
health.
Thankfully, the current EPA revised these standards earlier
this year. And while we are discussing the Safe Drinking Water
Act here, I think the same lessons apply. As water testing
methods improve, we are able to detect substances in our
drinking water on a much more granular level, in parts per
trillion or even quadrillion.
However, our ability to test a more granular presence of a
substance does not mean we should impose burdensome standards
that have no evidence of improving public health and are,
frankly, not attainable.
Ms. VanDe Hei, I am concerned that people may be focusing
too much on contaminant detection in order to regulate rather
than establishing a safe level at which adverse health effects
are expected. Is it true that there are many contaminants that
may be present in drinking water but at levels below
concentrations that have risk of adverse health effects?
Ms. Wu. Congresswoman, I think that is exactly right. I
think we tend to confuse the ability to detect with an impact
on public health. Chemists make their living lowering the
detection level, and we have seen that over time, over time,
over time. We used to measure in parts per million, parts per
billion, parts per trillion, and it won't be long where we will
be able to detect even lower than that.
But it is not safe to assume that as we detect lower and
lower that that influences public health protection. That is
where the science needs to come in.
And I believe, and I hear people talk about, oh, this can
be detected at such and such a level and so you should treat to
that, where in many cases we cannot. And we shouldn't follow
that road.
Mrs. Rodgers. Thank you.
Just as a followup, there is an argument that the lack of
EPA regulations is because of the focus on meaningful health
risk reduction and contaminant occurrence frequency at levels
of public health concern rather than the mere presence of any
level of contaminant.
Would you be concerned if regulations without these
criteria forced water systems to spend significant amounts of
funding to reduce contaminants when there will be little or no
public health benefit?
Ms. VanDe Hei. I would be very concerned. I think that that
is a discussion that we should all have, but a meaningful
benefit I think is essential to making sure that we are
prioritizing those contaminants that are of greatest risk to
public health.
When you add something like may or something a little less
meaningful, I don't understand why may is better than
meaningful when I know when something is meaningful. And yes,
that is interpretable, but so is may.
So I think the current standard-setting structure is good,
but I would also like to say that we are open to discussion
with this committee, any member of the committee, about the
statute.
Mrs. Rodgers. Well, what impact would there be on a
municipality or a utility's ability to possibly address other
public health threats too, just in the time remaining?
Ms. VanDe Hei. Well, every time they are spending resources
on contaminants that are not of public health concern, you are
still spending resources. So you need to take the funds that
you do have and spend it on those things. Because, you know,
the definition of vulnerable subpopulations has grown since it
was first put into the statute. We now look broader at
vulnerable populations. We see that in COVID-19. There are many
more people who are vulnerable to disease, to be infected that
are vulnerable populations.
And so we need to be able to consider what the impact of
that has on our ability to have the resources to do these
things in a manner that we want to. We want everybody to have
quality--high-quality drinking water, but that needs resources
in order to do that.
Mrs. Rodgers. Super. Thank you very much.
I yield back.
Mr. Tonko. The gentle lady yields back.
We now move to the vice chair of the full committee,
Representative Clarke, for 5 minutes for questions, please.
Ms. Clarke. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman and to our
ranking member, for holding today's hearing on the Safe
Drinking Water Act. And thank you to our three witnesses for
joining us and offering your testimony.
Our Nation's drinking water standards are in need of
serious reform. And as we examine this topic, I believe it is
critical that we ensure the most vulnerable among us are being
protected both now and in the future.
Just two weeks ago, a group of organizations comprised of
the National Partnership for Women & Families, In Our Own
Voice, the National Asian Pacific American Women's Forum, and
the Sierra Club released a report titled, ``Clean Water and
Reproductive Justice,'' detailing how the lack of access to
clean drinking water across our Nation is particularly severe
for women of color and their reproductive health.
Mr. Chairman, I would like to submit this report for the
record.
The report notes----
Mr. Tonko. Without objection.
Ms. Clarke. The report notes--Mr. Chairman?
Mr. Tonko. Yes. I said without objection. Thank you.
[The information appears at the conclusion of the hearing.]
Ms. Clarke. Thank you, thank you.
The report states that, quote, the impact of lack of access
to clean water is significant from disrupting people's daily
lives to forcing untenable choices between paying for water or
rent, to causing a wide range of health problems. One serious
consequence of contaminated drinking water is harm to
reproductive health, a cost that is borne disproportionately by
women of color and their families, end of quote.
Ms. Wu, do you think that drinking water standards should
be safe for women of color?
Ms. Wu. Yes, they should be.
Ms. Clarke. Do you think that our current drinking water
standards sufficiently protect women of color?
Ms. Wu. I don't think they do, even the existing ones, but
I also think that there are a lot that are missing that could
protect women of color.
Ms. Clarke. Do you think that our current drinking water
standards sufficiently regulate contaminants that impact
reproductive health?
Ms. Wu. No, I don't think they do.
Ms. Clarke. Clearly, this is an issue that urgently needs
to be addressed. In fact, in 2019, a collaborative of leading
reproductive justice organizations known as Intersection of Our
Lives released a groundbreaking nationwide pole which found
that 62 percent of women of color consider clean drinking water
to be an extremely important issue for Congress to swiftly act
upon, right along with healthcare and racial discrimination.
Ms. Wu, can you discuss what actions Congress should take
to assure that safe drinking water regulations protect
vulnerable populations such as women of color and their
families?
Ms. Wu. So the Safe Drinking Water Act needs to be more
explicit, that when it is setting the standards for drinking
water contaminants, that these standards actually protect
vulnerable populations, not that they have to consider them,
but that they are actually protected. That is what is important
to make sure we have.
Ms. Clarke. Lastly, I think it is also important to
recognize this issue in the context of the COVID-19 pandemic,
which has shed light on the deep and long-standing racial
disparities in our Nation's healthcare system.
Ms. Wu, how is access to clean drinking water a social
determinant of health? And why is it important when we consider
the disproportionate impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on
communities of color?
Ms. Wu. Well, more broadly, you know, environmental justice
communities are struggling with a disproportionate burden from
a lot of pollution sources, and we have found that when you
look on a county level, as you see increasing numbers of
communities of color or low-income communities or nonnative
speakers, that you have higher rates of drinking water
violations, that you have slower enforcement. So all of these
things are a part of the lack and the less access to safe and
affordable drinking water that communities that are already
suffering just layer on top of them. And so, you know, access
to running water is important under this crisis right now. And
a lot of communities have had their water shut off, and that is
unacceptable.
Ms. Clarke. Do you think that stronger drinking water
standards, including those that best protect women of color,
could have helped to mitigate the severity and lower the
disproportionate health impacts that we have experienced with
the COVID-19 pandemic?
Ms. Wu. Yes. Stronger standards would definitely help.
Ms. Clarke. Well, I thank you for your testimony here
today.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back the balance of my time.
Mr. Tonko. The gentle lady yields back.
The Chair now recognizes Representative McKinley for 5
minutes for questions. Sir, your 5 minutes start now.
Mr. McKinley. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
In reference back to that last questioning, I would like to
have it if someone would provide the names of the water
distribution companies or utilities that have actually shut off
someone's water supply. So I would like to have that.
But, Paul, I really--I want to talk more--my line of
questioning is more to you than it is our panelists, because
having designed water systems in my career, I was looking
forward to working on this drinking water issue in a bipartisan
fashion. You and I have worked together on numbers of pieces of
legislation before. And you have the reputation of being, on
the Lugar Bipartisan Ranking Index, the 48th, 48th best, most
bipartisan Member of Congress. So I thought we were going to be
able to work together on this in a bipartisan fashion. But as
of this morning, as of this morning, by 11 o'clock, our
Republican committee had not been approached by one person in a
way to work together as we develop this drinking water bill.
Not one person. So it makes me suspicious that this is going to
become another partisan legislation, partisan bill that is
going to go nowhere.
Now, it is not the first time that this happened in this
Congress. People are given hope that something is going to
happen, but then--on a variety of subjects, Paul. But then they
get loaded down with parts and divisive policies, and the bills
get stuck in the Senate, going nowhere.
Think about it, Mr. Chairman. H.R. 1. One of the primary
things we wanted to get done was get campaign finance reform.
It died in the Senate, not one Republican voted for it on the
House floor. There was no cooperation, no bipartisanship on it.
Infrastructure legislation. We hear people time and time
again wanting to have infrastructure legislation, but we don't
pass it because it is part of the way it is put in, partisan.
We only had three Republican votes on it.
Drug pricing bill, Paul. We all wanted to have drug pricing
bills, but the only bill that got passed down on a partisan
fashion only had two Republican votes.
And then we talked about earlier today, Mr. Chairman, the
PFAS legislation, PFAS, and drinking water. We could have done
something together in a bipartisan fashion, but instead of
working in that cooperation, your leadership put poison pills
to discourage Republican support. As a result, that legislation
is stuck in the Senate, and people are still exposed to a
contaminant that they shouldn't be exposed to, because people
want to play politics here in Washington.
Paul, it doesn't have to be this way. You are seeing my
frustration with this. It doesn't have to be this way. The
Energy and Commerce Committee has a track record of being very
cooperative, very bipartisan on a lot of matters. And just
think about it, just think of some that I have rattled off. On
reforms to TSCA that you and John Shimkus were involved with,
done. The Brownfields legislation, bipartisan, done. 2lst
Century Cures, bipartisan, accomplished. Opioid legislation,
major pieces of legislation, they were all done in a bipartisan
fashion.
But, apparently, you are under tremendous pressure from the
Democratic leadership that seems to be more interested in
dividing rather than consolidating, unifying this country. This
drinking water bill seems to be more of something that you want
to score ugly political points on rather than get something
accomplished.
But, Paul, we can work together. You and I can work
together. But I have got to tell you that the cost-benefit
analysis is going to be one of those key things early on that
is going to cause us a problem with it. It is a nonstarter.
Let's just hold for a second. Your Democrat staff has
implied that over the next six months--and this is very
touching--over the next six months, they have no need for
bipartisan action and support, because six months from now, you
all may actually control the President, the White House--or
excuse me, the White House, the Senate, and the House. And so
they are seemingly coming across to us in a way that says we
are just going to wait it out, and then we don't need
bipartisan support; we will just do whatever we want to do.
So we are seeing over the next six months, as a result of
that attitude, you are not going to see a campaign finance
report. We are not going to see infrastructure work. We are not
going to see drug pricing, and we are still going to be
drinking foul, contaminated water.
So, Paul, my question primarily would be back to you, Mr.
Chairman. What can we do to work together to get a drinking
water bill that actually can be passed into law, signed, and
help everybody, or are we just waiting until the next election?
Mr. Tonko. Yes. I can tell you the--can you hear me?
Mr. McKinley. Yes.
Mr. Tonko. I can tell you the issue is of importance so
that we want to get something done. And you are right, you
cited a bipartisan track record that you and I and other
members, Chairman Shimkus at the time, and I had over the
course of time.
I say let's take the information we garner here at this
hearing and go to work at making certain that we can move
forward with the protections that the general public deserve
and require. Drinking water standards are essential for us to
make certain that we are protecting people from contaminants
and that those most susceptible to the impacts of contaminants
will not have to undergo those impacts.
So, look, I stand ready to work with both sides to get
something done here.
Mr. McKinley. I guess we just have to wait and see, see how
it works out.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you, sir.
Mr. McKinley. Thank you.
Mr. Tonko. OK. With that, the gentleman yields back.
We now go to Representative Peters from California for 5
minutes of questions, please.
Representative Peters?
You need to unmute.
Mr. Peters. Got it, thank you.
I wanted also to endorse the comments of my two colleagues,
Mr. McKinley and Chairman Tonko, about the need for
bipartisanship. I mean, I think this idea of waiting till the
next election to see what happens is not the most constructive
for the country, and I certainly think that if it is not
bipartisan, it generally doesn't pass, and if it is not
bipartisan, it certainly doesn't last. So I would like to join
that course.
I wanted to focus my questions today on the disconnect,
though, in this statute between the setting of maximum
contaminant level goals and what it might take to make those
goals a reality. Many of the landmark environmental laws set
ambitious goals, and they get there step by step, but it isn't
clear to me that the Safe Drinking Water Act is doing that. And
the example I want to take is lead, which is certainly one of
the most dangerous contaminants, one we know that there is no
safe level for.
But this year, the EPA proposed a new Lead and Copper Rule
that keeps the same action level that has been in place since
1991. In other words, on lead, nearly 30 years later, we
haven't made progress in getting our standard closer to our
goal. And we have seen in places like Flint the enormous damage
that lead and heavy metals does to constituents, particularly
children.
So, Ms. Wu, what do you think about the example of the Lead
and Copper Rule and the need for--whether that shows the need
for reform of the Safe Drinking Water Act in particular?
Ms. Wu. Yes. I mean, lead is also a great example of where
we haven't had good, strong, protective standards. And, you
know, you could have EPA--you know, an action level that isn't
even a health-based standard. It is just an action level at
which action has to be taken. And so the fact that there is not
even a set kind of health-based number is kind of telling that
we can't regulate how much lead is in people's water.
Mr. Peters. Is there a particular way you would like to see
the statute strengthened so that we could make progress toward
safety goals, maybe on these most dangerous contaminants?
Ms. Wu. Yes. I mean, I think in addition to, you know, some
of the fixing of the legal standard itself, there are some
contaminants that we do know, like lead, have a lot of both
public health impacts, have adverse impacts, and are also
showing up in people's water. PFAS is an example. Perchlorate
as an example. We have legionella. We have hexavalent chromium.
So these are ones that we know are high hazard anyway, and
so we can also say in the statute, like EPA had to have done in
the past, say it is time to set standards for these. We don't
have to go through all of the other rigmarole, but really say,
like, set some standards for these high-hazard contaminants.
Mr. Peters. Right. And there is some contaminants for which
there is really--that those response ratio--or relationship is
really almost irrelevant because they are so toxic. And I think
lead is one of those, as I think is chromium and so forth.
Ms. VanDe Hei, one of the things you mentioned in your
testimony was new technologies. I think you mentioned reverse
osmosis, but maybe there is others, that are cutting-edge water
treatment technologies, the advantages they offer. What would
you like to see the Federal Government do to make the use of
those technologies more appealing for water systems around the
country?
Ms. VanDe Hei. That is a very good question. RO is a
membrane technology, and we have had membrane technologies for
years now. And they are used in, I think, primarily large water
systems for particular contaminants because they are so
expensive to purchase, number one, and to use. And so when they
are not in need, they are not used. And so if there is a way to
bring these kinds of technologies within the price range, then
that would probably help a lot.
The other thing that I think we saw in--I am sorry, go back
to the 1996 amendment, is that one time the baseline technology
was GAC, and that didn't make it into the statute, because it
is much more complicated, depending on how the treatment
process is set up. And I know some of you said that they were
familiar with how that is done, that the quality of the water
they are using, what impact that has on a particular treatment
technology. And if there was a magic bullet that would take out
everything in the water, I think people would find that just
great. But I don't think----
Mr. Peters. Well, I appreciate that.
My time has expired. I thank the witnesses for being here
today, and I hope you will continue to engage with the
committee as we move forward to improve this important law.
And I yield back.
Mr. Tonko. The gentleman yields back.
We now go to the gentleman from Ohio, Mr. Johnson,
Representative Johnson, for 5 minutes, please.
Mr. Johnson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank you to our
witnesses that are here with us today. You know, your real-
world expertise on this important issue is critical, so I
really appreciate all of you sharing your thoughts with us.
I think we all agree that our constituents expect and
deserve clean, safe drinking water for their families in every
American community, regardless of location. And, again, I think
we all agree on this. However, it is evident from the testimony
today that we are having to make a choice. On one hand, the
Federal Government can try a top-down, one-size-fits-all
approach, coupled with additional unfunded mandates, or we can
take an approach that lets States and localities tailor and
prioritize their water treatment and distribution to the most
pressing needs of their citizens.
One-size-fits-all Federal approaches simply don't work very
well in anything, in my experience. But in this particular
case, contrast, for example, a big metropolitan city and a
small rural community in Appalachia, Ohio, where I represent.
The threats to the safety of the drinking water are different,
and they also have different technologies, infrastructures and,
not to mention, financial resources. So, clearly, a balance
needs to be struck.
So, Ms. Chard, I would like to start with you. Do you think
the public's investment in public health protection is best
served as it relates to drinking water if contaminant
regulations are required in a particular area, regardless of
whether a contaminant would be present in the drinking water
there, at a level that would cause a public health concern?
Ms. Chard. I think that where they are smaller water
systems, they really have to prioritize. They have very limited
funding, and we want them to make the best use of that funding.
And if there is a contaminant that is very common in a
particular State or in urban areas, why is a rural community
spending their limited resources to look for something that is
not there. I think we just have to be mindful, and small
communities are not well served and ratepayers are not well
served when they are spending their resources looking for
something that doesn't exist.
Mr. Johnson. I think you almost answered this next question
too, but if you want to go into any detail, what is the
practical impact from dealing with other higher level public
health concerns when a community is faced with finite resources
that are dedicated to solving problems that will result in
little to no meaningful public health benefit?
Ms. Chard. I think we have to--we start with the standard
setting process, and that is great and we need standards, but
it is implementing those standards that protect public health.
And when we are looking at communities that have very, very
limited resources, very limited ratepayer base, they are
located significant distance so they cannot regionalize and
consolidate with another system, they are taking that limited
budget and they are picking and choosing what are they going to
sample, what upgrades are they going to make. And they are
choosing, we hope, those immediate public health threats, such
as bacteria in the drinking water. We don't want our drinking
water contaminated with bacteria that is going to make people
sick today. We would like to protect for those longer term
health effects, but if you have to choose, small systems are
choosing those immediate, acute health effects just as a matter
that they only have so much money.
Mr. Johnson. Yes. OK. Shifting gears just a little bit--
thank you for that answer, by the way.
And as we have heard here today, some would like to see the
cost-benefit analysis requirement removed from the Safe
Drinking Water Act. Do you believe that cost-benefit analysis
should be removed?
Ms. Chard. I do not. You can set all the standards you
want, but if a water system cannot implement effective
treatment, it doesn't do you any good. So I think including the
cost-benefit analysis allows some reasonable expectations to
come into the conversation. That is not saying you just throw
up your hands and walk away, but you know going in there are
going to be particular systems that are going to struggle more
than others and then maybe we can target resources, we can do
other things----
Mr. Johnson. OK.
Ms. Chard [continue]. Because it is part of reality.
Mr. Johnson. OK. Well, great. Well, my time is expired.
Thank you, ma'am.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Tonko. The gentleman yields back.
The Chair now recognizes the gentle lady from California.
Representative Barragan, you are recognized for 5 minutes,
please.
Ms. Barragan. Thank you, Chair Tonko, for holding this
critical hearing on the Safe Drinking Water Act.
The fight for clean and affordable water is very personal.
How do you put a price tag on health? How do you put a price
tag on a child getting sick from drinking water?
I represent a district in south Los Angeles where just a
couple of years ago, we had brown water coming out of the
faucets in Compton. The local water district had to be taken
over by the county, and that was the only way to get somebody
to seriously take a look at the brown water and say we are
going to do something about it. One person who gets brown water
is too many. Clean, safe, affordable drinking water should be
available to everyone.
And some of my colleagues today have focused on problems in
the Safe Drinking Water Act statute understandably because
there is serious problems there, but there have also been
serious issues in how this administration has implemented the
Safe Drinking Water Act, and I want to focus on that for a
moment.
Ms. Wu, you mentioned the problem of perchlorate, a
chemical and rocket fuel, that threatens the brain development
of young infants. It was the Trump EPA that recently decided
not to set a drinking water standard for perchlorate after
decades of work. Is that correct?
Ms. Wu. Yes. But I will also mention that we are currently
challenging that decision in court as well.
Ms. Barragan. Well, thank you.
And, Ms. Wu, it was this administration that issued the
dangerously weak Lead and Copper Rule proposal this year. Is
that correct?
Ms. Wu. That is also true, yes.
Ms. Barragan. And this administration has refused to use
the authority in the Safe Drinking Water Act to set interim
standards to address the dangerous chemical, PFOS, insisting on
going through a lengthy regulatory determination process
instead. Is that also correct?
Ms. Wu. Yes, it is.
Ms. Barragan. Well, thank you.
I want to make these points because I think it is important
to recognize that this EPA has failed communities across the
country that are struggling with drinking water contamination.
So, Ms. Wu, how can we limit the discretion available to
the EPA Administrator under the statute so that communities and
public health come first?
Ms. Wu. Well, the legal standard right now requires three
things. The third is really in the sole discretion of the
Administrator, but the first two, that the contaminant has
adverse health impacts and that it is showing up at levels that
is a public health concern, those two alone are enough to say
that we need to set a drinking water standard for that. So that
third level where you need that sole judgment of the
Administrator is unnecessary. We can protect public health with
just the first two elements.
Ms. Barragan. Is there anything you want to add? I know you
were great in your opening testimony on what we can do. Is
there anything that you want to add that Congress should be
considering as we legislate on safe drinking water? It is so
critical, I think, that we get it right so that we can put the
health of our communities first and that we are implementing
legislation to help those vulnerable communities who may live
in a different ZIP Code, may get different water, which
shouldn't be the case.
Ms. Wu. Yes. I mean, we shouldn't have a two-tier system
where those who can afford it have better water than those who
can't. But I also want to add that I think outside of just the
standard setting provision, it is really important to have
source water protection. Like, we should not let polluters get
away with polluting our water and then put the burden on our
drinking water utilities, on the customers, on the people who
are drinking it. The burden shouldn't be on us to pay to get
that pollution out of the water. It should be on the polluters
who put it there in the first place.
And so I think stronger source water protection and holding
the polluters liable for destroying our water is an important
component to making sure we have safe, affordable drinking
water.
Ms. Barragan. Well, thank you, Ms. Wu, for all the work you
are doing and your organization is doing. Sometimes it takes a
legal challenge.
I remember when I had my situation in my district where
there was brown water coming out of the faucets, I will never
forget having somebody in an elected office tell me, Why are
you focusing on this? It only impacts a few hundred people. And
I was so outraged by the response and saying this is the
problem, because one person who gets brown water is too many,
and we need to continue this fight for clean water for
environmental justice, because we know across this country
there are injustices.
So I want to thank you, Chairman Tonko, for calling this
hearing, and I look forward to working with my colleagues to
reform this important statute.
And with that, I yield back.
Mr. Tonko. The gentle lady yields back.
And now, the Chair recognizes the gentleman from Oklahoma.
Representative Mullin, you are recognized for 5 minutes,
please.
Mr. Mullin. Thank you, Chairman, and thank you for holding
this important hearing.
I just want to make a quick point. You know, there are many
people on this panel and on this committee that have never been
in a water treatment plant, that don't know how to even treat
the water. I, for one, still hold an operator's license. I have
had an operator license for actually many years, and a lot of
things that people are talking about is--I am just going to be
quite frank--is out of ignorance.
When we start talking about one person getting brown water
coming out of their faucet, understand that that isn't from the
water treatment facility; that is coming from the plumbing
infrastructure system. A lot of times it will come from a
simple connection that is connected to that one single faucet.
A lot of the lead contaminations that this committee has
focused on today doesn't come from the water treatment plant;
it comes from the infrastructure that the water is carried to
and from the places of business or to the house. If you really
want to be serious about this, about the coloration of the
water that is going to people's houses, why don't you look at
the infrastructure, and it is not always the treatment plants
that are doing that.
I find it odd that we are holding a committee hearing, and
yet a lot of people on this committee haven't even done their
research, but yet we want to talk as experts. We want to blame
the committee or the President, this administration, who has
been in office for 3-\1/2\ years, for all the drinking standard
problems. Yet there is many on this committee that have been on
this committee for a decade or decades. Don't forget the Obama
administration had control of the EPA for eight years, and they
still haven't addressed all of these issues. But, you know, who
wants to be right or wrong; it is about blaming someone else.
With that being said, I will end my rant and welcome Madam
Director from Oklahoma. It is not always we get to have
somebody from Oklahoma here, and it is an honor to have you. As
you know, my company and myself has worked with the Department
of Environmental Quality, DEQ, for years, and I will go as far
as saying decades. I have worked with DEQ for almost 25 years.
We have worked together on many water treatment plants. We have
worked together on many infrastructure needs out there. And I
want to welcome you. Thank you so much for being here.
Ms. Chard. Thank you, Congressman. It is my pleasure.
Mr. Mullin. Let me ask you something. Is it better to treat
water in a natural filtration system or to have standards so
high that you have to interject a chemical into it to make it
to those certain standards? Which one is better for the public
to drink?
Ms. Chard. I think both can be appropriate. It depends on
the contaminant that you are trying to address.
Mr. Mullin. Sure.
Ms. Chard. I think in many cases, certainly in Oklahoma and
other places, we are fortunate to get by and meet drinking
water standards with filtration and disinfection. However, as
standards get set lower and we start seeing new contaminants of
concern, we are definitely moving in a direction of more and
more advanced treatment processes, which many times do involve
chemicals.
Mr. Mullin. Right. Underneath the--would you talk a little
bit about what DEQ has done underneath the Safe Drinking Water
Act when it comes to especially rural parts of the country? As
you know, Oklahoma is mainly rural, and I represent almost all
rural areas.
Explain to me a little bit how DEQ works. Because I will
tell you, from a professional perspective, I would rather work
with DEQ any day of the week than work with the EPA at all, not
that we don't have to occasionally, but--I used to complain
about you guys. I don't do that anymore.
Ms. Chard. And we appreciate that.
Our mission is to protect public health. Our mission is to
work with our systems. We try to focus on plant optimization.
We try to provide technical assistance to our operators to
operate their plants the best they can, knowing that they may
be years away from having additional plumbing for construction.
We work----
Mr. Mullin. Because they don't have the infrastructure to
pay for it, they can't pass a bond.
Ms. Chard. Correct. We work with our water systems doing
water loss auditing, trying to help them identify water loss or
unneeded water uses. There is help to extend the life of their
systems and getting additional funding, because they are
getting paid for all of the water that they are treating. We
work to connect communities together to help improve water
treatment and water quality, and we have used our subsidies to
help systems consolidate where that is possible, even if it is
just on the administrative side.
Mr. Mullin. Thank you so much. And, Madam Director, thank
you so much for taking your time being with us today.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Tonko. The gentleman yields back.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Virginia.
Representative McEachin, you are recognized for 5 minutes,
please.
Representative, unmute, please.
Do we have Representative McEachin? If not--there he is.
Mr. McEachin. Yes.
Mr. Tonko. OK.
Mr. McEachin. I was trying my best to unmute.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you for convening this
hearing today.
I think we can all agree that access to safe and healthy
drinking water for every individual is critical, and I
appreciate that some of my colleagues today have discussed the
need to ensure that our drinking water is safe for our Nation's
vulnerable populations, including pregnant women, infants, and
children. This is incredibly important.
It is also incredibly important that we ensure our drinking
water is safe for environmental justice communities,
communities that have borne the brunt of disproportionate
exposure to pollution in their water, their air, and their
land.
Ms. Wu, can you explain why environmental justice
communities might need specific consideration in the setting of
drinking water standards?
Ms. Wu. Well, these are communities that have--are bearing
the brunt of pollution from all different fronts and
disproportionately even the rest of the communities. And so
they have been--you know, there has been a history of
disinvestment in their infrastructure. There has been less
enforcements, lower enforcement. And so these communities
really need to be considered and be taken into account when
drinking water standards are put into place, because
oftentimes, their water has more and is more dirty than in
other places.
Mr. McEachin. Thank you. And does the Safe Drinking Water
Act currently require drinking water standards to protect
environmental justice communities?
Ms. Wu. Currently, it does not.
Mr. McEachin. OK. Ms. Wu, how can we strengthen the Safe
Drinking Water Act to ensure that drinking water standards are
strong enough to protect environmental justice communities?
Ms. Wu. I think that you could put in there more explicitly
the requirement that the--you know, the burdens that our
environmental justice communities are already facing and being
explicit about the vulnerable populations, making sure that
they are considered as part of the vulnerable population
consideration, and then really, again, explicitly say that the
standards have to protect these vulnerable populations, not
just consider them.
Mr. McEachin. Thank you.
Every American deserves access to safe and healthy drinking
water. I look forward to fighting alongside with my colleagues
on this committee to ensure this becomes a reality. Ms. Wu, I
thank you.
And, Mr. Chairman, I yield back the balance of my time.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you, sir.
Do we have--the gentleman yields back.
Representative Carter, you are recognized for 5 minutes for
questions, please.
If you are not there, we will go to Representative Blunt
Rochester, please.
Mr. Shimkus. Mr. Chairman?
Mr. Tonko. Yes, sir.
Mr. Shimkus. You should call on a Republican next.
Mr. Tonko. OK. Mr. Duncan, or who do we have? OK.
Representative Duncan, I am sorry, you are recognized for 5
minutes, please.
Mr. Duncan. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I would like to yield my time to the gentleman from
Michigan, Mr. Walberg.
Mr. Walberg. I thank the gentleman and appreciate the
opportunity.
Thanks to the panel for being here. In fact, I just got off
a phone call, I had to step away, talking with an entity, a
business in my State, a Wolverine, who had significant issues
relative to PFOS and had been doing remediation under a consent
decree. And so far, it has worked very well with EPA, as well
as with EGLE, the regulatory entity under the State, and it has
been a challenge but, nonetheless, it is working, as well as
working with 3M. So this is a very, very important hearing
today.
Ms. VanDe Hei, the presence of perchlorinated chemicals in
Michigan is an area of great concern of mine and my colleagues
in Michigan, as well as other areas across the country. The
situation with PFAS in Michigan is alarming. The number of PFAS
confirmed sites has grown rapidly over the last few years, my
district included, and Michiganians are seriously concerned.
As you know, in February, the EPA made the decision to move
forward with regulating PFOS and PFOA under the Safe Drinking
Water Act. On July 22, the Michigan Department of Environment,
Great Lakes, and Energy, EGLE, announced that Michigan will
adopt a rule set to limit PFAS contamination in drinking water.
In your testimony, Ms. VanDe Hei, you highlight the
importance of allowing States to set their own limits for
federally regulated contaminants that are no less stringent
than EPA's standards or to set State regulations for a
contaminant that is not regulated by EPA at all. Could you
expand on it and discuss why this is an important aspect of the
Safe Drinking Water Act?
Ms. VanDe Hei. I will do my best, sir. One of the problems
I see with the Safe Drinking Water Act is something that
actually HAs, health advisories, were intended originally to
deal with, and that is regional contamination, where National
Primary Drinking Water Regulations are not necessary but
certain regions of the country have problems with different
contaminants.
So it is important that Michigan have the authority to do
what it is doing, and there are a number of other States that
do the same thing, New Jersey, California, and Massachusetts,
and I am sure there are others. And Michigan in particular has
been aggressive in this way.
And so I think it is very important that where the
contamination is significant, that the State be able to do what
it needs to do to protect the people of their State when that
happens.
Mr. Walberg. What challenges are there for the water
systems, the municipal water systems, specifically with that?
Ms. VanDe Hei. Well, the challenges for the water systems
are the treatment, the cost. It is great that--I forget the
company that you mentioned--is a part of the process for
cleaning it up. So all of the parties that are responsible for
the contamination--and I think it was something Mae said--that
what we need are the contaminants to be kept out of the water,
not in the water.
So I think your question was, why is it important? It is
because it is a major problem, and States need to have the
ability to take action.
Mr. Walberg. And the challenge, I guess, now is we are
seeing probably next week Michigan will set levels at
significantly lower than what we have presently under the Clean
Water Act, almost to the level right now that we can't--and
that is why I asked about the municipal water systems, that we
are going to have difficulty even measuring to get to that
level, which could be a challenge, I would assume.
Ms. VanDe Hei. It is a challenge, sir. And having different
levels in different States with different measuring devices is
a problem for water systems. When you have no standard that is
put in place to use to measure with, what do you do? And if you
can't measure to the level at which the standard is set, how do
you address that issue? So water systems are kind of left
miscommunicating with the public, which is something we haven't
done.
Mr. Walberg. I appreciate Mr. Duncan's time has expired. I
yield back.
Mr. Duncan. I yield back.
Mr. Tonko. The gentleman yields back.
And now, the Chair recognizes the gentle lady from
Delaware. Representative Blunt Rochester, you are recognized
for 5 minutes, please.
Ms. Blunt Rochester. Thank you so much, Mr. Chairman, for
calling this important hearing on the Safe Drinking Water Act.
And thank you also to all of the witnesses for your
testimonies.
The COVID-19 pandemic is shining an intense spotlight on
health risks and health disparities across our country, and I
think it is even more evident that safe drinking water is a
necessity in a pandemic as it is under normal circumstances.
I particularly want to focus initially on a few comments
from some of my colleagues who talked about the environmental
justice communities in their own States that they are working
with and dealing with. And in Delaware, we have communities
that also do not or did not have running water and that used
bottled water at times and well water that was contaminated.
And I particularly want to commend the community of
Ellendale that worked for many, many decades to get a public
drinking water system implemented. A gentleman named Harold
Truxon just kept going, kept going to make sure that his
community had safe drinking water. And we all know that having
the public water system is not enough. The water that comes
through that system also has to be healthy and safe to drink.
And so for me, this issue today is not just about data and
numbers; it is about families and communities. And in recent
years, I have worked with many of my colleagues on this
committee, on both sides of the aisle, to address the dangers
of PFAS in our water and in our environment. These dangers
include a range of health risks, including impaired immune
systems. As COVID-19 continues to spread at alarming rates,
strong immune systems are more critical than ever in the fight
against this pandemic and other infectious diseases.
All of my questions are for you, Ms. Wu. My first question
is, EPA has still not taken action to limit PFAS in our
drinking water. How does this failure of the Safe Drinking
Water Act make us as a Nation more susceptible to diseases like
COVID-19?
Ms. Wu. Well, the fact is that PFAS contamination is
showing up almost everywhere that we look, and so we know that
there are millions and millions of Americans who have dangerous
levels of PFAS in their water. And so the fact that there are
health effects associated with exposure to this chemical,
including immunological that you talked about, but also cancers
and other--you know, liver disease or ulcerative colitis, like
my friend had, just puts that extra burden on people as they
are trying to get through both this pandemic that we have but
also, you know, how do they get treatment for the diseases. My
friend had to wait to get the surgery that he needed because he
was scared to go in because of the pandemic.
Ms. Blunt Rochester. Some water systems have taken
aggressive action to get PFAS out of their water, but without a
Federal standard, there is no consistent floor of protection
nationwide. Do you think that this lack of consistent
nationwide protections contributes to disparate impacts from
water pollutants and may contribute to the disparate impacts of
COVID-19?
Ms. Wu. I think that is right, that the people who happen
to live in States that happen to take action on these
contaminants are lucky, but that that shouldn't mean that
everybody else then just has to suffer with it. And it is
important that we don't treat people differently based on which
State that they are living in. It is important that we have at
least a floor that is protective of everybody.
Ms. Blunt Rochester. Great. And there is currently
authority in the Safe Drinking Water Act for EPA to set an
interim drinking water standard to address pressing threats to
public health, authority they could use to set a standard for
PFAS now, but they have never used that authority.
Do you think that the EPA should use this authority to set
an interim standard for PFAS to protect communities as soon as
possible?
Ms. Wu. Yes. I think this is an urgent public health
threat, and it needs to be used to deal with it right now.
Ms. Blunt Rochester. And what do you think we could do to
strengthen this interim authority for the EPA to address this
public health, these threats as they emerge? Is there anything
that we can do?
Ms. Wu. Well, I think that, again, you know, be more
explicit about what that eminent threat and when it shows up,
that EPA can take the action. There is also right now a
requirement that once they do this interim thing, that
eventually they still have to go through this huge gauntlet of
other assessments that has basically stopped it for all the
previous ones. And so, you know, streamlining this whole
process and not making it so intensive would be an important
addition.
Ms. Blunt Rochester. Thank you. Thank you so much to Ms. Wu
and to the other witnesses.
And I join my colleagues in wanting to make sure we do
something in a bipartisan way to ensure the health and safety
of all Americans.
Thank you. And I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Tonko. The gentle lady yields back.
I do not see Mr. Carter. Is he not back? If he is not, then
we will go to the Representative from Florida, Representative
Soto, for 5 minutes, please.
Mr. Soto. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Congress last significantly amended the Safe Drinking Water
Act in 1996, and a lot of this is in the staff analysis, but it
really paints a damning situation. Since then, the new standard
setting process relied on a 5-year cycle.
Our Nation's primary drinking water standards regulate more
than 90 contaminants and contaminant groups. The standards have
been adopted since the 1996 law are for arsenic, radium, and
disinfectant byproducts, but those were done due to deadlines
already set in the 1996 law.
EPA has had an analysis on multiple different dangerous
pollutants and contemplated standards on everything from fecal
coliform to acrylamide to 13 other identified revisions. But
out of those 13, since 1996, they have approved one; one in 24
years.
Through sound science we are determining that current water
protection standards are unsafe. Through sound science we are
determining that new chemicals pose a danger to clean water.
But with only one new standard implemented in 24 years, it
shows that the system is broken, the Safe Drinking Water Act is
broken, and it is broken during a COVID-19 pandemic when we
need it most.
Ms. Wu, I know you have talked at length about it. But what
is the overall public health consequence of having a broken
Safe Drinking Water Act process for adding new chemicals and
new standards?
Ms. Wu. The problem is that we know that our water is
contaminated with a lot of contaminants that we know have
adverse health impacts. The science is also clear on those. And
we know that it is showing up at levels that cause these health
harms, and we know it is showing up in the water of millions of
Americans. But this broken Safe Drinking Water Act means that
we haven't actually done anything to get these contaminants out
of our water.
Mr. Soto. How many lives do you think we have lost in the
U.S. over the last 24 years due to this broken water process?
Ms. Wu. Oh, gosh, I couldn't even begin to guess. But, you
know, it is not just lives lost, but it is the quality of life.
If somebody survives cancer, does that mean it was okay then to
let them get it, right? All of the other diseases that could
come with these contaminants seriously affect quality of life.
Mr. Soto. In addition to cancer, which obviously can be
deadly in many instances, what are the other conditions
specifically that you see as a result of polluted water?
Ms. Wu. There are so many. There are ones that affect
developmental--development of children, and so that could be
impacts around behavior. This is what we see a lot in lead.
There could be things like liver disease, kidney disease.
Again, my friend who had ulcerative colitis meant that he no
longer has a colon because of it. There is so many different
types of harmful effects that exist, because we are talking
about a lot of different contaminants.
Mr. Soto. Thank you, Ms. Wu.
Ms. VanDe Hei, how do we value human life and health
conditions in a current cost-benefit analysis within the law?
How should we value life as we are trying to adjust these
standards?
Ms. VanDe Hei. Life is invaluable, but our ability to
protect people from every chemical that comes into existence is
impossible. I really, I guess, take Mae to task on some of the
statements that she has made. Yes, some contaminants are
carcinogenic, and the MCLG for them is zero. And others are
chronic and others are acute. Acute contaminants hurt people
immediately, and they are the first ones to be treated for it.
The chronic ones are second. And those that take 70 years plus
are--you are right, getting to zero is problematic. But there
is a triage of contaminants that are set out to protect public
health and do it immediately.
Mr. Soto. Because of my limited time, what type of
investments would a national infrastructure plan like the
Moving Forward Act that we passed in the House help with a lot
of our local and State governments to upgrade their
infrastructure to be able to handle some of these new
standards?
Ms. VanDe Hei. I have not seen any estimates of the 1916--
1916, sorry, I am living in the past--2016 proposal that came
from the committee, what those costs would be.
Mr. Soto. Well, this is 2020, and we have a new bill we
passed out of the House that included infrastructure funding
for water systems, and I would urge you all to take a look at
it. Because we are not only interested in making the standards
2lst century but putting our money where our mouth is moving
forward.
With that, I yield back.
Mr. Tonko. The gentleman from Florida yields back.
I see our gentleman from Georgia has returned. So,
Representative Carter, you are recognized for 5 minutes,
please.
Mr. Carter. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank all of you
for being on this very important hearing and being a part of
it.
Ms. VanDe Hei, I wanted to ask you, a lot of your testimony
today has been about the good work that the EPA is doing to
protect our drinking water and how the system works for people.
You discussed the cost-benefit analysis that you feel like
should be taken into consideration whenever there are any kind
of substantial changes that are made, and I can appreciate
that.
Having been a former mayor, I am very appreciative of that
and certainly appreciative of it at a Federal level where we
were often mandated what we were supposed to do, and we
referred to them as unfunded mandates. You know, having said
that, obviously, we were very concerned about the safety of our
citizens and the health of our citizens, but also it includes
the financial health of our city.
So I just wanted to ask you, what are the biggest concerns
you have in that space of the cost-benefit analysis, and how
would your members handle an increase in cost like that?
You are on mute. Ms. VanDe Hei, you are muted.
Ms. VanDe Hei. OK. Sorry about that.
There are two parts that I would like to make to sort of
clarify something, and that is, under the Safe Drinking Water
Act standard setting process, what is feasible is taken into
consideration when setting a standard. Feasible is defined as
what works for the larger system. It does not apply to the
smallest system. So feasible there is defined as what is
technologically feasible for the largest system.
And so you have a separate provision that takes cost
benefits into consideration. And I will say that again, into
consideration. It does not say under that provision of the
statute that thou shall set a standard where the benefits
exceed the costs. It doesn't say that.
So the cost-benefit analysis, I think, in the Safe Drinking
Water Act is there for public consumption, for the public to
consider when standards are being set.
So I am not sure if I answered your question, but I----
Mr. Carter. Well, I appreciate----
Ms. VanDe Hei. I think the analysis is important for water
systems to see, it is important for the public to see, it is
important for everyone to see. It doesn't make any sense to not
have it, especially when you do not have to set the standards
based on it.
Mr. Carter. Right, right. Well, I can appreciate exactly
what you are saying, because I became mayor of a city in 1996
that had a population of 4,500, and when I left as mayor in
2004--no kidding--that population was 19,000.
So we had a tremendous amount of growth, and with that came
what I referred to as the nuts and bolts of municipal
government, and that is water, sewer, things that, as an
educated pharmacist, I didn't have any clue about those things
until I became mayor, but I learned it real quick.
And I learned the impact that some of these regulations can
have on a municipality, particularly on a small municipality.
So I can appreciate very much what you are saying there.
Let me ask you another question, Ms. VanDe Hei. You talked
about the Safe Drinking Water Act as it pertains to urgent
threats to public health. Can you define urgent threats as you
think the EPA is using it in that context?
Ms. VanDe Hei. It is not defined in the statute. I think
Flint, Michigan, is a good example of an urgent threat to
public health. And there are multiple reasons for that and the
water system was part of the problem, but so was the State.
So was EPA, as far as I am concerned, because they could
have taken action earlier than they did, because it was a case
of urgent public health problem, and I think that it was known
about and that they could have taken action quicker.
Mr. Carter. OK.
Ms. VanDe Hei. But the term ``urgent'' is not defined under
the statute, that I know of.
Mr. Carter. Right. And do you feel like it needs to be?
Ms. VanDe Hei. Perhaps. Perhaps. Maybe that is something
that we all could talk about.
Mr. Carter. It just seems to me like when you are not at
least having some kind of guidelines with it that it becomes
subjective, and that is something that, again, as a former
mayor, I can tell you I never liked to be in that situation
either.
So I am out of time, but thank you all very much.
Obviously, a very important issue.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Tonko. You are most welcome.
The gentleman yields back.
The Chair now recognizes the gentle lady from Illinois.
Representative Schakowsky, you are recognized for 5 minutes,
please.
Ms. Schakowsky. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate the
hearing today and our testifiers. Thank you.
I live close to Lake Michigan. Actually, my whole district,
including the city of Chicago, our eastern border is Lake
Michigan. And the Great Lakes represent 20 percent of the
world's surface water. And the EPA is responsible for a
wonderful project to make sure that we stay clean.
And I think it is shocking what Darren Soto, Congressman
Soto mentioned, that in all the years since the act has been in
place that only one toxin has been identified. There are
millions of Americans who don't have access to clean water
right now. And we know that the environment and the challenges
we are facing are hurting our Great Lakes. We see rising lake
levels and worsening storms, and they are eroding drinking
water infrastructure. And unless we address climate, the
climate crisis, our water systems are going to be worsened.
But no one in the United States of America, the richest
country in the world, should worry that they cannot turn on the
tap and not have clean water. And this is why it is so
concerning to me that the EPA struggles to act promptly under
the Safe Drinking Water Act. Sometimes we even--can you hear
me?
So we hear the phrase ``paralysis by analysis.'' And I just
wanted to ask, Ms. Wu, have you heard that phrase and what does
it mean to you?
Ms. Wu. I have heard it. And it is I think, you know, the
idea that EPA or whoever just keeps going back and back and
back and looking and looking for as much certainty as possible
before they can take action on it, even though, you know, they
may have the science in front of them that shows more than
enough information for them to take action that is protective.
Ms. Schakowsky. So we know that years have passed while the
EPA goes through certain requirements and toxins remain in the
water. Can you give us an example of something that--I know a
number of people have asked questions about what is urgent, but
what are examples of common toxins that have been studied and
not addressed?
Ms. Wu. Well, I think perchlorate is probably the best
example, because it is really the only one that EPA tried to
get through this whole process, which is even as far back as
like the nineties we knew that it had harmful health impacts
for people, especially pregnant women who were exposed to it.
And we also knew that it was in the drinking water of millions
of Americans.
And then as EPA was trying to figure out how to set the
standards and what the numbers should be, you know, there were
a lot of points where industry could influence that uncertainty
and influence the science and, you know, try to change it. And
EPA even missed its statutory deadline for when it needs to
propose and finalize these standards. And it took a lawsuit
from NRDC to try to get them to say that they were going to set
one, and now we are seeing this administration try to backtrack
on that.
So, you know, perchlorate is the best example, because it
is the only one that EPA has tried to get through this, and we
can see we are, you know, how many years out and we still
haven't seen one from them.
Ms. Schakowsky. Let me ask you this: I work pretty closely
with the employees at EPA in Chicago in Region 5, and they have
been pretty much decimated staff-wise. Has this been a problem
just that the EPA does not have the personnel it needs to do
the kind of oversight and to move things more quickly?
Ms. Wu. I don't know the total answer to your question. You
know, for some of these, like you said, it has been decades of
science and assessments that EPA has done. So what is happening
to them right now shouldn't have impacted, say, you know, 10
years ago, when they could have embarked on this, or even
earlier. Maybe it is impacting it now, but, again, that doesn't
really explain like the decades of delay.
Ms. Schakowsky. Thank you. I do think that they feel like
they are hamstrung in doing today's job to protect our water,
because they have lost so much personnel, and I want to thank
all of you.
I yield back.
Mr. Tonko. The gentle lady yields back. I note that
Representative Walden, the full committee ranking member, has
returned. So we recognize Representative Walden for 5 minutes,
please.
Mr. Walden. Well, thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. And it
has been a terrific hearing.
Ms. VanDe Hei, many advocates for overhaul of the current
drinking water regulatory system have argued the EPA has not
taken contaminant from start to finish through the system
established in the 1996 amendment in a way that results in new
Federal regulation.
When the 1996 amendments were created, what was the focus
of that effort?
Ms. VanDe Hei. There were two focuses of that effort. The
first was to clean up what hadn't been done under the 1986
amendment, and those were the most important ones that didn't
get done. And that was the disinfection byproduct/
cryptosporidium rule that needed to be done.
And so the statute not only set a deadline, it gave them
the tools in which to do that. They needed to use a riskless
tradeoff in order to develop those two rules together. You
couldn't have lowering the disinfection and increasing
microbial risk or vice versa unintentionally.
So it took the contaminants that were of most concern and I
think the hardest ones to do and put them in the statute and
did set deadlines, but it also gave them the tools in which to
do that. And those took time. Those took time.
Since then, they have revised or at least are attempting to
revise the lead and copper rule. We could go around and around
about the problems with that or the good parts of it, but there
is no doubt to me that it is a complicated rulemaking.
The purpose of that amendment was to set the criteria for
EPA to use to set proposed standards when there were none in
the 1986 statute. And so that was really the second key
priority to the development of those amendments.
I think I lost Mr. Walden.
Mr. Shimkus. Mr. Chairman, Mr. Walden is having connection
issues. So I am not sure what your response will be, but he is
not connected anymore.
Mr. Tonko. Yes, why don't we go to Mr. McNerney now and we
will come back to Mr. Walden, or is he back?
Mr. Walden. Yes, I think I am back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Tonko. OK, I am sorry.
Mr. Walden. Yes, it kicked me out. I did nothing.
Mr. Tonko. We believe you.
Mr. Walden. Yes, to effect this.
Since 1996, EPA has actually taken significant regulatory
action to control contaminants in drinking water. These do
include arsenic, total coliform, stage two disinfection
byproducts, surface water treatment and filter backwash. And
the agency is aiming to finish the lead and copper rule.
Do you agree with me that, regarding public health
protection, these are significant rules, Ms. VanDe Hei, and
why?
Ms. VanDe Hei. They are very significant rules, and they
are very significant because they address issues of public
health concern.
The question of disinfection byproducts and microbial
contamination, those are real issues. Arsenic is a real issue.
It occurs in particularly closed systems and groundwater wells.
The total coliform rule is important to how well we treat
our water and can get it through the pipes and into the homes
without being contaminated. So.
The rules that were done were essential.
Mr. Walden. All right. Thank you.
I have one final question, Mr. Chairman, and that is the
agency, I think, deserves some credit for the good work these
professionals have done. They made a conscious choice to take
care of these issues because they are public health priorities.
And I think it is unfair to act as if EPA should have put these
regulations off to pursue other individual contaminant
regulation under the Safe Drinking Water Act.
So, Ms. VanDe Hei, how would you characterize the impact of
these rules on protecting public health from treated drinking
water?
Are you muted, by chance? Yes. We want to hear your words.
Ms. VanDe Hei. I just muted myself rather than unmuted
myself.
I think they were achieved, and the reason they didn't get
done under the 1986 amendment was because they were difficult.
You had to make difficult choices, but they had to be done. I
mean, I think everybody recognized that those contaminants or
those processes needed to be addressed, updated, done in order
to ensure that the water was safe to drink.
And then they were to move on to the rest of the
environment rulemaking process, issuing the factors that were
outlined in the Safe Drinking Water Act of 1996.
Mr. Walden. All right. Thank you.
And, Mr. Chairman, thank you for your indulgence in letting
me log back on after I got kicked out.
So, we appreciate all the witnesses and their testimony and
the answers to our questions and the good advice and counsel
you give the committee.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you. The gentleman yields back.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from California, Mr.
McNerney, for 5 minutes, please.
Mr. McNerney. Well, I thank the chairman and I thank the
ranking member for this hearing and the witnesses. It has been
very informative, so I appreciate what we have learned so far.
Ms. Wu, in your testimony you highlighted that the
vulnerable populations have often been left unprotected by
EPA's civil process. How important is it to provide explicit
guidance to the EPA, not only consider but to protect
vulnerable subpopulations in their standards?
Ms. Wu. I think it is really important that they are
explicit about it. The way that they think about some of the
regulations, if you don't consider, you know, the special needs
of vulnerable populations like infants or children--they are
not small adults. They really are different. They are a lot
more susceptible to a different gamut.
So, you know, it has to really take them into consideration
and these other vulnerable populations in order to protect
them.
Mr. McNerney. Not only consider them, but actually to
provide in their rulemaking.
Ms. Wu. Exactly.
Mr. McNerney. Thank you.
Ms. VanDe Hei, in your opinion, do our drinking water
systems face challenges in adapting their infrastructure to the
effects of climate change and extreme weather?
Ms. VanDe Hei. They definitely do. Drinking water systems
across the country will face challenges from climate change and
extreme weather, such as seawater intrusion into drinking water
sources, due to rising sea level and more frequent extreme
storms battering infrastructure, and prolonged drought that
threatens water supplies.
A decade ago, a report found that the cost of adapting to
these impacts across the Nation's water and wastewater systems
was $1 trillion over four years. And that was some time ago
that those cost estimates were done, and I think it is even
greater now.
And I think what is even more important, I think that we
are seeing the impacts of climate change, particularly around
the seacoast and particularly in the arid southwest. But water
systems will face large challenges, big challenges in adapting
to those things, and they have to do it now. As many of you
know, you can't change the structure of a water system in a----
Mr. McNerney. All right, right.
Ms. VanDe Hei. You have to be caring for the experience of
that water system over time and as funds are available to
improve the infrastructure.
Mr. McNerney. OK. Well, thank you for that answer.
Ms. Wu, this is a question that Ms. Barragan touched on. I
just want to ask it again, because I think it needs emphasis.
What are the problems that arise when we leave the decision
as to whether it would be, quote, meaningful to regulate a
contaminant up to the full judgment of the EPA administrator?
Ms. Wu. I think what ends up is that it is almost based on
the political leanings of the administrator and that you aren't
necessarily focused on the science and on, you know, the
technical assessments that the agency has done if then, after
knowing that there are adverse health effects associated with a
contaminant and knowing that it is showing up in people's water
at a level that is of concern, that then one person, one
administrator could make a political decision not to take any
action.
Mr. McNerney. Thank you. Well, in your testimony, you speak
of the importance of adding various triggers that will compel
the EPA to act and better protect public health. What might
some of these triggers look like?
Ms. Wu. There could be different ones. So you could say,
for example, if we know that a certain contaminant is showing
up at levels above some scientifically derived number. Maybe it
is the World Health Organization has a health advisory number
or ATSDR has some number, but it is showing up at levels above
that number. It is in some number--I will let you all pick
that, 100,000, a million, whatever it is--in a certain number
of States, that maybe that is an automatic trigger that sets in
place, like, we need a regulation for this.
It could be that a governor or a citizen could petition for
standards, and that would show the same thing. And that there
is some presumption then on EPA that they are going to set a
standard unless there is clear and convincing evidence that
they don't meet these statutory requirements. You know, it
could also, you know, be something like that.
But, you know, even the idea of having Governors do the
petitioning is something that is contemplated in other
statutes. It is contemplated in the Safe Drinking Water Act. So
it is not unusual.
Mr. McNerney. Good. I am glad you brought up Governors,
because I was going to ask that myself.
Ms. VanDe Hei, you noted in your testimony how confusing it
is between the maximum contaminant level goals and the maximum
contaminant levels or treatment technique. Can you speak to the
importance of reform that makes the drinking water regulations
understandable to the general public?
Ms. VanDe Hei. If I had my preferences a long time ago,
there would be one number. Having two numbers sitting out
there, and one was intended to be an aspirational goal and it
has now become the health-based number, with the MCL being
something else, when, in fact, the MCL is the standard by which
water is judged, that it meets that standard, not if it meets
the goal.
Like I said earlier, some carcinogens and other
contaminants today, the MCLG is zero. Well, as detection
methods get better and better and better, we still will never
get to zero. Do those detection measures indicate public health
concerns? No.
Mr. McNerney. Thank you.
My time has expired. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Tonko. OK. The gentleman yields back.
The Chair now recognizes the gentle lady from Michigan.
Representative Dingell, you are recognized for 5 minutes,
please.
Mrs. Dingell. Thank you, Chairman Tonko, and thanks for
holding this very important hearing.
My other colleagues have touched upon many other areas I am
worried about, so today I want to focus on the strong need for
Federal leadership and the establishment of a national drinking
water standard for PFAS, which has not happened, and in that
absence the States have had to act.
Michigan is one of the States that has been hit the
hardest. In fact, we have more than 100 contamination sites
now. Many of them are in my district. But our State is stepping
up and leading. Last week, we had to do our own maximum
contaminant level standard for seven PFAS chemicals, which will
go into effect or is expected to go into effect in early
August.
I would like to start with Ms. Chard. In the specific case
of Michigan, can you share with this committee about how much
time and money Michigan had to invest to set its own MCLs for
PFAS chemicals because the Federal Government failed to
establish a standard?
Ms. Chard. I can tell you it is a significant amount of
dollars. I do not know the cost for their epidemiologists and
their risk assessment. I know in talking to my counterparts,
they talk about the numbers in hundreds of thousands of dollars
to do that. So I apologize. I don't have those numbers to
provide you.
Mrs. Dingell. So not only are States being forced to do
this, but cities and local drinking water utilities are also
having to act, in the absence of Federal standards. In Ann
Arbor, the city's water utility has been a leader and on the
forefront of mitigating PFAS.
Ms. Chard, can you say how are water utilities nationwide
acting to protect consumers from PFAS chemicals in the absence
of a national drinking water standard, and what do water
utilities still need from the Federal Government to address
this crisis?
Ms. Chard. So water utilities are taking action through the
types of treatment they install. They may install over and
above what they were required in order to meet those limits
that are established nationwide. They may choose one treatment
technology over another. They may choose specific training for
their staff in order to do better treatment beyond that which
is required that will address some of those PFAS or other
emerging contaminants of concern.
Mrs. Dingell. Would you agree--and just answer this
quickly--that when it has been found in the water, the local
water, that those utilities feel an extra pressure to do
something since the Federal Government is not?
Ms. Chard. They definitely feel pressure to take an action
to protect their citizens.
Mrs. Dingell. So the Great Lakes, as my colleague Jan
Schakowsky mentioned, are a shared resource for many States,
including Canada as well. So isn't it critical that each State
across the region is addressing PFAS comprehensively and in
tandem together from State to State, based on a strong Federal
protective standard?
And what are the harms to the Great Lakes region and
nationwide in the absence of setting a maximum contaminant
standard for PFAS?
Ms. Chard. The States routinely work together, trying to
protect their region of the country, their citizens. Water
bodies don't recognize lines on a map. And for the Great Lakes,
as with other common water bodies, the States, the Federal
Government, or international partnerships have to develop.
Mrs. Dingell. So, Ms. Wu, in the minute I have, let me turn
to you. Is EPA at all close to establishing a national safe
drinking water standard for PFOA or PFAS within the statutory
deadlines?
Ms. Wu. Not close, no.
Mrs. Dingell. Do you think, both Ms. Chard or Ms. Wu, are
there any specific reforms to the Safe Drinking Water Act that
can be made today that would help speed up this process? I
mean, we know when people drink water with PFAS, it doesn't
leave their body. And we don't have a standard. We have
guidelines.
Do you think there is something that we could do to speed
up setting a national protective drinking water standard when
we know the country needs one? Either. Any.
Ms. Chard. I guess my comment is not specific to the PFAS
compounds, but, you know, we could look at occurrence data, how
frequently a contaminant shows up across the country, and focus
efforts on that area as opposed to trying to look at a large
suite of contaminants.
Mrs. Dingell. Thank you. Obviously, I am out of time.
I yield back, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Tonko. The gentle lady yields back.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from California,
Representative Ruiz.
Dr. Ruiz, you have 5 minutes, please.
Mr. Ruiz. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you to all the witnesses for testifying here today.
You are in the home stretch.
Safe and healthy water is essential for our public health.
I am a doctor, I am a public health expert, but it doesn't take
a doctor of public health to really stress that safe and
healthy water and clean water is essential for our public
health.
It is imperative during this pandemic that we make the Safe
Drinking Water Act work, to ensure vulnerable populations who
have been devastated by COVID-19, like farm workers, low-income
communities, and Native Americans, have access to safe and
clean drinking water.
We must have strong standards in place to prevent
situations like the one in my district, where residents in an
oasis mobile home park had arsenic in their water. Because of
the EPA and their guidelines, they were able to identify that
there was a problem and bring the water to the mobile home park
to compliance. Without those guidelines and oversight, my
constituents might still be drinking contaminated arsenic in
their water.
But protecting our communities from harmful drinking water
is just the first step. Clean and safe drinking water must be
accessible and affordable. Water service should not be shut off
because families can't pay their water bills.
The COVID-19 pandemic has put many families in my district
and across the country under financial strain, and they are
struggling to pay their utility bills. We should be doing more
to help those families pay their water bills right now, and we
should do more in the Safe Drinking Water Act to ensure water
affordability.
When the House passed the HEROES Act in May, we included
provisions to help pay water bills for struggling families
during the pandemic.
So my question for Ms. Chard is, do you support including
water utilities assistance for low-income families in our COVID
response?
Ms. Chard. I think it is critically important that we have
to consider the availability of clean, safe drinking water for
all of our citizens, especially in this time of the pandemic.
It is very much appropriate, in my opinion, that water
utility funding, the ability of citizens to pay their water
bill be a part of our national response.
Mr. Ruiz. Ms. Wu, what are your thoughts? Should the next
COVID response bill have assistance for water affordability?
Ms. Wu. Yes, I think it is absolutely critical to have the
assistance for affordability in addition to, you know, we have
seen some moratorium around shutoffs for water, but there also
needs to be assistance beyond just the end of this public
health crisis, so that people, you know, the arrearages for the
payments, you know, that are also adding up, that they aren't
suddenly shut off from the water once the public health crisis
is over, that we have a way that people are able to continue to
afford and get access to water.
Mr. Ruiz. I agree, because this is not just about relief
during the pandemic. Water affordability was a concern even
before the pandemic. Even as the Federal Government spends
hundreds of millions of dollars per year on assistance for
water utilities, water bills in some communities are far too
high. If we strengthen standards to make our water safer, these
affordability issues may get worse.
So my question for you, Ms. Wu, is, how do we use the
Federal assistance under the Safe Drinking Water Act to make
sure that our drinking water is safe and affordable for all
communities?
Ms. Wu. I think it is important that assistance is provided
to the communities who need it to be able to meet the standards
that we would want our drinking water to meet, so that they are
providing affordable water to all of their customers.
And, again, I think that the polluters, who are the ones
who are creating all these problems, ought to be footing the
bill for all of this. It shouldn't be on the utilities and it
shouldn't be on the ratepayers.
Mr. Ruiz. So my last question, this committee held a
hearing earlier this month on issues facing Tribal communities,
including the limited access to safe and affordable water,
particularly in the Navaho Nation.
My last question for Ms. VanDe Hei and Ms. Chard: How can
we reform the Safe Drinking Water Act to increase access to
safe water for Tribal communities? We will start with you, Ms.
VanDe Hei.
Ms. VanDe Hei. OK. I think in the same way that we are
trying to ensure safe and affordable water to everyone. Tribal
communities are no different, although they are sovereign
States, and so I am not sure what difficulties there may be
there. But----
Mr. Ruiz. I would recommend reviewing the last hearing,
because there are unique structural barriers for them to get
clean water infrastructure and safe water infrastructure that I
do believe we need to address.
Ms. Chard, if you can answer in 5 seconds, because my time
is up and I am going to yield back.
Ms. Chard. I would say we take advantage of the DWSRF
program and use that with the Tribal set-asides to help the
Tribal communities.
Mr. Ruiz. Thank you very much. Good idea.
I yield back.
Mr. Tonko. The gentleman yields back.
I believe that completes the list of colleagues, members
who chose to ask questions of our witnesses.
I request unanimous consent to enter the following into the
record: First, we have a report from National Partnership
entitled ``Clean Water and Reproductive Justice: Lack of Access
Harms Women of Color,'' then a letter from the city of Detroit
Water and Sewerage Department, also a letter from the
Metropolitan District of Hartford, Connecticut, a letter from
the American Water Works Association, and a letter from the Ute
Indian Tribe.
Without objection?
Mr. Shimkus. Without objection, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Tonko. So ordered.
[The information appears at the conclusion of the hearing.]
Mr. Tonko. I would like to thank our witnesses for joining
us for today's hearing. You added much to the discussion, and
we thank you for that, thank you for your time and thank you
certainly for your experience and expertise that you shared
with us.
I want to reiterate that we are serious about this effort.
This is just the beginning of the process, but we want to work
together. We should all be able to agree that our drinking
water should be safe for each and every one of us across this
country.
I remind members that, pursuant to committee rules, they
have ten business days by which to submit additional questions
for the record to be answered by our witnesses. I ask that our
witnesses respond promptly to any such questions that you may
receive.
And, with that, again, we thank you for spending your time
with us today, and at this time the subcommittee is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 1:37 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
